NASA insignia Aerospace Technology Innovation Volume 9, Number 4 o July/August 2001 o Advanced Technologies Satellite Technology Helps on the Farm image description follows Farmers will soon get the chance to benefit from a new global positioning satellite designed by JPL to make NASA satellites more efficient and cost-effective.
The system will equip tractors with receivers to provide instant location information that is vital for precision farming.
Photo provided by John Deere Corporation.
Some of the people closest to the land will be the first to benefit from a new global positioning technology developed to make NASA satellites more efficient and cost-effective.
Farmers will soon get the chance to put the new system to the test through a partnership between NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, California and NavCom Technology Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Deere 
Tractors will be equipped with receivers providing instant location information, which is vital for precision farming.
The technology will allow farmers to navigate fields at night and when visibility is poor.
More importantly, with soil sensors and other monitors, it will let them calculate and map out precisely where their fields may need more water, fertilizer or weed control, saving both time and money.
The system combines software developed by JPL and real-time global positioning system (GPS) data from the NASA Global GPS Network to produce corrections to the GPS orbits and clocks.
These corrections are broadcast to people using communication satellites operated by NavCom, which has licensed the Internet-based Global Differential GPS software from JPLs parent institution, the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, and plans to market the system this summer.
NASAs Earth Science Enterprise supports pioneering exploration and discovery of our home planet, while providing America and the world with practical societal benefits from our research, said Dr. Ghassem Asrar, Associate Administrator for NASAs Office of Earth Sciences.
Our agreement with NavCom will accelerate NASAs ability to develop, test and demonstrate the utility of global, real-time, precise GPS positioning for scientific and public applications, said John LaBrecque, Manager of the Solid Earth and Natural Hazards Program for the Office of Earth Sciences.
While existing GPS data can be used to locate a position within a few meters, the new Global Differential GPS system provides an instantaneous position to within 10 centimeters (4 inches) horizontally and 20 centimeters (8 inches) vertically anywhere on Earth.
No other system provides the same combination of accuracy and coverage.
In space, the new technology may enable improved performance by NASAs Earth-observing satellites.
Since the satellites will have precise information on their position, the information may make onboard data processing more efficient and reduce the time needed to transmit the data to the ground.
NASA also expects this new positioning technology to open the possibility for new airborne exploration techniques through more accurately controlled flights of airborne sensors.
The systems ability to provide precise positioning information in real time has a variety of potential commercial applications in aviation, marine operations, land management, transportation and agriculture.
The Commercial Technology Office at JPL is responsible for the collaboration between JPL and NavCom, which will provide NASA with a continuous, GPS differential-correction signal and also will invest in improving the NASA GPS infrastructure.
This collaboration is just one of several JPL programs designed to bring the benefits of the space program to American industry.
NASAs Earth Science Enterprise funds the development of the Global Differential GPS system.
The Enterprise is a long-term research effort dedicated to understanding how human-induced and natural changes affect the global environment.
Q
For more information, contact David Steitz at NASA Headquarters, 
home previous next contents
NASA Official: Jonathan Root o Web Design: Printing 
