Home 
Unique Reactors
Do Good Things Come in Small Packages? As pro- and anti-nuclear advocates (and many of those in between) ponder when, where, and if the next commercial reactor will come on line in the United States, the possibility arises that it might be in Galena.
Where?? Japan's Toshiba Corporation has offered to build a 10 MWe reactor to provide light and heat to Galena, a remote Alaskan village on the Yukon River.
The proposal, its possible implications, its prospects and potential hurdles are discussed in "Village invited to test cheap, clean nuclear power," by Joel Gay.
The article, which includes a diagram of the proposed reactor, appears on the web page of the Anchorage Daily News.
One of the obstacles cited is "public skepticism."
For many of the reactors described in this section, public skepticism proved a very significant hurdle--before they were built.
India Announces a Breakthrough Anil Kakodkar, Chairman of India's Atomic Energy Commission, announced that India plans to build a prototype advanced heavy water reactor (AWHR).
The unique design has completed peer review.
The estimated construction time is seven years, but a start date has not yet been announced.
According to The Times of India, this unique reactor will be fueled by a mix of thorium and uranium and will yield more uranium than it consumes.^1
The First (World) In the mid-1950's, both the Soviet Union and western countries were expanding their nuclear research to include non-military uses of the atom.
However, as with the military program, much of the non-military work was done in secret.
On June 27, 1954, the Worlds first nuclear power plant generated electricity but no headlines--at least, not in the West.
The capacity of the worlds first nuclear electricity generator was only 5 megawatts (electric), unimpressive when compared to some of todays giants (about a fourth of the Worlds generators exceed 1,000 megawatts in capacity).
Of course, being the first makes the Obninsk Nuclear Power Plant no less impressive.
The Ministry for Atomic Energy of the Russian Foundation (Minatom) provides a photo of the Obninsk plant on its web site.
The First (U.S.)
Before the first U.S. nuclear power plant went on line in 1957, nuclear reactors were already in service in the former Soviet Union and in the United Kingdom.
Contrary to the saying that there is no glory in being second (let alone third or fourth), the Shippingport Nuclear Power Plant fully earned a place in history.
The Dusquesne Light Company worked in partnership with the Federal Government to build the worlds first large scale commercial nuclear power plant.
The reactors were designed by the Westinghouse Electric Corporation in cooperation with the Division of Naval Reactors of the Atomic Energy Commission.
By the standards of the day, it seemed to belong to a different era.
President Eisenhower attended the opening ceremonies.
Shippingport continued to provide power during the terms of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, Nixon, Ford, and Carter before finally retiring in 1982, during President Reagans first term.
It was decommissioned and the Government declared the site safe for public use in 1987.
The Federation of American Scientists displays a photograph worth a look, especially by readers who might wonder if this description is too grandiose.
The Last ?? In 1997, a total of 78 reactors were either under construction, planned, or indefinitely deferred.
These units have a combined capacity of 67,484 MWe, approximately 25 percent of the total capacity already in existence.
However, only 45 reactors were under construction.
The remaining 33 units are either being planned or indefinitely deferred.
Three U.S. units are not projected to come on line.
Some experts have predicted that Watts Bar 1, which came on line in 1997, will be the last U.S. commercial nuclear reactor to go on line.
Other experts, however, predict that electricity shortages will revamp the demand for nuclear powerplants.
The future of the nuclear industry is uncertain.
Efforts to reduce carbon emissions throughout the world has focused new attention on the potential benefits of nuclear power.
But for the nuclear industry, it is an uphill struggle.
Based on the projections of the Energy Information Administration, however, several or more countries will have to build new nuclear units to meet anticipated electricity demand.
Based on these projections, it could be concluded that the worlds last commercial reactor is not yet on the drawing board.
The Oldest (World) The oldest commercial nuclear generating unit still in operation in 2001 was the Calder Hall Unit 1 (Capacity, 50 MWE) at Seascale, Cumbria, Great Britain.
When Calder Hall 1 began operation in August 1956, there were no commercial jet airliners, no man or woman had flown in space, U.S. refineries exported $600,000,000 worth of petroleum products, and motor gasoline sold for 30 cents per gallon .
Unit 1 was later joined by the Worlds second oldest currently operational unit (Unit 2, February 1957) and the third oldest (Unit 3, March 1958).
Calder Hall outlasted the 20th century, but none of the quartet (which includes Calder Hall 4) will outlast the 21st century.
On March 31, 2003, Cader Hall shut down permanently.
Latest: The World's Oldest Reactor Retires.
The Oldest (U.S.)
The United States has no commercial nuclear generating units still in operation that were built in in the 1950's.
The retirement of Haddam Neck 1 (the U.S. record-holder for longevity) in 1996, reduced to 4 the number of operable U.S. reactors built during the 1960's.
The record for longevity is now shared by two reactors that went into service one year after Haddam Neck: Oyster Creek 1 in Forked River, New Jersey, and Nine Mile Point 1 in Oswego, New York.
Both units are boiling water reactors, both went into service on the first day of December 1969, both were built by General Electric, and both were still producing electricity according to the latest available data (February 2003).
The Largest (U.S.)
Only one fourth of the commercial nuclear generating units currently in operation have capacities of 1,000 MWE or greater.
The United States has 51 such units, the most of any country.
The five largest U.S. units are located in the Southwest.
According to recently revised EIA data, the two largest U.S. reactors are in Bay City, Texas.
These units are South Texas 1 (1,264 Mwe) and South Texas 2 (1,265 Mwe).
Next in size are the three Palo Verde reactors near Wintersburg, Arizona.
Palo Verde 1 and 2 (1,243 Mwe each) are slightly smaller than the newest of the trio, Palo Verde 3 (1,247 Mwe).
The Palo Verde Nuclear Power Plant ranks third on the National Energy Information Centers list of the 100 Largest Utility Plants in the United States.
The Largest (World) The United States has the most nuclear reactors, Russia had the first, and the United Kingdom has the longest-operating, but all four of the largest reactors ever built are in France.
They were supplied by a French company, Framatome, to Electricite de France.
Chooz B1 (with a net capacity of 1,455 megawatts/electric) , was the first of the four to be completed.
It went into service in the Ardennes in August 1996.
Its twin, Chooz B2, is equal in capacity and is now also in service.
They are larger (by 5 megawatts/electric) than the recently completed Civaux 1 and 2 reactors.
By comparison, the total capacity of all the electric powerplants, nuclear and otherwise, in Vermont and Rhode Island (as of January 1, 1997) is slightly under 1,650 MWE.
The Last to Go into Operation (U.S. and World) There are 104 commercial reactors licensed to operate by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Before any reactor can generate electricity for use in homes and businesses, it must first undergo testing.
Going into operation, therefore is a bit of over-simplification for purposes of this feature.
A more accurate description would be connected to the grid, the date at which the operator begins generating electricity for sale.
The last U.S. reactor connected to the grid was Watts Bar 1 (capacity 1,170 megawatts/electricity) which entered service in February 1996.
Watts Bar 1 was built by Westinghouse and is located in Spring City, Tennessee.
The last foreign reactor to go into service, as of January 31, 2003, was Lingao 2 in China (connected to the grid on January 8, 2003).
The Last that Became a First^2 Years ago, Hollywood produced a comedy called, "The Wackiest Ship in the Army."
It was loosely based of the real life (and highly dangerous) exploits of the USS Kiwi, a spy ship in World War II.
The Kiwi was not the Army's only ship.
The last nuclear power plant built by the U.S. Army was on a converted liberty ship, the USS Sturgis.
The Department of Energy describes the Sturgis as follows: STURGIS Floating Nuclear Power Plant; Designation MH-1A, Location: Gatun Lake, Canal Zone; Principal nuclear contractor: Martin; Pressurized water reactor, Capacity: 10,000 net kW(e), Authorized 45,000 kW(t), Initial criticality, 1967; Shutdown, 1976.
The vessel provided power to the Canal Zone.
It was the first floating nuclear power plant and, for nearly three decades, appeared to be the last.
In 2008 (as described in the next item in this list), the Russians plan to bring on line the next floating nuclear power plant.
More information on the Sturgis, is available from two sources: "MH-1A" First Nuclear Power Barge: Pioneer Barge Built in America" in the August 1996 issue of Atomic and "Nuclear Power: An Option for the Army's Future," in the Army Almanac.
In the latter source, there is a photo of the ship.
The Floating Reactor (the Severodvinsk Reactor) In 2008, if all goes according to plan, the world's first commercial floating nuclear power plant^3 will be ready to begin operation...
Pravda, the Russian news publication, reported the project was approved by the head of the Ministry for Nuclear Power, Alexander Rumyantsev.
Sevmash Enterprise, which specializes in submarine construction, will build the vessel.
Rosenergoatom, the Russian nuclear firm, will supply the reactors.
Two such floating power stations are planned, each anticipated to cost $100 to $120 million.
The first one will supply power to the city of Severodvinsk, approximately 50 miles west of Archangel.
The 104th Reactor (U.S.)
It might be stretching a point to include Browns Ferry 1 in a survey of unique reactors.
What is unique about it? It is a Boiling Water Reactor (BWR), one of 35 located in the United States.
The reactor's capacity, 1,065 net MW(e) is slightly above the U.S. average.
Even its name is not unique: Browns Ferry 2 and 3 are identical in capacity, ownership, design, and reactor supplier.
The things that make Browns Ferry 1 unique in this country and quite possibly, in the world, can not be seen.
According to most lists, there are 103 commercial reactors in the United States.
But in reality, there are 104.
Browns Ferry 1, the reactor missing from the list, has not operated a single day in more than 15 years.
In 1985, it was shut down by a fire (not nuclear-related) in the reactor control room.
One fourth of the Nation's reactors have operating lives that are shorter than the shutdown period for this unit.
But the most unusual fact about this reactor that remains in perpetual limbo is that the Tennessee Valley Authority will restart it in 2007.
When that occurs, the forgotten reactor will make history.
Oldest Swiss Reactor Decommissioned It is quite possible that the first thought that will occur to most readers is, "I didn't know Switzerland had any nuclear reactors."
Those familiar with the Swiss nuclear industry may be surprised that Switzerland's oldest reactor is not Beznau 1.
Beznau 1 is the oldest of Switzerland's 5 commercial reactors.
According to Swissinfo^1, the experimental reactor at Lucens opened in 1962 and generated electricity for the first time in January 1968.
The reactor closed permanently following a pressure tube burst in 1969, the same year that Beznau 1 went on line.
No tours of the power plant are conducted--in fact, visitors to Lucens, Switzerland, may be tempted to ask if this power plant is in a cave somewhere.
The answer is yes.
The Reactor that Changed History (plus Three Reactors that did Not) More than a decade has passed since a nuclear accident in the Ukraine made "Chernobyl" a household word throughout the world.
Even with the millions (billions?) of words written since the incident in April 1986, many false perceptions continue.
For example, the death toll was not in the hundreds.
The fire did not destroy the power plant.
In fact, three of Chernobyl's four reactors were later returned to service.
The number 3 reactor continued operating into the 21st century (depending on how the century is calculated, since it closed in December 2000).
As often happens, however, failures are better remembered than successes.
The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) produced a fact sheet on Chernobyl, which may or may not answer all the questions, but at least approaches the subject impartially.
__________________________________________________________________
^1The Times of India, "India Makes breakthrough in nukes agenda," online http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/cms.dll/xml/uncomp/articleshow?msid= 207406, September 29, 2003, India, as cited in UxC News Headlines.
^2Swissinfo, on line: http://www.swissinfo.org , "Switzerland's first nuclear plant decommissioned," September 17, 2003.
^3Our thanks to Korey Jackson, who corrected an error in the item on the Floating Reactor.
The power plant planned for Severodvinsk was identified as the first floating nuclear power plant.
We've inserted the adjective "commercial."
Mr. Jackson, also supplied the two highly informative links included in the item on the Sturgis.
Learn about other information available from EIA on U.S. nuclear reactors.
Learn about other information available from EIA on international nuclear reactors.
Learn about other information available from EIA on uranium and on nuclear power.
Diagrams of Unusual Reactors
The Berkeley web site contains diagrams and photos of various reactors, including the following:
Advanced Boiling Water Reactor (ABWR) Advanced Liquid Metal Reactor: (ALMR) Integral Fast Reactor (IFR) Modular High Temperature Gas Cooled Reactor (MHTGR)
