______________________________________________________________________ 1994 Annual Report ______________________________________________________________________ Central Europe, the Baltic Countries and the Newly Independent States By the end of 1994, most countries in Central Europe and the Baltics were making significant progress in their efforts to transform centrally planned economies into market-oriented systems.
Since the formal dissolution of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991, each of the resulting independent republics has also been working towards this goal; however, progress in many of these countries remains limited.
A variety of methods continues to be used in the process of restructuring respective economic systems across the region, and the nature of reforms adopted and implemented varies from country to country.
The United States has actively supported political and economic reforms in Central Europe, the Baltic countries and the Former Soviet Union (FSU).
The United States continues to provide financial, technical, and administrative assistance designed to support movement toward democracy and market orientation.
It has also revised its export control policies relating to the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Controls (COCOM), in order to maintain only essential national security controls on U.S. exports.
A primary focus of U.S. efforts has been an extensive agenda of negotiations aimed at constructing a framework for the rapid expansion of trade and investment between the United States and Central Europe, the Baltic countries and the FSU.
This agenda includes the negotiation of trade agreements to extend MFN tariff treatment and protect intellectual property rights, an extension of Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) benefits to eligible countries, these states' fuller integration into the GATT/WTO, and the negotiation of Bilateral Investment Treaties which ensure national and MFN treatment, freedom from performance requirements, compensation for expropriation, transfers in freely usable currency, the use of appropriate dispute settlement procedures, and the investor's right to use binding arbitration.
By the end of 1994, bilateral trade agreements and investment treaties were in force with the majority of Central European and Baltic countries and the newly independent states of the FSU, and benefits under the GSP program had been expanded.
Most-Favored Nation Status (MFN): The Baltic Countries, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, Slovenia, and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia all currently receive unconditional MFN treatment.
Serbia/Montenegro are currently denied MFN treatment.
Albania, Bulgaria, Romania, and all Former Soviet Union (FSU) republics except Azerbaijan currently receive MFN treatment under Jackson-Vanik waivers (see section on Jackson-Vanik, below).
Jackson-Vanik: Title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 (Jackson-Vanik Amendment) requires that a Trade Agreement be in effect in order for certain Central European countries and states of the former Soviet Union to receive MFN status.
Title IV also requires that, as a condition to receiving MFN, these countries be in compliance with the requirements of the freedom of emigration provision of the Act.
The President is authorized to annually waive the requirements for full compliance if he determines that such a waiver will substantially promote the objectives of the freedom of emigration provisions and has received certain assurances from the particular country.
Legislation is required in order for a country to be removed from Jackson-Vanik.
Trade agreements and Jackson-Vanik waivers are currently in force with Albania, Bulgaria, and Romania.
The President found Bulgaria in full compliance with Title IV provisions in June 1993.
In December 1991, Congress terminated the application of Title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 to Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania; these countries now enjoy unconditional MFN status.
In April 1992, pursuant to special legislation, the President removed the Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR) and Hungary from Title IV and accorded them unconditional MFN status.
The Jackson-Vanik Amendment never applied to Poland or the former Yugoslavia.
However, Serbia/Montenegro are currently denied MFN treatment.
All FSU republics except for Azerbaijan have trade agreements in force with the United States and thus enjoy a Jackson-Vanik waiver and MFN treatment.
In September 1994, President Clinton found Russia in full compliance with Title IV provisions.
The Generalized System of Preferences (GSP)
Under the GSP program, developing countries are eligible to receive duty-free access to the U.S. market for many items, if they meet certain statutory criteria.
In addition, a country must first have MFN status to apply for GSP treatment.
Most Central European countries have been beneficiaries of this program since the early 1990s.
Until 1993, however, most of the Newly Independent States were not eligible for GSP benefits, because they are considered successor states of the former USSR, which was prohibited by statute from receiving GSP program benefits.
The prohibition against granting GSP to the successor states was removed as part of the 1993 Budget Act.
By the beginning of 1995, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgystan, Russia, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan had been made beneficiaries of the program.
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, are not considered successor states of the USSR, and therefore became beneficiaries of the GSP program in February 1992.
Energy Charter
In December 1991, the United States joined with more than 40 other countries (including countries of the FSU) in adopting the European Energy Charter.
The original intent of the Charter was to provide market access for Western countries to energy trade with the FSU.
The Charter itself simply enunciated non-binding principles for such East-West trade and investment in energy products and services.
The second phase of the negotiations - aimed at creating binding obligations in a so-called Basic Agreement - created a number of negotiating challenges regarding the relationship of this proposed sectoral agreement to existing GATT obligations, and to the bilateral trade and investment agreements that the United States has with the FSU and Central Europe.
Negotiations concluded in 1994.
The U.S. did not sign the resultant treaty, however, because it did not include international investment standards equivalent to those contained in bilateral investment treaties and multilateral investment agreements signed by the U.S.
The United States will nevertheless maintain an active interest in the program of the Energy Charter Treaty, and will participate as appropriate.
The United States will also continue to work through other channels to facilitate U.S. private sector energy investment in Central Europe and the FSU.
The Baltic Countries
In December 1991, the President signed Public Law 102-182 which restored most-favored-nation status and terminated applicability of Title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 (Jackson-Vanik) for the three Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
In 1992, the United States concluded Trade and Investment Framework Agreements with Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
In 1994, the United States signed Trade/Intellectual Property Rights Agreements with each of the Baltic States.
The U.S. has also signed Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) with Estonia and Latvia, and continued to negotiate a BIT with Lithuania.
All the Baltic countries became observers to the GATT in 1992; Latvia applied for full membership in 1993, Estonia and Lithuania in 1994.
The Independent States of the Former Soviet Union (FSU)
Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union at the end of 1991, each of the newly independent states immediately set to work to establish market-oriented economic systems.
Each of the twelve former republics continued to benefit from a waiver of the Jackson-Vanik amendment of Title IV for the Soviet Union (first issued in December 1990), making all independent states eligible for Eximbank programs and agricultural export credits and credit guarantees.
Trade was further encouraged by conclusion of trade and investment treaties.
Bilateral Trade Agreements
The United States signed a Trade Agreement with the Soviet Union in June 1990; the agreement included provisions to facilitate the conduct of commercial activities, the settlement of disputes, and the establishment of protection for intellectual property.
While the U.S. Congress approved the agreement in November 1991, the USSR collapsed before the Soviet legislature could approve it.
Because the U.S. Government wanted to establish trade relations with the emerging republics as quickly as possible, the Administration, after close consultations with the Congress, decided to offer the same agreement that was signed with the USSR to each of the twelve successor countries.
Each former republic had the option to make minor technical changes in the existing treaty (such as revising the name of the signatory country and changing the deadline for meeting IPR requirements); such non-substantive changes do not require additional Congressional approval.
Approval of the "re-typed" Trade Agreement is, however, required by the legislature of the newly independent state, if that state requires such approval in order to ratify an international agreement.
While use of the "re-typed" U.S.-USSR Agreement provided the most direct route to trade relations with the independent states, each of the NIS also had the choice of negotiating a completely new trade agreement with the United States which would need to be submitted to Congress.
(To date no NIS has requested to negotiate a new agreement.)
By the end of 1994, trade agreements were in force with Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine and Uzbekistan.
A trade agreement was signed with Azerbaijan in April 1993, but the Azerbaijani Parliament has not ratified it.
Intellectual Property Rights: The U.S.-Russia Trade Agreement required the establishment of an Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) Working Group and committed Russia (by December 31, 1992) to make best efforts to propose and enact legislation that protects intellectual property rights in a number of areas and to exchange side letters on compulsory licensing.
The Working Group first met in Moscow in September 1992.
By the end of 1992, the Russians had enacted a patent law, a semiconductor chips law and a law protecting computer programs as literary works.
In 1993, Russia also enacted trade and trademark legislation, as well as a copyright law.
Progress in the enactment of IPR-related legislation is only one step in the protection of intellectual property in the Russian Federation.
Enforcement of the IPR laws has been lacking, and piracy of U.S. films, videos, and computer software is rampant.
The IPR laws must be fit into a comprehensive civil and criminal code; courts with trained and experienced judges must be established; attorneys must be trained; and law enforcement and customs officers must learn how to identify and deal with violations of intellectual property rights laws.
For all of the other independent states of the former Soviet Union, the IPR elements of the Trade Agreements either in force, agreed to or under negotiation are the same as those included in the U.S.-Russia Trade Agreement.
The compliance deadline for those countries was December 31, 1993.
Among the other NIS, in 1993, the Armenian parliament adopted a law on patents; parliament is now considering passage of trademark and copyright laws.
Armenian officials say Armenia intends to join the Paris convention, the Madrid Agreement, and the Patent Cooperation Treaty.
Georgia has adopted patent and trademark laws, and in 1993 was reportedly drafting a copyright law.
Kazakhstan protects IPR through its civil code, but in practice there is lax enforcement and no criminal sanctions.
A draft copyright law is now before Parliament.
In 1992, Kazakhstan acceded to the Geneva Convention and joined the World Intellectual Property Organization.
The Government of Kyrgystan has submitted a package of IPR laws to Parliament, but the President dissolved Parliament in September 1994, before Parliament voted on the legislation.
The new 1995 Parliament is expected to review the proposed legislation.
Moldovan laws on intellectual property remain poor, although the government introduced a new IPR law that was expected to be reviewed by Parliament at the end of 1994.
Piracy remains widespread.
Tajikistan has many IPR laws in place, but lacks the means to enforce them.
Incidences of piracy of U.S. goods are small, however.
Tajikistan has adhered to the Berne Convention.
Turkmenistan adopted an IPR law in 1992, and a copyright law was enacted in October 1993.
Turkmenistan officials have reported that the Government intends to sign on to international intellectual property rights agreements.
With the help of appropriate international bodies and comment from U.S. officials, Ukraine implemented a set of intellectual property laws in 1994.
Enforcement remains sporadic and inadequate, however.
Ukraine has also adopted international conventions such as the Paris Convention and is preparing to join the Berne Convention.
Uzbekistan has begun the process of drafting IPR legislation, drawing on current Russian law as well as expertise from U.S. and other Western advisors.
Piracy of Western copyrighted materials remains common, and Uzbekistan does not yet belong to any international IPR organization.
Investment Treaties
Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) provide for the better of national or most-favored nation treatment for U.S. investments; adequate, prompt, and effective compensation in the event of an expropriation; guarantees of free transfers in convertible currency; mandatory access to investor-state and state-state arbitration for investment disputes, and freedom from performance requirements.
Three countries of the Former Soviet Union -- Moldova, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan -- had BITs in force with the United States by the end of 1994.
Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Russia, Ukraine and Uzbekistan had also signed Bilateral Investment Treaties with the United States.
None of these treaties is yet in force, however, as each is awaiting legislative approval or the resolution of language discrepancies.
In the case of Russia and Armenia, the BIT has been approved by the U.S. Senate but is awaiting ratification by the Russian and Armenian legislatures, respectively.
In the case of Ukraine, the Ukraine Parliament has ratified the Agreement, but it still awaits approval by the U.S. Senate.
Discussions for BITS are underway with the majority of other FSU countries.
Science and Technology
An umbrella Science and Technology Agreement was signed with Russia in December 1993.
Maritime
In 1992, maritime agreements were concluded with Russia and Ukraine, reformulating the pre-existing agreement with the Soviet Union on port access and commercial shipping.
Observer Status in the GATT
Russia currently has observer status in the GATT and applied for full membership in 1993.
Besides Russia, in 1993 Belarus, Armenia, Ukraine, and Moldova also applied for full GATT membership.
While the United States has expressed support for these republics' eventual membership, it may take time for them to be prepared for full GATT obligations such as financial contributions and tariff commitments.
Nine NIS republics are GATT observers including Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan.
U.S. Trade Complaints
Commerce issued its final determination in the antidumping duty investigation on ferrosilicon from Ukraine and Kazakhstan on March 3, 1993.
The final margin is 104.18 percent.
The DOC issued its final margin of 104.18 percent for the investigation on ferrosilicon from the Russian Federation on May 13, 1993.
Commerce issued its final determination in the antidumping duty investigation of solid urea from the USSR in May 1987.
The dumping margins ranged from 53.23 percent to 68.26 percent.
On June 29, 1992, following dissolution of the USSR, the Commerce Department transferred the order to each of the newly independent republics.
The current cash deposit rate is 68.26 percent.
Commerce did not conduct an administrative review of these cases in 1993.
On August 28, 1968, the Treasury Department issued an antidumping duty order on titanium sponge from the USSR.
The Commerce Department transferred it to the Baltic states and the republics of the former Soviet Union on August 12, 1992.
The current cash deposit rate for all the former republics and the Baltic states is 83.96 percent.
At the request of the domestic titanium sponge industry, the Commerce Department initiated an administrative review of titanium sponge from Kazakhstan, Russia and Ukraine in September 1993.
Other FSU commodity imports have raised industry concern, but have not resulted in anti-dumping cases at this time.
In April 1993 the U.S. potash industry filed a petition under Section 406(d) of the Trade Act of 1974 for relief from imports from Russia and Belarus.
In November 1993, the United States deferred a decision on market disruption, and in April 1994 held informal, informational consultations with Russia and Belarus to discuss their potash industries.
A joint statement was issued under which both Belarus and Russia agreed to make cumulative, industry-wide potash statistics publicly available.
In the case of aluminum, in 1993 U.S. and other Western aluminum-producing countries held a series of multilateral talks with Russia to discuss the situation in the world aluminum market, with particular emphasis on the impact of sharply increased Russian aluminum exports.
In January 1994, a multilateral Memorandum of Understanding was negotiated to address the situation.
Commercial Space Launch
On September 2, 1993, Vice President Gore and Russian Prime Minister Chernomyrdin signed a transition agreement on Russia's participation in the commercial space launch market.
This agreement formalized an agreement in principle reached between USTR and the Russian Space Agency May 7, 1993 in Moscow.
The agreement gives Russia an opportunity for its space launch industry to compete in the international commercial space launch market and offers Western users an additional source of competitive launch capacity.
It affords Russia the opportunity to compete for contracts to launch up to eight commercial payloads to geosynchronous earth orbit (GEO) for international customers (in addition to an already scheduled INMARSAT 3 launch) between signature and December 31, 2000 (In addition, subject to a case by case review, Russia may participate in the growing launch market for low earth orbit satellites.).
It also provides general rules of the road for fair competition in commercial space launch and requires Russia to charge prices comparable to those of Western launch providers for similar services during the period of its space launch industries' transition to market-based operations.
The United States and Russia held three rounds of consultations during 1994 concerning implementation of the agreement.
Central Europe
Trade Enhancement Initiative for Central Europe (TEI)
The expansion of trade and investment between the United States and Central Europe which began with the launching of the Administration's 1991 Trade Enhancement Initiative for the countries of Central Europe (CECs) continued in 1994.
The TEI program, which aimed at removing trade barriers between countries and helping the CECs develop their ability to participate in international free markets, encompassed three broad areas of assistance: opening markets, building export infrastructure, and avoiding the displacement of agricultural exports.
Open Markets: Efforts to open the U.S. market focused on increasing imports of textiles, steel and cheese, and increasing the number of products covered by GSP.
The textile quotas for Poland, Hungary, and the CSFR were increased by 30 to 100 percent through Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) signed in September and October, 1991 and again increased in 1993.
Under the Uruguay Round, all U.S. textile quotas will be phased out entirely within 10 years.
The TEI commitment on steel comprised adjustment of import ceilings, primarily through existing flexibility provisions, but also through increases, where necessary.
All quotas for steel Voluntary Restraint Agreement (VRA) countries, including the CECs, expired on March 31, 1992.
The United States continues to seek a multilateral steel agreement (MSA) that would liberalize steel trade and open global markets by disciplining subsidies and non-tariff barriers, as well as by reducing steel tariffs to zero over 10 years.
In 1993, the International Trade Commission reviewed an antidumping petition on steel imports from a number of countries, and found injury caused by steel plate imports from Poland and Romania; this could affect exports by these countries.
The TEI commitment on cheese was to increase access for quota-covered cheeses at the same time as the results of the Uruguay Round agriculture negotiations are implemented.
Under the Uruguay Round, most CEC GATT members will receive new tariff-rate cheese quotas.
The TEI GSP commitment was to give special and expedited consideration to the CECs by inviting product petitions.
During 1992, special consideration was given to requests by CECs for additional product coverage.
In July 1992, approximately 80 new items were added to the list of GSP-eligible products.
(For more information, see the GSP section of this report.)
Building Export Infrastructure: The TEI commitment on targeted technical assistance was to provide assistance in setting up export and investment promotion programs and export finance programs that meet OECD guidelines.
It also includes the provision of additional training in management and marketing, as well as advice on government procurement and customs service operations.
Export and investment promotion includes a program by the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID) to provide export and investment promotion in the CECs.
There are, in addition, finance course programs offered by the United States in the CECs to establish professional banker training institutions.
Existing programs for the agricultural sector were reviewed to ensure that they maintain a sizable component devoted to agriculture and agribusiness marketing.
The Commerce Department's Commercial Law Development Program (CLDP) has provided advisors to the CECs as they develop their commercial law regimes.
Finally, the United States also is offering training in the areas of an open government procurement system and customs services reorganization and computerization.
Avoiding Displacement of Agricultural Exports: The TEI commitment on avoiding the displacement of agricultural exports was to ensure that U.S. agricultural export subsidies (including its Export Enhancement Program) do not displace shipments from the CECs.
These precautions have included joint periodic reviews to assess the supply/demand situation and policy developments in each of the CEC countries, as well as discuss U.S. export programs.
Other Trade Issues: By the end of 1994, most of the Central European countries had concluded Association Agreements with the EU.
These include, as part of the phase-in of the agreements' free trade provisions, tariff preferences for CEC countries' imports from the EU.
The United States strongly supports the integration of the CECs into Western Europe.
However, the U.S. wants to ensure that these preferences do not unreasonably discriminate against U.S. exports to the region.
In late 1994, the United States Trade Representative launched a review of the CEC's reverse tariff preferences to the EU.
The review was part of a review of all GSP beneficiaries mandated by a Statement of Administrative Action attached to the Uruguay Round Act.
If the review determines that a CEC's preferential treatment of EU imports has or is likely to have an adverse effect on U.S. commerce, the US Trade Representative will enter into bilateral consultations with the CEC with the goal of eliminating the "reverse" preference.
Nine months later, USTR will make a determination of whether the "reverse" preferences have, or are likely to have, a significant adverse effect on U.S. commerce.
If USTR makes an affirmative determination, a CEC's status as a beneficiary developing country will be withdrawn or suspended, unless it has agreed to eliminate that significant adverse effect.
The review will terminate if the determination is negative.
Albania
Bilateral Trade Agreement: A bilateral trade agreement with Albania was concluded on May 14, 1992 and a Presidential Jackson-Vanik waiver was issued on May 20, 1992.
Following Congressional approval, the agreement and MFN status entered into force on November 2, 1992.
Albania became a beneficiary of the GSP program on July 1, 1993.
GATT/WTO Relations: Albania has applied for membership in the GATT/WTO and a working party has been established.
Bulgaria
In June 1993, Bulgaria was found to be in full compliance with the provisions of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.
Bulgaria has been eligible for export credits and credit or investment guarantees, since it first received a Jackson-Vanik waiver.
A bilateral Trade Agreement providing MFN status and protection of intellectual property rights has been in force with Bulgaria since November 1991.
Bilateral Investment Treaty: On September 23, 1992, the United States and Bulgaria signed a bilateral investment treaty, which entered into force on June 2, 1994.
GATT/WTO Membership: Bulgaria became an observer to the GATT in 1967, and is undertaking procedures for full GATT/WTO membership.
A GATT/WTO Working Party, established in 1990, is currently reviewing Bulgaria's membership application.
Bilateral Trade and GSP: Bulgaria had a trade surplus with the United States in 1991 ($14 million) and 1992 ($6 million).
In 1993, however, the United States had a $43 million trade surplus with Bulgaria, due to a dramatic increase of U.S. exports from $79 million in 1992 to $159 million in 1993.
In 1994, however, Bulgaria was projected to once again enjoy a trade surplus with the United States of $63 million.
Bulgaria was included in the list of countries enjoying GSP benefits in December 1991.
During the first 6 months of 1994, $9.3 million worth of Bulgarian exports were eligible for benefits under the GSP program.
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR): The US/Bulgaria Bilateral Trade and Intellectual Property Agreement required Bulgaria to implement regulations to protect intellectual property, and to accede to major international IPR conventions.
Bulgaria has complied with many of the Agreements provisions, but has not complied with the provision to adhere to the Geneva Phonograms Convention.
In 1994, the U.S. sound recording industry continued to complain about widespread piracy of CDs and tapes in Bulgaria.
Many of these illegal recordings are being exported around the world.
The United States continues to seek a bilateral resolution to this problem.
The Czech Republic And The Slovak Republic
The Czech and Slovak Federal Republic (CSFR) divided into two separate countries on January 1, 1993.
The two successor states will maintain a "watered down" customs union.
In anticipation of the split, the United States used the latter half of 1992 to conclude treaties and finalize outstanding issues with the CSFR.
These efforts ensured a smooth transition to trade relations with the successor states.
MFN and GATT Relations: The United States suspended GATT relations with the CSFR and withdrew MFN treatment in 1951 when Congress withdrew executive authority to grant MFN status to communist countries.
In April 1992, however, pursuant to statute, the President determined that Title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 (Jackson-Vanik amendment) ceased to apply to the CSFR.
Permanent MFN treatment and eligibility for export credits and investment guarantees were then extended to the CSFR.
Removal of the CSFR from Title IV also cleared the way for the United States to normalize GATT relations with the CSFR through an exchange of letters in December 1992; this effectively nullified the 1951 suspension.
Both the Czech Republic and Slovakia separately applied to accede to, and became full members of, the GATT/WTO in 1993.
Generalized System of Preferences: The 1990 Customs and Trade Act removed the legislative prohibition against the extension of GSP benefits to the CSFR and, in late October 1990, the CSFR requested participation in the program.
In April 1991, the CSFR was designated as a GSP beneficiary country.
During the first 6 months of 1994, approximately $94.4 million worth of imports from the Czech Republic, and $22 million from Slovakia were eligible for benefits under the GSP program.
Bilateral Trade Agreement: A bilateral trade agreement between the United States and the CSFR was signed in April 1990, and entered into force on November 17, 1990.
Following the normalization of GATT relations in late 1992, the U.S.-CSFR trade agreement was amended to utilize GATT safeguards and to extend the agreement's provisions for ten years.
Bilateral Investment Treaty: The United States and the CSFR signed a Bilateral Investment Treaty on October 22, 1991.
This agreement incorporates the provisions of the standard U.S. bilateral investment treaty.
The Treaty was approved by the U.S. Senate on August 11, 1992, and went into effect on December 19, 1992.
Trade Relations with Successor States: Both emerging states of the former CSFR are being treated as equal successors.
The provisions of the Bilateral Investment Treaty and the Trade Agreement (including MFN) apply to both countries.
Both states will remain beneficiaries under the GSP program, as long as they continue to meet the statutory criteria.
The United States supports GATT/WTO membership for each successor, with the expectation that they will assume the current GATT/WTO responsibilities of the CSFR.
The successor states acceded to the GATT as new countries under Article XXXIII.
Their accession, however, was backdated to January 1, 1993 so that there was no lapse in membership.
Both states are signatories to the Uruguay Round Agreement.
Bilateral Trade: The United States had a $170 million trade surplus with the CSFR in 1992, but was estimated to have had a $21.9 total trade deficit with the successor states in the first nine months of 1993.
In 1994, the Czech Republic was projected to have had a trade deficit with the United States of $115 million, and Slovakia a deficit of $63 million.
Hungary
Hungary was granted MFN treatment in 1978, pursuant to a Title IV trade agreement and the issuance of a Jackson-Vanik waiver.
Pursuant to legislation (which also affected the CSFR) Congress authorized the President to terminate the application of Title IV, including Jackson-Vanik, to Hungary.
Hungary was thus "removed" from the Title IV list on April 10, 1992.
Hungary was designated a beneficiary country under the U.S. GSP program in November 1989, and its exports under the program continue to increase.
In the first six months of 1994, $149 million of Hungarian exports to the United States were eligible for benefits under GSP.
Business and Economic Relations Treaty:
In 1991 the United States and Hungary began negotiations for a Business and Economic Relations Treaty designed to promote bilateral trade and investment with Hungary.
Basic elements of the treaty included guarantees for the treatment of investment consistent with those contained in other U.S. bilateral investment treaties, strengthened business facilitation provisions, and comprehensive intellectual property protection.
In July 1993, the two sides concluded the intellectual property portion of the Business and Economic Relations Treaty.
Under the agreement, the Republic of Hungary agrees to provide product patent protection; previously patents were limited to industrial processes.
Because of this change, Hungary was removed from the "Special 301" "priority watchlist" in 1993.
The IPR agreement also provides other patent and copyright protection provisions.
The investment portion of the Business and Economic Relations
Treaty remains to be concluded.
Problems remain concerning the provision of National Treatment; these stem from commitments Hungary made to the EU under the terms of their Association Agreement.
GATT/WTO Relations: Like many Eastern European countries, Hungary has been renegotiating its GATT protocol to remove mechanisms originally inserted to deal with its state-trading economies.
Hungary is a signatory to the Uruguay Round Agreement.
Bilateral Trade: In 1994, the U.S. had a trade surplus with Hungary of $42 million, or $7 million more than in 1993.
U.S. merchandise exports to Hungary in 1994 were $392 million, down $42 million from 1993.
U.S. imports from Hungary totaled $350 million in 1994, down from $401 million in 1993.
The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment in Hungary was $3.1 billion in 1994.
The United States private sector is the largest single investor in Hungary.
Poland
Bilateral Trade: In 1994, the U.S. trade surplus with Poland was $310 million, $152.5 million less than in 1993.
U.S. exports to Poland during this time were $960 million, down slightly from $974.5 million in 1993.
U.S. imports from Poland totaled $410.7 million in 1994, or $43.3 million less than in 1993.
The stock of U.S. foreign direct investment in Poland was $1 billion in 1994.
Poland became a GSP beneficiary in January 1990.
During the first six months of 1994, $184 million of U.S. imports from Poland were eligible for GSP benefits.
Tariff Dispute/Association Agreement with the EU: On March 1, 1992, Poland entered into an Association Agreement (which includes provisions for free trade in all non-agricultural sectors) with the EC (now EU).
Just prior to the implementation of that Agreement, Poland increased its applied MFN rates of duty.
Consequently, U.S. exporters to Poland faced tariffs significantly higher than those applied to EU exporters.
Scores of U.S. exporters and dozens of members of Congress complained that this discrimination was resulting in lost U.S. sales and contracts in Poland in many high-growth U.S. industry sectors, such as electronics, computers, telecommunications, and in a number of agricultural sectors.
Beginning in September 1992, the United States held a number of bilateral meetings with Poland to address the tariff issue.
As a result, in July 1993 Poland agreed to suspend tariffs on approximately 70% (by value) of items for which the U.S. had requested such relief.
Tariff-rate quotas were also established for imports of semi-conductor chips and other computer-related products.
In late 1993, Poland agreed to extend these concessions through 1994.
Business and Economic Relations Treaty: In March 1990, the United States and Poland signed a Business and Economic Relations Treaty which incorporated the investment protection and guarantees of standard U.S. bilateral investment treaties, expanded protection for intellectual property, and removed obstacles to the efficient operation of commercial ventures.
The Treaty was approved by the United States in October 1990 and approved by the Polish legislature in early 1991.
The United States delayed the entry into force of the Treaty until the Polish government passed legislation in the areas of patents and copyrights, and adhered to the Berne Convention.
Passage of the legislation was completed in early 1994, and the Polish Government took action to adhere to the Berne Convention in July.
Instruments of ratification were exchanged during President Clinton's trip to Warsaw and the BET entered into force on August 6, 1994.
GATT/WTO Relations: Poland has asked the GATT/WTO to renegotiate its original terms of participation in that organization, which reflected the centrally planned nature of its economy, and to replace them with a standard tariff-based Protocol of Accession and Schedule of Tariff Concessions.
GATT/WTO CPs have established a Working Party which is discussing Poland's request.
In 1994, the United States continued to work with Poland to achieve full integration into the GATT/WTO, based on market-oriented principles.
Romania
Bilateral Trade Agreement: A new trade agreement, signed in April 1992, went into force in November 1993, upon U.S. ratification.
The new Agreement replaced a previous agreement, the MFN provisions of which had been suspended.
It includes provisions for market access, trade promotion, financial transactions in freely convertible currencies, and strong protection on intellectual property.
In November 1993, Romania received a waiver of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment.
The waiver made Romania eligible for MFN treatment.
Bilateral Investment Treaty: The United States and Romania signed a bilateral investment treaty in Bucharest on May 28, 1992.
The Agreement, based on the standard U.S. bilateral investment treaty, will improve the investment climate for U.S. businesses by guaranteeing effective compensation in the event of an expropriation, and mandatory access to third party arbitration for investment disputes.
The Romania Parliament approved the treaty on November 9, 1992, and the U.S. Senate gave its advice and consent to the Agreement in 1993.
It entered into force in January 1994.
GATT Relations: Romania has been a GATT Contracting Party (CP) since 1973, based on special terms of participation reflecting its non-market economy.
Progress toward fuller integration with the GATT is currently being reviewed by GATT CPs.
Bilateral Trade: The United States had a trade surplus with Romania of $139.8 million in the first nine months of 1993.
Preliminary figures suggest that the U.S. will enjoy a $76 million surplus in 1994.
U.S. exports to Romania continue to grow, totaling $220 in 1994.
U.S. imports from Romania grew sharply to $144 million in 1994, up from $39 million in 1993.
The Former Yugoslavia
With the outbreak of internal conflict in the second half of 1991, the central government was unable to maintain its authority throughout all of Yugoslavia.
On December 5, 1991, the U.S. Government applied economic sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, and the textile visa arrangement and GSP benefits for Yugoslav exports were suspended.
These actions reflected U.S. resolve to use all available means to persuade parties to the hostilities to resolve their differences through peaceful means.
Although trade sanctions remain in place, several of the former republics worked during 1992 to establish individual trade regimes.
The United States has formally recognized four of the former republics: Slovenia, Croatia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Dissolution of the Federal Republic: Yugoslavia benefitted from MFN tariff treatment with the United States from 1948 to 1991; MFN treatment is now accorded to all of the former republics of Yugoslavia except Serbia and Montenegro.
Although Yugoslavia joined the GATT in 1966 with a standard Protocol of Accession, its position in the GATT/WTO will slowly be replaced by memberships of the individual republics of the former Yugoslavia.
Slovenia initiated negotiations for GATT membership in October 1992, became a GATT member in 1994, and a WTO member in 1995.
Croatia and Macedonia became GATT observers in 1993; Croatia has applied for full membership.
Yugoslavia received benefits under the U.S. GSP program since the program's establishment in 1975.
The entire country was suspended from GSP eligibility in December 1991, but each of the former republics -- except Serbia and Montenegro -- was re-designated a beneficiary of the program on September 11, 1992.
Bilateral Trade: For 1990, the U.S. trade deficit with Yugoslavia was $211 million, $89 million lower than in 1989.
U.S. exports to Yugoslavia in 1990 were $565 million.
U.S. imports from Yugoslavia in 1990 totaled $776 million or $23 million lower than in 1989.
______________________________________________________________________
1994 Annual Report ______________________________________________________________________
