[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Since then, scientists from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project II (GISP2), funded by the National Science Foundation, have been using the finely detailed atmospheric record preserved in the ice to examine regular oscillations in climate, climatic interactions between the northern and southern hemispheres, and human response to environmental change in the Arctic.
GISP researchers met recently to discuss findings on these and other topics.
The ice sheet "archive" was created as snow fell over Greenland year after year, trapping the gases, chemicals, and dust of the atmosphere, and eventually compressing into ice.
The GISP2 core, along with a complementary core drilled by the European Greenland Ice Core Project (GRIP), spans more than 100,000 years of climate history.
Some highlights of the GISP workshop:
The Human Factor: Anthropologists are using the GISP2 record to take a more refined look at settlement history in the North Atlantic.
One focus has been how the Little Ice Age, recorded in the Greenland ice sheet as beginning between 1400 and 1420, affected human settlement in Greenland.
Two very different cultures had colonized Greenland by then--the Vikings, who were farmers, and the Eskimo (Inuit), a hunting people--and climate change affected them quite differently.
Climate history can be read in the archeological sites of Norse farmers in Greenland, explained Hunter College anthropologist Thomas McGovern.
Cooling temperatures are recorded in soil layers that blanket the abandoned farm sites, where remains of typical Arctic insects begin to replace those associated with agriculture.
The Thule Eskimo, who were migrating east as the Norse moved west, were better able to cope with the climate chill.
Versatile and well-adapted to Arctic conditions, the Inuit hunted on land, on ice, and at sea, and had some of the largest dog teams known in the Arctic.
"The two parallel cases give us evidence of different human responses to environmental change," explained anthropologist Susan Kaplan of Bowdoin College.
The annual layers of the GISP core are now enabling a closer match between climate and human history.
Climate Rhythms Mark the Ice: The ice core's unbroken record for the last glacial period reveals that concentrations of six chemical species--ions of calcium, chloride, potassium, magnesium, sodium, and sulfate--have generally risen and fallen together during this period, according to the University of New Hampshire's Paul Mayewski, GISP2 chief scientist.
This group of ions traces the dynamics of the polar circulation cell of the Northern Hemisphere's atmosphere.
In colder periods, the polar cell expanded to the south and the atmosphere was better mixed, as noted by increases in the ion levels.
During thaws, the polar cell contracted, and ion levels fell.
Mayewski uses the ions to trace periodic patterns in climate history, which he believes are linked to variations in the Earth's orbit and to solar variations.
He discerns periodicities ranging from the scale of decades to tens-of-thousands of years.
"If these periodicities are as important to climate change as the GISP2 record suggests, we should also find them in the climate of the Southern Hemisphere, as recorded in Antarctic ice," Mayewski said.
North/South Relations: Michael Bender of the University of Rhode Island has used the variation in isotopes of atmospheric oxygen, which are trapped in the ice layers, to establish a common time-scale between the GISP2 core from the Northern Hemisphere and the Vostok core from Antarctica--giving a global picture of climate.
The isotopes serve as temperature indicators.
Warm interglacial periods, or interstadials, seen in the northern core made their mark at Vostok only when longer than 2,000 years in duration.
Between 15,000 and 110,000 years ago, Greenland had 24 interstadials, but only eight of these, all longer than 2,000 years, were recorded in Antarctica.
"Climate change is much more abrupt in Greenland than Antarctica, and the inference is that these events began in the North Atlantic, not in Antarctica," Bender said.
The Methane Mystery: Methane variations during the last 110,000 years are closely tied to temperature fluctuations during the same time, according to Todd Sowers of Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and Ed Brook of the University of Rhode Island, who have measured the methane concentrations of air trapped in the core.
The tropics produce much of the atmosphere's methane, so a tie between the North Atlantic temperatures and methane implies a climate link between the two geographic regions.
Tracings of methane and Greenland temperatures part company, however, during two periods.
In the first case, around 70,000 years ago, two large interstadials affected atmospheric methane little.
And secondly, around 8,800 years ago, methane levels dropped 20 percent, remaining there for 3,000 to 4,000 years before slowly rising.
A Sudden Chill 8,000 Years Ago: What made temperatures suddenly plunge 8,000 years ago, after most of the ice had retreated? This, the greatest cooling during the entire Holocene, or present warm period, shows up in ice chemistry, the quantity of snowfall, and other indicators, according to Richard Alley, glaciologist at Pennsylvania State University.
Evidence of changed methane levels at this time show that the climate shift reached well beyond Greenland.
Most earlier climate oscillations recorded in Greenland ice have been tied to ice sheet behavior, so this recent chill poses a puzzle.
A Meteorite Footprint: In 1908, an asteroid plummeted into the atmosphere over Siberia's Tunguska River region, exploding with an estimated energy of 15 megatons, and flattening trees for hundreds of square miles.
Preliminary studies of two shallow ice cores by Robert Sherrell of Rutgers University, Edward Boyle of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Robert Rocchia, Centre des Faibles Radioactivites, France, have shown 4- to 20fold jumps in the iridium concentration in Greenland ice from 1908.
Iridium deposits can indicate a meteorite impact, because extraterrestrial material is much richer in the element than is the Earth's crust.
If confirmed, this will be the first demonstration of a meteorite impact recorded in ice.
Iridium "spikes" may be detectable in deep ice from similar or larger meteorites that may hit the Earth as often as every 500 years or so.
A meteorite's signature, however, must be distinguished from that of a volcanic eruption.
The researchers found an 18-fold iridium enrichment in Greenland ice corresponding with a sharp increase in sulfate produced by the 1783 eruption at Lakigigar, Iceland.
They saw no such volcanic fingerprint in the 1908 ice, however, bolstering the Tanguska source hypothesis.
Volcanic Fire and Ice: Evidence of past volcanic eruptions preserved in the GISP2 core, notably sulfur and volcanic glass, can help reveal how a particular eruption affected climate.
Examining ice over the past 9,000 years, the University of New Hampshire's Gregory Zielinski has found that eruptions were larger and more frequent in the millenium just after the last deglaciation.
He suggests that the melting of the ice sheets may have spurred volcanism by removing a great weight from the Earth's crust-- metaphorically akin to "popping a cork."
Zielinski has also found a prominent sulfate spike spanning several years of GISP2 ice, believed to mark the eruption of Toba, Sumatra, 68,000-75,000 years ago.
An event this long-lived could have altered the temperature of the atmosphere, he suggested, and had a major impact on climate.
NSF Celebrating 50 Years Directorate for Geosciences, NSF 4201 Wilson Boulevard, Room 705N, Arlington, Virginia, 22230 Tel: 703.292.8500 | FAX: 703.292.9042 Last Modified: Sep 05, 2003 NSF Privacy Policy
