15 January 2004 Governor Tim Pawlenty, State of Minnesota Commissioner Dan McElroy, Department of Finance Dan McElroy, Chair Stadium Screening Committee It gives me great pleasure to submit this proposal for the Star of the North Stadium Complex, a combined Baseball Football facility.
I look forward to an opportunity for a personal presentation to you and the distinguished members of the Stadium Screening Committee on 20 January.
Thank you.
Respectfully, Richard G. Wolfgramm 807 Osceola Avenue Saint Paul, Minnesota 55105-3329 STA I NTRODUCTION R OF THE NORTH STADIUM CO MPLEX We should not build stadiums because teams threaten to leave town.
We should build stadiums because they are civic structures, like theaters, libraries, performing arts centers and universities.
We should build stadiums because, properly designed, they are a community asset, reflecting a public purpose and our values as participants and competitors in the larger world.
NARR ATIVE DESCRIPTION Certain key concepts drive the development of this design for a sports-complex: We should build two stadiums to be used by three primary tenants (the Minnesota Twins, the Minnesota Vikings and the Minnesota Gophers.
The two stadiums should be built on a single site, creating a destination for additional users and minimizing the cost of infrastructure improvements.
The two stadiums should be built with one movable roof, capable of being slid from one venue to the other.
The two stadiums should be built now to take advantage of the forty-year low of interest rates.
The twin stadiums should be built on the Saint Paul campus of the University of Minnesota.
The University should own the stadiums and it would share in revenues generated by leases to professional sports teams.
The University of Minnesota is the most beloved institution in the State.
It could benefit enormously by participating in a development that addresses its own needs as well as the needs of professional teams.
I. SIT E IZE 1.
LOCATION/S The location of the proposed site is 50 acres, out of several hundred acres of land, currently used for agricultural research on the Saint Paul campus of the University of Minnesota.
The campus is in Falcon Heights, adjacent to the State Fair.
The Midway area is in the geographic center of the Twin Cities Metropolitan region.
This location will help quell the political rhetoric, eliminate the animosity between two cities, and end the wasteful spending of planning departments in two municipalities that has characterized and plagued development for years.
At some time in the future the University's agricultural research fields will be relocated to a 7,000-acre site in Rosemount.
Agricultural research is no longer viable in an urban area.
A baseball stadium large enough to accommodate 42,000 seats on four levels (Lower Deck, Suite Level, Club Level and Upper Deck), expandable to 45,000 seats should be built.
A majority of the seats will be along the 1st and 3rd base lines.
The design will include 60 private suites; 12 group party suites; 4,000 Club seats, and accessible seating for 800; requirements outlined by the team.
With concourses, restroom areas, concession areas, restaurants, etc., the design will be compatible with the requirements of the Minnesota Twins as outlined in a recent presentation to the Screening Committee.
Additional design features and elements are outlined below in Item #6: Nature of Combined Facilities.
2.
AC CESSIBILITY This site is equally accessible from the East and West Metro areas, and from either downtown.
The site is north of Interstate I-94, east of Hwy. 280, and south of the intersection of 35W and Hwy. 36.
There are currently no improvements scheduled by MnDot. for either Hwy. 280, or Hwy. 36.
Long-overdue and necessary improvements to these highways could coincide with the construction of the stadiums and be planned for in the same way roads, bridges and other public infrastructure systems were upgraded for the Mall of America.
3.
PARKING/I NFRASTRUCTURE There is ample space for surface parking or parking structures adjacent to the stadium.
Parking structures would be used for University commuters and as transit terminals.
4.
TRA NSIT CONNE CTIONS Transit is critical to sports due the nature of large crowds coming and going simultaneously and in large groups.
Transportation will depend on the integration of several modes.
A true inter-modal transit system, to include automobile, conventional transit, PRT, and perhaps LRT, will be required.
The Center for Transportation Studies at the University would lead and coordinate the efforts of the Department of Transportation and the Metropolitan Council to develop a transit model for this project.
5.
STADIUM RE D LATED EVELOPMENT A stadium complex would become a destination for other events and activities including University sports, professional soccer, outdoor major league hockey games, and high school baseball and football tournaments.
The sports complex could be home to many more teams than the Viking's regularly scheduled eight to ten professional football games and the Twin's 81 professional baseball games.
The University will be in a position to develop additional sports related curriculum through its medical school, like a sports medicine research program and a sports fitness program for the aging - a growing concern for the boomer generation.
Other development in the vicinity of the complex will include a major hotel, 5,000 units of student housing and various retail establishments.
6.
COMBINED LOCATIO N Combined planning and construction will require phasing of various elements.
The Minnesota Twins do not want to delay an opportunity for a new stadium while the Vikings and Gophers are still planning.
Not only are the stadiums combined, but the stadium complex also needs to be integrated into the long-range development plans of the University.
Academic buildings, student housing, transit systems and plans for openspaces need to be considered jointly.
A plan for co-locating the stadiums need not delay the Twins current initiative.
The idea of co-locating the baseball and Properly designed, the stadiums can share areas, ticketing areas, mechanical systems, design solution that does not compromise turf, etc. football stadiums offers several advantages.
elements like the roof, concourses, training etc.
This will make for a more cost-effective other design criteria like sight lines, natural For purposes of discussion and comparison, Bank One Ballpark in Phoenix serves as the baseball prototype for this proposal.
Bank One Ballpark was designed by Ellerbe-Becket Architects for the Arizona Diamondbacks.
(Ellerbe-Becket Architects of Minneapolis was originally founded by Tom Ellerbe of Saint Paul.)
Bank One Ballpark is unique in that the orientation of the field is perpendicular to the orientation of the building.
The long axis of the field from home plate to center field is perpendicular to the long axis of the building shell and roof structure.
Putting a ballpark into a building with a fixed roof is a little bit like putting a round peg into a square hole.
Compromises are made; the building becomes obsolete.
Putting a ballpark into a building with a retractable roof is both difficult and extremely costly while a movable roof (accommodating two stadiums built side by side) is doable and far less expensive.
The football stadium for the Vikings and the Gophers will be designed to meet the requirements of both teams.
The Vikings want seating for 68,500 expandable to 72,000.
The Gophers want seating for 50,000 expandable to 80,000.
A stadium for 70,000 expandable to 80,000 is realistic.
A stadium with a movable roof, as described above, will allow for games in all seasons and in all weather.
A stadium with a movable roof will allow for aerial television shots from the Monday Night Football blimp and for dramatic outdoor fireworks displays after a victory.
This design will have no compromise for the fans or the players.
II.
FINANCING ES AND 1.
SOURC USES Financing will be provided through a combination of private business contributions and bonds issued pursuant to the laws of the State of Minnesota with such authorizations for revenue safeguards as the Minnesota State Legislature shall deem appropriate.
2.
PRIV ATE INVESTMENT Private contributions will be in the form of required individual and corporate contributions from the leagues and professional sports team owners.
3.
PUBLIC I NVESTMENT Public investment will be through bonds issued by the State of Minnesota.
The prevailing interest rates are the lowest in 40 years and create an opportunity for cost savings to the public.
Financing may also involve dedicated revenue streams such as prepaid rent, naming rights, and concessions from end users of the facility.
The Saint Paul campus of the University of Minnesota is efficient for taxpayers who will not have to build other University stadiums at significant cost to the public.
This plan allows the University to have modern state-of-the-art facilities on a shared basis with professional teams without the burden of placing a `full faith and credit' obligation against that institution.
Another advantage of one-site planning is the cost efficiency of providing utilities and roads, many of which can be planned for as if for a single tenant.
4.
O M WNERSHIP AND ANAGEMENT Owner: Manager: III.
The University of Minnesota The Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission COMMUNITY SUPPORT LOCAL G OVERNMENT AND Neither the University of Minnesota nor the City of Falcon Heights have been approached regarding this proposal.
CONC LUSION : Stadiums must have an overriding PUBLIC PURPOSE, a notion that is absolutely essential to the success of this effort.
PUBLIC PURPOSE is the ingredient that has been missing from previous discussions.
It is a key element of the largest public-private partnership in the State of Minnesota.
This proposal changes the conversation.
This proposal illustrates a plan that can capture the passion that people have for sports and can include our residents, taxpayers and voting public as stakeholders in the process, a true civic venture.
