Minnesota Pollution Control Agency Update: Investigation of deformed frogs July 30, 1997 he Minnesota Pollution Control Agency is continuing to research why so many of Minnesota's frogs are developing deformities in recent years.
Again this summer, reports have started to come in to the MPCA and other agencies of deformed frogs being found in various parts of the state.
If the 1997 season follows the pattern begun in 1995, the number of reports may increase through the late summer as the juvenile frogs from this year's hatch start appearing.
We will know more as the season progresses.
Currently the MPCA is working in partnership with several other agencies to investigate this phenomenon, which has now been reported in a number of other states as well.
These partners include the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, which is helping to analyze water and sediment chemistry at selected sites in Minnesota that recently have had abnormal frog populations; and the National Wildlife Health Center Laboratory in Madison, Wis., part of the U.S. Geological Survey's Biological Resources Division, which will be doing diagnostic workup on frogs from several Minnesota sites.
There are also plans for additional analysis of selected sites by the USGS office in Lawrence, Kansas.
An office of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency is conducting experiments in rearing frog eggs and carrying out toxicity tests on water from selected sites that had abnormal frogs in 1996.
T
analysis of tissue, others were sent to researchers for examination of their chromosomes and cell micronuclei.
These frogs also will be examined for evidence of parasitic infestation.
Where possible, multiple use is made of frogs collected from study sites to minimize the number of frogs removed from the sites.
Snails also are being collected from each site for tissue analysis, with the idea that snails as herbivores are consuming the same food that tadpoles do, and therefore may be surrogates for evidence of possible bioaccumulation from the breeding pond.
During July, young frogs are being surveyed for abnormalities.
During August and September, frogs will be collected for several kinds of research (see next page).
The second survey is called a global survey, in which a field crew is surveying different regions of the state for abnormal frogs.
The selected sites are among those reported to the MPCA last year, and also from new reports which come in by phone or from the Hamline University "Thousand Friends of Frogs" program or the USGS/EPA national reporting center in Jamestown, N.D.
The aim of the global survey is to verify and document abnormal frog reports statewide (up to 80 sites) and to collect frogs from locations that appear to be "hot spots" having high percentages of abnormal frogs.
From a selected set of these sites (up to 20 distributed through the state), limited water chemistry samples will be taken and frogs will be collected for biological analysis, specifically skeletal histology and diagnostic workup for disease agents and other workup where possible.
Field work in 1997 The MPCA is conducting two types of field surveys.
One is an intensive survey of 14 sites through the state, some of which have normal frog populations and some with abnormal populations.
This project was begun last year.
At these sites, extensive water chemistry analysis is being done on a regular basis, and sediment sampling will begin soon.
(The majority of these sites have had four rounds of water sampling thus far; sediment sampling will start late in July.)
Tadpoles of leopard frogs from these sites were collected for
Research by state investigative team In addition to these field activities, the MPCA is using funding from the 1997 Governor's initiative to continue working with a number of researchers on specific analysis of deformed frogs collected this summer, including:
This fact sheet can be made available in other formats, such as Braille, large type or audiotape upon request.
Printed on recycled paper with at least 10% fibers from paper recycled by consumers.
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency · Dr. David Hoppe, University of Minnesota/Morris, is conducting specific population surveys and reviewing historical information.
· Dr. Robert McKinnell, University of Minnesota/St.
Paul, will be examining selected organs and tissues of normal and abnormal male frogs.
· Dr. Debra Carlson, Augustana College, Sioux Falls, S.D., will be analyzing frog chromosomes for possible damage.
· Dr. Jeanne Lust, College of St. Benedict/St.
Johns University, Collegeville, Minn., will be analyzing cell micronuclei for evidence of genetic damage.
· Dr. Michael Lannoo of Ball State University in Indiana will be doing skeletal and neural histology.
He will be looking for evidence of certain agents which can cause characteristic changes to frogs' skeletal or neural systems.
· Dr. Stephen Goldberg of Whittier College in California will be analyzing frogs for parasites.
These researchers are compiling a "severity index" of abnormalities so that the degree of abnormalities at study sites can be related to the physical and chemical data (water and sediment chemistry) and estimates of the extent of parasitic or other infections at the sites.
The idea is that if more of the potential cause is present at a particular site, one would expect the abnormalities to be worse.
There should be a relationship between the degree of cause (the "dose") and the degree of effect (the "response").
Sampling of tadpoles so far this summer has shown a few with abnormalities.
Abnormal frogs are being found as well.
Thus far, the percentage of abnormalities found at the study sites ranges from a few percent to 13 percent.
More substantial surveys of the populations will take place in August and September, and possibly into early October before the frogs seek their overwintering sites.
Frogs that are collected are measured and weighed, and any abnormalities or external lesions are carefully
documented using field observation protocols modified from those of the National Wildlife Health Center.
To date, two field teams from MPCA and Dr. Hoppe's office have been surveying sites.
MPCA staff Dorothy Bowers is coordinating the field work, with overall coordination by Judy Helgen and Mark Gernes.
The intensive survey work is being done by Dorothy Bowers and intern Jeff Canfield (St. Olaf College).
The global survey crew consists of interns Drew Catron (St. Olaf College) and Anna Bosch (University of Minnesota/Morris).
One of the difficulties in this field work is establishing appropriate control sites, that is, sites where no abnormalities have been observed.
For example, one site that was selected as a potential control turned out this year to have abnormal wood frog tadpoles.
Only after the field work is done will we know whether most of the potential control sites actually sustained normal populations.
To report abnormal frogs Although the majority of field work is being conducted by professional staff, MPCA staff also would like to know about abnormal frogs that citizens find this year.
Please contact the MPCA to report sightings of abnormal frogs, at (612) 296-6300 or (800) 657-3864.
Observe and note any abnormalities carefully and take photographs if possible, but please do not remove the frogs from their environment.
Sightings also may be reported to the Frog Hotline of the Thousand Friends of Frogs program, (612) 523-2812 or (800) 888-2182.
For information on the deformed frogs investigation, contact the MPCA's Public Information Office at (612) 296-7792 or (800) 657-3864.
Or check our worldwide web site at www.pca.state.mn.us (click on "hot topics").
Minnesota Pollution Control Agency 520 Lafayette Road St. Paul, Minnesota 55155 USA www.pca.state.mn.us
