Text and Activities: Karen Williams Illustrations: Louise Zemaitis PAGE # 1 i SUBJECT Rain B arrel Butterfly Milkweed w/ taproot E. Red Cedar w/ spreading roots Arrowwood Viburnum Bayberry Beach Plum Black Cherry Creeping Juniper
2 3 4 5 6 7 8
E. Red Cedar 9 10' Flower Garden 11 Flower Garden 12` Hackberry 13 Hollies 14 Ornamental Grass 15 Yews 16 Celery Activity 17 19 Sand / Soil Activity Outdoor Water Use Survey 18 Seedling Activity 20 Backyard Wildlife
Dear Parents: This coloring book is designed to aquaint children with some of the concepts fimdamentalto gtxdbng under low water conditions.
These concepts have their base in two fields, ecology and horticulture.
Ecology studies the relationship of organisms (plants and animals) to their environment.
Horticulture is the science and art of growing- vegetables, flowers, and ornamental plants.
Since low water gardening (also known as xeriscaping) requires the use of plants that can flourish under natural conditions, without a lot of supplemental water, its application is an excellent opportunity for children to learn about the interaction of the physical and biological environment.
Low- gardening does not have to exclude other types of gardens, Most ofthe plants illustrated in this book have ornamental and/or wildlife value.
We have tried to include these uses in the illustzations, especially the wildlife uses because children are instinctively interested in wildlife.
Hopefully, children will use the m to begin an exploration of wildlife that exists in their environment.
While wat
I am constantly amazed at the information my children pick up while exploring in our yar
Cape May, along with the entire county, is facing a water crisis since withdrawal of water from the aquifers that supply the region exceeds the rate of Ma T!Gs is causing salt water intrusion into local wells and raising concerns about the sust
Conservation of water is critical, and outdoor uses are one of the easiest to reduce, using sound low water gardening principles.
Weurge youtousethisbook as a beginning.
Get out into your yard with your kids and help them learn science through gardening.
If you do not feel you know enoq
Kids and adults learn best through doing and trial and error is a large part of that process.
Mistakes this year can be tumed into successes the next if one is observant (buy small plants ifunsure, instead of big, expensive ones).
Just get out and do it. l
.
Happy
Gardening,
Karen Williams
It is easy to conserve water while growing a nice garden.
This coloring book will help you learn how.
Rain barrels collect rain water that falls on houses.
The water cifjn be saved to water plants water plants when it doesn't rain.
Mulches are s!pread on around plants.
Tl=Y can be shredded 4bark, wood chips, or grass chppmgs.
a 1 a* .
Mdches help keep weeds Corn growing and keep the sun from drying out the . * l
so11 t
1
lants get the water they need to live from th soil through their roots.
Plants that grow with.
a lot of water have speci roots that help the plants get water
butterfly milkweed f have a taproot into the soil.
It can get `root after the soil / surface has dried.
/ 4 /
/ \ \ \ \ \ \
/ / I
\ \
2
Plants like eastern red cedar (Juniperis virginiana) have spreading roots that coller;t water from a large area.
The next pages show some plants that can grow without a lot of water.
3
These bushes have white flowers in spring and blue berries in fdl.
The branches grow very straight and were used by Native Americans to make arrowshafts.
The berries ripen in fall and are eaten by migrating birds like this thrush.
4
Arromood (Viburnum dentatum)
Bayberry (Myrica pmrrsvleaniea) Bayberries grcnv wild ikNew Jersey sand dunes.
The berries are eaten bq many animals in win
Beach Plum (Prunus mudmu) The white flowers of beach plum are a welcome sight in spring.
The plums ripen in fall.
My people pick them to make jam.
6
i1" "i1 ii j* 1.
1 f f i 4 e
i. /
Black Cherry (Prunus serutina)
This tree will grow almost with little care.
Butterflies the flowers in spring.
It important as a food SOWC`R local and migratory birds.
mywhere nectar on is very for both
Creeping
Juniper
(Juniperis
~~~iz~~g~2~~) These evergreen bushes cover the ground.
The shade they make helps
keep weeds from growin; and protects the ground from the hot drying sun.
These tall straight evergreens can bc used to protect a house from winter winds, Cedar waxwings and other birds eat the berries 9
i
.O
Globe Thistle (Echinops ritro) Gloriosa Daisy (Rudbeckia hirta) Hollyhocks (Althea spp.)
Purple Coneflower (Echinea purpurea) Wild Bergamot {Monardafistulosa)
Hackberry (CeZtis occidentalis) These trees have a taproot, SO they CZUI get water thorn deep in the earth.
Snout and hackberry butterfly caterpillars eat the leaves.
Can you fmd the caterpillar hidden in this picture.
12
Mmy people plant arc green a11 yew red berries in fall may eat the berries
hollies because tiley ad have decorative and winter.
Robins in winter*
-
Ornamental Grasses Qnamental grasses come in many sizes
and colors.
People use them in their yards because they are interesttig to look at aU year.
The seeds may attract sparrows in fall or winter.
* 14
Yews (Taxus spp.)
There are many different varieties of yew, from short to tall.
They are used as hedges ad to frame buildings.
Mockingbirds ofken use their dense evergreen branches to build nests.
15
CELERY ACTXVTY Put a rib of celery in a dry plastic bag and place it on a window sill (preferably on a sunny day).
When you get home Corn school, examine the celery.
Is it different Corn when you placed it in the bag? How? Describe the inside of the bag.
If no changes have taken place, leave the bag on the window sill for another day.
Now place the stak of celery in a glass of water and leave it for several hours.
oes the stalk of celery ch
soft . limp
soft . hmp
limp l
circle words that describe the plastic bag you placed the celery in Middle of ,Exeeriment End of Experiment B~~~~~ of Experiment dry dry dry damp bP damp `wet wet wet.
CONCLUSION What caused the changes you observed in the piece of celery?
What caused the changes you observed in the plastic bag? 16
SAND/SOIL ACTIVITY Get some sand from the beach and some soil from you family's garden..
Let them dry for several days before starting the experiment.
Place the same amount of each in two flowerpots that are the same size.
Place a saucer under each pot.
Fill one measuring cup (1 quart size) with water for each container.
Pour water slowly into each pot.
When the water starts to seep out the holes in the bottom of the flower pots, stop adding more water, Wait about 10 - 15 minues to see if the water has been absorbed from the saucer.
If it has water again until the water seeps out.
Repeat until no more water is absorbed.
Figure out how much water you used on each pot by subtracting the mount used from the beginning amount.
Which pot used more water? Why?
OBSERVATIONS
I~AI-IZ -
.Describe the beach sand afld the soil.
CoIort look closely and give details.
Which color is most common? How many colors are there? Beach Sand Garden Soil 0
Beach Sand
Texture: how does it feel when you rub it betwTeen yorxlr fingers? * (harden Soil
How much sand or soil did you place in. each pot? ---.---..* It should be the same anxount for both pots.
HQW much water did the beach sand absorb? Gginning
-.A,- am -"P-P..
1--e...-I------momt mount ieft asxLoIlxLt tlsed amount ka anx3tmt t.t.txd
"--%..
How much water did the garden soil absorb? --__111-..--.-. m ---U--I---- ---..--.-..-"..-___11 beginning iimcmnt Which material, sand or soil absorbed more water? ---...I_ Why do you think this is so?
SEEDLING ACTMTY Get some easy to grow seeds like radishes and two identical (saxne size, shape, color etc.) containers.
Make sure the containers have drain holes in the bottom.
Fill the containers with soil.
Plant the s;une number of seeds in each (10 - 20).
Water the containers when the soil surface, becomes dry.
When the seedlings are 2 - 3 inches high water both pots well.
Then cover the soil surface inone pot with 1 inch of mulch (grass clippings would work well).
Place both pots in a sunny spot and do not water.
Check the pots each day.
Which seedlings wilt fast? ,.
Date: Color of containers: Type of seeds used: --.-me Number of days to sprout: .
Number of days to grow to 2 - 3 inches: OBSERVATIONS Day `N-umber ! Pot with Mulch !I Pot without Mulch Size of containers: *
6
!
In which pot did the plants wilt fast?
Pot with Miilch
Pot without Mulch
OUTDOOR WATER USE SURVEY Conduct a water use survey of your family's garden.
Complete the questions below about your garden.
Then think with your parents about how you can reduce amount of water used in the garden.
Use the suggestions below and think of you own methods.
Be cre How times each week do YOU water YOW lam and/Qr garden?
Trees Shnibs Flower Beds GrassLLa~ o you have an automatic sprinkler system? doesn't water en its raining? ow m leak?
Vegetables Flower Boxes /Pots Does it have a rain sensor so Do any of them 0X water used m your t
outdoor faucets does your house have? If they do leak, do they need new washers?
ould you be willing to try to re 0 gardens?
water reductio , methods do you already we? Ho
s.
That water is stored until out with a watering can or
Outside showers use a lot of water.
This water usually seeps into the ground right outside the shower.
Depending on your yard (if you do have an outside shower), you might be able to collect this water, and send it to a flower bed or vegetable garden.
of plants, like the ones described in this coloring book, can grow where it is very dry, and won% need extra water in your garden.
IYhese plants could replace grass or plants that need extra water.
What different ways can you think of to cut back on the atnount of water needed in your garden? 19
BACKYARD WILDLPEE SURVEY Survey the wildlife in you backyard.
Use the sighting log provided below or m
Write down the date and time of all sightings.
Libraries are good sources of identification guides or you may already have some at home.
If you don't know what kind of animal you observe, write down a description or draw a picture to help you remember what it looked like when you get a book.
You can keep track of all kinds of information.
Some b things are what animals are doing in your yard, or how many .you see.
You may think of other things to write down.
Draw your house and garden here.
5 ' ( I
1
Guide to Activities: The fidlowing details the concepts covered in the activities found in the coloring book.
The concepts were not included in the directions in the book, because they would make the directions too lengthy and we wanted the children to think on their own rather than being told what to think.
You should encourage your cW fo think about these concepts without telling them the "right" answer, this will encourage critical thinking.
All ages of children can benefit 
Youngchiltiwill not be able to understand fully what they observe, but will absorb enough to lay the foundation for further learning as they mature.
Use your understanding of your child's intellect to guide you in helping them with these activities.
cells contain water.
In non-woody plant material, the pressure of this water ell walls is what provides the plant with rigidity.
If the water content of the plant drops below a certain level the plant will wilt or droop.
By removoing the celery rib from the refkidgerator and placing it in the sun., you cause it to transpire (lose water to the atmosphere) more rapidly.
You should see two 
First; wa@r droplets should appear on the inside of the plastic bag as water transpired by the celery condenses on the plastic.
Second, the celery should wilt or btxmme SC
If the celery does not become soft after 2 days, try su g that the celery be placed on the inside the bag may be hinderin `ndow sill withaut the bag because humi, the e saR, placing it in water should cause it to become rigid again as the celery absorbs water.
Seedling Activity This activity examines the role of mulch in controlling water loss fkom soil surfkces. the activity, it is important to be as uniform as possible between the For example, if one container is black, and the other white or green, aibscxb mom energy from the sun and heat up more, thus losing more evaporation.
If one pot has more soil that the other, it will be able to hold a greater qua.Ai$ of water and supply the seedlings for d longer period of time.
If one pot has more seedlings than the other, they will use the available water faster, since there are more of them.
The differences described above, ifthey were to occur would be sources of exPerimental error.
Scientists in all disciplines must always consider possible sources of experimental error in order to assure un-biased results.
If your child seems intrigued by this idea, you might suggest using multiples of each treatment (mulched and un-mulched pots), using a second set of pots with just soil or soil and mulch (no plants) or some combination of the two.
When scientists conduct experiments, they always run more than one replica of each treatment (in this case the treatments are mulched and un-mulched pots).
This reduces the possibility that the results observed in the experiment are due to an accident or extrordinary circumstance.
Inthis experiment, the radishes in the pot without mulch should wilt first, due to a greater rate ofwater evaporation from the soil surface.
YVater `Use Survey Every person in Cape May County contributes to the water shortage through his/her individual use.
Every gallon of water that is conserved contributes to the solution.
This activity can help children learn about their impact on the problem in a positive way9 by thinking of ways to improve the situation (limit individual water use).
It is important to provide children with a feeling of empowerment concerning our environment.
The message too offen from the media is negative, causing feelings of hopelessness.
We need to help children feel they can make a difference, If your children choose to participate in this activity, you can help bY being open and receptke.
While not advocating killing you prize (fifl in the blank), we feel you should be receptive to implementing any changes your children suggest.
Encourage further learning by suggesting they monitor the impact of any cknges in the watering practices implemented on your property.
For a further description of water conservation measures see the City's "Water Conservation Garden'* brochure.
Celery Activity
.
S`anclbii Activity `Ibis activity measures the water holding capability of dif%rent types of soil.
Soils hold water both between the individual soil particles and absorbed in the soil's organic material (decayed plant matter, called humus or compost).
The sponge-like organic material holds far greater water per unit volume than the mineral (ground up rock) portion of the soil.
Beach sand has nearly no organic matter, while garden soils have varying amounts of humus.
When conducting this experiment, it is important to make sure that all soil samples are completely dry before starting (experimental error again).
Scientists dry soil in low temperature ovens (about 2000F') for several hours.
If you are mble with using your oven for such earth pursuits, use the sun on a hot, dry day, or speed up the process in a closed car on a hot day.
In many soils, when bone dry, water will initially run quickly through.
This is due to a lack of surface tension fkom other water molecules in the soil.
This water will be absorbed through the holes in the bottom of the pot.
Eventually, the soil will become saturated, and no more water will be absorbed.
The sand should absorb much less water than a soil with humus.
As a variation, ifyou or a neighbor has a compost pile, tty the experiment with compost as well as sand and soil.
Compost is nearly 100% humus and should absorb more water than soil.
Backyard Wildlife Survey Your childmnmay already study the wildlife that uses your backyard.
Rabbits, worms, but
Children are naturally curious about their world and will observe all these things.
This activity will help to focus those observations.
While these animals may seem ordinary or mundane to you, children can learn a lot about their behavior, appearence and interactions by simple watch
tie of the easiest backyard wildlife to observe is butterflies.
If one moves slowly and takes car; not to cast a shadow over the insect, butterflies can be approached quite closely.
Most field guides list host plants, the plantseaten by the btdidlies cxtb@ks. Including these speceis in your yard may encour
Bac@ard wildlife in Cape May is not limited to typical suburban species.
Cape May is onthe Eastern Flyway and its penninsular geography funnels southbound migratory birds into the City during fall migration.- Most landbirds follow the penninsula south to Cape May Point, trying to avoid% long water crossing to lllebme.
Iluring migration, many bird species can be foundin atypical habitats, like 
It would be pr@de
Most songbirds, like warblers 
frtim' shore when the sun comes up.
If and when they make it back to land, they ,are ex@
If your children observe th
Enrxnuage your children to watch, but not approach.- They p;;iU'see,more ifthe birds are undisturbed.
Donot become too stuck on species identificatitiri.
@or beginbiriers to know the difikmmbetwm~ws, warblers, and thrushes (all common migrants through the Cape and illustrated in most field guides) is more important than howing the precise species.
Understanding how the animal uses i
Have fim w
It can be an onping project that over time will provide your children not only with an understanding of their backyard wildlife, but of seasonal cycles and of Cape May's importance as habitat for migratory birds.
S`snd/SoiI Activity `Ibis activity measures the water holding capability of different types of soil.
Soils hold water both between the individual soil particles and absorbed in the soil's organic material (decayed plant matter, called humus or compost).
The sponge-like organic material holds far greater water per unit volume than the mineral (ground up rock) portion of the soil.
Beach sand has nearly no organic matter, while garden soils have varying amounts of humus.
When conducting this experiment, it is important to make sure that all soil samples are completely dry before starting (experimental error again).
Scientists dry soil in low temperature ovens (about 2OOG') for several hours.
If you are uncomfortable with using your oven for such earth pursuits, use the sun on a hot, dry day, or speed up the process in a closed car on a hot day.
In many soils, when bone dry, water will inititiy run quickly through.
This is due to a lack of surface tension fkom other water molecules in the soil.
`Ibis water will be absorbed through the holes in the bottom of the pot.
Eventually, the soil will become saturated, and no more water wiIl be absorbed.
The sand should absorb much less water than a soil with humus.
As a vzuihm, ifyou or a neighbor has a compost pile, try the experiment with compost as well as sand and soil.
Compost is nearly 100% humus and should absorb more water than soil.
' Backyard Wildlife Survey Your chil
Rabbits, worms, lmtterf.lies and their caterpillars all qualify as wildlife.
Children are naturally curious about their world and will observe all these things.
This activity will help to focus those observations.
While these animals may seem ordinary or mundane to ~0% children can learn a lot about their behavior, appearence and interactions by simple mattcl@ Obsewahn skills learned through watching wildlife carry over into the rest of a person's life; a skill not easy to measure, but with application in all areas of ._ endeavor.
Some of the easiest backyard wildlife to observe is butterflies.
If one moves slowly and takes care not to cast a shadow over the insect., butterY%es can be approached quite closely.
Most field guides list host plants, the plantsi:
Backyard wildlife in Cape May is not limited to typical suburban species.
Cape May is on
IIhxing migration, many bird species can be fourid:in atypical habitats, like dmibbeq around houses in Cape May.
It would be pr$d
Most songbirds, like warble* 
If and when they make it back to land, they are ex
If your children observe th
Enoauage your children to WEltch, but not approach., `I'
Donot become too stuck on species identificatioii. ,
Understanding how the animal uses its environment is just as, ifnot more important.
Have fun w
It can be an ongoing project that over time will provide your children not only with an understanding of their backyard wildl%e, but of seasonal cycles and of Cape May's importance as habitat for migratory birds.
ntal Protection Cape May Ci t
rant
Cape May City Environmental spring 199
