To: From: CC: Subject: Date: Colorado Poison Control Board Members Other Interested Parties Gail Finley Rarey, EMS Section Chief Lynne Keilman, EMS Fiscal Officer Invitation to apply for open positions on the Colorado Poison Control Oversight Board January 2, 2004 This invitation is extended to all current Poison Control Oversight Board members and other individuals interested in serving on the Poison Control Board.
If you are interested in any board position open or up for reappointment at this time, complete and submit an application along with a current resume, to the Governor's Office of Boards and Commissions and submit a copy of your application to the Health Facilities and Emergency Medical Services Division within the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment.
The Poison Control Oversight Board has specific responsibilities related to the provision of poison control services and the dissemination of information concerning the care and treatment of individuals exposed to poisonous substances.
Board terms are four years and the board will meet four (4) times per year.
While there is no monetary compensation for board membership, members are reimbursed for travel expenses.
The board's required membership structure, statutory responsibilities, and a list of open and/or positions up for reappointment are attached.
The deadline for receipt of applications is April 30, 2004.
Please submit the attached application and a current resume to each of the addresses listed below: Barb Card, Director Governor's Office of Boards and Commissions 136 State Capitol Building Denver, CO. 80203 Fax 303/866-2003 AND Dr. Ellen J. Mangione, Director HFEMS Division HFEMS ­ A2 4300 Cherry Creek Drive South Denver, CO 80246 Fax 303/691-7720
If you have any questions, please feel free to contact: Gail Finley Rarey at 303/692-2997, or gail.finley-rarey@state.co.us cc: Office of Boards and Commissions Attachments: Application form Board responsibilities list and membership structure Positions Open for Appointment in July 2004
J:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.docJ:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.doc 1/29/2004
Colorado Poison Control Board Responsibilities List Effective July 1, 2002 The board shall have the following powers and duties: 1.
Review contract bids for the provision of poison control services and the dissemination of poison control information by means of a toll-free telephone network.
2.
Provide oversight and input to the department concerning the provision of poison control services and the dissemination of poison control information by means of a toll-free telephone network.
3.
The board shall exercise its powers and duties as a type 2 board.
J:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.docJ:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.doc 1/29/2004
Membership Structure as Defined by Colorado Statute
25-32-104.
Poison control services - statewide poison control oversight board - duties.
(1) As of July 1, 2002, the department of public health and environment shall allocate moneys for the provision of poison control services on a statewide basis and for the dissemination of information concerning the care and treatment of individuals exposed to poisonous substances.
The department shall have the powers and duties outlined in section 25-32-105 in carrying out the poison control services.
Provision of such poison control services shall be overseen by a statewide oversight board, described in subsection (3) of this section, which board shall have the duties and responsibilities set forth in subsection (4) of this section.
(2) On July 1, 2002, the statewide poison control oversight board, referred to in this article as the "board", which was created in 1994, in section 25.5-2-103 (2), C.R.S., shall be transferred from the department of health care policy and financing to the department of public health and environment by a type 2 transfer.
The members of the board who are serving terms on July 1, 2002, shall continue to serve for the remainder of the terms for which they were appointed by the governor; except that the member of the board who serves as the representative of the department of health care policy and financing shall no longer serve on the board and the governor shall appoint the executive director of the department of public health and environment or the executive director's designee to fill that position on the board.
(3) (a) As specified in subsection (2) of this section, on and after July 1, 2002, the board shall consist of seven members, appointed by the governor, as follows: (I) One member who is involved in the provision of hospital emergency care services; (II) One member with expertise in public health; (III) A designee of the chancellor of the university of Colorado health sciences center; (IV) The executive director of the department of public health and environment or such executive director's designee; and (V) Three members from the public at large, at least one of whom has personally utilized the services of the poison control center or has a family member who has utilized the services of the poison control center.
(b) Each congressional district within the state shall be represented by one member of the board designated in paragraph (a) of this subsection (3). (c) At least one member of the board shall reside west of the continental divide.
(d) Each member appointed pursuant to paragraph (a) of this subsection (3) shall serve a term of four years, and the terms of the members of the board shall remain staggered as originally determined by the governor.
(e) A vacancy on the board occurs whenever any member moves out of the congressional district from which such member was appointed.
A member who moves out of such congressional district shall promptly notify the governor of the date of such move, but such notice is not a condition precedent to the occurrence of the vacancy.
The governor shall fill the vacancy by appointment for the un-expired term.
(f) No more than four members of the board shall be members of the same major political party.
J:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.docJ:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.doc 1/29/2004
(g) The board membership shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
(h) The members of the board shall serve without compensation; except that they shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties pursuant to this section as members of the board including, but not limited to, reasonable expenses incurred for in-state travel.
(4) (a) The board shall have the following powers and duties: (I) To review contract bids for the provision of poison control services and the dissemination of poison control information by means of a toll-free telephone network; (II) To provide oversight and input to the department concerning the provision of poison control services and the dissemination of poison control information by means of a toll-free telephone network.
(b) The board shall exercise its powers and duties as a type 2 board.
Source: L. 2002:Entire article added, p. 424, § 1, effective July 1.
25-32-103.
Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: (1) "Board" means the statewide poison control oversight board, created in section 25-32-104.
(2) "Department" means the department of public health and environment.
(3) "Poison control services" shall include the following services provided by an entity certified by a national organization whose membership is comprised of poison control centers: (a) Twenty-four-hour toll-free telephone service dedicated to disseminating information on the care and treatment of individuals exposed to poisonous substances; (b) Nurses and pharmacist specialists in poison information who are trained in the triage and treatment of poisoning and who are certified by a national organization whose membership is comprised of poison control centers; and (c) Supervision by a physician who is board-certified in medical toxicology and who shall be available twenty-four hours each day for consultation.
Source: L. 2002: Entire article added, p. 424, § 1, effective July 1; (3)(b) amended, p. 946, § 7, effective August 7.
Editor's note: Subsection (3)(b) was originally numbered as section 25.5-2-103 (2)(b), and the amendments to it in House Bill 02-1403 were harmonized with subsection (3)(b) as relocated to this section by House Bill 02-1348.
J:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.docJ:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.doc 1/29/2004
Colorado Poison Control Oversight Board Membership Structure Seven (7) Governor appointed members-- At least one member shall reside west district within the state shall be represented by one member of the board designated Statutes/TITLE 25 HEALTH/HEALTH CARE/ARTICLE 32 POISON CONTROL statewide poison control oversight board No more than four members of the board Four (4) Year Terms Appointment Description: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
A member with expertise in public health Three members of the public at large, at least one of whom has personally utilized the services of the poison control center or has a family member who has utilized the services of the poison control center.
See number 2.
See number 2.
A member who is involved in the provision of hospital emergency care services; A designee of the chancellor of the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center; and The executive director of the Department of Public Health and Environment, or such executive director's designee.
Expiration date 2004 2004 2006 2006 2004 2006 2006 of the continental divide.
Each congressional in paragraph (a) of subsection (3) of Colorado ACT/25-32-104.
Poison control services ­ shall be members of the same political party.
J:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.docJ:\updates to website\poisoncontrolapppackage2004.doc 1/29/2004
