LESSON 2C-NARRAnVE 1: How DID HUMANS ARRIVE IN NORTH AMERICA? T hink about your family's move Archaeologists believe humans originated in the Old World and migrated to the New World.
artifacts of ancient people provide to Montana.
Someone in your clues that help us study those who family moved here from moved to and lived here long before another part of our country, or even European immigrants arrived.
another part of our world.
The move, Discoveries of artifacts crafted by or migration, may have happened humans guide archaeologists to recently, or it may have taken place develop theories about the ancient lifeyears ago.
If your family's journey ways in Montana.
By studying artifacts happened in the last few decades, they and other evidence, archaeologistscan more than likely traveled to Montana reconstruct the dates of arrival, travel by motorized vehicle.
If the migration routes, and daily life of the prehistoric took place earlier, your ancestors may people who lived here.
The majority of have traveled to Montana by train, by archaeologists believe that the first covered wagon, or even on foot.
All of people arrived in Montana at least the families of the people who live in 12,000years ago.
Other archaeologists the land we call Montana immigrated believe the people arrived thousands of here-traveled here from another years earlier.
And some Native area-at some time in the past.
Americans believe that their ancestors Montana's historical archaeologists were created here and have always are interested in the lifeways of people lived in this land.
Future research and who migrated to our state during the fieldwork may change our ideas about eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
this question.
Many written records exist that help us Anthropology is the science that study the historical past.
Meriwether studies the origin, development, and Lewis and William Clark kept detailed culture of people.
Some anthropolojournals when they explored this land gists study human skeletons to deterin the early nineteenth century.
Other mine our physical origins and the early explorers have left us primary changes in ancient people.
Other documents, or first-hand written anthropologists study social customs accounts, of their travels.
Historic and beliefs.
On the basis of their immigrants explored the land, trapped studies, anthropologists have animals for fur, traded with the concluded that humans have adapted, American Indians who were already or changed, through time.
According to here, and mined for precious minerals.
this view, humans have evolved, just Others who moved to Montana as plants and animals have.
This ranched, homesteaded, and worked theory is challenged by people outside industrial jobs.
You, too, are a part of the scientific community who have Montana's continuing history.
other beliefs about the origins of The prehistoric era, or time, humans.
intrigues many archaeologists.
The According to current scientific Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings2-21 research, the earliest people lived in Africa, or possibly Asia, over two million years ago.
As environmental conditions shifted, people adapted to the changes.Their ability to walk in an upright position, and the use of early stone tools, helped them survive the challenges of daily life.
The human ability to think and plan ahead also made it possible for them to survive.
As time progressed,the tools humans made of stone became more refined and sophisticated.
The human ability to use fire for protection and cooking represented yet another advancement.
Anthropologists believe that human intelligence-which allows people to subsist through dangers and difficulties-separates humans from other species of mammals.
Anthropologists have developed a timeline that represents the changes and adaptations that have occurred in human development.
The most recent human expansion came around 200,000 years ago when contemporary, or modem, humans evolved.
This species, our species, is known as Homo sapiens.
Homo and sapiens are Latin words meaning "man" and "wise."
Discoveries in Europe, Asia, and Africa currently suggest that Homo Sapiens evolved in the Old World and later migrated to the New World.
You may have heard of the ancient times referred to as the Stone Age.
People made tools out of stone during this period.
Metal tools were not invented yet.
The terms Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic describe the old, middle, and new stone ages as they occurred in the Old World.
Uthic (from the Greek word jithos) means "stone."
The Paleolithic covers the greatest number of years, stretching from approximately two million years ago to about ten thousand years ago.
Few technological changes took place during the old stone age.
The Mesolithic and Neolithic were of shorter duration, and advancementsin technology progressed more rapidly.
These periods came after the last Ice Age.
Each age's length varied, depending upon the location of a culture in the world.
Old Stone Age people were intelligent hunters and gatherers.
They followed animal herds to obtain food, and they migrated with the seasons to harvest plants.
Mesolithic people were also hunters and gatherers, although they also fished in many places.
There are very few people living as hunters and gatherers in the world today.
Farming developed during the Neolithic, or New Stone,Age.
The Stone Age came to an end when metal tools and ornamentation became widely used.
Old World cultures were most affected by this development.
The Bronze Age followed the Stone Age because bronze tools and weapons were sturdier than those made of stone.
The Iron Age began as people learned to combine metals to make iron, which was even sturdier than bronze.
Europeans brought iron tools and weapons to the New World.
Before they had contact with Europeans, American Indians used tools made primarily of stone.
In Montana, stone tools were used through the 1800s.
However, once contact was established with the eastern United States, American Indians placed a high value 2-22 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society on metal tools and equipment and used them regularly.
Through the hundreds of thousands of years of Stone Age living, ancient humans migrated to most areas of the world.
Allover the world, cultures rose, developed, and disappeared over time.
Those people who were able to adapt survived.
Humans had to adapt to changes during the Ice Age in their natural and social environments.
The ancient cultures that were unable to make the necessarymodifications did not last.
Cultures in various parts of the world developed at different rates and in different directions.
The abilities to grow crops and domesticate animalsas sources of food-and to manufacture tools out of metal indicated that a culture was developing economically.
With the passing of the Stone Age, most people became less nomadic and they settled permanently in villages.
A society became a civilization when it developed social beliefs, class position, and rank and its people settled in cities.
Industry and trade with other cultures signified further growth within a civilization.
Wars with opposing societies often altered civilizations.
Cultures continue to develop and change today.
Archaeologists study archaeological sites to develop theories about the ancient travel routes to North America.
Many archaeologists believe that the first humans migrated from northeastern Asia to the New World during the last Ice Age, when ocean levels were lower.
Over the years, people then migrated all the way to the tip of South America.
An opposing theory states that people arrived first in South America and then walked north.
Yet another theory argues that the first people here came along the coasts of Greenland and Iceland.
Ocean currents, according to this theory, offered highways to the New World in any season.
An alternative boat theory states that the first people in North America arrived from Australia and the Pacific Islands.
Future archaeological discoveries and methods may lead to new interpretations of arrival or, or more likely, prove a theory that already exists.
For many archaeologists, the Bering Land Bridge theory has merit.
It states that ancient people walked from Siberia, in northeastern Asia, to what is now Alaska.
This would have been possible thousands of years ago during the Ice Ages.
The geological record shows that, during periods of cold and increased snowfall, much of the earth's water was captured in huge ice sheets and glaciers.
As the water froze on land, sea levels dropped dramatically, exposing a wide strip of land connecting Asia and North America.
Called Beringia, this land bridge would disappear as water rose during warmer periods.
Geologists believe that Beringia was exposed for travel at different times, around 38,000 BC, 26,000 BC, and 11,000 BC.
These intervals would have allowed animals and humans to migrate from one continent to another, in either direction.
Animal fossils provide the proof of a migratory route between the two continents.
Ancient camels and horses originated on our continent and migrated to Asia, leaving only fossils in North America.
Ancient animals that migrated east Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings 2-23 During the last Ice Age,there wasa land bridge acrossthe BeringStrait, betweenSiberiaandAlaska.
Archaeologistsbelieve that some of the first humanscame to North Americaacross this land bridge and then passeddown through an ice-freecorridor between the glacialice sheets.
Recent evidence suggeststhat other routes into North Americaalso existed.
COUrtesy MontanaHistorical SOdety.
from Asia included fox, wolf, bison, deer, bear, yak, and elephant.
Traffic was definitely two-way on the Bering Land Bridge.
Beringia is submerged today, with North America and Asia separated by only fifty-six miles of shallow ocean.
During the Ice Ages, Beringia was an immense stretch of land, stretching hundreds of miles wide north to south.
Ancient people may not have even been aware that they were migrating to a new continent.
More than likely, they were traveling in search of food as the seasons changed.
They were probably following herds of animals grazing across the land.
Other food sources, such as plants, also encouraged people to migrate.
And weather conditions may have forced people eastward as ice sheets moved into Siberia.
There may also have been too many people for the land to sustain.
A combination of these circumstances most likely led to the migration across the land bridge.
Ancient people living in the northern latitudes were well adapted to a climate of cold and ice.
Few trees grew on Beringia.
It was an immense grassland.
The peoples' shelters were huts made of branches or bones and animal skins.
They carried their belongings as they migrated.
They traveled in small bands, or family groups, and subsisted as hunters and gatherers.
They caught fish in lakes and along the seashores.
They may have traveled along the shorelines in small boats made of animal skins.
They probably traveled most during the warmer seasons, but sometimes they even traveled when the land was covered with winter's snow and ice.
This migration route across the Bering Land Bridge existed only during 2-24 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society the coldest part of the glacial periods.
During most of the glacial period and especially during interglacials, the ice melted and Beringia was again covered by the sea.
The pathway from the continent of origin was closed, and the people and land mammals who had crossed the bridge from Asia became North American residents.
Once on this continent, the people are believed to have eventually traveled south, but archaeologists are not sure which way they went.
At that time, large parts of Alaska were relatively free of glaciation, but huge ice sheets covered much of Canada and the northern United States, blocking the way to the south.
Most archaeologists believe that seasonal warming periods melted the edges of the glaciers and created ice-free corridors, or paths, allowing the people to migrate between the mountains and the plains.
The routes varied, depending on each season's weather; but the people probably used high plateaus extensively, negotiating their way on foot through mountain passes.
Another route to the south may have hugged the shoreline of the Pacific Coast.
During the glacial periods, when ocean levels were lower, the beaches and coastal plain were much wider than are those today.
Unfortunately, if early people did travel along this glacial shoreline, their campsites are today under the ocean and difficult for archaeologists to find and study, if they are preserved at all.
Families may have lived in the cold north country for long periods of time, or they may have hurried south as quickly as possible.
The distance from the land bridge to the tip of South America is 11,000 miles.
In studying artifacts and sites in South America, archaeologists have determined that some of these are very old-and possibly even older than those in North America! Further study of South American sites will provide additional clues to the original migration into the New World and about early life in North America.
Archaeologists study remnants of ancient trails through Montana for clues to the past movements of people.
The Old North Trail is one such trail.
Some believe this trail, or system of trails, may have been used as long as 10,000 years ago, when Montana's early travelers walked through the icefree corridor.
The path follows the eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains, or the Rocky Mountain Front.
At the front, the Great Plains extended eastward and mountains bordered the west.
Along the Old North Trail, early peoples could find shelter, wood, water, and plant and animal food sources.
Historians and prehistorians have studied remnants of ancient trails along the Rocky Mountain Front that wind across streams and through gullies and traverse ridges or go around buttes.
These scientists have found hunting drive lines and tipi rings near and along these trails.
Ruts still preserved in the dirt may indicate that some early travelers used a travois, a framework of poles used to carry belongings behind dogs or horses.
Rock cairns, or stones intentionally stacked as landmarks and symbols, occur along the route.
The Old North Trail could be the oldest and longest on our continent.
A variety of other main trails probably Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings2-25 existed, as did smaller secondary and tertiary trails.
These ancient routes connected North America long ago, much as highways do today.
Families, individuals, and groups of people traveled the trails for a variety of purposes: to visit relatives, war with enemy tribes, and embark on sacredmissions.
Other travelerstransported trade goods between different areas of the country, carrying Yellowstone's obsidian to the Ohio River, for example.
No matter which origin and travel theory proves most true, the fact is that North America (as well as Central and South America) was already inhabited by large numbers of people when European explorers and immigrants arrived.
At least six hundred separate tribes of peoplelived in NorthAmerica at that time.
They prevailed in a variety of climatesand conditions,from desertsto woodlands and from plains to the arctic.
Thesepeoplesexhibitedgreat diversityin their physical appearances and lifeways.
Each tribe had its own traditions, tools, houses,and languages.Even today, the differenttribes have their own stories of creation and accounts of where they come from.
These different tribes of "Indians" (mistakenlylabeled as such by an early explorer who thought he had reachedIndia) representthe first inhabitants of Montana.
2-26 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society LESSON 2C-NARRAnvE 2: FIRST PEOPLE-NAnVE TRADmoNs AND ARCHAEOLOGY The following texts are by Native Americans.
The first is by Roger Echo-Hawk, a Native American, about archaeological and native oral traditions regarding the first people in the New World.
The second is a Kootenai creation story.
ANCIENT WORlDS AMERICAN ORAL by Roger Echo-Hawk T he first people dwelt in a land of lingering darkness.
In some Native American origin stories, humans emerged from this region to witness the sun's creation or the ordering of night and day.
Thousands of years later, many Indians said that their ancestors entered the world from a dark place located underground.
Other oral traditions, however-told in both Asia and America-describe the creation of earth from a watery world, and these stories do not typically associate darkness with the first people.
Many archaeologists believe that humans from Asia entered North America more than 11,000 years ago.
As Ice Age glaciers absorbed water, sea levels fell hundreds of feet and "Beringia" appeared in the far north, linking Asia to Alaska.
Some of the oldest human sites in eastern Beringia can be found above the Arctic Circle, where darkness lingers over the earth.
Other scholars believe that humans followed the coastlines of Beringia by boat into the Americas-a route which does not pass through the Arctic Circle.
Climatologists believe that the Ice Ages were swept by windstorms of much greater power than present-day hurricanes and tornadoes, and in one Indian tradition, the first people were created in the heavens and placed on earth by tornadoes.
Other Indian stories say that the climate underwent a swift change when the animals (who reigned over the earth) caused summer to appear.
Paleoclimatologists have found that a very sudden global warming event occurred 11,700 years ago at the end of the Ice Age.
This date coincides with the earliest accepted archaeological evidence for the presence of humans in Alaska.
Many Native American oral traditions refer to the existence of dangerous "monsters" and giant animals in ancient times, and other stories are set in a period when animals and birds ruled the world.
Paleontologists describe Ice Age America as a realm dominated by giant animals, or "megafauna."
Mammoths, mastodons, and giant sloths towered over human hunters; and fearsome short-faced bears, great cats, and other creatures could have made the New World a dangerous place for unwary people.
In many Indian traditions, a great flood covered the earth in ancient times, and some stories associate this event with the end of the age of monsters.
Traditions of a mighty deluge can be found in oral and written literatures from around the world.
The end of the most recent Ice age, some 12,000 years ago, could have involved cataclysmic flooding.
As the glaciers slowly melted, for Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings 2-27 example, the sudden release of a massive ice sheet into the ocean would have brought worldwide flooding.
The end of the Ice Age also coincides with the extinction of many species of megafauna around the world.
The first Americans made artifacts and left sites which archaeologistscan study for insights into the distant past.
The ancient ancestors of modern Native Americans also created verbal documents about their experiences, and successivegenerations of Indians heard these stories as accounts of actual, not fictional, historical events.
If Native American origin traditions shed light on the lifeways of people who settled in North America during the last Ice Age, then Indian literature preserves a remarkable legacy of documents about ancient human history in the New World."
(From: Ancient Worlds, Society for American Archaeology Bulletin, Volume II, Number4, 1993).
A VISIT TO THE SKY WORLD people.
The Earth People shot an aITow up into a cloud and when it stuck tho/ shot a series of arrows, each into the notch of the arrow ahead of it, until tho/ hadfomled a chain ofarrows all the way down to the ground.
Then the Earth People began to climb up into the sky.
Wolverine, who had wanted to go on the raid, was left behind.
In his anger he jerked the chain of arrows down from the sky so that the earth people would not be able to climb down.
When the aITOWS to the ground, tho/ fomled a fell chain of mountains to the south of Kootenay Lake.
When he reached the sky, Muskrat ran ahead of the others and constructed a large lake with many tipis around it.
After the rest of the Earth People arrived, they searched the village for their enemies but were only able to find Muskrat in hiding.
They killed him and returned to make their way back to the ground only to find that the arrow chain was gone.
They went in search of Thunderbird who lived in the clouds.
his They captured him and plucked (A Kootenai Creation Story) Among the Old People(the animal people),Muskrat was considered be a to sneaky character.
When his brother died, Muskrat wanted to marry his sister-in-law.
She refused him.
In his anger he shot her with an arrow that could not be identified by his people.
When friends came to investigate the murder, Muskrat cleverly told them that thealTOW come had from the sky.
The earth people were convinced that the Sky people had killed the woman and th~ were determinedto go to the sky to make war on the Sky feathers.
Then they glued the feathers to their bodies and flew down to the ground.
Woodpecker, his brothers and sister, and his cousin Flicker decided to stay up in the sky and explore a little.
They walked until tho/ reached the place where the Earth meets the sky.
There they sat down on the shore of a large lake to rest.
As they sat, a huge wave rolled up on the shore and poor Flicker was swallowed by Water Monster.
Woodpex::ker his siblings ran from and bay to bay and danced until thefish came to see what was happening.
Woodpecker asked them to help locate Water Monster so that he could save his cousin Flicker.
The fish were only too happy to help.
2-28 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society When tho/ finally located Water Monster, Woodpecker tried to kick the monster but his foot only struck a glancing blow.
He and his brothers chased Water Monster all the way up the Kootenay River and then back to the south along Lake Windennere.
At Longwater Bay the monster dug an underwater cave and hid from the woodpeckers.
just about then, the woodpeckers saw Old Grandfather Creator of the Kootenais crawling up from the south and naming all the places as he went.
As he crawled he left scratch marks on the land and rivers }lowed in the fulTOWSleft by his belly.
"Quickly! Make a dam at the end of the lake to trap Water Monster," Woodpecker called to him.
Always obliging, Old Grandfather broke off a chunk of mountain, fonned it with his knees, and created a portage between the Kootenay and Columbia Rivers.Woodpeckerwas able to comer the Water Monster until the rest of the EaJth People came to help him slay the monster.
Th~ cut him open and out.flew Flicker, a little thinner and weaker but still alive.
The animals cut the monster into pieces.
They threw his ribs into the river where they formed cliffs.
Then the animals dug hot springs around the area and cooked the blood and body parts until they were well done.
The animals threw the parts around the land to become food for the New People.
(From Work House, Native American Environmental and Heritage Education Program, 1993) Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings 2-29 LESSON 2C-VOCABULARY: How DID HUMANS ARRIVE IN NORTH AMERICA? anthropology Bering Land Bridge Beringia Bronze Age cairns corridor era sapiens hunters and gatherers Ice Ages immigrated Iron Age Mesolithic migration Neolithic Old North Trail Paleolithic 2-30 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society Homo LESSON2C-VoCABUlARY: primary documents Rocky Mountain Front Siberia Stone Age How Dm HUMANS ARRIVE IN NoRm AMERICA? (CONflNUED) travois Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings 2-31 LESSON 2C-ARcH Grades: 4-8 Time: 20 minutes ACnvITY: HUMANS ON EARTH Materials: yardstick Arch Journal Content Area: history, math, writing, and science Who: whole group and individual OBJECTIVE AND OUTCOME EXTENSIONS 3-8: -Students will learn that humans have inhabited Earth for a relatively short time, as compared to the geologic time scale.
-Students will estimate the distance on a yardstick they believe humans have inhabited earth.
They will write sentences comparing that time with the geologic time scale.
ACTIVITY .Researchthe humanpast according to evolutionary theory.
.ResearchNativeAmerican creation stories for Montanatribes. .Write a creation story.
.Research the history of calendars and different cultural measuresof time.
See: Extension Resources-Exploring Time 1.
Show the students a yardstick and explain that it represents all of geologic time.
Instruct students to estimate on the yardstick the length they believe represents the time humans have lived on Earth, according to scientific theory.
2.
Instruct students to write their estimations in their Arch Journals.
3.
Informthe students that, according to the geologictime scale,the amount of time humans have actually inhabited Earth measuresless than 1/16" on the yardstick.(Teachers: Earthis estimated If to be 4,600 million years old, then one inch equals about 127 million years.
According to human paleontologists, humans are less than eight million years old, or lessthan 1/16".)
4.
Instruct students to write sentences comparing their estimations with the actual measurement.
2-32 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society
