Texas Poison Center Network Commission on State Emergency Communications Anthrax Facts ­ October 19, 2001 Anthrax is a naturally occurring disease found primarily in cattle and sheep.
It is caused by microscopic bacteria and occurs all over the world.
In the USA, there have been only 18 patients with inhalation anthrax since 1900 and none since 1978, until the Florida patient this month.
However, about 5-10 cases of human cutaneous (skin) anthrax occur in the US every year.
Despite the thousands of reports of white powder, illness and suspicious letters and packages, as of today there have been NO Texas patients infected with anthrax since September 11, 2001.
There are three types of anthrax: skin, gastrointestinal, and inhaled.
Skin (cutaneous) anthrax is the mildest form.
It almost never causes more than a skin reaction that results in a black sore if treated with antibiotics.
Gastrointestinal anthrax is very rare type of anthrax caused by ingesting an extremely large number of anthrax spores.
This can occur by eating uncooked meat infected with anthrax.
Inhaled anthrax is the most dangerous type and is caused by breathing in a great number of anthrax spores.
The illness develops days to weeks after the exposure and causes symptoms like the flu.
Inhaled anthrax can progress and cause severe disease and death.
The US Post Office handles 680 million pieces of mail each day; as of today only 3 pieces of mail have tested positive for anthrax.
Anthrax hoaxes have occurred for several years and are still occurring today.
Federal officials have investigated 171 anthrax hoaxes from 1998 to 2001.
These usually involve a sending a powder or liquid substance in the mail with a note that states it contains anthrax.
The important thing to remember is that Anthrax is difficult to catch and can be easily and effectively treated.
At this time, Texans have little to fear from anthrax.
Common questions about anthrax.
I received some suspicious mail.
What should I do? You should call 9-1-1.
You can place the mail in a plastic bag without touching it with your skin and seal it up.
Then wash your hands with soap and water.
Do not carry the package around or show it to others.
Remember that there have been no packages or mail in Texas that have tested positive for anthrax.
There is more information on the United States Postal service website about how to handle mail that you feel is suspicious.
(www.usps.com/) I found some white (brown, blue, green) powder or liquid.
I want it tested for anthrax.
Call 9-1-1.
If you suspect anthrax do not touch, taste or smell the powder.
Leave the room.
Wash all exposed skin with soap and water.
I have a rash, sore, skin lesion, etc.
Is it anthrax? Many things can cause skin lesions, and you can only get skin anthrax through a break in the skin, like a cut.
Skin anthrax is easily treated with antibiotics.
You should go to your doctor in the next few days, and get his/her opinion about the skin lesion.
I think I have the symptoms of anthrax, and I want to be tested for anthrax.
Anthrax causes the same symptoms that many viruses and bacteria do.
You should go the your doctor so the cause of your illness can be determined.
In rare cases, there is a laboratory test that your doctor can have done if he/she determines that the test is necessary.
In most cases, you do not need to begin antibiotics until the test is completed in 2 or 3 days.
Remember, no patients in Texas have been diagnosed with anthrax.
My friend thinks she has anthrax, and I think I caught it from her.
Anthrax is not passed from person to person.
No person-to-person transmission of inhalation anthrax has ever been reported.
It is not dangerous to be in a room that had anthrax sprayed into it the previous day.
Spores are only dangerous when (a) in an open skin wound, (2) eaten, and (3) in an aerosol form.
In most cases, aerosol spores are no longer floating in the air after 24 hours.
They are deactivated when exposed to sunlight or moisture.
Surfaces can be washed with soap and water or diluted bleach and made safe.
Do I need to be vaccinated? No.
While there is a vaccine it is only being given to our armed forces and a few people who work with anthrax every day.
Should I start taking antibiotics? Should I get some Cipro? No.
At this time you should not be taking or stockpiling antibiotics.
The CDC has established recommendations for your physician to follow when deciding if you should take antibiotics and which one will be given.
Every antibiotic has potentially harmful side effects and should only be taken when it is absolutely necessary.
What should I tell my children? Anthrax is a sickness caused by a germ.
Some bad people are sending the germ to others.
So far only famous people have been sent the germ.
You are safe in your home and school.
Who can I call for more information? For more information on anthrax call your local poison center at 1-800-222-1222.
There are nurses, pharmacists, and physicians at the poison center available to help you.
