Louisiana State Board of Elementary and Secondary Education Ms. Glenny Lee Buquet President Third District Mr. Keith Johnson Secretary-Treasurer Second District Mr. Walter Lee Fourth District Ms. Donna Contois First District Dr. James Stafford Fifth District
Dr. Richard Musemeche Sixth District Dr. John A. Bertrand Seventh District Ms. Linda Johnson Eighth District Mr. Gerald Dill Member-at-Large Ms. Leslie Jacobs Member-at-Large Mr. Paul G. Pastorek Member-at-Large
For further information, contact Nancy Beben Division of Student Standards and Assessments (225) 342-3946, nbeben@mail.doe.state.la.us
This public document was published at a total cost of $125.
150 copies of this public document were published in this first printing at a cost of $125.
The total cost of all printings of this document including reprints is $125.
This public document was published by the Louisiana Department of Education, P.O. Box 94064, Baton Rouge, LA 70804 to assist the education community in developing a course of study for Applied Mathematics III, a course approved in the Secondary Mathematics Program of Study.
This material was printed in accordance with the standards for printing by State Agencies established pursuant to R.S. 43:31.
Applied Mathematics III A Model Course Guideline
August 1999 Louisiana Department of Education Cecil J. Picard, Superintendent
For further information, contact Nancy Beben Division of Student Standards and Assessments (225) 342-3946, nbeben@mail.doe.state.la.us
Foreword Applied Mathematics III: A Model Course Guideline is a model designed to assist in developing a rigorous and relevant course of study for Applied Mathematics III, a course approved in the Secondary Mathematics Program of Studies (Bulletin 741: Louisiana Handbook for School Administrators, 1997-98, pages 91, 104).
The model presents a discussion of standards-based curriculum, the use of technology, and the concept of rigorous and relevant learning for all students.
It also includes a course description, a content outline, and a detailed correlation of the course content with the strands and benchmarks of the Louisiana Mathematics Framework (May, 1997).
Sample instructional activities and assessment strategies are also included.
The intended audience for this publication includes mathematics teachers, mathematics chairpersons, supervisors of mathematics, coordinators of mathematics, local curriculum developers, and school administrators who are involved in secondary mathematics curriculum development and committed to high quality mathematics education.
Applied Mathematics III
Acknowledgments
The team of educators who developed Applied Mathematics III: A Model Course Guideline is to be commended for their dedicated work and generous contribution of time and talent.
The collaborative efforts of these experienced and committed professionals made possible curricular guidelines which reflect contemporary thinking about mathematics education and support high quality mathematics education for all students.
We are grateful to local school districts that generously released the following middle school and high school classroom teachers and the curriculum specialists and supervisors to participate in this project.
Tina Armand, Teacher Avoyelles High School Moreauville, LA Penny Castille, Teacher Carencro High School Lafayette, LA Nicole Johnson, Teacher Baton Rouge Magnet High School Baton Rouge, LA Nancy Beben, Teacher Slidell High School Slidell, LA Janice Coco, Teacher Avoyelles High School Moreauville, LA Lisa Taylor, Teacher Ruston High School Ruston, LA
The work for this project was coordinated by Nancy Beben, Mathematics Program Manager, and Dr. Jennifer Falls, Supervisor for Middle and Secondary Student Standards, Division of Student Standards and Assessments, Louisiana State Department of Education.
Dr. Ben Lindeman, mathematics consultant with the International Center for Leadership in Education in Schenectady, New York provided assistance with this project.
Special acknowledgment goes to Marlene Ritter, Director of the Bureau of Secondary Education, who initiated the project.
Sincere appreciation for technical editing is extended to Chris Parmentier, Leslie Lightbourne, and Latrenda Knighten, Division of Student Standards and Assessments, Louisiana State Department of Education.
Applied Mathematics III
Table of Contents
Foreword ...................................................................................... i Acknowledgments ............................................................................... ii Table of Contents .............................................................................. iii Introduction ....................................................................................
Standards-Based Curriculum ..............................................................
Content ........................................................................
Instruction .....................................................................
Assessment ......................................................................
Technology ...........................................................................
Rigorous and Relevant Learning for All Students ............................................
1 1 1 3 3 4 5
Course Description ..............................................................................
6 Content Outline .................................................................................
7 Correlation with the Louisiana Mathematics Framework .............................................
10 Sample Instructional Activities ...................................................................
The Golden Ratio ...................................................................
Marshmallow - Toothpick Project ......................................................
Exploring Lung Capacity ..............................................................
14 15 20 22
Sample Assessment Strategies ....................................................................
24 Resources ....................................................................................
28
Applied Mathematics III
Introduction
Standards-Based Curriculum As the curriculum development process takes place, it is important to understand what is meant by the term curriculum.
Traditionally, the term curriculum has been associated exclusively with course content.
Recently, however, the term has been expanded to encompass not only content but also instructional methods and assessment strategies.
The Louisiana Mathematics Framework serves as a guide for curriculum and instruction and as a general reference to the basic principles of mathematics assessment.
Content The Framework defines five pervasive themes and six content strands with benchmarks for each content strand at three levels of education: K-4, 5-8, and 9-12.
The standards and benchmarks define what Louisiana students should know and be able to do in mathematics.
The charts below describe the pervasive themes and content strands.
The content, or what , of each course should reflect all six content strands of the Framework.
Louisiana Mathematics Framework - Pervasive Themes Mathematics as . . .
Problem Solving Numerical Intuition Enables students to . . .
Solve and generate diverse and complex problems that arise from relevant, real-life circumstances.
Develop a common sense approach to using numbers, an intuitive feel for numbers, an appreciation for different levels of accuracy needed and the ability to determine the reasonableness of answers.
Use critical thinking skills in questioning, elaborating, validating, and justifying.
See the connections among topics in mathematics, between mathematics and other subject areas and relevant real-life situations.
Communicate their mathematical knowledge through speaking, writing, and demonstrating.
Reasoning Connections Communication
Applied Mathematics III
Louisiana Mathematics Framework - Content Strands Number and Number Relations Number sense involves an intuitive common-sense approach to number relationships and operations.
It is of primary importance and should permeate every area of the mathematics curriculum.
All students should develop an understanding of numbers and how they relate to one another in terms of magnitude, order, and operations.
Algebra is a powerful language used to analyze and describe relationships and mathematical properties.
It enables students to interpret real-world experiences and gives alternative ways of solving problems.
Measurement is a vital component in connecting numbers to the real world.
The study of measurement should consist of active investigations based on real-world problems and should include the appropriate use of manipulatives and technology.
These investigations should encourage the development of communication, reasoning, and problem-solving skills.
Geometry is the study of the physical shapes of the world in which we live.
It provides an environment for the development of inductive reasoning and deductive reasoning.
Data analysis involves the collecting, organizing, presenting, and interpreting of numerical information.
Probability is that branch of mathematics that deals with uncertainty and the likelihood of events occurring or not occurring.
Discrete mathematics involves finite sets and structure sets, including matrices and graph theory.
These three subjects are essential to help students relate mathematical thinking to real-life situations.
Patterns, Relations, and Functions involves the use of informal investigations to observe patterns created by nature and man.
Through the study of patterns, students learn to generalize, order, and make predictions.
This process leads to an understanding of mathematical relationships as students verbalize, complete, create, and analyze patterns.
Algebra
Measurement
Geometry
Data Analysis, Probability, and Discrete Math.
Patterns, Relations, and Functions
Applied Mathematics III
Instruction Although a more delineated course content is an important step toward improving school mathematics, improved instruction, or how teachers teach, also plays an important role.
Teachers should incorporate a variety of instructional techniques in their classrooms.
Instructional strategies must complement content in a way that creates a classroom environment in which mathematical tasks engage students' interests and intellect; C classroom discourse promotes the investigation and growth of mathematical ideas; C technology and other tools and materials are used to pursue mathematical investigations; C and students work individually, in small groups, and as a whole class.
C
Assessment Assessment, or how teachers assess student learning in mathematics, is a process through which evidence is gathered about a student's understanding and ability to apply that understanding.
If real change in the mathematics curriculum is to take place, the manner in which assessment is conducted will also have to change.
Changes in mathematics content and in the way mathematics is taught must be reflected through accompanying changes in assessment.
Assessment is an ongoing, dynamic process both diagnostic and prescriptive in nature.
Assessment and instruction must be intertwined so that each supports the other in promoting the development of mathematical power for all students.
Various assessment techniques should be used to evaluate student progress and to assist in making decisions regarding individual student performance.
Some of the assessment techniques and activities that can be used include the following: C C C C C C teacher observation oral questioning written tests requiring constructed responses open-ended questions class presentations projects completed individually and collectively C C C C C journals performance tasks portfolios state assessments standardized tests
Applied Mathematics III
Technology With the infusion of technology into schools, the educational community will need to re-evaluate the content, instructional strategies, and assessment devices that are current practices in schools.
What teachers teach, how teachers teach, and the means by which teachers evaluate the relative success of teaching and learning are influenced by technology.
Some of what has been taught should be revised or eliminated.
In addition, other skills and strategies never previously needing to be taught now need to be stressed.
Recommendations from NCTM The following are recommendations from the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics relating to technology.
It is important that each system assess its own program and determine the appropriate use of calculators and technology in the classroom.
C Supply a scientific calculator with graphing capabilities to each student at all times.
C Provide computer availability in every classroom for demonstration purposes.
C Provide computer access to all students for individual and group work.
C Explore and experiment with mathematical ideas such as patterns, numerical and algebraic properties, and functions.
C Develop and reinforce skills such as estimation, computation, graphing, and analyzing data.
C Focus on problem-solving processes rather than the computations associated with problems.
C Use calculators to perform the tedious computations that often develop when working with real data in problem situations.
C Use technology to gain access to mathematical ideas and experiences that go beyond those levels limited by traditional paper and pencil computation.
Continued emphasis on mental mathematics, estimation, number sense, and operation sense in curriculum and in assessment is recommended.
It is important that students know when to use various methods of computation such as mental techniques, pencil and paper algorithms, a calculator, or estimation for a given situation.
Students are expected to apply computational skills in a variety of challenging situations.
Assessment of computational skills should be made in and out of problem-solving contexts.
Applied Mathematics III
Rigorous and Relevant Learning for All Students Education exists in the larger context of society; and as that society changes, education must respond.
In the early 1900s, growing concern about the ability of immigrants to participate effectively as citizens led to modification of the school curriculum to ensure that all students obtained the reading, writing, and computational skills required for citizenship.
After World War II, Americans wanted their children to have a standard of living higher than their own without having to work so hard in the fields, factories, shops, and mills to achieve it.
Going to college was seen as the way to a better life.
Although schools did not abandon their commitment to citizenship, preparing students for higher education became the main thrust of the curriculum.
Now, America is leaving its industrial-based society behind and becoming a more complex, technological, information-based society.
The skills, knowledge, and behaviors students need to succeed in this new society are changing dramatically, with the result that C the old standards in the general track are no longer adequate to prepare students for work, continuing education, or life itself; C the college-prep track needs to be more relevant (although a strong theoretical base continues to be essential, it alone is no longer sufficient); C in addition to basic mathematical skills and knowledge, students need to be able to apply their knowledge and solve complex problems using mathematics; C the relevance of the traditional vocational education curriculum is being challenged as job-specific skills come and go with each wave of new technology; C relevance appears increasingly to be related to lifelong learning skills; C all students need to be able to reason mathematically, to communicate effectively, and to make connections with mathematics to other disciplines and to real-world situations.
Students C C C C today need mathematics courses that will provide courses of study that demand rigor in mathematics; provide relevant applications of rigorous mathematics; are designed for all students; provide students with the necessary mathematics to pursue further study, whether that study be a four year academic college, a two year technical school, on-the-job apprenticeship, etc.; C address all adult roles: work, home/family, citizenship, lifelong learning, and leisure.
Implementation of a rigorous and relevant curriculum requires a thorough understanding of (1) the technologies, procedures, knowledge, and activities in all adult roles; (2) the mathematical skills that underpin these technologies, procedures, knowledge, and activities; and (3) the ways they relate to and are interrelated with each other.
A rigorous and relevant education is mandatory if today's students are to be prepared to function and succeed in a society.
Applied Mathematics III
Applied Mathematics III Course Description
The Applied Mathematics curriculum focuses on giving students the ability to investigate the relationship of mathematical concepts to real-world applications and skills in the technical workplace.
It is designed for the average to above average student with an adequate reading level and the desire for post-secondary education.
Only teachers who have received adequate training and who promote active learning by all students should teach the course.
These courses allow students to explore and discover mathematical concepts through non-routine activities and problem-solving in a wide variety of disciplines.
Students are provided with meaningful hands-on experiences and have the opportunity to learn through teamwork and the use of technology.
It is the goal of the Applied Mathematics program that students become lifelong learners who are able to adapt to a dynamic work environment.
The teacher should provide authentic, rigorous tasks that require students to reason and communicate mathematical ideas.
By shifting from a dispenser of information to one of a facilitator of mathematics learning, the teacher provides a stimulus that promotes active learning by all students.
Teachers must strive to create an environment where students are challenged to justify their solutions, work in teams, formulate their own problems and provide multiple strategies for problem solving.
A variety of rich, meaningful activities should be chosen to connect mathematics to other disciplines and to the real world.
These activities should have the potential for being understood at many different levels and involve the use of calculators and technology.
Oral and written communication should be emphasized to enhance the understanding of the mathematical concepts.
Although application is the driving force of the course, skills must be reinforced.
Applied Mathematics should provide the experiences which enable a person to master new skills, technologies, and procedures on an ongoing basis.
Assessment is a process through which evidence is gathered about a student's understanding and ability to apply understanding.
This process should be not only be an evaluation of students' progress but also a tool to improve teaching and learning.
There is no single type of instrument to assess students' understanding.
Assessment must be varied and may include the following techniques: observations, oral questions, journals, portfolios, tests/quizzes, projects, activities, concept maps, presentations, etc.
These assessment techniques should require students to demonstrate the ability to communicate ideas effectively, to be good problem solvers who can reason critically, and to work together as teams.
Applied Mathematics III
Applied Mathematics III Content Outline 1.
Lines and Angles · · · · Represent, name, and define the different parts and types of lines and angles.
Discover and apply the properties of parallel and perpendicular lines and the resulting angles.
Measure line segments and angles.
Solve real-world applications involving angles, parallel and perpendicular lines, tangent lines, and bisecting lines and angles.
2.
Two-Dimensional Figures · · · · Identify, compare, and classify common two-dimensional figures and their properties.
Name the parts of polygons and circles.
Calculate the perimeter, area, and circumference of common two-dimensional figures.
Solve real-world applications involving perimeter and area of two-dimensional figures.
3.
Three-Dimensional Figures · · · · Identify, compare, and classify common three-dimensional figures and their Calculate the surface area and volume of common three-dimensional figures.
Solve problems involving the surface area and volume of common threedimensional figures.
Apply solid geometry principles to solve problems normally encountered in the workplace.
properties.
4.
Ratios and Proportions · · Read, interpret, and compare ratios.
Solve proportions.
Applied Mathematics III
· · ·
Recognize similar and congruent figures.
Use proportions to find the lengths of sides of similar figures.
Use ratio and proportion to construct scale drawings.
5.
Trigonometry and Right Triangle Relationships · · · Apply the Pythagorean theorem and the sine, cosine, and tangent functions to right triangles to relate sides and angles.
Use the ratios of special right triangles to solve practical problems.
Solve real-world applications involving right triangles.
6.
Spatial Visualization · · · Determine point, line, and plane symmetry of geometric figures.
Use orthographic drawing techniques to draw two-dimensional projections of objects.
Draw basic geometric views using isometric and one- and two-point perspective techniques.
drawing
7.
Coordinate Geometry · · · · · Determine if lines are perpendicular or parallel.
Find the length and midpoints of line segments.
Use an equation to represent a circle in a coordinate plane.
Add vectors in a coordinate plane.
Interpret and depict simple objects in a three-dimensional coordinate system.
8.
Logic · · Understand inductive and deductive reasoning.
Apply the language and symbols of logic to occupational situations and determine appropriate conclusions.
Applied Mathematics III
· · · ·
Perform geometric construction.
Use postulates and theorems to build geometric proofs involving lines, triangles and quadrilaterals.
Solve real-world applications involving logical reasoning.
Apply the language and symbols of logic to occupational situations and determine appropriate conclusions.
9.
Transformations · · .
Construct congruent geometric figures using reflections, translations, and rotations.
Construct similar geometric figures using dilations.
10.
Probability and Data Analysis · · · · · · · Use technology to create bar graphs, circle graphs, and line graphs to solve real-world problems.
Construct histograms, scatter diagrams, and normal distribution curves from data obtained by counting or measuring.
Given a set of data, determine a line or curve of best fit.
Use technology to create spreadsheets to solve practical problems.
Use geometric models to simulate and calculate finite probabilities.
Demonstrate dependent and independent situations.
Illustrate congruence and similarity transformations in the coordinate plane.
Applied Mathematics III
Applied Mathematics III Correlation with the Louisiana Mathematics Framework
The Louisiana Mathematics Framework, approved by the State Board of Secondary and Elementary Education in May 1996, provides the foundation and structure for building a rich and meaningful mathematics curriculum for all Louisiana students.
This document gives leadership and vision for developing this curricular guideline.
The five pervasive themes and six content strands defined by the Framework are described in the Introduction.
The chart that follows correlates the main topics in Applied Mathematics III with the strands and benchmarks of the Framework.
Applied Mathematics III
Three-dimensional Figures
Two-dimensional Figures
Transformations
Trigonometry
Spatial Visualization
Ratios and Proportions
Coordinate Geometry
Lines and Angles
Strand: N.1 N.2 Demonstrating an understanding of the real number system Demonstrating that a number can be expressed in many forms, and selecting an appropriate form for a given situation Using number sense to estimate and determine if solutions are reasonable Determining whether an exact or approximate answer is necessary Selecting and using appropriate computational methods and tools for given situations Applying ratios and proportional thinking in a variety of situations Justifying reasonableness of solutions and verifying results
Number and Number Sense
U U U U U U U
U U U U U U U U
U U U U U U U U
U U U U U U U
U U U U U U U Algebra
U
Logic
Louisiana Mathematics Framework
U
N.3 N.4 N.5
N.6 N.7
Strand: A.1 A.2 Demonstrating the ability to translate between real-world situations Recognizing the relationship between operations involving real numbers and operations involving algebraic expressions Using tables and graphs as tools to interpret algebraic expressions, equations, and inequalities Solving algebraic equations and inequalities using a variety of techniques with appropriate tools
U
U
A.3
U U U U Measurement
A.4
Strand:
M.1
Selecting and using appropriate units, techniques, and tools to measure quantities in order to achieve specified degrees of precision, accuracy, and error of measurements Demonstrating an intuitive sense of measurement Estimating, computing, and applying physical measurement using suitable units
U U U
U U U
U U U
U U U U
U U U
M.2 M.3
Applied Mathematics III
Probability and Data Analysis
U U U U U U U U
U U
Three-dimensional Figures
Two-dimensional Figures
Transformations
Trigonometry
Spatial Visualization
Ratios and Proportions
Coordinate Geometry
Lines and Angles
M.4
Demonstrating the concept of measurement as it applies to real-world experiences
U
U
U
U Geometry
Logic
Louisiana Mathematics Framework
U
Strand: G.1 Identifying, describing, comparing, and classifying of geometric figures in 2 and 3 dimensions using technology where appropriate to explore and make conjectures about geometric concepts and figures Representing and solving problems using geometric models and the properties of those models Solving problems using coordinate methods, as well as synthetic and transformational methods Using inductive reasoning to predict, discover, and apply geometric properties and relationships Classifying figures in terms of congruence and similarity and applying these relationships Demonstrating deductive reasoning and mathematical justification
U U
U U
U U
U U
U
U
G.2
G.3
U
U U U
G.4
G.5
U
U
G.6
Strand: D.1 Designing and conducting statistical experiments that involve the collection, representation, and analysis of data in various forms Recognizing data that relate two variables as linear, exponential, or otherwise in nature Using simulations to estimate probabilities Demonstrating an understanding of the calculation of finite probabilities using permutations, combinations, sample spaces, and geometric figures Recognizing events as dependent or independent in nature and demonstrating techniques for computing multiple event probabilities Recognizing and answering questions about data that are normally or non-normally distributed
Data, Discrete Math, and Probability
D.2 D.3 D.4
D.5
D.6
Applied Mathematics III
Probability and Data Analysis
U U U U U
Three-dimensional Figures
Two-dimensional Figures
Transformations
Trigonometry
Spatial Visualization
Ratios and Proportions
Coordinate Geometry
Lines and Angles
Logic
Louisiana Mathematics Framework D.7 D.8 D.9 Making inferences from data that are organized in charts, tables, and graphs using logical thinking procedures, such as flow charts, Venn diagrams, and truth tables Using discrete math to model real-life situations
U
Applied Mathematics III
Probability and Data Analysis
U
Three-dimensional Figures
Two-dimensional Figures
Transformations
Trigonometry
Spatial Visualization
Ratios and Proportions
Coordinate Geometry
Lines and Angles
Strand: P.1 Modeling the concepts of variables, functions, and relations as they occur in the real world using the appropriate notation and terminology Translating between tabular, symbolic, or graphic representations of functions Recognizing the basic behavior of families of elementary functions, such as polynomial, trigonometric, and exponential functions, and where appropriate, using graphing technologies to represent them Analyzing the effects of changes in parameters (e.g., coefficients and constants) on the graphs of functions, using technology whenever possible Analyzing real-world relationships than can be modeled by elementary function
Patterns, Relations, and Functions
P.2 P.3
P.4
U
U U U
P.5
Applied Mathematics III
Logic
Louisiana Mathematics Framework
Probability and Data Analysis
Applied Mathematics III Sample Instructional Activities
Applied Mathematics III
The Golden Ratio Source: Nancy Beben Slidell High School Slidell, LA Number and Number Sense Geometry Measurement Algebra The learner will construct a Golden Rectangle using a compass.
The learner will find the ratio of length to width of various common rectangular shaped objects.
The learner will find the ratio of height to the lower torso of members of the class and find a class average.
Content Strands :
Knowledge/Skills:
Materials :
Video - Donald in Mathmagic Land (Disney) - Optional rulers compasses protractors tape measures various rectangular objects calculators
Introduction :
This activity was developed to go with a unit on ratio and proportion.
The students will use their knowledge of ratios to investigate the common occurrence of the golden ratio in nature and everyday objects.
Applied Mathematics III
Description:
1.
The students are shown drawings of several rectangles and asked to choose which one is their favorite or which one has the most pleasing shape.
Research shows that most people choose the Golden Rectangle.
2.
Explain what the Golden Ratio is and give a little of its historical background.
3.
Show the section of Donald in Mathmagic Land that discusses the Golden Ratio.
4.
Lead students through a construction of a Golden Rectangle.
5.
In groups, students measure the length and width of various rectangular objects.
They then find the ratio of length to width for each object and find an average of the ratios.
Discuss which objects are close to being Golden Rectangles.
6.
In groups, students measure the height and lower torso (belly button to floor) of each student.
They then compute the ratio and take an average.
This ratio should be close to the Golden Ratio.
Find a class average and determine the student in the class with the most "golden" proportions.
Applied Mathematics III
The Golden Ratio Thousands of years ago, the Greeks became interested in a mathematical relationship called "the Golden Section."
This special relationship is illustrated by the line segment below.
A B BC = AC AB BC The value of the ratio is approximately 1.618.
A rectangle in which the ratio of length to width is 1.618 is called a Golden Rectangle.
The Greeks felt the Golden Rectangle was the most pleasing of all rectangles.
It was used extensively in art and architecture, especially in ancient Greece and during the Renaissance.
The Golden Ratio is frequently found in nature: for example, it is found in the spiral of snails' shells, the arrangements of leaves on a branch or seeds on a sunflower, in generations of rabbits, or in the proportions of a starfish.
Ancient artists sculpted human figures so that body height to lower torso (belly button to floor) was 1.618 to 1.
In this lab you will be constructing a Golden Rectangle, finding examples of the Golden Rectangle in everyday objects, and determining whether the ratio of body height to lower torso is the Golden Ratio for each person in class.
Equipment: ruler compass protractor tape measure various rectangular objects calculator C
Applied Mathematics III
Name: Subject:
Date: Period:
Data Sheet
1.
Draw a 2" by 2" square and label it ABCD. 2.
Put a compass on midpoint M and draw arc CF. 3.
Extend the sides and draw rectangle ABEF.
Find the ratio of length to width.
AF = AB =
Finding examples of Golden Rectangles Object 1.
Small index card 2.
Large index card 3.
Small envelope 4.
Large envelope 5.
Playing card 6.
Typing paper 7.
Drawing paper 8.
Poster paper 9.
Door 10.
Window Average Applied Mathematics III
Length
Width
Ratio
Body Height
Name
Height
Lower Torso
Ratio
Average
Group average ratio:
Class average ratio:
Person in class with most "golden" proportions:
Applied Mathematics III
Marshmallow - Toothpick Project Source: Kay Fenton Episcopal High School Baton Rouge, LA Geometry Algebra Patterns, Relations and Functions Data, Discrete Math and Probability
Content Strands :
Knowledge/Skills:
To visualize solid figures To learn the relationship of vertices, edges, and faces of solids
Materials :
Marshmallows Toothpicks Graph Paper
Applied Mathematics III
Marshmallow - Toothpick Project
Objectives : Procedure:
To visualize solid figures To learn the relationship of vertices, edges, and faces of solids Construct solid figures using marshmallows for vertices and toothpicks for edges.
Make a chart and record the number of vertices (V), edges (E), and faces (F) for each solid.
If you use a solid for which you know the name, include that name in your chart.
Each of you should make at least four solids with different numbers of vertices and edges.
Then compile your data into one chart for your group.
Find an equation which shows the relationship of the number of vertices, edges, and faces.
Group chart Equation relating V, E, and F Make a chart with 2 columns: V + F and E. Graph the points on this chart, using V + F as the x-coordinate and E as the y-coordinate.
Find an equation for the line found.
Hand in
:
Optional :
Applied Mathematics III
Exploring Lung Capacity Source: Content Strands :
Muffet Fox Hughes McDougal Littell/Houghton Mifflin Measurement Geometry Algebra Patterns, Relations and Functions Estimate volume.
Measure circumference.
Use the formula for the volume of a sphere to calculate air volume.
Organize and interpret data.
10-12" round balloons Measuring tapes (cm) Calculators Paper and Pencils
Knowledge/Skills:
Materials :
Applied Mathematics III
Exploring Lung Capacity Question: How much air do you think your lungs can hold? What's the capacity of your lungs? Background Information: Tidal Air - The amount of air a person normally breathe in and expel while at rest (involuntarily when not thinking about it).
Reserve Air - What's left inside a person's lungs (can sometimes be "knocked out").
Vital Air - The total of tidal and reserve air.
Materials: 10-12" round balloons, measuring tapes, calculators Procedure: 1.
Students make an estimate of the capacity of their lungs.
Discuss US Standard and metric measurement and "benchmarks" or familiar capacities.
Discuss factors and variables.
2.
With one deep breath, students blow up their balloon, exhaling all the air possible.
Then they tie off balloon.
Students measure the circumference of the balloon.
They use this information to substitute into the formula for volume of a sphere and figure the volume.
How does this compare to their original estimate? Analyze the classes' data.
Students complete statistical analysis of the data.
Students discuss and plan other related surveys; they explore variables which may correlate to lung capacity.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Applied Mathematics III
Applied Mathematics III Sample Assessment Strategies
According to NCTM's Assessment Standards for School Mathematics, assessment is "the process of gathering evidence about a student's knowledge of, ability to use, and disposition toward, mathematics and of making inferences from that evidence for a variety of purposes."
Assessment should be an ongoing, dynamic process integrally linked to instruction and content.
A variety of strategies should be used and should match the purpose for the assessment.
When choosing an assessment strategy, consider questions such as these: C What do you want to know? C What kinds of information would be most helpful? C What is most important? C How can you judge success? C Specifically, what can you have the students do? C What are you going to look for?
Applied Mathematics III
Sample Assessment Strategies The New Soccer Field Your company is constructing a soccer field for a high School.
The field is 110 yards long and 80 yards wide.
You receive the following memo from your boss: The Board of Zoning requires that a 6" layer of gravel must be laid on all athletic fields before top soil is added, to give adequate drainage.
Our gravel supplier says that each truckload contains 12 cubic yards of gravel, at a cost of $9.25/cubic yard delivered.
Calculate how many truckloads of gravel we should order for the soccer field and estimate how much it will cost.
I need to have your background calculations, clearly explained, as well as the total cost in order to get budget approval.
Write a memo to your boss that fulfills this request.
After responding to the first memo, you receive the following memo from your boss: I have good news and bad news.
The good news is we may not need 6" of gravel after all.
The 6" figure applies to soils with poor drainage.
The bad news is that we will not know how thick our gravel layer must be until we receive the soil scientist's report.
Meanwhile, I need to estimate the cost of gravel in order to report on our projected expenses at tomorrow's staff meeting.
In view of this uncertainty, analyze our costs to buy gravel for various thicknesses, ranging from 1" to 8".
Construct a well-organized, understandable display of this information for the meeting.
In addition, write me a clear explanation of how you determined these costs, so I can answer any questions that arise during the meeting.
Respond to the second memo.
SOURCE: Connecticut State Dept. of Education
Applied Mathematics III
Pizza Order The glee club is having a party.
The school will provide sodas.
You are in charge of ordering pizza.
The club has only $85 to spend and wants as much pizza as possible, since a crowd is expected.
The treasurer insists that all purchases be justified as the best buy, by comparing prices from three different places.
Menus from the three excellent places are below.
Analyze the menu options and determine what you will order.
Write a plan for buying pizza.
In your plan: · Explain exactly what you decided to order.
· Tell how much the total cost will be.
(There is no sales tax.)
· Justify why your plan is the most pizza for the money.
CHECKERS PIZZA
PIZZA PALACE Delivered in 30 Minutes Or Your Next Pizza is Free! Size 12"small 14" large Price $6.95 $9.95
Add $1 per topping for small, $1.25 for large pizza.
Call 1-800-GO-PIZZA
Eat Here or Take Out Personal Pizza (6") Small (9") Medium (12") Large (15") Extra Large (18") Plain Cheese 3.50 6.50 9.50 12.50 15.50
Pepe's Pizzeria Plain $8.65 9.65 11.65 1 Topping 9.95 10.95 12.95
One Topping 4.00 7.75 11.00 14.55 17.75
12" small 14" medium 16" large
Serving over 50 years.
Open 7 days
Old fashioned brick ovens Old fashioned service.
110 Elm Street
SOURCE: Connecticut State Dept. of Education
Applied Mathematics III
Writing Assignments Writing is a valuable instructional and assessment activity and can serve many purposes.
The process of writing helps students clarify their thinking and internalize what they are learning.
Carefully written journal prompts can help students connect what they are learning to concepts they have already mastered, to other areas of mathematics, and to real-life applications.
Journal writing also provides a means for teachers to discover students' attitudes and feelings about mathematics and about their own progress in class.
It can also help teachers assess students' understanding, allowing the teachers to adjust teaching methods and the pace of the class accordingly.
Reading and responding to journal entries provides teachers with opportunities to get to know their students individually, to show concern, and to provide support and assistance.
Writing activities can be used in a variety of ways.
They can be used as homework assignments, as class openers, as a wrap-up at the end of class, or as checks for understanding in the middle of a lesson.
They can vary from formal writing assignments and projects to informal responses to journal prompts.
Informal writing should not be graded for spelling and punctuation, but students should be required to take all assignments seriously and to respond appropriately.
It is important for teachers to model what they expect from students and to be very explicit about what they require and how writing will be assessed.
Sample Prompts 
Design a mathematical bumper sticker.
I like mathematics because . . .
Why is estimating important? The quarter is half over.
Evaluate how well you think you are doing in math right now.
Describe a problem or topic in this unit that you found difficult.
Analyze your reaction.
Applied Mathematics III
<
Applied Mathematics III Resources
Antinone, Linda, Chris Brueningsen, Elisa Brueningsen, and Bill Bower.
Real-World Math with the CBL System.
Texas Instruments, 1995.
Carlson, Ronald J., and Mary Jean Winter.
Transforming Functions to Fit Data.
Berkeley: Key Curriculum Press,1998.
Cook, David.
Constructive Assessment in Mathematics.
Berkeley: Key Curriculum Press, 1997.
Davidson, Neil, ed. Cooperative Learning in Mathematics.
New York: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1990.
Johnson, David R. Every Minute Counts.
Palo Alto: Dale Seymour Publications, 1982.
Johnson, David R. Making Minutes Count Even More.
Palo Alto: Dale Seymour Publications, 1982.
Johnson, David R. Motivation Counts.
Palo Alto: Dale Seymour Publications, 1982.
Meridian Creative Group.
Exploring Science and Math Using Casio's EA-100.
Erie, 1998.
Mumme, Judy.
Portfolio Assessment in Mathematics.
Berkeley: University of California, 1990.
Stenmark, Jean Kerr, ed. Assessment Standards for School Mathematics.
Reston, VA: The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 1995.
NCTM Materials: The National Council of Teachers of Mathematics 906 Association Drive Reston, Virginia 22091-1593 Mathematics Teacher Mathematics Teaching in the Middle School Curriculum and Evaluation Standards for School Mathematics, 1989 Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics, 1991 Addenda Series - Curriculum and Evaluation Standards How to Evaluate Progress in Problem Solving , Randall Charles, Frank Lester, and Phares O'Daffer, 1987
Nichols, Stephen.
CBL Explorations in Algebra for the TI-82 and TI-83.
Erie: Meridian Applied Mathematics III
Creative Group, 1996.
Paulos, John Allen.
Innumeracy: Mathematical Illiteracy and Its Consequences.
New York: Hill and Wang,1988.
Polya, George.
How to Solve It.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973.
Rock, David, and Doug Brumbaugh.
Problem Solving with the CFX-9850G/9850GaPLUS Color Graphing Calculator.
Goldenrod: Paragon Publications, 1997.
The Consortium for Mathematics and Its Applications.
COMAP Materials.
57 Bedford St., Suite 210, Lexington, MA 02173.
The Graphing Technology in Mathematics Project.
Graphing Power: High School Activities for the TI-81 and TI-82.
Palo Alto: Dale Seymour Publications, 1995.
The Graphing Technology in Mathematics Project.
Graphing Power: Middle School Activities for the TI-81 and TI-82.
Palo Alto: Dale Seymour Publications, 1995.
Internet Sites LaSIP URL: http://www.lasip.state.la.us Making Connections - Louisiana Department of Education URL: http://www.doe.state.la.us NASA Spacelink URL: http://spacelink.nasa.gov/index.html Pages written by: The Education Division of NASA The Math Forum Internet Resource URL: http://forum.swarthmore.edu/~steve/
Applied Mathematics III
