PAYING THE PRICE Pennsylvania's Rich Legacy of Coal Leaves Cleanup Problems for Today Organizations partner to reclaim abandoned mines The coal mining industry of the past that once brought economic boom to Pennsylvania has left behind some serious environmental, health and safety problems.
However, thanks to programs at both the federal and state level and partnering among local governments, watershed associations, conservation districts, citizens groups, and the coal industry, these problems are slowly being solved.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
9
PAYING THE PRICE
and unprotected mine shafts reaching hundreds of feet into the belly of the earth.
Today's coal industry must follow strict regulations and laws requiring reclamation of land once a mine has been exhausted, but during the early part of the century, when coal was the undeniable king, industry practices largely went unchecked.
Powerful industrialists, such as Andrew Carnegie, used coal to fuel their behemoth steel factories and move America into the forefront of the world economy.
A
s rich coal deposits were being taken from Pennsylvania's ground between the late 1880s and 1940s, few thought about the environmental degradation and safety hazards being left behind.
The wealthy industrialists who employed thousands of miners to extract this energy-rich mineral from the ground were concerned only about fueling America's industrial revolution and war-fighting efforts during both World Wars.
Today, hundreds of abandoned surface and deep mines dot the landscape in 45 Pennsylvania counties as a reminder of more prosperous times.
Along with these abandoned mines come an array of environmental, health, and safety hazards, including dangerous highwalls, waterfilled pits, dilapidated buildings, acid mine drainage, mine fires, subsidence,
Paying the price During World Wars I and II, Pennsylvania coal mines supplied raw power to the nation's war machine and helped to make America the "arsenal of democracy."
Because all resources available were going to the war effort, the government deemed the reclamation of mine land a waste of time and manpower.
As one vein of coal would be depleted, mine companies would close up shop and move to other locations.
Over time, these abandoned mines accumulated to the point where the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) has estimated it could take $15 billion to correct all the hazards left behind and 50 years just to eliminate the high-priority problems.
"In effect, Pennsylvania is still paying the price of the first and second World
"Ineffect, Pennsylvania is stillpayingthe priceofthefirst and second World Wars in our reclamation efforts."
ErnestGiovannitti,Director Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation
Wars in our reclamation efforts," says Ernest Giovannitti, P.E., director of DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
Although regulations finally came to the coal industry in the early 1940s, they only amounted to the government requiring that coal companies knock down highwalls left after strip mining, and there was little enforcement, says Giovannitti.
It was not until 1963 that Pennsylvania passed legislation that required coal companies to return mined land to its approximate original contour once the mining had ended.
In 1977, Congress passed the Federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA), which included a mandatory enforcement provision if mined land was not reclaimed and established funding for Pennsylvania's abandoned mine program.
Active coal mining companies were also required to post larger bonds than what the state legislation required that would be used to reclaim the land if the company left town, went bankrupt, or was unable to reclaim the land itself for any other reason.
By 1977, the coal industry in Pennsylvania was a mere shadow of its former existence in the glory days of the early 20th century.
The majority of coal mining in the state took place before reclamation requirements were in place, leaving the biggest abandoned mine land problem in the country.
The state has been left with an estimated 2,500 miles of streams polluted by acid mine drainage, 175,000 acres of unreclaimed land, 100 million cubic feet of burning coal refuse, and potential subsidence problems for hundreds of thousands of acres.
Hazards abound Abandoned mines cause a variety of problems in the areas where they are left behind.
Many times, these hazards are a threat to the health, safety and general welfare of Pennsylvania citizens living and working near these sites.
Many of these abandoned mines are located in or near residential areas, schools, and hospitals and have become dangerous attractions for children and dumping grounds for garbage.
Highwalls -- Highwalls are one of the most widespread hazards created by abandoned mines.
These shear cliffs, sometimes hundreds of feet high, occur during
PHOTO BY CARL SOCOLOW
10
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
Coalminingindustryleaves richlegacytoPennsylvania'sculture There is evidence of coal use dating as far back as 4,000 years ago in the Bronze Age, but its true potential was not uncovered until the Industrial Revolution began to progress at full speed in the latter part of the 19th century.
Pennsylvania's rich deposits of both anthracite (hard) and bituminous (soft) coal made the state ripe to become an economic giant in the country and the world, and in fact, Pennsylvania outproduced most of the world around 1917, when the coal industry was at its pinnacle.
Coal miners The coal industry in Pennsylvania supplied the fuel that helped the state become the leading producer of steel for America's growing infrastructure and for both World Wars.
Industrialist Andrew Carnegie took advantage of this readily-available energy source to build his steel empire with the Carnegie Steel Company and later the U.S. Steel Corporation.
The coal industry was a ready source of employment for thousands of immigrants who poured into the United States during the turn of the century.
These immigrants were able to earn an honest, yet difficult, living by working in the mines across Pennsylvania and living in the shadows Men working in a breaker in Larksville, of the great coal breakers.
Luzerne County, 1919.
Like an iceberg's tip, these breakers where the coal was crushed, sorted, cleaned, and loaded onto railroad cars, were just a small visible percentage of the vast network of tunnels that lay below the earth's surface.
The anthracite coal industry grew earlier than the bituminous industry but weakened once heavy industry, particularly the steel industry, The Baltimore Colliery, Wilkes-Barre, Pa., circa 1917 It was not too long ago when the words "Pennsylvania" and "coal" were almost synonymous.
Between 1800 and 1950, the state was the Saudi Arabia of coal and the major source of fuel for the country's Industrial Revolution and war-fighting efforts during both World Wars.
The history of coal actually begins hundreds of millions of years ago when prehistoric plant life decayed in layers called peat.
Wide areas of the earth's surface eventually sank and were covered with water, which put tremendous pressure on these layers of peat and gradually turned it into coal.
The earth's crust bulked and folded, causing more pressure and heat, which helped form the high-quality coal found today in Pennsylvania.
with electric headlights circa 1917 increasingly turned to coke, a derivative of bituminous coal, in place of anthracite as the fuel of choice.
Coal mining waned slightly after World War I but was again invigorated when an energy source was needed during World War II.
However, since the war, coal has increasingly lost markets to oil, gas and nuclear energy.
Today's coal industry is a shadow of its former existence, but Pennsylvania still ranks fourth in coal mining, behind Wyoming, West Virginia, and Kentucky.
Today, coal still affects most people's lives because more than half of the electricity produced in Pennsylvania derives its energy source from coal.
The breakers that stood hundreds of feet high may no longer be around, but left behind is a legacy that has shaped the coal regions of northeastern and western Pennsylvania.
The people who moved to these coal company towns developed a unique culture that still exists today and can be seen in the faces and lifestyles of the people who live there.
All photos courtesy of the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, Bureau of Historic Sites and Museums, Anthracite Museum Complex
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996 Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
111 1
PHOTOS COURTESY OF THE BUREAU OF ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION
Open mine shafts are a danger in many areas of the state, especially for curious children, unsuspecting hunters and four-wheel enthusiasts.
The Eagle Hill shaft, shown above, in Blythe Township, Schuylkill County, was capped and fenced off to eliminate this hazard.
12
the strip mining process when ground is removed to uncover a rich vein of coal.
Besides being a falling hazard, these highwalls usually collect deep pools of water at the bottom, which can become a drowning hazard.
These abandoned areas are attractive places for teenagers to gather for drinking parties, and the combination of alcohol, water, and steep falls can sometimes turn deadly.
Fortunately, the solution to many of these highwalls is a simple earth-moving job where the displaced ground is put back and the area is contoured to its original state.
Open shafts -- Mine shafts are another hazard associated with abandoned mines.
It is far too easy for hunters and fourwheeling enthusiasts to stumble across mine shafts unknowingly and be injured in a fall or plummet to their death.
To solve these problems, reclamation efforts have focused on sealing these shafts.
To date, DEP has spent approximately $80 million to fix mine hazards such as highwalls, water-filled pits, and open mine shafts.
Subsidence -- Mine subsidence also poses a threat to roads and buildings over hundreds of thousands of acres in Pennsylvania.
Once coal has been extracted from beneath the earth, large voids are left underground.
Coal companies usually put wooden support beams in place to secure the roof above, but over time, these wooden beams tend to decay and weaken.
Damage caused by subsidence can be as minor as hairline cracking in a house to the complete collapse of a building located on abandoned mine land.
Usually to correct subsidence problems, DEP will fill the void with a granular material or a mixture of fly ash and concrete.
To date, the state has spent more than $114 million to correct subsidence problems.
Water problems -- Many times, abandoned mines will cause nearby residents with wells to lose drinking water.
Sometimes the water is contaminated, making it undrinkable, but more often, the water table is lowered when water fills up abandoned mine shafts and workings.
DEP has spent more than $2.1 million to replace residential water supplies, usually by laying pipe to connect the residents to public drinking water supplies.
Fires -- Underground mine fires, one
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
of the most dramatic mine hazards, are usually caused when garbage collecting in an open pit ignites and catches an exposed coal vein on fire.
The fire will then follow the vein underground until its fuel source is depleted.
The Centralia mine fire is the most famous and has been burning for 34 years with no end in site, but the department has also been monitoring dozens of minor mine fires around the state.
Dangerous gases from a fire can seep through the ground and into people's homes, or subsidence problems can occur once a fire has has weakened mine-roof supports below the ground.
Extinguishing underground mine fires is usually an expensive proposition.
The most frequent solutions are to totally excavate the burning material or cut a trench into the ground that will cut off the fire.
However, the bureau is looking at other technology such as fire-extinguishing foams.
To date, DEP has spent more than $53 million fighting mine fires.
Acid mine drainage -- Acid mine drainage is probably the most widespread problem associated with abandoned mines, but until recently, has not received as much attention.
"Acid mine drainage is the biggest pollution problem we have in Pennsylvania," says Giovannitti.
"Other pollution sources may be more dangerous, but mine drainage is more widespread."
It is estimated that 2,500 miles of streams in the state are contaminated with acid mine drainage.
To help fight the problem, the federal government has allowed states to set aside up to 10 percent of their annual reclamation appropriations for the abatement of acid mine drainage.
Unlike the other reclamation grant money, which DEP doesn't get until it has spent it, the commonwealth can earn interest on the 10 percent set-aside funds.
To treat acid mine drainage, DEP uses a combination of active and passive abatement methods.
Active facilities usually direct the acid drainage through manmade structures, where the water is chemically treated.
Passive systems are natural features, such as wetlands, that raise the pH level of the water.
Because of their lower costs and near-maintenance-free qualities, passive systems are usually preferred.
However, passive systems cannot
Slow and steady wins the race
TobyCreekWatershedAssociationWinning UphillBattleoverAcidMineDrainage Watershed associations around the state have become a major force in the abatement of acid mine drainage.
These citizens groups, formed to correct and clean up their respective watersheds, have proven that the bottom-up approach can work to solve the abandoned mine problem in Pennsylvania.
The Toby Creek Watershed Association is one such group.
Bill Sabatose was a young man fresh out of the Army when he helped form the group 30 years ago and became its first and only president.
The idea of cleaning up the watershed was a radical idea at the time because everything in the area streams was dead and people wondered why bother, he says.
The association got started through the Elk and Jefferson County conservation districts at a public meeting at which 300 people attended.
More than 100 people stayed to become the first members of the group, and today, the Toby Creek Watershed Association boasts 2,000 members.
Persistence and hard work has paid off for the group, which in the early days studied the 125-square-mile watershed to document all major sources of pollution and found 125 sources, the majority of which were related to acid mine drainage.
Realizing the group could not correct all of these problems, the association members whittled the number down to the 14 major sources.
Over the years, the group has conducted six major projects to divert water away from deep mines in the area, cutting the acid load in half.
A number of deep mines were also sealed, and at about half of them, the acid mine drainage was successfully abated.
The active coal mining industry also started to get involved by remining and reclaiming abandoned sites through incentives offered through the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), says Sabatose.
After all this and 30 years later, the Toby Creek Watershed Association is now down to only two major sources out of the 14 originally identified -- Brandy Camp and Kyler Run, which the group hopes to treat with passive systems such as wetlands.
Today, fish are living in 14 miles of the Toby Creek and 50 miles of the Clarion River, which was also recently named a scenic river by President Clinton.
The biggest change Sabatose has seen as a result of the association's efforts is an improvement in the watershed's economy.
Tourists now come in from the cities to fish, staying in hotels, buying gas, and patronizing the area's boat launches, he says.
Thirty years ago, many business owners could not see how cleaning up the watershed would help the economy, but now they can.
Attitudes have also changed in the area.
If someone polluted the rivers 30 years ago, no one would have said anything, but today, violations are reported instantly, says Sabatose.
Forming a successful watershed association is no easy task, he admits.
The Toby Creek Watershed Association has been fortunate to have very dedicated people from all walks of life, including township supervisors, farmers, scientists, and teachers.
Organization and a strength of people have been essential to its success.
Watershed associations can't expect success to happen overnight, he says.
It takes years of partnering with townships, DEP, the Natural Resource Conservation Service, the Boat and Fish Commission, soil and water districts, and local representatives, says Sabatose.
"We can see the light at the end of the tunnel where before there was no light," he says.
"I commend DEP and the other agencies, but the real thanks goes to the members because without them, no one would have listened."
For more information about the Toby Creek Watershed Association, contact Bill Sabatose at (814) 265-8749.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
13
PAYING THE PRICE treat the high volumes of water that active systems can.
In the past 20 years, DEP has constructed many temporary treatment plants that have since been shut down.
However, a handful remain, including the Wildwood, Swamp Creek and Toby Creek facilities in DEP's western region of the
state and Rausch Creek and Aylesworth Creek in the eastern region.
Because treatment facilities cure the symptom but not the sickness, the day you stop treatment is like the day you never started, says Charles Meyers, district engineer for the Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation's Ebensburg office.
DEP has spent more than $90 million to abate acid mine drainage -- a mere drop in the bucket compared with the estimated $5 billion needed to solve the problem.
Leading the fight Today, DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation is leading the fight in Pennsylvania to reclaim abandoned mine lands and put them back into productive use or restore them to scenic and wildlife
areas.
The bureau distributes funds, investigates citizen complaints, designs and constructs projects, and bids out larger projects for private companies to complete, all of which is overseen by the U.S. Department of the Interior's Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM).
Besides the central office in Harrisburg, the bureau has regional offices in Ebensburg, Cambria County, and WilkesBarre, Luzerne County.
Among all three offices, the bureau investigates nearly 900 inquiries each year, about 30-35 percent of which are related to abandoned mines.
The inquiries usually fall into one of three categories: 1) Emergencies -- Once on the scene of a reported problem, the bureau investigators may find the situation to be an emergency, which is defined as suddenly occurring and/or life-threatening.
These cases are handed over immediately to OSM, which has funding and manpower available to handle such emergencies within a matter of days, says Meyers of the Ebensburg Office, which oversees the bituminous coal regions in western Pennsylvania.
2) Active mine related -- Sometimes, reported problems turn out to be the result of active mining taking place in the area.
These problems are reported to DEP's Bureau of Mining and Reclamation, which regulates active mining operations and the state's bond forfeiture program.
3) Abandoned mine related -- If the problem seems to be the result of an abandoned mine, the bureau can either use its in-house crew to fix the problem or if the problem is too large, contract it out to a private construction company.
For contracted projects, the bureau develops preliminary project scopes and cost estimates, determines property ownership, secures necessary funding, designs the project, secures rights of entry from all property owners, and bids out the project
PHOTOS COURTESY OF THE BUREAU OF ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION
This highwall hazard (top photo) in Springfield Township, Fayette County, was backfilled and revegetated at a cost of $534,000 using bond forfeiture money.
The bottom photo shows the results of the project.
14 Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
Coalitions Form to Solve Abandoned Mine Problem When six conservation district directors in western Pennsylvania got together to stop one of their favorite programs from being scrapped, a new and equally effective organization was started.
Around 15 years ago, there was a push in Congress to eliminate the Rural Abandoned Mine Program (RAMP), which at the time was administered through the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Soil Conservation Service.
Six conservation district directors had seen what good this program had done in the many rural communities they serviced and decided to form an organized effort to stop the program from being shelved.
Out of this effort, the group formed the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation and today has members in 23 counties, says Mark Killar, regional coordinator for the coalition.
The goal of the group is to provide leadership for encouraging the reclamation, development, and best use of abandoned mine lands in the bituminous coal area of western Pennsylvania.
This independent, non-profit, non-partisan group supplements the efforts of the Pennsylvania Association of Conservation Districts, RAMP, and other programs and organizations with similar goals.
Over the years, the group has done a lot to promote reclamation and was involved in the early stages when the state's abandoned mine program was being developed, says Killar.
The group has grown rapidly and has even helped to launch the National Coalition for Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation.
The Western Pennsylvania Coalition works through the conservation districts because of their connections with other state agencies and local resources.
Each year, the coalition invites conservation districts to submit proposals for projects that will get funding from the coalition.
The coalition's Water Quality Technical Advisory Committee, consisting of experts from federal and state agencies, the mining industry, and academia, review the projects and decide which ones should be funded.
Since 1994, the coalition has been operating on a $900,000 grant under the non-point source pollution section of Section 319 of the Clean Water Act.
The coalition was given this funding in increments of $300,000 each year.
With the last draw given to the coalition in 1996, the group is looking to secure more funding.
One project funded with this 319 grant was a joint sewer and acid mine drainage project in Broad Top Township, Bedford County.
Once completed, the project will have brought public sewer lines to about 600 homes and onlot systems to those remaining.
The Bedford County Conservation District will also build wetlands and other passive treatment systems to abate the acid mine drainage flowing into Six-Mile Run.
(For more details on this project, see page 20.)
The coalition will only undertake projects where passive treatments can be used because they are much less expensive, says Killar.
Active treatments, such as man-made chemical treatment facilities, could cost as much as $100,000 a year to run, not to mention the initial cost of building such a facility.
The coalition also looks for other qualities in a potential project, including local support, matching funds, no active mining taking place on the property, and how it will affect other reclamation projects in the watershed.
Killar tells interested townships to contact their county conservation district if they are interested in starting a project.
He also suggests they partner with as many other organizations as possible and get residents involved because they may be surprised at the response they get.
Seeing the need for such a group in the anthracite regions of eastern Pennsylvania, conservation district directors and other interested parties have also formed the Eastern Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
This coalition has only been in existence since the fall and is just now starting to look at some projects to get off the ground.
Like the western coalition, the eastern coalition hopes to secure 319 grant funding and hire a regional coordinator by late spring of 1997, says Nick Goretski, vice chair of the group.
Right now, the eastern coalition is getting organized and working to coordinate and develop more watershed associations in the anthracite region.
For more information, townships should contact the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, RD12, Box 202B, Greensburg, PA 15601, telephone (412) 837-5271, or the Eastern Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, RD3, Box 238-C, Sunbury, PA 17801, telephone (717) 988-4224.
With the help of the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, a drainage and wetland system was constructed to abate acid mine drainage coming from Jones Mine in Beaver County.
The created wetland allows the discharge water to become aerated and then retains the water long enough to allow the iron to drop out before it enters Brady Run.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996 Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
15 15
PAYING THE PRICE to the lowest responsible bidder.
Before the federal government got involved with reclaiming abandoned mine land, the state floated a $500 million bond issue, $200 million of which was devoted to abandoned mine land reclamation in a program called Operation Scar Lift.
The program has funded many worthwhile reclamation efforts, but the last of the funds have recently been used.
Today, funding to reclaim abandoned mine sites comes from two basic sources.
The first and largest source comes from the federal government under Title IV of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act and is distributed by OSM to Pennsylvania.
Active coal operators pay a 35-centsnow.
Each year, the AML Trust Fund per-ton fee for each ton of surface-mined collects $200-$250 million, but Congress appropriates only around $170 million, coal and a 15-cents-per-ton fee of deep $22 million of which goes to Pennsylvamined coal, which go into the Abandoned nia.
The result over the years has been an Mine Land (AML) Trust Fund. unappropriated $1 billion in the AML In theory, the federal government diTrust Fund, which critics say Congress is vides the trust fund so that 50 percent goes using to offset the federal deficit.
back to the states and 50 percent goes to In the year 2004, the OSM.
Of OSM's Surface Mining Control share, 20 percent and Reclamation Act is goes back to the scheduled to expire, and states based on coal operators will no historical coal longer be required to pay production (Penninto the fund.
This, along sylvania gets the with the unappropriated most), 20 percent Harold Campion billion dollars, could leave goes to emergency CassTownship,SchuylkillCounty Pennsylvania with a huge reclamation proabandoned mine land projects directly overblem and no major source seen by the fedof funding to deal with it. eral government, and 10 percent goes to The fund has been extended once in the Rural Abandoned Mine Program the past so it is possible Congress could (RAMP) administered by the U.S. Departextend it again, says Giovannitti.
Howment of Agriculture.
ever, many of the coal producers in the However, Congress has not historiwestern states will likely bulk at this cally followed this formula, Giovannitti because they do not have the same abansays.
For example, RAMP, a program that doned mine problem as the eastern states.
has helped many rural communities in the Currently, Wyoming mines more coal past, has not been funded for several years
"Thisisan excellent program.
I can't say enough good things aboutit."
Refusefire...
PHOTOS COURTESY OF THE BUREAU OF ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION
Subsidence...
Refuse piles created during the mining process often contain a fair amount of coal, which can spontaneously combust as heat builds.
To extinguish refuse fires, contractors will spread out the burning coal and douse it with water.
As mine workings below the surface weaken and roofs collapse, the foundations of buildings above can be damaged.
Belmar Junior High School in Washington Township, Fayette County, sustained serious damage from an abandoned mine below.
Eventually, 50 percent of the building was closed for repairs and reconstruction.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
16
than any other state, but it does not have as many abandoned mines because the majority of its mines were opened after reclamation requirements took effect in 1977.
Various organizations, such as the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, are currently lobbying Congress to release the trust's $1 billion surplus to the states and also to extend the trust fund, says Mark Killar, regional coordinator for the coalition.
The other, more minor source of funding comes from the commonwealth's Surface Mine Conservation and Reclamation Act, which provides funding to reclaim bond forfeiture mining sites.
Active mining companies are required to reclaim mined land when finished.
As protection in case the coal company would become bankrupt or leave the site before reclamation takes place, the company is required to post bond.
If the coal company abandons the site, the bond money is handed over to the Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation, which essentially steps into the shoes of the operator and reclaims the land just as the operator would have, says Michael Ferko, district engineer of
the bureau's Wilkes-Barre office, which oversees the anthracite coal regions of northeastern Pennsylvania.
Up close and personal Looking first-hand at some of the state's areas hit hardest by the abandoned mine land problem brings a new perspective to the issue.
One such area is Broad Top Township in Bedford County, says former supervisor Bernie Hoffnar, who now serves as a member of the DEP Secretary's Advanced Science and Technology Resources Team, which is addressing the problem.
The biggest environmental problem facing Broad Top Township is degradation due to past mining, Hoffnar says.
The township has various abandoned mine land problems such as deep cuts, open shafts, abandoned mine facilities, highwalls, water-filled pits, and acid mine drainage.
However, officials and citizens of Broad Top Township and the surrounding area have not just sat back and let the problems continue.
Through an organized effort that began 20 years ago, townships in a three-county area, in cooperation with the conservation districts, began document-
An abandoned mine caused roads to crack and an athletic field to subside at Freedom Jr./Sr.
High School in New Sewickley Township, Beaver County.
The school also suffered structural damage.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996 17
PAYING THE PRICE ing the problems and identifying sources of pollution.
In addition to Broad Top Township, these included Carbon and Wood townships in Huntingdon County and Wells Township in Fulton County.
The area is drained by three major streams, all polluted by acid mine drainage and having pH levels of between 3 and 4, which Hoffnar says is like vinegar and unable to support aquatic life.
"At first, the task seemed daunting," says Hoffnar, "but we began chipping away at the problems and things began to happen."
For years, residents of the area had a passive attitude and a sense of hopelessness, but with each reclamation that occurred, people started to feel that it was possible to clean up the area, he says.
Many of the projects in the township have been done under the RAMP program because they were small in nature.
Highwalls have been knocked down and returned to their original contour, and refuse
piles of coal and earth and old mine structures have been removed.
The Borough of Coaldale, a small town of about 140 people completely surrounded by Broad Top Township, was the site of one of the first RAMP projects in the country.
An old, abandoned mining tipple, which is a place for screening coal and loading it onto trucks or railroad cars, stood in the town on church property.
For years, the dreary structure cast a symbolic shadow of gloom over the small town and surrounding township.
The decaying tipple lowered property values and gave people a "why-bother" attitude.
With help from the RAMP program, the tipple was finally removed in the 1970s and a miraculous thing happened, says Hoffnar.
People instantly took a different attitude about their town and started feeling it was worth fixing up.
Residents began painting their houses and making other home improvements.
Another reclamation project in the township, which was supposed to be small, actually turned into a bigger project but ended up perhaps saving lives.
The township planned to reopen a mine shaft, install a drainage system, and then seal off the opening.
In the process, the mine broke open and water gushed out, washing machinery down the creek and damaging several homes.
Hoffnar fears that if the mine had been ignored, heavy rains could have increased the danger and caused it to burst by surprise, creating
John Stefanko, in the Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation's Project Design area, uses a map and computer to aid him in the design of a future reclamation project.
The main office in Harrisburg and the regional offices in Ebensburg and Wilkes-Barre have design staff on hand to develop reclamation projects around the state.
18
much more damage than it did.
Currently, the township is partnering with the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation and the Bedford County Conservation District to undertake a joint acid mine drainage and sewage project in the township that will take three to five years to complete.
Township officials wanted to reduce the acidity of Six Mile Run but in doing so thought they might create an even bigger pollution problem in the township, says Hoffnar.
Currently, many of the homes don't even have septic systems, but instead drain their sewage right into the creeks that flow by the houses.
The acidic water helps neutralize the sewage dumped into the water, but if that acidity were removed, the pollution problem could be even greater.
To address the problem, the conservation district secured funding from the coalition to install a combination of public sewage and septic systems in the township.
Americorps, a work program to help students pay off college loans, has designed a passive treatment system consisting of a series of wetlands, rock-lined channels, and limestone treatment systems to help abate acid mine drainage into Six Mile Run. Project funding is estimated to fall short by about $20,000 to $30,000, which the township and the conservation district hope will be made up with money from the Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
"This is a true partnering program," says Terry Miller of the Bedford County Conservation District.
"We also hope to have students at Tussey Mountain High School do water testing, so there's an educational aspect to the program, too."
Broad Top Township is also encouraging mining companies to come back into abandoned sites and remine them.
Because of new technologies, active mining is often a viable alternative on abandoned sites, once thought depleted.
When an active mining company remines an abandoned site, it is then required to reclaim the land once finished, thus saving DEP the time and cost of reclaiming the site.
Like Broad Top Township in Pennsylvania's bituminous coal region, townships in Pennsylvania's anthracite coal
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
PHOTO BY CARL SOCOLOW
region are also experiHowever,withthe highencing similar problems walls being replaced by left by the once prospersmooth, contoured land, ous coal industry.
Peach Mountain Road Norwegian Towntends to drift shut a lot ship in Schuylkill Counmore in snowstorms, he ty has had a number of complains jokingly. back-filling projects Abandoned mines completed to remove have also caused probdangerous highwalls in lems for years in Cass the Peach Mountain Township, Schuylkill Road area, says SuperviCounty, but things did sor George Bobinas.
not come to a head until As part of standard about 10 years ago when procedure, the Bureau of a resident fell into an open Abandoned Mine Recpit in her backyard and lamation invites all inwas not rescued for sevterested parties to preeral days, says Supervijob and final inspection sor Harold Campion. meetings.
Bobinas has Open pits like this one attended most of these George Bobinas near residents' homes meetings to keep his NorwegianTownship, were common, but now township involved in the SchuylkillCounty the abandoned mine land process.
reclamation program has "The biggest benefit our township has filled in most of them.
had from the abandoned mine land pro"This is an excellent program," says gram is that the Peach Mountain Road Campion.
"I can't say enough good things area is beautiful again," says Bobinas. about it."
"Instead of residents seeing strip mines, Working together from they now see nicely contoured land, trees, the grassroots up and wetlands."
In the beginning of the program, DEP's The Schuylkill County Municipal strategy was to select abandoned mine Authority has also placed a water tower in land projects at random, says Giovannitti, this isolated area to increase the water head of the bureau.
So many projects were pressure to parts of Pottsville.
Bobinas equally worthy, he says, that it didn't thinks these drinking water lines may really matter which were done first.
In fact, someday encourage residential developthe department could not design projects ment in the area.
"The biggest benefit our township has had from the abandoned mine land program is that the Peach Mountain Road area is beautiful again.
Instead of residents seeing strip mines, they now see nicely contoured land, trees, and wetlands."
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
19
Today'scoalindustrypartofthesolution,nottheproblem It is true that the coal industry of the past and lax government regulations have created many of today's abandoned mine problems in Pennsylvania.
However, the modern coal industry has done an excellent job in complying with the state's tough environmental laws and goes the extra mile to reclaim land disturbed by its operations, says Ted Clutter, communications director for the Pennsylvania Coal Association, a trade group that represents the bituminous coal industry.
Before 1977, when Congress passed the Surface Mine Conservation and Reclamation Act (SMCRA), government regulation of the coal industry did not have much teeth.
SMCRA changed all that by requiring all active mining operations to reclaim land to its approximate original contour once mining has ended, setting stringent penalties for coal companies that do not do this and establishing the federal Abandoned Mine Land Trust to fund reclamation of abandoned mine land nationwide.
The trust is funded completely by the coal industry, which pays a 35-cent fee per ton of surfaceIn this typical western Pennsylvania strip mining operation, a crane removes the overburden of earth from the coal seam below and frontend loaders remove the coal.
Surface mining laws require operators to practice concurrent backfilling, whereby they replace the displaced overburden as they go.
This way, if an operator is unable to reclaim the land at the end of a project, DEP will not have as many open pits to fill. mined coal and a 15-cent fee per ton of deep-mined coal.
Pennsylvania coal operators pay more than $12 million into the fund every year.
Active mining operations are also required to post bond to reclaim the land if the company goes bankrupt or is unable to reclaim the land on its own.
The regulations are working, according to Clutter.
"Nearly 15 years of modern surface mining law, regulation and policy have benefited the post-mining environment," he says.
"Some 15,000 acres of land are still surface- mined in Pennsylvania every year, but only about one percent of permits now result in forfeiture or create unacceptable post-mining discharges.
Compare that to the late 1970s, when nearly 20 percent of active mining operations generated such problems."
By going in and remining abandoned sites, today's coal industry is helping to reclaim abandoned mines, improve the environment, and reduce health and safety threats, says Clutter.
"With modern equipment and higher productivity mining techniques, remining can glean enough good quality coal to pay operator costs and turn them a small profit," he says.
"But more importantly for Pennsylvania, when operators remine abandoned sites, they take on the responsibility to reclaim them to modern standards.
In the process, they remove hazards such as old mine openings, surface structures, highwalls, and water-filled pits."
The state Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) encourages remining through bond credits to coal operators, alternative revegetation standards, and the Remining Operators Assistance Program that helps identify sites suitable for remining.
Today's coal industry is much smaller than at its high point between 1880 and 1950.
Pennsylvania currently ranks fourth in coal production behind Wyoming, West Virginia and Kentucky.
Even so, the state still claims nearly a fourth of all the coal mined in the United States since the Industrial Revolution.
Modern technology has allowed fewer miners to mine more coal than in the past.
For example, it took 181,000 Pennsylvania miners to mine 177 million tons of bituminous coal in 1918.
Today, Pennsylvania coal operators mine about 60 million tons of coal each year with only 8,000 miners.
Safety standards are also much better in today's coal industry.
Fatalities per 1,000 employees is down from 2.79 in 1910 to .5 in 1995.
In fact, the coal industry now ranks safer in fatalities and lost-time accidents than agriculture and construction.
In the glory days of the industry, coal was used to fuel the vast steel mills in Pennsylvania, the nation's railroads, and was a major heating source for homes and businesses.
Today, the majority of coal mined in the state is destined for electric utilities inside and outside Pennsylvania.
Over half of the commonwealth's electricity is generated by coal because of its abundance, cost-effectiveness, and reliability, Clutter says.
PHOTO COURTESY OF THE PENNSYLVANIA COAL ASSOCIATION
20
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
fast enough and in the early years was unable to use all the OSM grant money available to the state.
DEP is now at the point where all the 1996 grant money will be used by March 1997, when the 1997 grant money will be available.
There will be a $5 million backlog that the department cannot fund, and enough projects will be designed so that all of 1997's grant money will be committed by June 1997.
"We are at the point now where we need to be more selective with projects, where before, it really didn't matter," says Giovannitti.
This has made the bureau take a different look at how it approaches the abandoned mine land problem by looking at an area as a whole instead of individual mines.
Before, DEP may have cleaned one mine site that was causing acid mine drainage on a river but not take care of the three other sites upstream that were also contributing to the problem.
Also, many agencies and organizations are working to correct the abandoned mine land problem in the state, including local governments, the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS), the Army Corp of Engineers, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, private endowments and coalitions, and watershed associations.
DEP saw a need to coordinate the efforts of all these groups in order to get the job done most effectively.
In answer to this problem, the Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation has drafted a comprehensive plan outlining its new strategy.
The purpose of the plan is to establish a frame-work for organizing reclamation efforts, coordinating among those involved in reclamation activities, prioritizing expenditures, and decision-making.
The draft was sent to more than 400 consulting engineers and watershed associations for review and has been posted on the department's web site on the Internet.
Giovannitti hopes to start using the comprehensive plan by the beginning of 1997 and encourages townships to get a copy to review and send comments to the department.
DEP is not the only group using the bottom-up approach to solving the abandoned mine land problem.
OSM is also
"Everyone I talk to now is focused on working at the local level and using local resources to build a coalitionoffederal and state partners to get things done."
DavidHamilton OfficeofSurfaceMining Harrisburg
Toby Creek in Elk County and another to Quemahoning Creek in Somerset County.
The money will be funneled through DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
Townships important partners With the push toward a bottom-up approach to abandoned mine lands, townships should make sure they are represented at the table.
Townships can be important partners in the process by knowing where the abandoned mine land problems are in the township and reporting them to watershed associations, conservation districts, and the bureau, says Giovannitti.
"The people in the state can look at maps of abandoned mine lands, but that doesn't show the day-to-day problems that exist in a community," says Ernie Fuller, secretary of Broad Top Township.
"Hazards such as the mine tipple in Coaldale Borough would hardly even appear on the map, so townships must make sure people know about their problems."
Townships, watershed associations, and other groups interested in reclaiming abandoned mine land should start with small, doable projects to build credibility with the local residents and show them that things are possible, says Hamilton of the OSM.
"Many people have lived with these problems for so long that they don't realize anything is different," he says, "or don't know that advanced treatment technologies are now making it possible to correct the problems of the past."
y
working to coordinate everyone's efforts with a program called the Appalachian Clean Streams Initiative, which reaches beyond the commonwealth's borders.
"Everyone I talk to now is focused on working at the local level and using local resources to build a coalition of federal and state partners to get things done," says David Hamilton, program specialist for the OSM office in Harrisburg and Pennsylvania coordinator for the Appalachian Clean Streams Initiative.
The mission of the Clean Streams Initiative is to coordinate citizens groups, university researchers, the coal industry, corporations, the environmental community, and local, state, and federal government agencies that are involved in cleaning streams polluted by acid mine drainage.
A major goal of the initiative is to increase the exchange of information and eliminate duplicate efforts among local, state, and federal government agencies.
As Pennsylvania coordinator, Hamilton helps identify funding sources and develop local partnerships.
"The initiative helps build congressional support because if we can all talk in terms of the total effort under way, it is much more visible and gives people the incentive for providing funding and resources," says Hamilton.
Although the initiative has been in existence for several years, it will receive a budget of $4 million for the first time in fiscal year 1997.
From this budget, Pennsylvania will receive two grants of $325,000 each, one to go toward projects on the Little
Formoreinformation For more information about the state's abandoned mine land program, townships should contact the Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation, 5 th Floor, Rachel Carson State Office Building, P.O. Box 8476, Harrisburg, PA 17105-8476, telephone (717) 783-2267.
Townships may also enter the department's Web page through http://www.dep. state.pa.us.
Pennsylvania Township News -- December 1996
21
