Appendix 2 GEM Community Involvement Plan Regional Capacity Survey The GEM Regional Capacity Survey for Community Involvement was carried out to support development of a GEM Community Involvement Plan (EVOS Project 030575) by the Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies, the Chugach Regional Resources Council, and the Prince William Sound Science Center.
Objectives The objectives of the GEM Community Involvement Survey were to: 1) assess the regional capacity for community involvement in GEM Program activities.
2) identify potential community partners for the GEM program, assess their interest in participating in a spectrum of potential GEM community involvement opportunities and specifically, their interest in and capacity for participation in community- based monitoring and research.
3) identify important community issues and concerns that could be addressed by GEM monitoring and research.
Methods The survey occurred in December 2002 and January and February, 2003 and was conducted by staff members of Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies (CACS), Prince William Sound Science Center (PWSSC), and Chugach Regional Research Commission (CRRC) under the guidance of the GEM Community Involvement Plan Project Team.
1 The Project Team developed a target list of 164 potential GEM organizational partners within the geographic scope of the GEM area.
Organizations that were targeted included: Ø Environmental interest organizations in local communities Ø Regional or national environmental interest organizations with a focus on GEM region Ø Organizations with educational facilities that focus on Gulf of Alaska Ø Tribal governments and organizations Ø City and Borough governments Ø Commercial fishing and aquaculture organizations Ø Research organizations with community involvement projects or programs Ø Natural resource or land - managing agencies with community involvement projects or programs Ø University programs with a focus on community involvement The compiled list was divided into four categories based on the survey methods to be used and the amount of follow- up that was planned after an initial request for response.
The four categories were: Key Respondents, Tribal Respondents, Agency Respondents, and General Respondents.
The Key Respondent list (Addendum A) was selected by the 1
Project Team members: Marilyn Sigman, CACS; Nancy Bird, PWSSC; Mimi Hogan, Paul McCollum, CRRC; He nry Huntington, Joseph Spaeder, Christine Celentano, Pat Norman, Gary Kompkoff
Project Team based on their knowledge of the current programs and/or partnerships and relevance to the GEM Program.
CRRC Project Team members were responsible for the selection of the organizations for the Tribal Respondent list (Addendum B).
The Agency Respondent list (Addend um C) was composed of agencies with community involvement programs.
Organizations on the General Respondent list (Addendum D) were a mix of various organizations ranging from city/borough governments to commercial fishing and aquaculture organizations.
The survey project staff developed the survey questions (Addendum E) under the guidance and review by the Project Team.
The survey was conducted primarily as an online survey but was supplemented by faxed or mailed surveys when email addresses could not be obtained or the respondent identified "hard copy" surveys as the preferred method.
The most common reason for this request was expressed discomfort with being unable to view the entire survey or look ahead for related questions.
CRRC staff determined the appropriate survey method for the Tribal list, supplementing online surveys with faxed or mailed "hard copy" surveys and one - on- one interviews to improve the response rate.
Development and reporting from the online survey was contracted to the SurveyMonkey, a computer services company, after their services had been used successfully by Kachemak Bay Research Reserve staff to conduct a statewide inventory of organizations concerned with coastal management issues.
The Survey Monkey method employed tools that controlled the survey flow with custom skip logic based on responses to specific questions.
The online survey required selecting contact persons in each organization and obtaining email addresses.
A personalized email (Addendum F) was sent to the contac t person in each targeted organization describing the GEM Program briefly (with a link to the EVOS WEB site to obtain further information), the purpose of the survey, the overall GEM Community Involvement Plan Project, and the project partners.
The letter then urged the recipient to take the survey via a web link.
The survey was managed through the SurveyMonkey website.
The results of surveys that were not completed online were entered into the online database by project staff.
A Microsoft Excel database of survey results was created by the online survey service with files that could be easily downloaded for further analysis.
Survey Effort Two reminder email messages were sent to Agency and General respondents if no response occurred following an initial email.
The web link to the online survey was included in the email message.
CACS and PWSSC project staff followed- up with additional email and phone messages to the key respondents to encourage completion of survey.
CRRC staff made follow- up phone calls to tribal respondents who had not responded to email or "hard copy" surveys and assisted respondents with filling out surveys through interviews.
Results Responses were received from 95 of the 164 target organizations.
Six of the respondents identified themselves but either did not fill out the survey or responded that they did not wish to participate in the survey.
Response rates of the remaining 89 organizations, by respondent category, were 82% of the key respondents (44 of 54), 41% for tribal respondents (8 of 15), 39% for general respondents (27 of 64) and 45% for agency respondents (14 of 29).
Three key respondents who did not reply to the survey had previously expressed interest in involvement with the GEM program during an interview conducted by EVOS staff (Shester 2002).
Geographic versus Community Focus In response to questions #2- 4 concerning the organization's geographic or community area of interest, most respondents chose geographic area (75%) for question #2 and many indicated more than one ge ographic area in response to question #3.
Of the 68 respondents that chose geographic area, over half (53%) indicated a statewide interest, while the remainder provided a similar number of responses to the three geographic categories of Gulf of Alaska (35%), Cook Inlet (34%), and Prince William Sound (31%) (See Figure 1).
Twenty- one responded that their focus was on specific communities.
Figure 1.
Targeted Geographic Areas of the GEM region.
Targeted Geographic Area 60% 53% 50% Response Percent 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% Alaskan Geographic Area 19% 19% Alaska Gulf of Alaska Cook Inlet Prince William Sound Kachemak Bay Kodiak Archipelago
35% 34%
31%
Interests in a Spectrum of GEM Community Involvement Activit ies Interest in becoming involved with the GEM Program was assessed through question #5.
Respondents were asked to choose among ten different involvement categories.
Survey respondents could select one or more of the ten different categories.
Only three of the 95 respondents indicated no interest in participating in the GEM program.
All other respondents checked at least one category and a number checked as many as six.
Throughout the survey process, the online responses indicated a markedly high interest (85- 90%) in the category "Being on a GEM Program Email/mailing List for Announcements of Meetings and Availability of Publication."
The final positive response
rate was 82%.
The second highest category for community involvement interest, at 62%, was "Participating in Community- based Research or Monitoring Activities".
Other community involvement types that more than 50% of the respondents indicated interest in included: "Providing Input to GEM Advisory Committees" (61%), "Participating in Annual Meetings to Learn about the GEM Results" (58%), and "Receiving and Disseminating GEM Synthesized Information" (57%) (See Figure 2).
Close to half of the respondents, 49%, responded with interest in both "Setting GEM Program Priorities and Identifying and Incorporating Specific Community Issues and Concerns."
All categories received expressions of interest with no category receiving fewer than 21 positive responses.
Figure 2.
General Interest in Community Involvement in the GEM Program selected by over 50% of the respondents.
Top 5 GEM Community Involvement Interests 85% 80% Response Percent 75% 70% 65% 60% 55% 50% Interest Types 62% 82% Being on the GEM Program Email/mailing list for Announcements Participating in Communitybased Research or Monitoring Activities Providing Input to GEM Advisory Committees
61% 58% 57%
Participating in Annual Meetings about GEM Program Results Receiving and disseminating GEM Synthesized Information
Interests in GEM Community- based Research and Monitoring Activities The 55 organizations that responded that they were interested in Participating in Community- based Research or Monitoring Activities were asked an additional question with 11 options for how they would like their organization to be involved in these activities (See Appendix E for full question and complete responses).
The highest response rate, 88%, was to "Having access to data generated by GEM scientists and community- based research and monitoring".
Many responding organizations (77%) expressed interest in providing "Training and support of citizens (including K- 12 students) in the collection of data and local knowledge ".
Many of the organizations also responded with interest in opportunities to present their findings.
Seventy- three percent of the organizations responded that they are interested in providing their organization's findings to state and/or local governments, while 69% are interested in presenting specifically at local meetings.
The same percentage of respondents (69%) were interested in collecting data as those interested responding with interest in presenting at local meetings (See Figure 3).
Figure 3.
Respondent Rate for Interest in Involvement in Community- Based Research and Monitoring selected by over 50% of the Respondents asked this question.
Interest in GEM Community-Based Research and Monitoring 90%
88%
85% Having access to data generated by GEM scientists and community-based research and monitoring 77% Response Percent 75% 73% 69% 69% Training and support of citizens (including K-12 students) in the collection of data and local knowledge Providing your organizations findings to state/local governments Collecting data (including local knowledge and observations) Presenting findings at local meetings
80%
70%
65%
60% 57% 55%
Generate specific community-based project proposals
50% Types of Involvement in Community-Based Research and Monitoring
Priority Needs and/or Issues of Concern Related to GEM Monitoring and Research The survey also attempted to survey attitudes about important needs and/or issues rela ted to environmental monitoring and research that could be addressed by the GEM Program.
An open- ended question (#7) was included that asked respondents to identify their organizations' top three priority needs and/or issues of concern.
The open- ended ques tions were binned into general categories outlined in Table 1.
In Table 1, the general categories have been bolded along with the total number of times it has been selected.
Beneath the totals are sub - categories and their total number of selections, which were then summed in the category total.
The survey respondents described diverse needs and/or issues of concern.
The largest number of responses (more than 20 each) were binned into the "habitat concern/issue" and "human impact concern/issue" categories.
Nineteen and eighteen responses were binned into the "fisheries" and "fish and wildlife populations" categories, respectively.
Due to the subjective nature of the binning process and the broad nature of the categories relative to the variety of responses, however, the original responses better reflect the array of concerns and issues considered important by the survey respondents.
Table 1.
Priority Needs and/or Issues of Concern for Environmental Monitoring and Research which Survey Respondents think the GEM Program should address.
Issue/Need Habitat Concern/Issue Nearshore Watershed Offshore/ACC Habitat Prioritization/Fragmentation Human Impact Concern/Issue Fisheries Concern/Issue General Salmon Fish and Wildlife Populations Issue General Birds Marine Mammals Education Outreach Training Youth Involvement Contaminants General Oil -related Data Management/Database General TEK/LEK Monitoring General Citizen- Based Climate/Weather Water Quality Food Webs Funding Habitat Mapping 28 11 10 4 3 21 19 11 8 18 11 4 3 13 3 5 5 12 8 4 12 9 2 12 7 5 10 9 8 5 5
Number of times Selected
A follow- up open- ended question (#8) asked how needs and issues were determined.
Sixty- four of the 95 survey respondents answered this question.
Responses were also binned.
The majority of organizational respondents said that the needs or issues they stated related directly to their mission statement, requests from Board of Directors, or organizational priorities (38%).
The next highest response, at 23%, was "from experience".
Some respondents stated that the specific needs they identified were a perceived gap in the work of their organizations or in the community (17%).
A near equal number of respondents (16%) said that they determined the needs through disc ussions, meetings or scoping sessions.
Only two of the 64 organizations said that they had determined these needs or issues of concern through a survey.
Involvement of volunteers and youth
Questions #8- 10 requested information on participation by volunteers, paid staff, and youth.
The majority of responding organizations (49 of 82, or 60%) had a combination of paid staff and volunteers, but 6 (7%) were volunteer organizations.
Of 52 organizations with citizen volunteers., 37 (71%) chose the category 1- 25 as the number of active volunteers, 9 (17%) chose the category 26- 50, and 6 (6%) indicated more than 50.
Of the 75 organizations who responded to the question regarding youth involvement in their community involvement programs (#11), 50 (76%) responded that that they did have school classes (K - 12) or youth involved in their programs.
Existing Community- based Research and Monitoring Programs Of the 95 respondents, 78 responded to question #13 that asked whether or not their organization has an existing co mmunity- based research and monitoring program.
Thirtyeight organizations (49%), replied positively (see Table 1).
The responses from the cities of Homer, Soldotna, and Whittier, however, overlapped other responses by mentioning programs within their city limits that had also completed the survey.
Therefore, the total number of existing community- based research and monitoring programs in the GEM region identified by survey respondents is 35.
Table 1.
Profile of the 37 organizations, within the GEM region, with existing community- based research or monitoring programs.
Organization ADEC ADEC - Division of Environmental Health ADEC - Rural Issues Region/Community Cook Inlet Alaska Alaska Habitat Watershed Watershed Watershed Monitoring Type Water Quality Water Quality, Contaminants Water Quality, Land Use/Human Impact, Contaminants, Habitat Quality Habitat Mapping Water Quality Fish and Wildlife Population Weather, Water Quality, Land Use/Human Impact, Habitat Quality, Habitat Mapping, Butterfly Surveys, Plant, Lichen, Insect, and Fungi Inventories
Alaska Marine Conservation Council Anchorage Waterways Council Audubo n Alaska BLM Campbell Creek Science Center
Alaska Municipality of Anchorage Alaska Alaska
Nearshore, Offshore Watershed Watershed, Nearshore Watershed
Organization
Region/Community
Habitat
Monitoring Type
Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies Chenega IRA Council Chugach School District City of Homer (Through Cook Inlet Keeper, Kachemak Bay Research Reserve, and USGS) City of Kodiak City of Soldotna (Through Kenai Watershed Forum) City of Whittier/ Port 
Kachemak Bay
Watershed, Nearshore Watershed, Nearshore Nearshore Watershed, Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current, Offshore Watershed, Nearshore Watershed Nearshore
Prince William Sound Cook Inlet, Prince William Sound City of Homer
Fish and Wildlife Population, Weather, Water Quality, Land Use/Human Impact Water Quality, Contaminants Weather, Water Quality Fish and Wildlife Populations, Weather, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Contaminants, Habitat Quality, Habitat Mapping Water Quality, Wastewater Plant Monitoring Water Quality Fish and Wildlife Population, Weather, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Mapping, Habitat Quality, Impacts of E.V.O.S Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact Water Qualit y, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Quality Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Quality Fish and Wildlife Populatio ns, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Quality, Habitat Mapping Fish and Wildlife Populations, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Quality, Contaminants Monitoring Type
City of Kodiak City of Soldotna Gulf of Alaska, Prince William Sound, Alaska
Community Rivers Planning Coalition Cook Inlet Keeper Copper River Watershed Ecotrust
Cook Inlet Cook Inlet, Kachemak Bay No Response Alaska
Watershed Watershed, Nearshore Watershed Watershed, Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current, Offshore Watershed
Eyak Preservation Council
Gulf of Alaska, Prince William Sound
Organization
Region/Community
Habitat
Kachemak Bay Conservation Society Kenai Watershed Forum
Kachemak Bay
Watershed
Cook Inlet
Watershed
Kodiak Brown Bear Trust
Kodiak Archipelago
Watershed
Native Village of Eyak
Gulf of Alaska, Prince William Sound
Watershed, Nearshore
Native Village of Tatitlek Oil Spill Recovery Institute Port Graham Traditional Council Prince William Sound Science Center PWSRCAC
Prince William Sound Alaska Cook Inlet Gulf of Alaska, Prince William Sound Gulf of Alaska, Kachemak Bay, Kodiak Archipelago, Prince William Sound Alaska Alaska
No Response Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current Watershed Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current, Offshore Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current Watershed Nearshore, Alaska Coastal Current, Offshore Watershed
Fish and Wildlife Populations, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Quality Water Quality, Contaminants, Habitat Quality, Stream Geomorphology Fish and Wildlife Populations, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Habitat Mapping, Habitat Quality Fish and Wildlife Populations, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact, Contaminants Habitat Mapping Fish and Wildlife Populations, Weather, Habitat Mapping, Weather, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact Fish and Wildlife Populations, Habitat Quality, Physical Oceanography, Food Webs Water Quality, Contaminants Recycling Weather, Ocean Water Quality, Ocean Currents and Optical Qualities Fish and Wildlife Populations, Water Quality, Habitat Qua lity, Habitat Mapping
RuralCAP SALMON Project
The Nature Conservancy
Alaska
Organization
Region/Community
Habitat
Monitoring Type
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service UAF- Environmental and Natural Resources Institute UAF- GLOBE Partnership
Cook Inlet, Gulf of Alaska, Kachemak Bay, Kodiak Archipelago, Prince William Sound Alaska Alaska
Watershed
Watershed Nearshore Watershed, Nearshore Watershed Nearshore
USDA- Forest Service Valdez Native Tribe
Cook Inlet, Prince William Sound Prince William Sound
Fish and Wildlife Populations, Water Quality, Land Use Change/Human Impact Water Quality, Habitat Quality, Stream Macroinvertebrates Weather, Water Quality, Contaminants, Soils, Plant Phenology, Land Cover/Biology Habitat Quality Fish and Wildlife Populations, Water Quality, Contaminants, Habitat Quality, Habitat Mapping Water Quality
Wasilla Soil and Water Conservation District
Wasilla, Big Lake, Willow
Watershed
Water Quality monitoring was the most frequent type of community- based monitoring or research program identified (28 of 35 programs, or 72%) The next most common type of monitoring was Habitat Quality (17 of 35 programs) (see Figure 4 for the other types of existing monitoring and research programs).
Figure 4.
Monitoring and Research Types in the GEM Region that involve community members.
Types of Existing Community-Based Research and Monitoring in the GEM Region 30 28
25
Number of Programs
20 17 15 15 15 13 11 10 10
Water Quality Habitat Quality Fish and Wildlife Populations Land Use Change/Human Impact Contaminants Habitat Mapping Weather/Climate
5
0 Monitoring and Research Types
The organizations that responded that they have a community involvement program related to research and monitoring were asked a follow- up question (#14) about the which of the four GEM habitat types habitats they monitored.
Watersheds were by far the most common habitat response (76% of responses), followed by the nearshore (50%).
Question #15 asked how organizations involved community members in their monitoring and research programs.
Responses generally fell into 5 categories.
The most common was data collectio n (40%), followed by education (20%).
Interestingly, 12% said meetings and another 12% specified receiving input from community members, which occasionally included input like local and traditional knowledge.
Only 8% of the organizations stated that they involved community through publications.
Conclusions 1.
The online survey method supplemented with other methods to follow up on key and tribal respondents proved a cost- effective survey method for a diverse audience.
The one feature of the survey method that proved to be a barrier for some people was the fact that they had to answer each question sequentially and could not read through the entire survey before completing it or look ahead for related questions.
2.
The survey results demonstrate the substantial c urrent and potential capacity in the region for community involvement in the GEM Program.
A significant number of organizations expressed interest in participating in the GEM Program in a variety of ways.
When presented with a spectrum of opportunities ranging from relatively
passive involvement, such as being on the GEM Program mailing/email list for announcements, to active involvement, such as participating in community- based research and monitoring, 89 survey respondents selected at least one, and many selected six ways they would like their organization to participate in GEM community involvement activities.
3.
Fifty- five organizations stated an interest in participating in community- based research and monitoring.
Thirty- five programs currently exist in the GEM region which could provide potential partnerships and relevant data- sharing.
The higher number of organizations interested in participating in research and monitoring, coupled with responses from 12 organizations that "monitoring" was a need they believed should be addressed by GEM, demonstrates the large potential for these types of community- involvement programs as part of GEM. 4.
The results of the survey provide a framework for development of an interested GEM network based on a foundation of existing programs and partnerships.
In addition, the survey results provide the GEM Program with information on interests, needs and issues of concern during the process of creating and implementing a community involvement plan.
5.
The survey identified habitat and "habitat" and "human impact" as broad common concerns of a number of respondents but did not serve to identify more specific common issues of concern throughout the region.
More work is needed to identify the priority issues of individual communities, local and tribal governments, and organizations.
Reference Shester, G. 2001.
Report on information needs and collaboration opportunities between GEM and Alaska marine conservation organizations.
Report to Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council.
November 28, 2001.
9 pp. Mimeo and WEB- published on EVOS Web site.
Addendum A: Key Respondents Mailing List Key Respondents Mailing List Organization Name AK Center for the Environment AK Community Action on Toxics AK Inst.
For Sustainable Recreation and Tourism AK Marine Conservation Council AK Oceans Network AK Rainforest Campaign AK Sealife Center AK Youth for Environmental Action Alaskans Listening to Alaskans about Subsistence Anchorage Waterways Council Audubon Alaska Bird Treatment and Learning Center Campbell Creek Science Center (BML) Luise Campbell Creek Science Center (BML) Mark Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies Center for Biological Diversity Center for Science in Public Participation Coastal Coalition Community Rivers Planning Coalition Conservation GIS Support Center Cook Inlet Keeper Cook Inlet Regional Citizens Advisory Council Marilyn Corrie Amy Rick Lindsay Mike Bob Susan Woelfin Denecke Sigman Bosman Crook Steiner Winkler Beltz Shavelson Saupe Smith Lowthian Padawer Cable Dunne Seaman Huber Ruffner Anderson Studebaker Envi ronmental Education Coordinator Adult Education Specialist Executive Director Alaska Program Coordinator Alaska Program Coordinator Director Watershed Coordinator Board President First Name Randy Pamela Deb Dorothy Shelly Brian Amy Polly Cynthia Emily Stan Last Name Virgin Miller Ajango Childers Johnson McNitt Haddow Carr Monroe Creely Senner Title Executive Director Executive Director Executive Director Executive Director Program Assistant Conservation Director Education Director Coordinator Director Monitoring Program Director Executive Director Survey Response None None Yes Yes Yes None Yes Yes None Yes Yes Yes Yes Incomplete Survey Yes Yes Yes Not Interested Yes Yes
Executive Director Yes Director of Science and Research Yes Executive Director President Program and Development Director Executive Director Board Member Reserve Manager Executive Director Executive Director Project Coordinator President Yes Yes Yes None Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Copper River Watershed Project Kristen Eastern Kenai Peninsula Environmental Doug Action Association Eyak Preservation Council Imaginarium Kachemak Bay Conser vation Society Kachemak Bay Research Reserve Kenai River Sportsfishing Association Kenai Watershed Forum Kenai Watershed Forum Kodiak Audubon Society Lauren Chris Willy Glenn Brett Robert Ole Stacy
Key Respondents Mailing List Organization Name Mat -Su Resource Conservation and Development, Inc National Wildlife Federation Ocean Alaska Science and Learning Center Ocean Conservancy Oceana First Name Rhoda Patrick Peter Kris Jim Last Name Portis Lavin Armato Balliet Ayers Bird Parsons Devens Bird Senear Marshal Pulliam Banks Boggs Bogan Sparrowe Cullenberg Wynne Johnson Burgett Kromrey Smith Salasky Vanik Coordinator PWS Project Manager Director Director Director North Pacific Office Acting Director Director of Education and Exhibits Executive Director Acting President Tech Staff Education/Outreach Coordinator Coordinator Alaska State Director Director Bioassessment Project AK Global Change Education Coordinator Coastal Community Development Specialist Marine Mammals-Kodiak Marine Extension Agent Title Survey Response None Yes Yes None None Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes None Yes
Oil Spill Recovery Institute Nancy Pratt Museum/Homer Society of Natural Gale History Prince William Sound RCAC Prince William Sound Science Center PWS Fisheries Application and Planning SALMON/CAOS SOS Response Team The Nature Conservancy UAA AK Natural Heritage Program UAA ENRI UAF GLOBE Program UAF Marine Advisory UAF Marine Advisory Program UAF Marine Advisory Program John Nancy Elizabeth Phil Karl David Keith Dan Elena Paula Kate Terry
UAF-AK Cooperative Extension Service Meg USDA Seward Ranger District Wasilla SWCD Youth Area Watch Youth Area Watch Karen Glenda Shoo Vicki
4-H Fisheries 
Addendum B: Tribal Respondents Mailing List Tribal Mailing List Organization Name Alaska Native Science Commission Chenega IRA Council Chickaloon Village Chignik Lake Village Council Native American Fish and Wildlife Society Native Village of Chignik Native Village of Chignik Lagoon Native Village of Chignik Lake Native Village of Eyak Native Village of Nanwalek Native Village of Ouzinkie Native Village of Seldovia Native Village of Tatitlek Port Graham Traditional Council Qutekcak Native Tribe RuralCAP Valdez Native Tribe Kate Williams Environmental Program Director Larry Jennifer Evanoff McGill President Environmental Specialist First Name Last Name Title Survey Response None Yes Incomplete Survey None None None None None Yes None None None Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Gary Patrick Arne Ellen Charlie
Kompkoff Norman Hatch Kazary Hughey
President Chief Vice President Environmental Program Director Natural Resources Manager
Addendum C: Agency Respondents Mailing List Agency Mailing List Organization Name ADF
Aquatic Education Coordinator Yes Area Research Biologist Principal Investigator Harbor Seal Res.
Program Assistant Director Wildlife Education Specialist Natural Resources Manager Rur al Issues Specialist Acting Director Environmental Specialist Refuge Manager President Refuge Manager State Director Watershed Coordinator Education Coordinator Project Leader Director Supervisory Biologist Wildlife Biologist Director Regional Director Acting Regional Dir ector Scientific Coordinator Monitoring Coordinator Coastal Program Coordinator Branch Chief Coordinator District Ranger District Ranger
ADEC-Division of Environmental Health Kristin ADEC Timothy AK Maritime National Wildlife Refuge Greg AK Soil District Alaska Wildlife Bureau EPA And Water Conservation Peninsula/Becharof National Refuge of Land Management Omar Susan Tom Phil Al Gary Anne John Tracy Steve Rob Joan John Alan Micheal Gordon Mark Becky Jim
Homer Soil and Water Conservation District U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Kenai Fjords National Park Kenai National Wildlife Refuge Kodiak National Wildlife Refuge National Marine Fisheries Service National Park Service National Parks Conservation Association NOAA Alaska Region SW AK Network - National Park Service U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service US Geological Survey USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service USFS Cordova Ranger District USFS Glacier Ranger District
Addendum D: General Mailing List General Mailing List Organization Name AK Crab Coalition AK Draggers Association/Pelagic Resources Inc First Name Arni Jay Last Name Thomson Stinson Middaugh Behnke Wade Brown Cleary Painter Kelley Macy Shogan Ogg Woody McCallum McCallum Zeine Drathman Snow Reed Buchman Casey Boedeker Dengel Rand Brown Fandrei Lung Aspelund Deatherage Hagee Craig Goecke Nealon Pray Title Executive Director President Executive Director Executive Director Executive Director Survey Response None Yes None None None
AK Health Project Daniel AK Longline Fishermen Ass'n Linda AK Natural Resource 
Environmental Science None Dept.
Chair Development Director Vice President Executive Director Executive Director Executive Director President Executive Director Executive Director Acting City Manager City Manager City City City P/W Manager Manager Clerk Director None Yes None None None Yes None Yes None None Yes None Yes Incomplete Survey Yes Yes Yes None Yes Not Interested Yes
City of Soldotna City of Valdez City of Wasilla City of Whittier/Port 
City Manager City Manager City Manager Representative President Executive Director
Watershe d Coordinator None Executive Director Alaska Program Associate District Chairman District Chairman District Chairman District Chairman GIS Analyst None Yes None None None None Yes
General Mailing List Organization Name Fisheries Conservation Action Group Friends of McNeil River Kenai Peninsula Fishermen Ass'n Kenai River Center Kenai River King Salmon Fund Kodiak Brown Bear Trust Kodiak Island Borough Kodiak Seiners Association Marine Exchange of Alaska Mat -Su School District Municipality of Anchorage North Gulf Oceanic Society North Pacific Fishery Management Council Pew Oceans Commission Prince William Sound Aquaculture Corporation Prince William Sound Audubon Society Sierra Club-Alaska Chapter Society for Conservation GIS The Alaska Oceanographic Society The Wilderness Society Trout Unlimited UAF Fishery Industrial Technology Center UAF Geophysical Institute UAF Water and Environmental Research Center First Name Linda Mike Paul John Paul Dave Pat Kelley Paul Terry Greg Craig Clarence Christophe Dave Milo Pamela Mike Micheal Eleanor Jan Scott Syun- Ichi Douglas Last Name Kozak Adams Shadura Mohorcich Dale Cline Carlson Schactler Webb Slaven Moyer Matkin Pautzke Tulou Reggiani Burcham Brodie Beltz Brittain Huffines Konigsberg Smiley Akasofu Kane Maw Lynn Wells Childers Holm Chair Vice President Coordinator President Chairman Manager Administrative Mgr.
Operations Manager Teacher Municipal Clerk Director Executive Director Executive Director General Manager Title Survey Response None None None None None Yes Yes None Yes Yes None Yes None None None None Yes Yes None None Yes Yes None None Yes Yes None Yes None
Vice Chair Board President Alaska Regional Director Alaska Director Director Director Director Executive Directors Administrative Project Manager Director UFA Representative
United Cook Inlet Driftnetters Ass'n Roland United Salmon Association Marcia Valdez Fisheries Development Association Jason Western Gulf of Alaska Fishermen Kodiak Regional Aquaculture Ass Joe Oliver
Addendum E: Survey Questions and Responses 1.
Tell us about you Response Response Percent Total Name Organization Title 100% 100% 100% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 92 92 92 92 0
2.
Does your organization's interest encompass all communities in a geographic area or a specific community/communities? Response Response Percent Total Geographic area Community or communities 75% 25% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 3.
Which geographic area do you target? Response Response Percent Total Cook Inlet Gulf of Alaska Kachemak Bay Kodiak Archipelago Prince William Sound Alaska 33.8% 35.3% 19.1% 19.1% 30.9% 52.9% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 4.
Which community or communities does your organization target? Total Respondents (skipped this question) 21 71 23 24 13 13 21 36 68 24 69 23 92 0
5.
Please indicate your interest in participating in the following GEM community involvement activities.
Please check all that apply.
Response Response Percent Total Setting GEM program priorities Identifying and incorporating specific community issues and concerns Providing input to GEM advisory committees Participating in annual meetings to hear about GEM program results Organizing community forums to review GEM information or results Participating in community forums about the GEM program Receiving and disseminating GEM synthesized information Providing educational programs based on GEM data and information Being on the GEM program email/mailing list for announcements of meetings and availability of publications based research or monitoring activities Other (please specify) 49.4% 49.4% 60.7% 58.4% 44 44 54 52
23.6%
21
43.8% 57.3% 39.3%
39 51 35
82%
73
61.8% 23.6% Total Respondents (skipped this question)
55 21 89 3
6.
If your organization has indicated an interest in participating with GEM in community -based research or monitoring, how would your organization like to be involved? Please check all that apply.
Response Response Percent Total Generate specific communitybased project proposals Collecting data (including 56.9% 29
local knowledge and observations) Training and support of citizens (including K -12 students) in the collection of data and local knowledge Managing a data/local information archive Having access to data generated by GEM scientists and community- based research and monitoring Interpreting and synthesizing data (including local knowledge and observations) Providing your organization's findings to state/local governments Presenting findings at local meetings Providing and managing facilities and/or equipment in support of citizen research and monitoring Providing financial support for citizen monitoring and research projects Maintaining a mailing list to disseminate findings Other (please specify)
68.6%
35
76.5%
39
29.4%
15
88.2%
45
49%
25
72.5% 68.6%
37 35
37.3%
19
17.6% 31.4% 9.8% Total Respondents (skipped this question)
9 16 5 51 41
7.
What are the top three priority needs and/or issues of your organization for environmental monitoring or research, which you think should be addressed by the GEM program? Response Response Percent Total 1.
2.
3.
100% 92.6% 73.5% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 68 63 50 68 24
8.
How did you determine these needs and issues? Total Respondents (skipped this question) 9.
Are you completely a volunteer organization or do you have paid staff? Response Response Percent Total Volunteer Paid Combination 7.3% 32.9% 59.8% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 10.
How many active citizen volunteers do you have? Response Response Percent Total 1-25 26-50 51-100 101+ 71.2% 17.3% 3.8% 7.7% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 11.
Are school classes (K -12) and youth engaged in your community involvement program? Response Response Percent Total Yes No 66.7% 33.3% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 12.
What are the other organizations that you partner with for your community involvement program? Total Respondents (skipped this question) 63 29 50 25 75 17 37 9 2 4 52 40 6 27 49 82 10 64 28
13.
Do you have an existing community -based research or monitoring program? Response Response Percent Total Yes No 48.7% 51.3% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 38 40 78 14
14.
What do your current research or monitoring programs measure? Please check all that apply.
Response Response Percent Total Fish and Wildlife Populations Weather Water Quality Land Use Change/Human Impact Contaminants Habitat Quality Habitat Mapping Other (please specify) 38.5% 25.6% 71.8% 38.5% 33.3% 43.6% 28.2% 30.8% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 15 10 28 15 13 17 11 12 39 53
15.
Of the four habitats that GEM addresses, in which of the habitats do you conduct research or monitoring? Please check all that apply.
Response Response Percent Total 76.3% 29 18.4% 50% 15.8% Total Respondents (skipped this question) 16.
How do you involve the citizens in your research or monitoring? Total Respondents 34 7 19 6 38 54
Watersheds Alaska Coastal Currents Nearshore Offshore
(skipped this question)
58
17.
When you designed your community- based monitoring and/or research program did you use an existing model? If so, which one? Total Respondents (skipped this question) 26 66
Addendum F: Email Message Sent to Respondents Hello , My name is Bree Murphy from the Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies.
I am contacting you on behalf of the Gulf of Alaska Ecosystem Monitoring (GEM) Community Involvement Program.
GEM is a unique, long- term monitoring program supported by an endowment of Exxon Valdez Oil Spill (EVOS) settlement funds.
Planning is underway to develop a program that will incorporate public involvement, interagency cooperation and collaboration, and accessible, informative data and information on the Gulf of Alaska ecosystem.
We are conducting a survey to evaluate: 1) the interest in specific types of community involvement and 2) the current and potential regional capacity for participation in community- based research and monitoring.
At the suggestion of Marilyn Sigman, Exe cutive Director with the Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies, your organization has been listed as a potential partner in this program, because your community is within the GEM area or because your regional, statewide, or national scope encompasses the GEM area.
Please take a few minutes to complete the linked survey, before January 17th 2003, so that we can assess your organization's interest in participating in the GEM community involvement program, http://www.surveymonkey.com/s.asp?u=99938152148.
If you would like to learn more about GEM, please browse the website at http://www.oilspill.state.ak.us/gem/.
If you cannot or wish not to participate in our online survey, I can send you the survey as a hard copy in the mail, or FAX it to you.
If you would like the survey in an alternative form, please reply by indicating which version you would like and sending pertinent mailing information.
Feel free to contact me for any questions about the GEM community involvement program or our survey.
Thank you for your participation.
Bree Murphy
