Appendix A Appendix A Appendix B Strategy List: 35 Dimensions of Critical Thought (formally named) A. Affective Strategies S-1 thinking independently S-2 developing insight into egocentricity or sociocentricity S-3 exercising fairmindedness S-4 exploring thoughts underlying feelings and feelings underlying thoughts S-5 developing intellectual humility and suspending judgment S-6 developing intellectual courage S-7 developing intellectual good faith or integrity S-8 developing intellectual perseverance S-9 developing confidence in reason B. Cognitive Strategies - Macro-Abilities S-10 refining generalizations and avoiding oversimplifications S-11 comparing analogous situations: transferring insights to new contexts S-12 developing one's perspective: creating or exploring beliefs, arguments, or theories S-13 clarifying issues, conclusions, or beliefs S-14 clarifying and analyzing the meanings of words or phrases S-15 developing criteria for evaluation: clarifying values and standards S-16 evaluating the credibility of sources of information S-17 questioning deeply: raising and pursuing root or significant questions S-18 analyzing or evaluating arguments, interpretations, beliefs, or theories S-19 generating or assessing solutions S-20 analyzing or evaluating actions or policies S-21 reading critically: clarifying or critiquing texts S-22 listening critically: the art of silent dialogue S-23 making interdisciplinary connections S-24 practicing Socratic discussion: clarifying and questioning beliefs, theories, or perspectives S-25 reasoning dialogically: comparing perspectives, interpretations, or theories S-26 reasoning dialectically: evaluating perspectives, interpretations, or theories C. Cognitive Strategies - Micro-Skills S-27 comparing and contrasting ideals with actual practice S-28 thinking precisely about thinking: using critical vocabulary S-29 noting significant similarities and differences S-30 examining or evaluating assumptions S-31 distinguishing relevant from irrelevant facts S-32 making plausible inferences, predictions, or interpretations S-33 giving reasons and evaluating evidence and alleged facts S-34 recognizing contradictions S-35 exploring implications and consequences Reprinted by permission from the Foundation for Critical Thinking, PO Box 220, Dillon Beach, CA 94929.
www.criticalthinking.org
Appendix B
Appendix C
Process Skill A Competencies: 1.
Define practical problems families and individuals face in everyday work and family life.
(PS/A-1) 2.
Identify the types of practical problems families and individuals frequently face.
(PS/A-2) 3.
Apply individual values and goals to decision making.
(PS/A-3)
Managing Work and Family Life Process Skills Scoring Guide Steps to Mastery Identify Values Achieving (Mastered) -Clearly identifies values.
-Consistently applies values to decisionmaking.
-Accepts that others may have differing values.
Growing (Requires Supervison) -Clearly identif ies values.
-Usually applies values to decisionmaking.
Learning (Not Mastered) -Identifies values but does not apply them to decision-making.
Score
Consider Opinions of Others
-Lists several -Selects an opinions and links alternative and them to v alues. justifi es choice based -Analyzes each option on values.
in relation to -Considers possible resources.
consequences of -Evaluates opinions each option before based on the extent making choice.
to which they rely on facts.
-Selects an alternative and justifies choice based on values.
-Considers all consequences before making a choice.
-Uses a decisionmaking matrix to evaluate decisions involving many alternatives.
-Explains whether the goal was met.
-Reflects on how other options might have turned out.
-Considers this decision for similar situations.
-Selects an alternative and justifi es choice based on values.
-Considers possible consequences of each option before making choice.
-Lists some possible opinions but does not link them to values.
Select Alternatives
-Selects an alternative, but cannot j ustify choice based on values.
Evaluate Actions
-Explains whether the goal was achieved.
-Reflects on how other options might have turned out.
-Explains whether the outcome was appropriate.
Score Guide: 3-Mastered; 2-Requires Supervision; 1-Not Mastered; N-No Exposure.
Total Points: _______ Total Possible Points: _______
Appendix C
Process Skill B Competencies: 1.
2.
3.
4.
Identify characteristics of a respectful relationship.
(PS/B-1) Demonstrate effective communication skills.
(PS/B-2) Examine the consequences of actions for self and others.
(PS/B-3) Apply conflict resolution techniques when needed for consensus.
(PS/B-4)
Building a Respectful Relationship Process Skills Scoring Guide Steps To Mastery Use Active Listening Skills Achieving (Mastered) -Listens carefully; makes eye contact, provides feedback.
-Asks questions to clarify meaning.
-Summarizes the content of the speaker's message for understanding.
-Empathizes with those who have different ideas.
-Accepts individual differences.
-Expresses feelings and thoughts with words and actions.
-Thoughts and ideas are clearly presented.
-Assists others in clarifying meaning.
-Reaches out to others who are hesitant to share ideas and assists them in organizing their thoughts.
-Clarifies expectations before making choices.
-Works to identify common goals.
-Compromises with consideration for others.
Growing (Requires Supervision) -Listens carefully without interrupting.
-Makes eye contact; provides good nonverbal feedback.
Learning (Not Mastered) -Listens carefully without interrupting.
Score
Express Concern for Others
Participate in Respectful Relationships
-Empathizes with those who have different feelings, knowledge, and abilities.
-Accepts individual differences, though lacks concern.
-Shares thoughts fully and ideas are clearly presented.
-Assists others in clarifying meaning to increase understanding.
-Displays limited tolerance for those who have different feelings, knowledge, and abilities.
-Speaks words clearly, but thoughts may be disorganized or incomplete.
Explore Meaning and Shared Goals
-Questions and clarifies meaning or expectations before reviewing possible alternatives.
-Works to identify common goals.
-Prefers clear, concrete direction with little or no discussion of alternatives.
Score Guide: 3-Mastered; 2-Requires Supervision; 1-Not Mastered; N-No Exposure.
Appendix C Process Skill C Competencies: 1.
Demonstrate practical problem-solving skills.
(PS/C-1) 2.
Evaluate consequences of possible solutions for self and others.
(PS/C-2) 3.
Compare and contrast practical problem-solving techniques to other problem-solving strategies.
(PS/C-3)
Solving Practical Problems Process Skills Scoring Guide Steps to Mastery Identify the Problem Achieving (Mastered) -Identifies the problem to be solved.
-Considers self and others in the desired solution.
-Identifies complications that must be resolved.
-Consults several resources, and evaluates the credibility of each.
-Selects resources that provide factual and/or value information.
-Seeks enough resources to provide a balance of information.
-Considers several options including the consequences for self and others.
-Analyzes each option's ability to resolve the issue.
-Weighs each option against the consequences.
-Selects one option and explains how the choice will achieve the desired outcome.
-Considers ethical and logistical issues.
-Evaluates results and actions.
Growing (Requires Supervison) -Identifies the problem to be solved.
-Considers self and others in the desired solution.
Learning (Not Mastered) -Identifies the problem to be solved.
Score
Examine the Facts and Information
-Consults several resources and evaluates the credibility of each.
-Selects resources that provide factual and/or value information.
-Consults several resources, but does not evaluate reliability.
Consider the Consequences of Options for Self and Others
-Considers two or more options and identifies consequences for self.
-Analyzes each option's ability to resolve the issue.
-Considers only one or two options with no regard for the possible consequences.
Implement a Plan of Action
-Selects one option and explains how the choice will achieve the desired outcome.
-Considers ethical and logistical issues.
-Selects one option with no consideration of actions needed to implement choice.
Score Guide: 3-Mastered; 2-Requires Supervision; 1-Not Mastered; N-No Exposure.
Total Points: _______ Total Possible Points: _______
Appendix C Process Skill D Competencies: 1.
Define the roles of a responsible family member and citizen.
(PS/D-1) 2.
Demonstrate positive leadership skills.
(PS/D-2) 3.
Compare and contrast the duties of a responsible family member and citizen.
(PS/D-3)
Assuming a Leadership Role Process Skills Scoring Guide Steps to Mastery Select Planning Goals Achieving (Mastered) -Involves others in the group in establishing a goal.
-Encourages others to accept the goal.
-Uses the goal to set a plan of action for self and group.
-Empathizes with other group members.
-Actively seeks input from others.
-Considers perspectives of others and involves the group in plan of action.
-Guides the group in work to achieve goal.
-Encourage cooperation among group members.
-Motivates members to participate in working toward goal.
-Applies all leadership styles, but has trouble matching the strategy to the situation.
-Accepts responsibility for success and failure, while encouraging participation.
-Serves as a leader role member for other members.
Growing (Requires Supervison) -Involves others in the group in establishing a goal.
-Encourages others to accept the goal.
Learning (Not Mastered) -Determines goal for the group.
Score
Build Consensus
-Empathizes with other group members.
-Actively seeks input from others.
-Listens to input given by members.
Recommend Methods for Achieving Goals
-Motivates some group members to work toward goal.
-Attempts to encourage cooperation among group members.
Applies all leadership styles, but has trouble matching the strategy to the situation.
-Accepts responsibility for success and failure, while encouraging participation.
-Independently works to achieve goals.
Apply Leadership Goals
-Applies one or two leadership styles consistently.
Score Guide: 3-Mastered; 2-Requires Supervision; 1-Not Mastered; N-No Exposure.
Total Points: _______ Total Possible Points: _______
Appendix D
Missouri Show-Me Standards The new educational goals and standards are a result of the Outstanding Schools Act of 1993, which calls on Missouri citizens and educators . . . to define appropriate, rigorous expectations for children's learning.
Committees of teachers, citizens, parents, lawmakers and state officials have been working on the proposed goals and standards since then.
The goals and standards listed below were approved as a final regulation by the Missouri State Board of Education, January 18, 1996, and are available through the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education's home page 
Goal 1: Students in Missouri public schools will acquire the knowledge and skills to gather, analyze and apply information and ideas.
Students will demonstrate within and integrate across all content areas the ability to: 1.
develop questions and ideas to initiate and refine research 2.
conduct research to answer questions and evaluate information and ideas 3.
design and conduct field and laboratory investigations to study nature and society 4.
use technological tools and other resources to locate, select and organize information 5.
comprehend and evaluate written, visual and oral presentations and works 6.
discover and evaluate patterns and relationships in information, ideas and structures 7.
evaluate the accuracy of information and the reliability of its sources 8.
organize data, information and ideas into useful forms (including charts, graphs, outlines) for analysis or presentation 9.
identify, analyze and compare the institutions, traditions and art forms of past and present societies 10.
apply acquired information, ideas and skills to different contexts as students, workers, citizens and consumers Goal 2: Students in Missouri public schools will acquire the knowledge and skills to communicate effectively within and beyond the classroom.
Students will demonstrate within and integrate across all content areas the ability to: 1.
plan and make written, oral and visual presentations for a variety of purposes and audiences 2.
review and revise communications to improve accuracy and clarity 3.
exchange information, questions and ideas while recognizing the perspectives of others 4.
present perceptions and ideas regarding works of the arts, humanities and sciences 5.
perform or produce works in the fine and practical arts 6.
apply communication techniques to the job search and to the workplace 7.
use technological tools to exchange information and ideas Goal 3: Students in Missouri public schools will acquire the knowledge and skills to recognize and solve problems.
Students will demonstrate within and integrate across all content areas the ability to: 1.
identify problems and define their scope and elements 2.
develop and apply strategies based on ways others have prevented or solved problems
Appendix D 3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
develop and apply strategies based on one's own experience in preventing or solving problems evaluate the processes used in recognizing and solving problems reason inductively from a set of specific facts and deductively from general premises examine problems and proposed solutions from multiple perspectives evaluate the extent to which a strategy addresses the problem assess costs, benefits and other consequences of proposed solutions
Goal 4: Students in Missouri public schools will acquire the knowledge and skills to make decisions and act as responsible members of society.
Students will demonstrate within and integrate across all content areas the ability to: 1.
explain reasoning and identify information used to support decisions 2.
understand and apply the rights and responsibilities of citizenship in Missouri and the United States 3.
analyze the duties and responsibilities of individuals in societies 4.
recognize and practice honesty and integrity in academic work and in the workplace 5.
develop, monitor and revise plans of action to meet deadlines and accomplish goals 6.
identify tasks that require a coordinated effort and work with others to complete those tasks 7.
identify and apply practices that preserve and enhance the safety and health of self and others 8.
explore, prepare for and seek educational and job opportunities Communication Arts (CA) In Communication Arts, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of and proficiency in: 1.
speaking and writing standard English (including grammar, usage, punctuation, spelling, capitalization) 2.
reading and evaluating fiction, poetry and drama 3.
reading and evaluating nonfiction works and material (such as biographies, newspapers, technical manuals) 4.
writing formally (such as reports, narratives, essays) and informally (such as outlines, notes) 5.
comprehending and evaluating the content and artistic aspects of oral and visual presentations (such as story-telling, debates, lectures, multi-media productions) 6.
participating in formal and informal presentations and discussions of issues and ideas 7.
identifying and evaluating relationships between language and culture Fine Arts (FA) In Fine Arts, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of: 1.
process and techniques for the production, exhibition or performance of one or more of the visual or performed arts 2.
the principles and elements of different art forms 3.
the vocabulary to explain perceptions about and evaluations of works in dance, music, theater and visual arts 4.
interrelationships of visual and performing arts and the relationships of the arts to other disciplines
Appendix D 5.
visual and performing arts in historical and cultural contexts Health/Physical Education (HP) In Health/Physical Education, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of: 1.
structures of, functions of, and relationships among human body systems 2.
principles and practices of physical and mental health (such as personal health habits, nutrition, stress management) 3.
diseases and methods for prevention, treatment and control 4.
principles of movement and physical fitness 5.
methods used to assess health, reduce risk factors, and avoid high risk behaviors (such as violence, tobacco, alcohol and other drug use) 6.
consumer health issues (such as the effects of mass media and technologies on safety and health) 7.
responses to emergency situations Mathematics (MA) In Mathematics, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of: 1.
addition, subtraction, multiplication and division; other number sense, including numeration and estimation; and the application of these operations and concepts in the workplace and other situations 2.
geometric and spatial sense involving measurement (including length, area, volume), trigonometry, and similarity and transformations of shapes 3.
data analysis, probability and statistics 4.
patterns and relationships within and among functions and algebraic, geometric and trigonometric concepts 5.
mathematical systems (including real numbers, whole numbers, integers, fractions), geometry, and number theory (including primes, factors, multiples) 6.
discrete mathematics (such as graph theory, counting techniques, matrices) Science (SC) In Science, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of: 1.
properties and principles of matter and energy 2.
properties and principles of force and motion 3.
characteristics and interactions of living organisms 4.
changes in ecosystems and interactions of organisms with their environments 5.
processes (such as plate movement, water cycle, air flow) and interactions of earth's biosphere, atmosphere, lithosphere and hydrosphere 6.
composition and structure of the universe and the motions of the objects within it 7.
processes of scientific inquiry (such as formulating and testing hypotheses) 8.
impact of science, technology and human activity on resources and the environment
Appendix D Social Studies (SS) In Social Studies, students in Missouri public schools will acquire a solid foundation which includes knowledge of : 1.
principles expressed in the documents shaping constitutional democracy in the United States 2.
continuity and change in the history of Missouri, the United States and the world 3.
principles and processes of governance systems 4.
economic concepts (including productivity and the market system) and principles (including the laws of supply and demand) 5.
the major elements of geographical study and analysis (such as location, place, movement, regions) and their relationships to changes in society and environment 6.
relationships of the individual and groups to institutions and cultural traditions 7.
the use of tools of social science inquiry (such as surveys, statistics, maps, documents)
Appendix E
All Aspects of the Industry Recent national legislation requires that vocational education programs provide a strong experience in "all aspects of the industry" (AAOI) for industries that students are preparing to enter.
AAOI's ultimate goal is to give future workers a sense of the issues involved in the world of work.
Such knowledge can empower future workers to make informed decisions about their career paths.
This knowledge can also allow workers to make meaningful contributions to the industry, instead of performing mindlessly like another piece of equipment.
The main areas of AAOI include · · · · · · · · Planning Management Finance Technical and Production Skills Principles of Technology Labor and Community Issues Health/Safety/Environment Personal Conduct
Duty Bands and Objectives A. Planning A1 Describe why industries respond to customer wants and expectations.
A2 List differences in how companies deliver products versus delivering services.
A3 Describe ways a worker can influence company decision making.
A4 Identify benefits in anticipating technology and market trend changes.
A5 Identify an example of how regulatory laws can impact how a business operates.
A6 Identify an example of how a political organization can impact how a company operates.
B. Management B1 Identify key components of a company "mission statement."
B2 Identify how a corporate "chain of command" works.
B3 Describe the significance of a company's "corporate culture."
B4 Describe how a company organizes its departments.
B5 List typical ways company departments communicate.
B6 Cite examples of why a worker should adjust to different management styles.
B7 Cite an example of how companies are dependent on the national economy.
B8 Cite an example of how a company is dependent upon the local economy.
B9 Describe the importance of achieving internal and external customer satisfaction.
B10 Identify examples of how cultural diversity can affect an industry.
B11 Identify key differences in how private companies and government agencies operate.
B12 List reasons why written policies are used in industry.
B13 Identify resources available from professional organizations.
B14 Identify how roles and responsibilities in a family business are different than in larger companies.
B15 List benefits a worker can get by participating in meetings.
B16 List key differences in how a family farm operates versus how another small business operates.
B17 Describe how a company's marketing affects all its employees C. Finance C1 List typical ways a business obtains capital.
Appendix E C2 Describe the importance of accounting in a business.
C3 Describe key implications for a company that grants credit.
C4 Describe how a company estimates and bids for a contract.
C5 Describe how paycheck deductions affect a worker.
C6 Describe the importance of cost containment in a company.
D. Technical and Production Skills D1 Demonstrate a basic math ability.
D2 Demonstrate the capability to measure quickly and accurately.
D3 Demonstrate the ability to speak and write the English language effectively.
D4 Demonstrate the ability to listen effectively.
D5 Demonstrate the ability to use effective negotiation skills.
D6 Demonstrate the ability to manage time effectively.
D7 Demonstrate the ability to read blueprints and drawings.
D8 Demonstrate the ability to perform basic computer operation.
D9 Describe the importance of deadlines and schedules.
D10 Demonstrate the ability to use team player skills.
D11 Demonstrate the ability to use supervisory and delegation skills.
D12 Demonstrate the ability to utilize good public speaking skills.
D13 Describe the importance of using troubleshooting techniques.
D14 Cite one example of a job that is interrelated with another job.
D15 Demonstrate the ability to obtain technical information.
D16 Identify certification requirements for a specific job.
E. Principles of Technology E1 Describe the key characteristics of the technology used in your industry.
E2 Describe the importance of analyzing new equipment for possible use.
E3 Describe the importance of continuously upgrading one's job skills.
E4 Describe the importance of adaptability and learning from experience.
E5 Describe the importance of acquiring and analyzing information effectively and making sound decisions.
E6 Describe the importance of cross-training.
F. Labor F1 Describe the importance of a written job description.
F2 Describe the importance of knowing your rights as a worker.
F3 Describe the role labor organizations play in your industry (if any).
F4 List advantages/disadvantages of hourly and salaried pay.
F5 List differences between being a self-employed worker and a worker employed by a company.
F6 Describe the importance of participating in quality enhancement programs.
F7 Describe the importance of understanding why a worker is asked to occasionally work longer hours.
F8 Describe the importance of cultural sensitivity.
G. Community G1 Describe the importance of recognizing why a worker should contribute special skills through volunteer work.
G2 Identify key ways a company helps its community.
G3 Identify key ways a community helps a company.
G4 Identify an impact of buying outside the community.
G5 Describe how a company's public perception is important.
Appendix E G6 Describe the importance of providing for the access needs of the physically challenged.
H. Health, Safety and Environment H1 Describe the importance of complying with federal agency regulations.
H2 Describe why it is important to avoid job-specific health threats.
H3 Read and comprehend major components of a Material Safety Data Sheet.
H4 Identify basic safety training (tornado, fire, first aid) techniques.
H5 Describe the importance of participating in preventive medicine programs.
H6 Describe the importance of handling stress effectively.
H7 Describe the importance of good workplace ergonomics.
H8 Identify any effects weather could have on an industry.
H9 Describe the importance of management's responsibility for a safe workplace.
I. Personal Conduct I1 Describe the importance of recognizing the dignity of all work.
I2 Describe the importance of producing quality and effective work.
I3 Describe the importance of being fit for duty (no drugs, no alcohol).
I4 Describe the importance of exhibiting good attitude, enthusiasm, integrity.
I5 Describe the importance of exhibiting good grooming and appearance.
I6 Describe the importance of good personal financing.
Source: All Aspects of the Industry (catalog number 65-9000-I).
University of Missouri-Columbia: Instructional Materials Laboratory, 1994.
Appendix F
SCANS Competencies SCANS foundation skills identified by the U.S. Department of Labor describe generic skills needed by nearly everyone.
The SCANS competencies, however, are more specific in nature and are listed below.
(SCANS is the acronym for the Secretary [of Labor]'s Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills.)
1.
Resources Allocates time Allocates money Allocates material and facility resources Allocates human resources 2.
Interpersonal Participates as a member of a team Teaches others Serves clients/customers Exercises leadership Negotiates to arrive at a decision Works with cultural diversity 3.
Information Acquires and evaluates information Organizes and maintains information Interprets and communicates information Uses computers to process information 4.
Systems Understands systems Monitors and corrects performance Improves and designs systems 5.
Technology Selects technology Applies technology to task Maintains and troubleshoots equipment
Appendix F
Appendix G
Missouri Core Employment Competencies In 1992, three Missouri agencies copublished the Pre-Employment and Work-Maturity Competencies: A Guide for Practitioners.
The Missouri competencies identified in the practitioner's guide are endorsed by all three agencies: the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, the Department of Labor and Industrial Relations, and the Department of Economic Development.
The list includes seven core competencies and related employability skills.
Locally developed learner outcomes may, of course, be added, and local groups are encouraged to utilize the identified state competencies for development of their own pre-employment and work maturity skills.
A. Making Career Decisions A1.
Perform self-assessment A2.
Explore occupational information A3.
Perform decision-making process B. Using Labor Market Information B1.
Identify sources of information B2.
Use labor market information C. Preparing a Resume C1.
Collect resume data C2.
Develop a resume D. Completing the Job Application Process D1.
Prepare letters of inquiry D2.
Provide accurate educational data D3.
Provide accurate work history data D4.
Provide accurate personal data D5.
Provide accurate reference information D6.
Fill out job application form E. Demonstrating Effective Interviewing Skills E1.
Present proper appearance E2.
Prepare for interview E3.
Greet the interviewer E4.
Participate in the interview E5.
Respond to interview closure E6.
Prepare a letter of follow-up F. Demonstrating Knowledge of the Proper Work Attitudes and Behaviors F1.
Be dependable F2.
Be punctual F3.
Maintain a positive attitude and behavior F4.
Complete tasks effectively with or without supervision F5.
Practice good grooming and personal hygiene F6.
Recognize legal issues in the workplace
Appendix G
G. Demonstrating Knowledge of Effective Interpersonal Skills G1.
Communicate with others G2.
Maintain relationships with others
Appendix H
Work and Family Life OCAP (Ohio's Competency Analysis Profile) Unit 0: Process Competencies 0.0.1: Managing work and family responsibilities for the well-being of self and others 0.0.2: Applying problem-solving process to personal and family problems for well-being of self and others 0.0.3: Relating to others in positive, caring ways 0.0.4: Assuming leadership role as a responsible family member and citizen Unit 1: 1.0.1: 1.0.2: 1.0.3: 1.0.4: 1.0.5: 1.0.6: 1.0.7: 1.0.8: 1.0.9: Unit 2: 2.0.1: 2.0.2: 2.0.3: 2.0.4: 2.0.5: 2.0.6: 2.0.7: 2.0.8: 2.0.9: 2.0.10: Unit 3: 3.0.1: 3.0.2: 3.0.3: 3.0.4: 3.0.5: 3.0.6: 3.0.7: Personal Development Enhance personal development of self and others throughout the life span Enhance self-esteem of self and others Manage stressful situations Formulate plan to achieve career goals Form healthy, caring relationships with family members Form healthy, caring relationships with peers Manage conflict Choose ways to express sexuality responsibly Evaluate importance of responsible parenting for individuals, families, and society Resource Management Manage resources to achieve personal goals Make informed consumer choices for the well-being of self and others Create a living environment that supports the well-being of individuals and families Evaluate types of housing in relation to the family life cycle, lifestyle, values, goals, and resources Maintain a living environment that supports the well-being of self and family Identify ways to take responsibility for living in a global environment Make decisions related to selecting, obtaining, and maintaining clothing for self and family Maintain clothing for self and family Plan food choices that meet health needs of individuals and families Prepare and serve nutritious foods Life Planning Develop a life-management plan Care for self and others to ensure wellness Build and maintain constructive interpersonal relationships Build and maintain strong, functional families Develop strategies for lifelong career planning Coordinate personal and career responsibilities for well-being of self and others Establish a plan for using resources to meet individual and family needs and goals
Appendix H
Unit 4: 4.0.1: 4.0.2: 4.0.3: 4.0.4: 4.0.5: 4.0.6: 4.0.7: 4.0.8: Unit 5: 5.0.1: 5.0.2: 5.0.3: 5.0.4: 5.0.5: 5.0.6: 5.0.7: 5.0.8: Unit 6: 6.0.1: 6.0.2: 6.0.3: 6.0.4: 6.0.5: 6.0.6: 6.0.7: 6.0.8:
Nutrition and Wellness Make choices that promote wellness and good health for self and others Analyze interrelationship between food choices and wellness Evaluate relationship between psychological and social needs and food choices Plan strategies for choosing foods that promote wellness Obtain and store food for self and family Prepare and serve nutritious meals and snacks Select and use equipment for food preparation Identify strategies to promote optimal nutrition and wellness of society Family Relations Analyze the significance of the family Nurture human development in the family throughout the life span Analyze factors related to forming one's own family Analyze factors that build and maintain healthy family relationships Develop communication patterns that enhance family relationships Deal effectively with family stressors, conflicts, and crises Manage work and family roles and responsibilities Analyze social forces that influence families across the life span Parenting Assess impact of the parenting role in society Value responsibility for personal growth within the parenting role Prepare for a healthy emotional and physical beginning for parent(s) and child(ren) (e.g., birth, adopted, foster, blended families) Meet developmental needs of children and adolescents Build positive parent-child relationships Use positive guidance and discipline to promote self-discipline, self-esteem, and socially responsible behavior in children and adolescents Access sources of parenting information, support, and assistance Plan ways that families and society can share in nurturing children and adolescents
Appendix I
National Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences Education CAREER, COMMUNITY, AND FAMILY CONNECTIONS 1.0 Integrate multiple life roles and responsibilities in family, career, and community roles and responsibilities.
1.1 Analyze strategies to manage multiple individual, family, career, and community roles and responsibilities.
1.1.1 Examine policies, issues, and trends in the workplace and community that impact individuals.
1.1.2 Analyze the impact of social, economic, and technological change on work and family dynamics.
1.1.3 Analyze ways that individual career goals can enhance the family's capacity to meet goals for all family members.
1.1.4 Analyze the potential impact of career path decisions on balancing work and family.
1.1.5 Determine goals for lifelong learning and leisure opportunities for all family members.
1.1.6 Determine skills and knowledge needed to develop a life plan for achieving individual, family, and career goals.
1.2 Demonstrate transferable and employability skills in community and workplace settings.
1.2.1 Examine potential career choices to determine the knowledge, skills, and attitudes associated with each.
1.2.2 Demonstrate job-seeking and job-keeping skills.
1.2.3 Apply communication skills in community and workplace settings.
1.2.4 Demonstrate teamwork skills in communication and workplace settings.
1.2.5 Examine the strategies to manage the impact of changing technologies in workplace settings.
1.2.6 Demonstrate leadership skills and abilities in the workplace and community.
1.2.7 Examine factors that contribute to maintaining safe and healthy work and community environments.
1.2.8 Demonstrate work ethics and professionalism.
1.3 Analyze the reciprocal impact of individual and family participation in community activities.
1.3.1 Examine goals that support individuals and family members in carrying out community and civic responsibilities.
1.3.2 Arrange a plan for individuals and families to select and develop skills in community activities.
1.3.3 Determine skills that provide beneficial services to the community.
1.3.4 Examine community resources and systems of formal and informal support available to individuals and families.
1.3.5 Examine the impact of public policies, agencies, and institutions on the family.
CONSUMER AND FAMILY RESOURCES 2.0 Evaluate management practices related to the human, economic, and environmental resourses.
2.1 Demonstrate management of individual and family resources, including food, clothing, shelter, health care, recreation, and transportation.
2.1.1 Apply management and planning skills and processes to organize tasks and responsibilities.
2.1.2 Examine how individuals and families make choices to satisfy wants and needs.
2.1.3 Implement decisions about providing safe and nutritious food for individuals and families.
2.1.4 Implement decisions about purchasing, creating, and maintaining clothing.
2.1.5 Implement decisions about housing and furnishings.
2.1.6 Examine information about procuring and maintaining health care to meet the needs of individuals and family members.
2.1.7 Implement decisions about recreational needs.
2.1.8 Apply consumer skills to acquire and maintain transportation that meets the needs of individuals and family members.
2.2 Analyze the relationship of the environment to family and consumer resources.
2.2.1 Determine individual and family responsibility in relation to the environmental trends and issues.
2.2.2 Examine environmental trends and issues affecting families and future generations.
2.2.3 Examine behaviors that conserve, reuse, and recycle resources to maintain the environment.
2.2.4 Investigate government regulations for conserving.
Appendix I
2.3 Analyze policies that support consumer rights and responsibilities.
2.3.1 Examine state and federal policies and laws providing consumer protection.
2.3.2 Investigate how policies become laws related to consumer rights.
2.3.3 Examine skills used in seeking information related to consumer rights.
2.4 Evaluate the impact of technology on individual and family resources.
2.4.1 Review types of technology that impact family and consumer decision making.
2.4.2 Examine how media and technological advances impact family and consumer decisions.
2.4.3 Assess the use of technology and its impact on quality of life.
2.5 Analyze interrelationship between the economic system and consumer actions.
2.5.1 Examine the use of resources in making choices that satisfy needs and wants of individuals and families.
2.5.2 Examine individual and family roles in the economic system.
2.5.3 Examine economic impacts of laws and regulations that pertain to consumers and providers of services.
2.5.4 Determine practices that allow families to maintain economic self-sufficiency.
2.6 Demonstrate management of financial resources to meet the goals of individuals and families across the life span.
2.6.1 Examine the need for personal and family financial planning.
2.6.2 Apply management principles to individual and family financial practices.
2.6.3 Apply management principles to decisions about individual and family insurance.
2.6.4 Obtain personal and legal documents related to managing individual and family finances.
CONSUMER SERVICES 3.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in consumer services.
3.1 Analyze career paths within consumer service industries.
3.1.1 Determine roles and functions of individuals engaged in consumer service careers.
3.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
3.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in consumer services.
3.1.4 Examine the impact of the consumer service industry on local, state, national, and global economies.
3.2 Analyze factors that impact consumer advocacy.
3.2.1 Examine the role of advocacy groups at state and national levels.
3.2.2 Determine the contributions of policy makers to consumer advocacy.
3.2.3 Explore strategies that enable consumers to become advocates.
3.2.4 Examine the effects of consumer protection laws on advocacy.
3.2.5 Determine strategies to reduce the risk of consumer fraud.
3.2.6 Examine the role of media in consumer advocacy.
3.2.7 Determine the effects of manufacturers' policies and procedures on advocacy.
3.2.8 Explore the use of educational and promotional materials in consumer advocacy.
3.3 Analyze factors in developing a long-term financial management plan.
3.3.1 Explain the impact of the economic system on personal income, individual and family security, and consumer decisions.
3.3.2 Examine components of a financial planning process that reflects the distinction between needs and wants, values, goals, and economic resources.
3.3.3 Determine the impact of consumers' credit in long-term financial planning.
3.3.4 Examine investment and savings alternatives.
3.3.5 Determine the effects of risk management strategies on long-term financial planning.
3.3.6 Consider the impact of key life transitions on financial planning.
3.3.7 Explain the role of estate planning in long-term financial planning.
3.4 Analyze resource consumption for conservation and waste management practices.
3.4.1 Investigate sources and types of residential and commercial energy, waste disposal, and pollution issues.
3.4.2 Investigate consumer programs and services provided by government, public utilities, resource
Appendix I recovery businesses, and environmental organizations.
3.4.3 Explore strategies and practices to conserve energy and reduce waste.
3.4.4 Examine waste management issues.
3.4.5 Examine roles of government, industry, and family in energy consumption.
3.5 Demonstrate skills need for product development, testing, and presentation.
3.5.1 Conduct market research to determine consumer trends and product development needs.
3.5.2 Design or analyze a consumer product.
3.5.3 Examine features, prices, product information, styles, and performance of consumer goods for potential trade-offs among the components.
3.5.4 Perform a test on a product utilizing valid and reliable testing procedures.
3.5.5 Apply statistical analysis processes to interpret, summarize, and report data from tests.
3.5.6 Examine the labeling, packaging, and support materials of consumer goods.
3.5.7 Demonstrate a product or educate an audience.
3.5.8 Utilize appropriate sales techniques to compare, demonstrate, assist, and advise consumers in the selection of goods and services that meet consumer needs.
EARLY CHILDHOOD, EDUCATION, AND SERVICES 4.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in early childhood, education, and services.
4.1 Analyze career paths within early childhood, education and services.
4.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in early childhood, education, and services.
4.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
4.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in early childhood, education, and services.
4.1.4 Examine the impact of early childhood, education, and services occupations on local, state, national, and global economics.
4.2 Utilize developmentally appropriate practices and other child development theories when planning for early childhood, education, and services.
4.2.1 Examine child development theories and their implications for educational and childcare practices.
4.2.2 Determine a variety of assessment methods to observe and interpret children's growth and development.
4.2.3 Consider cultural and environmental influences when assessing children's development.
4.2.4 Determine special needs of children.
4.2.5 Put into effect strategies that promote children's growth and development.
4.3 Demonstrate integration of curriculum and instruction to meet children's developmental needs and interests.
4.3.1 Examine a variety of curriculum and instructional materials.
4.3.2 Implement learning activities in all curriculum areas that meet the developmental needs of children.
4.3.3 Implement an integrated curriculum that incorporates a child's language, learning styles, home experiences, and cultural values.
4.3.4 Demonstrate a variety of teaching methods to meet individual needs of children.
4.3.5 Arrange learning centers that provide for children's exploration, discovery, and development.
4.3.6 Establish activities, routines, and transitions.
4.4 Demonstrate a safe and healthy learning environment for children.
4.4.1 Manage physical space to maintain a safe and healthy learning environment.
4.4.2 Apply safe and healthy practices that comply with state regulations.
4.4.3 Implement strategies to teach children health, safety, and sanitation habits.
4.4.4 Provide safe and healthy meals and snacks.
4.4.5 Document symptoms of child abuse and neglect and use appropriate procedures to report suspected abuse or neglect to the designated authorities.
4.4.6 Implement basic health practices and prevention procedures for workers and children regarding childhood illness and communicable diseases.
4.4.7 Demonstrate security and emergency procedures.
Appendix I 4.5 Demonstrate techniques for positive collaborative relationships with children.
4.5.1 Establish developmentally appropriate guidelines for behavior.
4.5.2 Demonstrate problem-solving skills with children.
4.5.3 Demonstrate interpersonal skills that promote positive and productive relationships with children.
4.5.4 Implement strategies for constructive and supportive interactions between children and families.
4.5.5 Present information to parents regarding developmental issues and concerns related to children.
4.6 Demonstrate professional practices and standards related to working with children.
4.6.1 Utilize opportunities for continuing training and education.
4.6.2 Apply professional ethical standards as accepted by the recognized professional organizations.
4.6.3 Implement federal, state, and local standards, policies, regulations, and laws that impact children, families, and programs.
4.6.4 Demonstrate enthusiasm, initiative, and commitment to program goals and improvements.
4.6.5 Apply business management skills to planning businesses in early childhood, education, and services.
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE 5.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in facilities management and maintenance.
5.1 Analyze career paths within facilities management and maintenance areas.
5.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in facilities management and maintenance careers.
5.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
5.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in facilities management and maintenance.
5.1.4 Examine the impact of facilities management and maintenance occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
5.2 Demonstrate planning, organizing, and maintaining an efficient housekeeping operation.
5.2.1 Design housekeeping standards and procedures.
5.2.2 Operate cleaning equipment and tools.
5.2.3 Manage use of supplies.
5.2.4 Maintain building interior surfaces, wall coverings, fabrics, furnishings, and floor surfaces.
5.2.5 Perform cleaning based on established standards.
5.2.6 Design energy-efficient methods.
5.2.7 Demonstrate quality services that exceed the expectations of customers.
5.3 Demonstrate sanitation procedures for a clean and safe environment.
5.3.1 Examine the various types of cleaning methods and their environmental effects.
5.3.2 Examine federal and state regulations regarding the handling, use, and storage of chemicals.
5.3.3 Apply Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) regulations to situations in which bloodborne pathogens exist and need to be labeled.
5.3.4 Execute a pest control system appropriate for the facility.
5.3.5 Apply Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) standards.
5.3.6 Apply the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) regulations.
5.4 Apply hazardous materials and waste management procedures.
5.4.1 Carry out federal, state, and other regulations regarding waste management.
5.4.2 Demonstrate a waste minimization plan.
5.4.3 Practice a recycling program for conservation of resources.
5.4.4 Record hazardous situations accurately and communicate to appropriate authorities.
5.4.5 Determine procedures for safely handling and storing hazardous materials and waste products.
5.4.6 Demonstrate safe disposal of pesticides.
5.5 Demonstrate a work environment that provides safety and security.
5.5.1 Design procedures for external and internal emergencies.
5.5.2 Prepare security procedures.
Appendix I 5.5.3 Demonstrate safe procedures in the use, care, and storage of equipment.
5.5.4 Apply safety and security procedures as required by Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and other agencies.
5.5.5 Apply procedures for infection control.
5.5.6 Examine concepts of epidemiology.
5.6 Demonstrate appropriate laundering processes.
5.6.1 Examine the functions of machines and equipment used in laundry operations.
5.6.2 Demonstrate laundry procedures.
5.6.3 Apply procedures for the selection of textiles, chemicals, and equipment associated with laundry.
5.6.4 Apply regulations regarding laundry/linen systems.
5.7 Demonstrate facilities management functions.
5.7.1 Demonstrate quality customer service that exceeds expectations.
5.7.2 Examine the elements involved in staff planning, recruiting, interviewing, and selecting of employees.
5.7.3 Design staff schedules.
5.7.4 Conduct orientation, regular training and education, and on-the-job training/retraining.
5.7.5 Apply work measurement techniques.
5.7.6 Apply principles of purchasing and receiving in facility management operations.
5.7.7 Implement inventory procedures.
5.7.8 Apply accounting principles in planning and forecasting profit and loss.
FAMILY 6.0 Evaluate the significance of family and its impact on the well-being of individuals and society.
6.1 Analyze the impact of family as a system on individuals and society.
6.1.1 Examine family as the basic unit of society.
6.1.2 Determine the role of family in transmitting societal expectations.
6.1.3 Examine global influences on today's families.
6.1.4 Examine the roles of family in teaching culture and traditions across the life span.
6.1.5 Examine the role of family in developing independence, interdependence, and commitment of family members.
6.1.6 Determine the impact of change in transitions over the life course.
6.1.7 Explore the ways family and consumer sciences careers assist the works of the family.
6.2 Demonstrate appreciation for diverse perspectives, needs, and characteristics of individuals and families.
6.2.1 Demonstrate awareness of multiple diversities and their impact on individuals and families.
6.2.2 Examine the impact of cultural diversity on individuals and families.
6.2.3 Examine the impact of empathy for diversity on individuals in family, work, and community settings.
6.2.4 Demonstrate respect for diversity with sensitivity to antibias, gender, equity, age, culture, and ethnicity.
6.2.5 Examine the impact of the global village on the need to appreciate diversity.
FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES 7.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in family and community services.
7.1 Analyze career paths within family and community services.
7.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in family and community service careers.
7.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
7.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in family and community services.
7.1.4 Examine the impact of family and community service occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
7.2 Analyze factors related to providing family and community services.
7.2.1 Examine local, state, and national agencies and informal support resources providing human services.
7.2.2 Determine professional, ethical, legal, and safety issues that confront human service employees.
Appendix I 7.
7.
7.
7.
Examine licensing laws and regulations that affect service providers and their participants.
Determine harmful, fraudulent, and deceptive human service practices.
Determine the rights and responsibilities of human service participants and their families.
Determine effective individual and family advocacy and self-advocacy strategies to overcome diverse challenges facing human service participants.
7.2.7 Explore community-networking opportunities in family and community services.
2.3 2.4 2.5 2.6
7.3 Demonstrate professional behaviors, skills, and knowledge in providing family and community services.
7.3.1 Utilize rules, regulations, and work-site policies that affect employer, employee, participant, and family rights and responsibilities.
7.3.2 Demonstrate professional collaborative relationships with colleagues, support teams, participants, and families.
7.3.3 Maintain accurate and confidential documentation to be submitted in a timely manner to appropriate sources.
7.3.4 Examine participants' strengths, needs, preferences, and interests across the life span through formal and informal assessment practices.
7.3.5 Demonstrate use of technology in human services.
7.4 Evaluate conditions affecting individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.4.1 Assess health, wellness, and safety issues of individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.4.2 Determine management and living environment issues of individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.4.3 Research personal, social, emotional, educational, and recreational issues for individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.4.4 Discriminate between situations that require personal prevention or intervention and those situations that require professional assistance.
7.4.5 Determine situations that require crisis intervention.
7.4.6 Determine the appropriate support needed to address selected human service issues.
7.5 Identify services for individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.5.1 List needs and accommodations for people with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.5.2 State ways in which individuals affect the family financially, socially, and emotionally with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.5.3 Cite coping or adjustment strategies and stress management practices for participant, a caregiver, and family members.
7.5.4 Highlight the importance of friends, family, and community relationships for an individual with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
7.5.5 Give support that validates the participant's capabilities and right to privacy, dignity, and autonomy.
7.5.6 Give participants strategies to make informed choices, access resources and support, follow through on responsibilities, and take appropriate risks.
7.5.7 List verbal and nonverbal communication skills related to advising and counseling individuals and families with a variety of disadvantaged conditions.
FOOD PRODUCTION AND SERVICES 8.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in food production and services.
8.1 Analyze career paths within the food production and food services industries.
8.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in food production and services careers.
8.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
8.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in food production and services.
8.1.4 Examine the impact of food production and services occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
8.2 Demonstrate food safety and sanitation procedures.
8.2.1 Determine pathogens found in food and their role in causing illness.
8.2.2 Employ food service management safety/sanitation program procedures.
8.2.3 Use knowledge of systems for documenting, investigating, and reporting foodborne illness.
Appendix I 8.2.4 Use the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) principles and procedures during food handling processes to minimize the risks of foodborne illness.
8.2.5 Practice good personal hygiene/health procedures, and report symptoms of illness.
8.2.6 Demonstrate proper receiving and storage of both raw and prepared foods.
8.2.7 Demonstrate food handling and preparation techniques that prevent cross-contamination between raw and ready-to-eat foods and between animal or fish sources and other food products.
8.2.8 Examine current types and proper uses of cleaning materials and sanitizers.
8.2.9 Use Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) Right to Know Law and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) and explain their requirements in handling hazardous materials.
8.2.10 Demonstrate waste disposal and recycling methods.
8.2.11 Demonstrate ability to maintain necessary records to document time and temperature control, employee health, maintenance of equipment, and other elements of food preparation, storage, and presentation.
8.3 Demonstrate selecting, using, and maintaining food production equipment.
8.3.1 Operate tools and equipment following safety procedures and OSHA requirements.
8.3.2 Maintain tools and equipment following safety procedures and OSHA requirements.
8.3.3 Demonstrate procedures for cleaning and sanitizing equipment.
8.3.4 Examine efficiency of equipment purchases based on long-term business needs, specific regulations, and codes related to foods.
8.3.5 Demonstrate procedures for storage of equipment and tools.
8.4 Demonstrate planning menu items based on standardized recipes to meet customer needs.
8.4.1 Use computer-based menu systems.
8.4.2 Apply menu-planning principles to develop and modify menus.
8.4.3 Examine food and equipment needed for menus.
8.4.4 Do menu layout and design.
8.4.5 Prepare requisitions for production requirements.
8.4.6 Record performance of menu items.
8.5 Demonstrate commercial preparation for all menu categories to produce a variety of food products.
8.5.1 Demonstrate skills in knife, tool, and equipment handling.
8.5.2 Demonstrate a variety of cooking methods including roasting and baking, broiling, smoking, grilling, sautéing, frying, deep frying, braising, stewing, poaching, steaming, woking, convection, microwaving, and other emerging technologies.
8.5.3 Utilize weights and measures to demonstrate proper scaling and measurement techniques.
8.5.4 Apply the fundamentals of time and temperature to cooking, cooling, and reheating of a variety of foods.
8.5.5 Prepare various meats, seafood, and poultry.
8.5.6 Prepare various stocks, soups, and sauces.
8.5.7 Prepare various fruits, vegetables, starches, and farinaceous items.
8.5.8 Prepare various salads, dressings, marinades, and spices.
8.5.9 Prepare sandwiches, canapés, and appetizers.
8.5.10 Prepare baked goods and desserts.
8.5.11 Prepare breakfast meats, eggs, cereals, and batter products.
8.5.12 Demonstrate food presentation techniques.
8.5.13 Examine the applicability of convenience food items.
8.6 Demonstrate implementation of food service management functions.
8.6.1 Apply principles of purchasing and receiving in food service operations.
8.6.2 Practice inventory procedures including first in/first out concept, date markings, and specific record keeping.
8.6.3 Apply accounting principles in planning and forecasting profit and loss.
8.6.4 Examine the areas of legal liability within the service industry.
8.6.5 Verify human resource policies including rules, regulations, laws, and hiring/compensation/overtime.
8.6.6 Apply the procedures involved in staff planning, recruiting, interviewing, selecting, and scheduling of employees.
Appendix I 8.6.7 Conduct staff orientation, regular training and education, and on-the-job training/education.
8.6.8 Implement marketing plan for food service operations.
8.6.9 Design internal/external disaster plan.
8.7 Demonstrate the concept of internal and external customer service.
8.7.1 Examine the role of service as a strategic component of performance.
8.7.2 Demonstrate quality services that exceed the expectations of customers.
8.7.3 Examine the relationship between employees and customer satisfaction.
8.7.4 Apply strategies for resolving complaints.
8.7.5 Demonstrate sensitivity to diversity and individuals with special needs.
FOOD SCIENCE, DIETETICS, AND NUTRITION 9.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in food science, dietetics, and nutrition.
9.1 Analyze career paths within the food science, dietetics, and nutrition industries.
9.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in food science, dietetics, and nutrition careers.
9.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
9.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in food science, dietetics, and nutrition.
9.1.4 Examine the impact of food science, dietetics, and nutrition occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
9.2 Appl 9.2.1 9.2.2 9.2.3 9.2.4 9.
9.
9.
9.
2.5 2.6 2.7 2.8 y risk management procedures to food safety, food testing, and sanitation.
Determine factors that contribute to foodborne illness.
Employ food service management safety/sanitation programs.
Use knowledge of systems for documenting, investigating, and reporting a foodborne illness.
Use the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) during all food handling processes to minimize the risks of foodborne illness.
Practice good personal hygiene/health procedures.
Demonstrate procedures for receiving and storage of raw and prepared foods.
Classify current types of cleaning materials and sanitizers and their proper use.
Use Occupational Safety and Health Administration's (OSHA) Right to Know Law and Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) and explain their requirements in handling hazardous materials.
Demonstrate waste disposal and recycling methods.
9.2.9
9.3 Evaluate nutrition principles, food plans, preparation techniques, and specialized dietary plans.
9.3.1 Determine nutrient requirements across the life span addressing the diversity of people, culture, and religions.
9.3.2 Appraise and interpret nutritional data.
9.3.3 Assess principles to maximize nutrient retention in prepared foods.
9.3.4 Assess the influence of socioeconomic and psychological factors on food and nutrition behavior.
9.3.5 Monitor recipe/formula proportions and modifications for food productions.
9.3.6 Critique the selection of foods to promote a healthy lifestyle.
9.3.7 Categorize foods into exchange groups and plan menus, applying the exchange system to meet various nutrient needs.
9.4 Demonstrate basic concepts of nutritional therapy.
9.4.1 Conduct nutritional screening.
9.4.2 Use nutritional information in care planning.
9.4.3 Utilize a selective menu.
9.4.4 Select appropriate special nourishment based on nutritional needs.
9.4.5 Instruct individuals on nutrition for health maintenance and disease prevention.
9.5 Demonstrate use of current technology in food product development and marketing.
9.5.1 Utilize various factors that affect food preference in the marketing of food.
9.5.2 Utilize data in statistical analysis in making development and marketing decisions.
Appendix I 9.
9.
9.
9.
9.
5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 Prepare food for presentation and assessment.
Maintain test kitchen/laboratory and related equipment and supplies.
Implement procedures that affect quality product performance.
Conduct sensory evaluations of food products.
Conduct testing for safety of food products, utilizing available technology.
9.6 Demonstrate food science, dietetic, and nutrition management principles and practices.
9.6.1 Build menus to customer/client preferences.
9.6.2 Implement food preparation, production, and testing systems.
9.6.3 Verify standards for food quality.
9.6.4 Create standardized recipes.
9.6.5 Manage amounts of food to meet needs of customers, clients.
9.6.6 Examine new products.
9.6.7 Implement procedures that provide cost-effective products.
9.6.8 Establish par levels for the purchase of supplies based on an organization's needs.
9.6.9 Utilize Food Code Points of time, temperature, date markings, cross-contamination, hand washing, and personal hygiene for safe food preparation.
HOSPITALITY, TOURISM, AND RECREATION 10.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in hospitality, tourism, and recreation.
10.1 Analyze career paths within the hospitality, tourism, and recreation industries.
10.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in hospitality, tourism, and recreation careers.
10.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
10.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in hospitality, tourism, and recreation.
10.1.4 Examine the impact of hospitality, tourism, and recreation occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
10.2 Demonstrate procedures applied to safety, security, and environmental issues.
10.2.1 Examine the importance of safety, security, and environmental issues related to the hospitality, tourism, and recreation industries.
10.2.2 Demonstrate ability to ensure customer safety.
10.2.3 Manage evacuation plans and emergency procedures.
10.2.4 Examine utilization of resources and ways to conserve them.
10.2.5 Design a system for documenting and investigating reports related to safety, security, and environmental issues.
10.3 Apply concepts of service to meet customer expectations.
10.3.1 Practice service methods that exceed the expectations of customers.
10.3.2 Determine the relationship between employees' attitude and actions and customer satisfaction.
10.3.3 Employ strategies for resolving complaints.
10.3.4 Measure the impact customer relations has on success of the hospitality, tourism, and recreation industry.
10.3.5 Measure the impact customer relations has on the needs of populations.
10.4 Demonstrate practices and skills involved in lodging occupations.
10.4.1 Demonstrate front desk skills.
10.4.2 Perform cash handling, accounting, and financial transactions.
10.4.3 Manage convention, meeting, and banquet support functions.
10.4.4 Apply basic skills in food and catering services.
10.4.5 Manage use, care, maintenance, and storage of equipment, tools, and supplies.
10.4.6 Apply facility services skills.
10.4.7 Apply time and work management to facility service tasks.
10.4.8 Perform appropriate work roles within the sales and marketing division.
10.5 Demonstrate practices and skills for travel-related services.
10.5.1 Examine geography, climate, sites, and time zones of various regions and countries.
10.5.2 Examine customs of various regions and countries.
Appendix I 10.5.3 10.5.4 10.5.5 10.5.6 Inspect food, beverage, and etiquette for various regions and countries.
Assemble information needed for domestic and international travel.
Produce travel documents and itineraries.
Check travel arrangements using computerized systems.
10.6 Demonstrate management of recreation, leisure, and other programs and events.
10.6.1 Coordinate client inquiries and requests.
10.6.2 Design themes, time lines, budgets, agendas, and itineraries.
10.6.3 Organize locations, facilities, suppliers, and vendors for specific services.
10.6.4 Prepare for distribution of event materials.
10.6.5 Demonstrate skills related to promoting and publicizing events.
10.6.6 Manage programs and events for specific age groups or populations.
10.6.7 Promote wellness through recreation and leisure programs and events.
HOUSING, INTERIORS AND FURNISHINGS 11.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in housing, interiors, and furnishings.
11.1 Analyze career paths within the housing, interiors, and furnishings industry.
11.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in housing, interiors, and furnishings careers.
11.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
11.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in housing, interiors, and furnishings.
11.1.4 Examine the impact of housing, interiors, and furnishings occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
11.2 Evaluate housing decisions in relation to available resources and options.
11.2.1 Determine the principles and elements of design.
11.2.2 Determine the psychological impact that the principles and elements of design have on the individual.
11.2.3 Determine the effects that the principles and elements of design have on aesthetics and function.
11.3 Evaluate the use of housing and interior furnishing and products in meeting specific design needs.
11.3.1 Research product information, including but not limited to floor coverings, wall coverings, textiles, window treatments, furniture, lighting fixtures, kitchen and bath fixtures, and equipment, accessories, and building materials.
11.3.2 Select manufacturers, products, and materials, considering care, maintenance, safety, and environmental issues.
11.3.3 Review measuring, estimating, ordering, purchasing, and pricing skills.
11.3.4 Appraise various interior furnishings, appliances, and equipment that provide cost and quality choices for clients.
11.4 Demonstrate computer-aided drafting design, blueprint reading, and space planning skills required for the housing, interiors, and furnishings industry.
11.4.1 Read information provided on blueprints.
11.4.2 Examine floor plans for efficiency and safety in areas, including but not limited to zones, traffic patterns, storage, electrical, and mechanical systems.
11.4.3 Draw an interior space to scale, using correct architecture symbols and drafting skills.
11.4.4 Arrange furniture placement with reference to principles of design, traffic flow, activity, and existing architectural features.
11.4.5 Utilize applicable building codes, universal guidelines, and regulations in space planning.
11.4.6 Create floor plans, using computer software.
11.5 Analyze influences on architectural and furniture design and development for housing, interiors, and furnishings.
11.5.1 Explore features of furnishings that are characteristic of various historical periods.
11.5.2 Consider historical architectural details to current housing and interior design trends.
11.5.3 Examine the development of architectural styles throughout history.
11.5.4 Compare the historical architectural styles throughout history.
Appendix I 11.5.5 Consider future trends in architectural and furniture design and development.
11.6 Evaluate client's needs, goals, and resources in creating design plans for housing, interiors, and furnishings.
11.6.1 Assess human needs, safety, space, and technology as they relate to housing and interior goals.
11.6.2 Assess community, family, and financial resources needed to achieve client's housing and interior goal.
11.6.3 Assess a variety of available resources for housing and interior design.
11.6.4 Critique design plans that address client's needs, goals, and resources.
11.7 Demonstrate design ideas through visual presentation.
11.7.1 Select appropriate studio tools.
11.7.2 Prepare renderings, elevations, and sketches, using appropriate media.
11.7.3 Prepare visual presentations, including legends, keys, and schedules.
11.7.4 Utilize a variety of presentation media such as photography, video, computer, and software for client.
11.8 Demonstrate general procedures for business profitability and career success.
11.8.1 Examine legislation, regulations, and public policy affecting the housing, interiors, and furnishings industry.
11.8.2 Examine personal and employer responsibilities and liabilities regarding industry-related safety, security, and environmental factors.
11.8.3 Examine security and inventory control strategies, laws, and work-site policies and how they affect loss prevention and store profit.
11.8.4 Demonstrate procedures for reporting and handling accidents, safety, and security incidents.
11.8.5 Apply procedures for maintaining inventory control and loss prevention, including cash and credit transactions.
11.8.6 Examine operational costs such as mark ups, mark downs, cash flow, and other factors affecting profit.
11.8.7 Demonstrate knowledge of the arts, various resources, and cultural impact upon design industries.
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 12.0 Analyze factors that impact human growth and development.
12.1 Analyze principles of human growth and development across the life span.
12.1.1 Examine physical, emotional, social, and intellectual development.
12.1.2 Examine interrelationships among physical, emotional, social, and intellectual aspects of human growth and development.
12.2 Analyze conditions that influence human growth and development.
12.2.1 Investigate the impact of hereditary and environment on human growth and development.
12.2.2 Determine the impact of social, economic, and technological forces on individual growth and development.
12.2.3 Examine the effects of gender, ethnicity, and culture on individual development.
12.2.4 Examine the effects of life events on individuals' physical and emotional development.
12.3 Analyze strategies 12.3.1 Examine the 12.3.2 Examine the 12.3.3 Examine the that promote growth and development across the life span. roles of nurturance on human growth and development.
role of communication on human growth and development.
role of support systems in meeting human growth and development needs.
INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIPS 13.0 Demonstrate respectful and caring relationships in the family, workplace, and community.
13.1 Analyze functions and expectations of various types of relationships.
13.1.1 Examine processes for building and maintaining interpersonal relationships.
13.1.2 Examine the impact of various stages of the family life cycle on interpersonal relationships.
13.1.3 Compare physical, emotional, and intellectual responses in stable and unstable relationships.
13.1.4 Determine factors that contribute to healthy and unhealthy relationships.
Appendix I 13.1.5 Explore processes for handling unhealthy relationships.
13.1.6 Determine stress management strategies for family, work, and community settings.
13.2 Analyze personal needs and characteristics and their impact on interpersonal relationships.
13.2.1 Examine the impact of personal characteristics on relationships.
13.2.2 Consider the effect of personal needs on relationships.
13.2.3 Examine the effect of self-esteem and self-image on relationships.
13.2.4 Determine the impact of life span events and conditions on relationships.
13.2.5 Explain the impact of personal standards and codes of conduct on interpersonal relationships.
13.3 Demonstrate communication skills that contribute to positive relationships.
13.3.1 Examine the impact of personal characteristics on relationships.
13.3.2 Demonstrate verbal and nonverbal behaviors and attitudes that contribute to effective communication.
13.3.3 Demonstrate effective listening and feedback techniques.
13.3.4 Examine barriers to communication in family, work, and community settings.
13.3.5 Practice ethical principles of communication technology in family, work, and community settings.
13.3.6 Examine the impact of communication technology in family, work, and community settings.
13.3.7 Examine the roles and functions of communications in family, work, and community settings.
13.4 Evaluate effective conflict prevention and management techniques.
13.4.1 Determine the origin and development of attitudes and behaviors regarding conflict.
13.4.2 Determine how similarities and differences among people affect conflict prevention and management.
13.4.3 Determine the roles of decision making and problem solving in reducing and managing conflict.
13.4.4 Appraise nonviolent strategies that address conflict.
13.4.5 Choose effective responses to harassment.
13.4.6 Assess community resources that support conflict prevention and management.
13.5 Demonstrate teamwork and leadership skills in the family, workplace, and community.
13.5.1 Create an environment that encourages and respects the ideas, perspectives, and contributions of all group members.
13.5.2 Demonstrate strategies to motivate and encourage group members.
13.5.3 Create strategies to utilize the strengths and limitations of team members.
13.5.4 Demonstrate techniques that develop team and community spirit.
13.5.5 Demonstrate ways to organize and delegate responsibilities.
13.5.6 Create strategies to integrate new members into the team.
13.5.7 Demonstrate processes for cooperating, compromising, and collaborating.
13.6 Demonstrate standards that guide behavior in interpersonal relationships.
13.6.1 Examine types of standards for making judgments about interpersonal relationships.
13.6.2 Apply guidelines for assessing the nature of issues and situations.
13.6.3 Apply standards when making judgments and taking action.
13.6.4 Demonstrate ethical behavior in family, workplace, and community settings.
13.6.5 Examine the relative merits of opposing points of view regarding current ethical issues.
NUTRITION AND WELLNESS 14.0 Demonstrate nutrition and wellness practices that enhance individual and family well-being.
14.1 Analyze factors that influence nutrition and wellness practices across the life span.
14.1.1 Examine physical, emotional, social, psychological and spiritual components of individual and family wellness.
14.1.2 Compare the impact of psychological, cultural, and social influences on food choices and other nutrition practices.
14.1.3 Examine the governmental, economic, and technological influences on food choices and practices.
14.1.4 Investigate the impact of global and local events and conditions on food choices.
Appendix I 14.1.5 Examine legislation and regulations related to nutrition and wellness issues.
14.2 Evaluate the nutritional needs of individuals and families in relation to health and wellness across the life span.
14.2.1 Assess the effect of nutrients on health, appearance, and peak performance.
14.2.2 Research the relationship of nutrition and wellness to individual and family health throughout the life span.
14.2.3 Assess the impact of food and diet fads, food addictions, and eating disorders on wellness.
14.2.4 Appraise sources of food and nutrition information, including food labels, related to health and wellness.
14.3 Demonstrate ability to acquire, handle, and use food to meet nutrition and wellness needs of individuals and families across the life span.
14.3.1 Apply various dietary guidelines in planning to meet nutrition and wellness needs.
14.3.2 Design strategies that meet the health and nutrition requirements of individuals and families with special needs.
14.3.3 Demonstrate ability to select, store, prepare, and serve nutritious and aesthetically pleasing foods.
14.4 Evaluate factors that affect food safety, from production through consumption.
14.4.1 Determine conditions and practices that promote safe food handling.
14.4.2 Appraise safety and sanitation practices throughout the food chain.
14.4.3 Determine how changes in national and international food production and distribution systems impact the food supply.
14.4.4 Appraise federal, state, and local, inspection and labeling systems that protect the health of individuals and the public.
14.4.5 Monitor foodborne illness as a health issue for individuals and families.
14.4.6 Review public dialogue about food safety and sanitation.
14.5 Evaluate the impact of science and technology on food composition, safety, and other issues.
14.5.1 Determine how scientific and technical advances impact the nutrient content, availability, and safety of foods.
14.5.2 Assess how the scientific and technical advances in food processing, storage, product development, and distribution impact nutrition and wellness.
14.5.3 Determine the impact of technological advances on selection, preparation, and home storage of food.
14.5.4 Assess the effects of food science and technology on meeting nutritional needs.
PARENTING 15.0 Evaluate the impact of parenting roles and responsibilities on strengthening the well-being of individuals and families.
15.1 Analyze roles and responsibilities of parenting.
15.1.1 Examine parenting roles across the life span.
15.1.2 Examine expectations and responsibilities of parenting.
15.1.3 Determine consequences of parenting practices to the individual, family, and society.
15.1.4 Determine societal conditions that impact parenting across the life span.
15.1.5 Explain cultural differences in roles and responsibilities of parenting.
15.2 Evaluate parenting practices that maximize human growth and development.
15.2.1 Choose nurturing practices that support human growth and development.
15.2.2 Select communication strategies that promote positive self-esteem in family members.
15.2.3 Assess common practices about emerging research about discipline on human growth and development.
15.2.4 Assess the impact of abuse and neglect on children and families and determine methods for prevention.
15.2.5 Determine criteria for selecting care and services for children.
15.3 Evaluate external support systems that provide services for parents.
15.3.1 Assess community resources and services available to families.
15.3.2 Appraise community resources that provide opportunities related to parenting.
15.3.3 Review current laws and policies related to parenting.
Appendix I
15.4 Analyze physical and emotional factors related to beginning the parenting process.
15.4.1 Examine biological processes related to prenatal development, birth, and health of child and mother.
15.4.2 Consider the emotional factors of prenatal development and birth in relation to the health of parents and child.
15.4.3 Examine implications of alternatives to biological parenthood.
15.4.4 Determine legal and ethical impacts of technology.
16.0 Integrate knowledge, skills, and practices required for careers in textiles and apparel.
16.1 Analyze career paths within the textiles and apparel design industry.
16.1.1 Determine the roles and functions of individuals engaged in textiles and apparel careers.
16.1.2 Explore opportunities for employment and entrepreneurial endeavors.
16.1.3 Examine education and training requirements and opportunities for career paths in textiles and apparel services.
16.1.4 Examine the impact of textiles and apparel occupations on local, state, national, and global economies.
16.2 Evaluate fiber and textiles materials.
16.2.1 Select appropriate terminology for identifying, comparing, and analyzing the most common generic textiles fibers.
16.2.2 Determine performance characteristics of fiber and textiles.
16.2.3 Review textiles legislation, standards, and labeling in the global economy.
16.2.4 Assess effects of textiles characteristics on design, construction, care, use, and maintenance of products.
16.2.5 Select appropriate procedures for care of textiles products.
16.3 Demonstrate fiber and textiles materials.
16.3.1 Examine the ways in which fabric, texture, and pattern can affect visual appearance.
16.3.2 Apply basic and complex color schemes and color theory to develop and enhance visual effects.
16.3.3 Utilize elements and principles of design in designing, constructing, and/or altering textiles products.
16.3.4 Demonstrate design concepts with material or computer, using draping and/or flat pattern-making technique.
16.3.5 Implement design that takes into consideration ecological, environmental, sociological, psychological, technical, and economic trends and issues.
16.3.6 Apply elements and principles of design to assist consumers and businesses in making decisions.
16.3.7 Demonstrate ability to use technology for fashion design.
16.4 Demonstrate skills needed to produce, alter, or repair textiles products and apparel.
16.4.1 Use a variety of equipment, tools, and supplies for apparel and textiles construction, alteration, and repair.
16.4.2 Examine production processes for creating fibers, yarn, wove, and knit fabrics, and nonwoven textiles products.
16.4.3 Use appropriate industry materials for cleaning, pressing, and finishing products.
16.4.4 Explore current technology and trends that facilitate design and production of textiles products and apparel.
16.4.5 Demonstrate basic skills for producing and altering textiles products and apparel.
16.5 Evaluate elements of textiles and apparel merchandising.
16.5.1 Review marketing strategies for apparel and textiles products.
16.5.2 Assess the cost of constructing, manufacturing, altering, or repairing textiles products.
16.5.3 Assess ethical considerations for merchandising apparel and textiles products.
16.5.4 Review external factors that influence merchandising.
16.5.5 Critique varied methods for promoting apparel and textiles products.
16.5.6 Select research methods, including forecasting techniques, for marketing apparel and textiles products.
16.6 Evaluate the components of customer service.
16.6.1 Assess factors that contribute to quality customer relations.
16.6.2 Assess the impact of cultural diversity as a factor in customer relations.
16.6.3 Determine the skills necessary for quality customer service.
16.6.4 Determine solutions to address customer concerns.
Appendix I 16.7 Demonstrate general operational procedures required for business profitability and career success.
16.7.1 Examine legislation, regulations, and public policy affecting the textiles and apparel industry.
16.7.2 Examine personal and employer responsibilities and liabilities regarding industry-related safety, security, and environmental factors.
16.7.3 Examine the effects of security and inventory control strategies, cash and credit transaction methods, laws, and work-site policies on loss prevention and store profit.
16.7.4 Demonstrate procedures for reporting and handling accidents, safety and security incidents.
16.7.5 Examine operational costs such as mark ups, mark downs, cash flow, and other factors affecting profit.
16.7.6 Demonstrate knowledge of the arts, of various resources, and cultural impact upon the textiles and apparel industry.
Appendix I
Appendix J FV-3
DEPARTMENT OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION Division of Vocational and Adult Education P. O. Box 480 Jefferson City, Missouri 65102-0480 GUIDE FOR SUBMITTING APPLICATIONS FOR EXPANDING/NEW REGULAR VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAMS The following outline constitutes the minimum information necessary to review the appropriateness of applications for expanding/new regular full-time preparatory (500 or more hours of instruction) vocational education programs.
Prepare and submit a separate proposal for each program to the State Director of Vocational Education between September 1 and May 1 of the school year prior to the operation of the program.
The local education agency (LEA) will be notified concerning the approval or disapproval of each program application.
Please note that the program approval between September 1 and May 1 becomes effective at the beginning of the next school year.
I. GENERAL INFORMATION A. Identify the program by the U. S. Department of Education Classification of Instructional Programs (CIP) code number and program title.
B. Indicate how the need for the program was determined - employment opportunities, current and projected trends, on the advice of administration or an advisory committee, etc.
If applicable, describe the LEA's cooperation with the Local Workforce Investment Board (LWIB) administrative entity in the development of the program application.
C. Provide the names of program advisory committee members and their occupations.
Explain to what extent the proposal has been reviewed by the advisory committee.
If applicable, what is the outcome of outside reviewers' appraisal? D. Identify what department or other unit within the institution will administer the program? How will program supervision be provided - by whom, frequency of supervisory visits, how much time will be required to supervise the program, etc.? E. Identify the building within which the program will be housed.
What is its location in the LEA? Describe the space to be utilized for the program.
F. State the relationship of the proposed program to present offerings and to long-range plans of the LEA. G. Describe the LEA's plan for achieving national business/industry program accreditation and student certification (where applicable).
H. What is the proposed date for initiating the program?
II.
INSTRUCTIONAL INFORMATION A. State the program objectives in measurable terms.
B. Provide a topical outline of major units or instructional divisions in the proposed program/course(s).
C. List the instructional materials, major texts and references to be used.
D. Describe standards of performance or level of proficiency expected by students at program completion.
Include a listing of program/course competencies/student learner outcomes.
Appendix J
III.
STUDENT INFORMATION A. Describe how students will be selected for program participation.
What is the anticipated number of students to be enrolled in the program? B. Describe the educational guidance and counseling services to be provided.
C. Describe the planned student placement procedures that will be provided for program completers.
D. Describe the planned student follow-up procedures.
E. Explain the student participation in the appropriate career and technical student organization sponsored by the Division of Vocational and Adult Education.
F. Describe how the program is to be made accessible to all special populations (single parents, displaced homemakers, individuals seeking nontraditional careers, individuals identified as being disadvantaged, individuals with disabilities, etc.).
IV.
BUDGET A. Provide anticipated salary expenditure for the program.
B. List major equipment items currently available for the program.
C. Itemize proposed equipment, teaching aids, and supply expenditures for the program.
D. Outline long-range plans for major equipment item purchases.
V. EVALUATION A. Identify evaluation instrument(s) to be used in evaluating the effectiveness of the program.
B. Explain the procedures and/or methods of evaluation to be used in determining the results.
Relate the results to the program objectives.
C. Indicate how the results of the evaluation are to be utilized for program improvement.
NOTE: 1.
Postsecondary institutions should utilize the new and/or expanding program approval application process established by the Coordinating Board for Higher Education (CBHE), (Department of Higher Education) rather than the outline delineated above.
For consideration of vocational education program operation and funding support approval by the Department of Elementary and Secondary Education, the institution must submit a copy of the application that was submitted to the CBHE to the state director of vocational education between September 1 and May 1 of the school year prior to the operation of the program.
Notification concerning approval or disapproval of postsecondary vocational education programs will only occur after a copy of CBHE's approval letter is received in this office.
2.
Instructional equipment and/or salary funding support is not automatic upon approval of the program.
Funding support is dependent upon the availability of annually appropriated state and/or federal vocational education funds.
3.
Applicants are encouraged to contact the appropriate state vocational education program area director for technical assistance regarding the preparation of applications, the program approval and funding process, and any additional (specialized)
Appendix J informational requirements concerning expanding/new regular vocational education programs.
4.
Requests for program expansion that only require adding additional instructor time may submit a letter to the appropriate program section director which addresses Section I ­ General Information, Items A, B, D, E, F and H.
Other information may be requested by the program section director, which is deemed appropriate for final approval.
All other requests for expanding/new regular vocational education programs must address all sections and items in the guide.
6-120-003 11/01
