ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH FUND GRANT APPLICATION GUIDELINES Fiscal Year 2005 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH Office of Health Promotion Division of Chronic Disease Prevention and Control 535 W. Jefferson St. Springfield, IL 62761
Table of Contents
General Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Review Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Types of Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 Early Researcher Grants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2 General Research Grants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Eligible Applicants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Submission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Preparation of the Application . . . . . .
General Instructions . . . . . . . . .
Specific Instructions . . . . . . . . .
New Applications . . . . . .
Resubmitted Applications Continuation Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4 4 5 6 10 10
Grantee Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 Attachments - Forms Cover Page Cover Page 2 Abstract Budget (Summary and Attachments I - V) Other Support New Application Checklist Continuation Application Checklist Attachments - Other Use of Funds
I.
GENERAL INFORMATION
The Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund is supported by Illinois taxpayers' contributions through their annual state income tax return.
This fund, in existence since 1985, has supported 118 research projects in Illinois.
Grants must be used to investigate the epidemiology, etiology, pathology, diagnosis, care, treatment, evaluation, cure, social and economic impacts, or other important fields of study pertaining to Alzheimer's disease and related disorders.
Although many of the submitted applications are biomedical or technical in nature, research in the fields of gerontology, nursing, psychology, public health and economics is encouraged.
Research is also encouraged in the areas of respite care, in-home care, longterm care, health care finance and psychosocial issues.
Grants are only available to Illinois researchers.
The application guidelines may be copied and shared with colleagues.
Please note that most of the pages are two-sided.
II.
REVIEW PROCESS
The Illinois Department of Public Health (Department) is responsible for awarding grants from the Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund, as authorized by the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois [410 ILCS 410/3].
The Alzheimer's Disease Assistance Act Advisory Committee is responsible for reviewing applications and making funding recommendations to the Department.
A Peer Review Panel, appointed by the Department, assists with technical evaluations of proposals and makes recommendations to the Advisory Committee.
NOTE: TO ASSURE MINIMUM STANDARDS OF EQUITY AND FAIRNESS, APPLICATIONS THAT ARE LATE, INCOMPLETE OR FAIL TO FOLLOW THE REQUIRED FORMAT WILL NOT BE REVIEWED AND WILL RECEIVE NO FURTHER CONSIDERATION DURING THIS FUNDING CYCLE.
Criteria for review include: 1.
2.
receipt on or before the deadline; adherence to specified application format including page limitations (see pages 4 - 5); inclusion of all required content including forms/documentation as specified in Section V, Preparation of the Application, Specific Instructions, pages 5 - 11; for an initial (new) application, a clearly stated research question or hypothesis with demonstrated evidence of the project's originality;* project specific aims/objectives are achievable within the stated time frame and the identified activities will lead to achievement of the objectives;* clear data analysis methods which are substantiated and will provide a reasonable test of the hypothesis;*
3.
4.
5.
6.
1
7.
qualifications of the principal investigator(s) indicate the ability to implement and complete the project;* sufficient resources and appropriate justification in the budget;* and for a continuation application, demonstrated progress in the current year specific aims/objectives an explanation of how the second year is different from and builds upon the findings from the first year.*
8.
9.
* Review criteria used by the Peer Review Panel and the Alzheimer's Disease Advisory Committee.
NOTE: Criteria "5" applies only to initial (new) applications; "9" applies only to continuation grant applications.
III.
TYPES OF APPLICATIONS
Grants will be made allowing successful applicants to conduct research, trained inquiry or experimentation related to investigating epidemiology, etiology, pathology, diagnosis, care, treatment, evaluation, cure, social and economic impacts, or other important fields of study related to Alzheimer's disease and related disorders.
Although many of the applications submitted to the Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund are biomedical and technical in nature, the Fund allows for a broad range of research topics.
Research is also encouraged in the areas of respite care, in-home care, long-term care, health care finance, and psychosocial issues.
ALL RESEARCH PROPOSALS MUST BE BASED ON SOUND RESEARCH METHODOLOGY.
Initial grant awards will be for 12 months (July 1 - June 30), renewable for a second year contingent upon continued availability of funds and adequate performance/progress.
Applicants are therefore encouraged to plan in a way that each year's work, especially Year 01, can stand on its own.
Annual sums, not to exceed $30,000 for a General Research Grant and $35,000 for an Early Researcher Grant, are available.
The Department will fund research grants on an annual basis but for no more than two consecutive years.
Continuation (Year 02) projects must submit an application for review.
The exact amount and number of grants funded will depend upon the amount in the Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund and upon the number of applications received and approved.
The Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund is a special fund in the State Treasury as described in the Civil Administrative Code of Illinois [410 ILCS 410/3].
Funding will be granted to institutions and an individual or individuals under the authority of to students, residents and fellows.
Researchers Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund are eligible not individuals.
Research may be provided by an institution.
Research grants are available previously awarded monies from the to submit applications for different projects.
Early Researcher Grants will be available to support researchers who, at the time of funding, have not been principal investigators on any federally funded grant.
Also, it must be his/her final year of higher education during the grant period or no more than three years past completion of specialty training (first project year only).
The design, organization, management and overall execution of the research must be carried out by the early researcher.
Secretaries, 2
technicians, statisticians and other personnel may be used in an adjunct role, but specialized skills must be carried out by the early researcher.
The applicant must demonstrate by past achievements as well as future plans, apart from the grant project, that he/she intends to commit a major part of the future to research in Alzheimer's disease and related areas.
Early Researcher Grants are eligible for an annual award not to exceed $35,000.
General Research Grants will be available to support qualified principal investigators to investigate specific questions related to Alzheimer's disease and related disorders research.
General Research Grants are eligible for an annual award not to exceed $30,000.
Eligible applicants for either type of research grant (general or early) must meet one of the following criteria: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
be a physician licensed in Illinois to practice medicine in all of its branches; be a licensed hospital in Illinois; be a licensed laboratory in Illinois; be a post-secondary higher educational institution in Illinois; or be a health care professional.*
* This category is very broad and includes, but is not limited to, licensed health care professionals (e.g. nurses, therapists, social workers etc.), Ph.D.s, biologists, psychologists, gerontologists, economists, and behavioralists.
NOTE: Recipients of funds must be institutions and not individuals.
Priority will be given to applications for the Early Researcher Grant and to single year applications.
Pilot projects intended to obtain data for potential applications to other funding sources will be given special consideration.
Research projects addressing the needs of special populations are encouraged.
IV.
SUBMISSION Mail or deliver the original and ten (10) exact, clear copies in one package to: Illinois Department of Public Health Office of Health Promotion Division of Chronic Disease Prevention and Control 535 W .
Jefferson Street Springfield, IL 62761 Secure the application and each of its copies with rubber bands, binder clips or paper clips only.
DO NOT USE STAPLES.
3
Applications must be received on or before the close of business (5 p.m. cst), Wednesday, January 21, 2004.
The application must be complete and accurate at the time of submission.
NOTE: TO ASSURE MINIMUM STANDARDS OF EQUITY AND FAIRNESS, APPLICATIONS THAT ARE LATE, INCOMPLETE OR FAIL TO FOLLOW THE REQUIRED FORMAT WILL NOT BE REVIEWED AND WILL RECEIVE NO FURTHER CONSIDERATION FOR FUNDING DURING THIS FUNDING CYCLE.
For additional information, please contact Jane Kessler by phone at 217-782-3300, fax 217-782-1235 or e-mail jkessler@idph.state.il.us.
V.
PREPARATION OF THE APPLICATION
General Instructions The application must: be typewritten and one-sided on 8 ½" x 11" white paper; have .75 inch or wider margins; use letter quality type; use a font size no smaller than 12 pt (no smaller than the font size in this document); not use photoreduction; be clear and legible so applications can be copied; have all graphs, diagrams, tables and charts drawn in black ink; have clear and legible figures, charts, tables, figure legends and footnotes which may have a smaller font size; not include glossy photographs or paper, colored copies, colored paper or other materials that cannot be copied; and not include staples.
4
Specific Instructions Page limitations and the correct format must be observed for each section.
Applications which fail to follow the page limitations and correct format will not be reviewed.
A summary of the page limitations, format and content requirements is outlined in the following chart.
Page Limitations and Content Requirements Section Abstract Page Limit (single-sided) 1 Content See instructions page 6, Section C. (200 words, singlespaced) See instructions on page 7, Section E. (double-spaced) See instructions on page 10.
(single-spaced) See instructions on page 9, Section F. (single-spaced) See instructions on page 10, Sections D, E 
No more than two (2) pages for each key person, collaborator and consultant.
(single-spaced) See instructions on page 9, Section J. Documentation of institutional review (approval or exemption), consent form, questionnaires, surveys, etc. (one-sided, no staples)
Research Plan (new application) Resubmission of Application (response to review) Literature Cited Continuation Application
15
1
2
8
Biographical Sketches
2 each
Appendix
--
5
New applications for General Research Grants and Early Researcher Grants must include the following items, in the order listed.
A. Completed and signed Cover Page (form included in attachments); Sections 1 - 5 are self explanatory.
B. Completed and signed Cover Page 2 (form included in attachments); Section 6.
Provide the name and address as it is to appear in the contract if a grant is awarded as a result of this application.
Section 7.
Mark (X) to indicate your type of organization.
Documentation of current status such as a Certificate of Good Standing from the Secretary of State or other comparable proof of not-for-profit status must be provided for all applicants other than governmental entities.
Section 8.
Provide the appropriate district numbers for the area(s) to be served.
This information should be based on the district where the grantee is located.
Section 9.
Requires the signature of person identified in Section 6 and certifies compliance with all requirements and authority to enter into contracts on behalf of the applicant organization.
Section 10.
Provide the name and address of the person responsible for the fiscal conduct and financial reports for the project.
Section 11.
Provide the organization's Illinois Department of Human Resources (IDHR) Number.
Required if the organization has 15 or more employees.
Section 12.
Provide the organization's federal Tax Identification Number (TIN), Federal Employer Identification Number (FEIN) or the state assigned Governmental Unit Code.
Section 13.
Requires the signature of the person identified in Section 10 and certifies responsibility for fiscal conduct and fiscal reports under the grant agreement that may result from this application.
C. Abstract in lay language is limited to one (1) page, 200 words or less and singlespaced with the following headings ­ specific aim(s)/objective(s), background, design including subject population(s) and hypothesis.
The abstract is meant to serve as a succinct and accurate description of the proposed project when separated from the application.
Use the attached form or duplicate the format.
Detailed Budget (forms provided in the attachments) for the funding period, providing sufficient resources to complete the project.
The budget must be by line item category and provide sufficient detail and justification for the use of grant funds to support project activities.
The applicant must indicate the total project
D.
6
costs, the source of any other funds supporting the project, as well as the amount of support requested from the Department.
NOTE: Grant funds cannot be used for indirect costs.
Please refer to Use of Funds (included in attachments).
Complete the budget forms included in the application guideline's attachments.
If needed, additional photocopies of the forms may be made.
The budget summary page should reflect the total Year 01 (or Year 02 for a continuation application) cost of providing the research, not just the amount requested from the Department.
The amounts allocated to other funding source(s) must be identified on the lower half of the sheet.
Budget forms, Attachments I - V, should reflect Year 01 (or Year 02 for a continuation application) funding only.
NOTE: For projects which will exceed one year in funding, an estimate of Year 02 funding needs must be included on a separate copy of the summary page.
This is the only budget page that should reflect projected Year 02 funding needs.
The personal services section (Attachment I) should show the title and name for each position, actual monthly salary, the number of months to be worked in the project, and the percent of time in the project.
Vacant positions should only be included for the number of months that they are expected to be filled.
Multiplying these amounts (monthly salary x number of months x percent of time) will derive the total amount of support for the program.
This amount is then to be allocated to the support requested from the Department and/or to the applicant's other sources.
Fringe benefits rates must be itemized.
Fringe benefits to be claimed through the grant must be actual expenditures of grantee funds and be supported on the Reimbursement Certification Form with check or ledger transfer numbers.
Other line items should be itemized as specifically as possible.
Justification must be provided.
Additional pages may be added if necessary.
Justification for specific items listed in the detailed budget must be included.
Justifications should clearly indicate why the items being requested are essential to the achievement of the project's objectives.
Allocated costs such as utilities or space costs must be justified and the methodology for allocations must be explained.
NOTE: Tuition is an unacceptable budget expenditure.
No indirect costs are allowed.
Please refer to Use of Funds (included as an attachment).
E. Research Plan body should follow the general format of an application for a grant from the National Institutes of Health but must not exceed 15 one-sided pages, double-spaced with a font size of 12 pt or larger (no smaller than the font in this document).
The Pubic Health Service (PHS 398) application forms may be used 7
for this application.
The PHS 398 forms can be found at the National Institutes of Health web site: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oer.htm.
The required application sections and suggested maximum lengths follow.
1.
SPECIFIC AIMS: List the broad, long-term objectives and what the specific research proposed in this application is intended to accomplish.
One page is recommended.
2.
BACKGROUND and SIGNIFICANCE: Briefly outline the background leading to the application.
Include a critical review of existing literature and knowledge and identify the gaps that the project is intended to fill.
Precisely state the significance and relevance to the priorities of the Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund (as listed in the first paragraph of General Information on page 1).
Two pages are recommended.
3.
PRELIMINARY STUDIES: State the experience and competence of the investigator(s) and provide any preliminary data towards the specific aim(s).
Two pages are recommended.
4.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN and METHODS: Describe the experimental design, procedure(s) to be used and the method(s) for collecting, analyzing, and interpreting data.
For studies using human participants, this section should also include eligibility (inclusion/exclusion) criteria.
Discuss the evaluation method(s) to be used to measure progress in achieving the specific aims/objectives and a plan for monitoring the overall project (e.g. regular meetings, interim analyses, etc.).
Review potential difficulties and limitations.
Provide a detailed time line for carrying out specific activities including designation of the individual(s) responsible for each.
Seven pages are recommended.
5.
HUMAN PARTICIPANTS: For studies using human participants, this section should address the potential research risks and what steps are taken to protect participants from these risks.
This section should include how informed consent will be obtained and what procedures are in place to safeguard those persons with conditions that impair decision making capacity (e.g., Alzheimer's disease).
This section must also discuss inclusion of women and racial and ethnic minorities.
One page is recommended.
6.
VERTEBRATE ANIMALS: For studies using vertebrate animals, identify the species, strains, ages, sex, and number of animals.
Justify the use and choice of animals.
Provide information on the veterinary care of the animals.
Describe procedures for limiting discomfort, pain and injury, including use of analgesics and anesthesia.
Describe any method of euthanasia.
One page is recommended.
NOTE: All studies using human participants or vertebrate animals must include, in the appendix, evidence that the appropriate approval or exemption has been obtained from the applicant's institutional review and copies of the informed consent, if applicable.
Collaborative applications require all collaborators' review documentation be submitted with the application.
Pending review status is not acceptable.
Studies exempt from institutional review must provide 8
documentation of exemption.
Clearances must be secured by the applicant prior to submission of an application and documentation must be included with the proposal.
(See Section J, page 9.)
7.
FACILITIES and ENVIRONMENT: Include a description of facilities, equipment and other resources available to the investigator to be used in the research.
One page is recommended.
F. Literature Cited: List all references with complete citations not to exceed two pages, one-sided, single-spaced.
Biographical Sketch(es) or Curriculum Vitae(s) of the principal investigator(s) and other major professional staff are not to exceed two (2) pages each (onesided, single-spaced) including qualifications, education, work experience and a list of relevant publications within the preceding five years.
(The NIH Biographical Sketch Form is recommended.)
Other Support (single-spaced, one-sided) documentation must be provided using the attached form or duplicating the format.
Add additional one-sided pages if necessary.
The required information includes a list of any active and pending research which includes a) the funding agency, b) the grant title, c) the role of the applicant, d) total direct costs, e) project dates and f) a description of any overlap that occurs with respect to the proposed project.
The overlap summary should provide a description of how the research grant will enable the applicant to pursue research that differs from any of the applicant's ongoing research.
The attached sample format (NIH style) is intended to provide guidance regarding the type and extent of information requested.
Not-For-Profit Status.
Applicants other than governmental entities must provide documentation of current not-for-profit status.
Appendices (one-sided, no glossy photos or paper, no staples) must include documentation of institutional review(s), informed consent (if applicable), and questionnaires, surveys etc.
The appendices must only be used for necessary ancillary information not as a means to provide additional information required in the defined application.
The required documentation of institutional review is one of the following: 1.
Institutional Review Board's (IRB) approval or exemption for human research; Animal Use and Care Committee's approval or exemption for animal research; OR
G.
H.
I.
J.
2.
9
3.
A letter stating why the proposed research is exempt from review of the two groups listed above and signed by the chair of the department where the research will be conducted.
NOTE: Pending institutional review is not acceptable.
NOTE: If the application is a collaboration, each institution's institutional review documentation must be included at the time of submission.
NOTE: Applications that do not include the required institutional review documentation, as listed above, will not be reviewed and will receive no further consideration this funding cycle.
K. Completed New Application Checklist (included in the application packet).
NOTE: In addition to the above items "A - K," new applications for the Early Researcher Grant must also include the following documents and information.
L. Brief Overview of the applicant's career goals as they relate to Alzheimer's Disease research including identification of a mentor (two [2] page limit, onesided, double-spaced).
Three Letters of Recommendation, including one from the applicant's supervisor or academic advisor.
(Copies of the application must include the three letters of recommendation.)
A Letter from the Mentor agreeing to serve in that capacity.
(Copies of the application must include this letter.)
M.
N.
Resubmitted applications must follow the Specific Instructions for new applications (page 6).
Resubmitted applications must also provide a one (1) page (one-sided, singlespaced) response to weaknesses/issues identified by reviewers in the previous application.
This response must include how the weaknesses/issues are addressed in the current application.
The page heading should be Resubmission of Application, include the principal investigator's name and immediately follow the face page in the application.
Continuation applications must include the following items in the order listed.
A. B. Completed Cover Page (form included in the attachments).
Completed Cover Page 2 (form included in the attachments) as described in Section B, page 6; Detailed Budget (forms included in the attachments) as described on page 6, section D. Progress Report which contains a description of the findings to date; progress in meeting each project specific aim/objective; and a detailed evaluation of progress.
10
C.
D.
E.
Activities for Meeting Project Specific Aims/Objectives for year 02 (which cannot be revised from the year 01 application) and a detailed time line for carrying out specific aims/objectives and activities including designation of the individual(s) responsible for completion of each activity.
Evaluation Method(s) to be used to measure progress in achieving the specific aims/objectives for monitoring the overall project (e.g., regular meetings, interim analyses, etc.)
Identify any Year 01 difficulties or limitations and method(s) to address and correct.
F.
NOTE: Sections D - F, described above should be limited to eight (8) pages, one-sided, double-spaced.
G. Biographical Sketch(es) or Curriculum Vitae(s) of any new key personnel (see page 9, section G); and Completed Continuation Application Checklist (form included in the attachments).
H.
V.
GRANTEE INFORMATION All grantees are required to: A. receive prior written approval from the Department to use grant funds for out-ofstate travel; submit semiannual progress reports; participate in site visits and conferences as may be necessary for the monitoring and evaluation of the project; submit a final summary report at the completion of the project which may be disseminated by the Department and which addresses the following issues: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
E. why the research was performed; the type of research protocol used in the project; where the research was conducted; the number of participants/animals included in the research, if applicable; the research findings; how the findings compare with previous research on the same subject; and if it is a pilot project, indicate future funding avenues to be pursued;
B. C.
D.
provide a presentation before the Alzheimer's Disease Assistance Act Advisory Committee or other formal body, if requested by the Department.
11
Payment Methodology Payments to the grantee shall be made on a reimbursement basis.
The grantee shall document actual expenditures incurred for the purchase of goods and services necessary for conducting research activities.
The grantee shall use the Department's Reimbursement Certification Form to request reimbursement.
The grantee must submit requests for reimbursement periodically (monthly or quarterly) throughout the period of the grant.
After Department review and approval for the reimbursement request, a State of Illinois Voucher shall be prepared and processed through the Office of the State Comptroller for payment to the grantee.
The final reimbursement request must be received by the Department within thirty (30) calendar days after the end of the grant award period.
Please reference the attachment Use of Funds.
Contract Expiration All projects will end on the date specified in the grant agreement and will not be extended or renewed without adherence to the formal continuation application process (see page 10).
Termination of the Grant Agreement or Funding The grant agreement may be terminated by either party upon thirty (30) calendar days written notice to the other party, as specified in the grant agreement.
The grant agreement may be terminated immediately without penalty of further payment being required if the Illinois General Assembly fails to appropriate or otherwise make available sufficient funds for the award or if sufficient funds are not available in the Alzheimer's Disease Research Fund.
The Department shall be empowered to suspend funding or terminate the grant agreement of the grantee who has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the grant agreement.
Denial, Suspension or Revocation of Grant Application or Grant Agreement After notice and opportunity for hearing, the Director may deny the application for grant funds or suspend or revoke the grant agreement in any case in which substantial or continued failure is proven.
If the Director finds that the public interest, health, safety, or welfare requires emergency action summary suspension of the grant agreement may be ordered pending proceedings for revocation.
Such proceedings shall be promptly instituted and promptly determined.
Such notice shall be made by certified mail or by personal service; shall set forth the particular reasons for the proposed action; and shall provide the grantee an opportunity to request a hearing.
The right to a hearing will be waived if the grantee does not respond to the official notice within ten days of receipt.
Procedures for Hearing The Rules of Practice and Procedure in Administrative Hearings, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 100, shall apply to all proceedings.
12
Data Requests and/or Collaboration of the Department Data requested from the Department, including any appropriate direct cost reimbursement, must be negotiated prior to submission of the grant application.
The budget must reflect the reimbursement amount requested.
(No personnel service costs are allowed.)
Collaboration on research projects by Department personnel is allowed.
(Personnel service costs are not allowed.)
A letter of support from the Department is essential for collaborative research projects.
Depending on the nature of the project, an additional IRB review, through the University of Illinois - Springfield, may be required for the Department's participation.
This IRB form must be included with the application at the time of submission.
Contact For additional information regarding this program, please contact Jane Kessler, Alzheimer's Disease Program Coordinator, by phone at 217-782-3300, fax 217-782-1235 or e-mail jkessler@idph.state.il.us.
13
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH FUND FY 2005 GRANT APPLICATION COVER PAGE LEAVE BLANK FOR IDPH USE ONLY NUMBER 1.
TITLE OF PROJECT: (Please Type) DATE RECEIVED
2.
TYPE OF APPLICATION (check all that apply) A. B. C. New (Year 01) Intend to apply for continuation grant next year (Year 02) Continuation (Year 02) Early Researcher
3.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR Name Credentials/Position Department Institution Address City, State, Zip Code Phone Fax E-mail
4.
TOTAL AMOUNT OF FUNDING REQUESTED (fill in amount) A.
This Project Year B. Proposed Amount for Year 02 (if applicable)
5.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR ASSURANCE: To the best of my knowledge, the data and statements in this application are true and correct.
I agree to accept responsibility for the scientific conduct of this project and to provide the required progress reports if a grant is awarded as a result of this application.
Signature of Principal Investigator
Date
ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH FUND FY 2005 GRANT APPLICATION COVER PAGE 2 Important Notice: This state agency is requesting disclosure of information that is necessary to accomplish the statutory purpose outlined under 30 ILCS 105/1 et. seq.
Failure to provide this information may prevent the application from being processed.
6.
PERSON AUTHORIZED TO SIGN CONTRACT N a me Title Organization Address City, State, Zip Code Phone 7.
TYPE OF ORGANIZATION Fax E-mail Corporation Not-for-Profit Tax Exempt Organization (IRC 501 [a] only Congressional Governmental Entity Trust or Estate
Partnership Medical and Health Care Services Provider
8.
LEGISLATIVE DISTRICT State Senate State Representative
9.
APPLICANT CERTIFICATION The applicant agrees to comply with all state/federal statutes and rules/regulations applicable to the project.
My signature indicates that I have authority to enter into contracts on behalf of the applicant organization.
Signature
Date
10.
FISCAL CONTACT Name Title Organization Address City, State, Zip Code Phone Fax E-mail
11.
ORGANIZATIONS IDHR NUMBER (if 15 or more employees) 12.
ORGANIZATION'S TAX IDENTIFICATION NUMBER 13.
FISCAL OFFICER ASSURANCE I agree to accept responsibility for the fiscal conduct of this project and to provide the financial reports as required under the grant agreement that may result from this application.
I understand this is a reimbursement grant and indirect costs are not allowed.
Signature Date
ABSTRACT Project Title:
Principal Investigator: Institution: Funding Requested: Year 01
Year 02 (if applicable)
ATTACHMENT I Personnel Services Name of Employee Position Title (as applicable to program) Monthly Salary % 0f Time On Program Amount Requested
Other funds/In-Kind Contributions:
Fringe Benefits
Amount Requested
Itemize Each Component 
NOTE: Cost Allocation Plans are not allowed.
Prepared by:Office of Health Promotion
ATTACHMENT II Contractual Services Name of Contractor/Service Justification (as applicable to program) Amount Requested
Other funds/In-Kind Contributions:
NOTE: Cost Allocation Plans are not allowed.
Prepared by: Office of Health Promotion
ATTACHMENT III Supplies Name of Supplies/Vendor Justification (as applicable to program) Amount Requested
Other funds/In-Kind Contributions:
NOTE: Cost Allocation Plans are not allowed.
Prepared by: Office of Health Promotion
ATTACHMENT IV Travel (Must list all employees individually) (Costs for employees not listed on budget will not be reimbursable)
Name of Traveler/Employee
Justification (as applicable to program)
Amount Requested
Other funds/In-Kind Contributions:
NOTE: Cost Allocations Plans are not allowed.
Prepared by: Office of Health Promotion
ATTACHMENT V Equipment Type of Equipment/Vendor Justification (as applicable to program) Amount Requested
Other funds/In-Kind Contributions:
NOTE: Cost Allocation Plans are not allowed.
Prepared by: Office of Health Promotion
OTHER SUPPORT Project Title:
Principal Investigator:
NEW APPLICATION CHECKLIST ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH FUND
Correct format per application guidelines (e.g. page limitations and spacing as per section instructions, font size - 12pt or larger, one-sided, no glossy photos or paper, no photoreduction, no staples).
See page 4.
NOTE: To assure minimum standards of equity and fairness, applications that are late, incomplete or fail to follow the required format will not be reviewed and will receive no further consideration during this funding cycle.
Completed and signed cover page.
(Form provided in attachments.)
See Section A, page 6.
Completed and signed cover page 2.
(Form provided in attachments.)
See Section B, page 6.
Resubmitted Application (if applicable).
See page 9.
Project abstract in lay language (correct format, single-spaced, 200 words or less, one-sided) See Section C, page 6 .
Research plan (15 pages, single-sided, double-spaced) including all components listed in Section E. See page 7.
Literature cited (2 pages, single-sided, single-spaced).
See Section F, page 9.
Biographical sketch(es) or curriculum vitae(s) of principal investigator(s) and other major professional staff (2 pages each, single-spaced, one-sided).
See Section G, page 9.
Other Support (correct format, one-sided).
See Section H, page 9.
Documentation of not-for-profit status (if applicable).
See Section I, page 9.
Documentation of institutional review - approval or exemption - in appendices.
See Section J, page 9.
NOTE: Applications that do not include the required institutional review documentation will not be reviewed and will receive no further consideration for funding during this funding cycle.
Applicants for Early Researcher Grants must also include the applicant's career goals (2 page limit, onesided, double-spaced), three letters of recommendation and a letter from the mentor.
See Sections L, M and N, page 10.
Completed New Application Checklist (this form).
See Section K, page 10.
CONTINUATION APPLICATION CHECKLIST ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH FUND
Correct format per application guidelines (e.g. page limitations and spacing as per section instructions, font size - 12pt or larger, one-sided, no glossy photos or paper, no photoreduction, no staples).
See page 4.
NOTE: To assure minimum standards of equity and fairness, applications that are late, incomplete or fail to the required format will not be reviewed and will receive no further consideration for funding during this funding cycle.
Specific instructions for continuation applications are on page 9.
Completed and signed cover page (form provided in the attachments).
Completed and signed cover page 2 (form provided in the attachments).
Detailed line item budget with justification (forms provided in the attachments) .
Progress report and status of objectives.
See Section D, page 10.
Second year project activities and time line.
See Section E, page 11.
Evaluation or monitoring methods.
See Section F, page 11.
NOTE: The last 3 items listed above are limited to 8 pages total, one-sided, double-spaced.
Biographical sketch(es) or curriculum vitae(s) of any new principal staff.
See Section G, page 9.
Completed Continuation Application Checklist (this form).
See Section H, page 11.
Format for Completing Form for Other Support NAME OF INDIVIDUAL (All investigators/researchers must be listed.)
ACTIVE Project Number (Principal Investigator) Source Title of Project (or Subproject) Role The major goal(s) of this project are...
PENDING Project Number (Principal Investigator) Source Title of Project (or Subproject) Role The major goals of this project are...
OVERLAP (summarized for each individual) and adjustments that will be made if the proposal is funded.
Samples ANDERSON, R.R. ACTIVE 2 RO1 HL 0000-13 (Anderson) 3/1/94-2/28/97 NIH/NHLBI $186,529 Chloride and Sodium Transport in Airway Epithelial Cells Principle Investigator 30% Dates of Project Annual Direct Costs Percent Effort Dates of Project Annual Direct Costs Percent Effort
The major goals of this project are to define the biochemistry of chloride and sodium transport in airway epithelial cells and clone the gene(s) involved in the transport.
ROOO (Baker) Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Gene Transfer of CFTR to the Airway Epithelium Co-Investigator 9/1/93-8/31/95 $43,123 10%
The major goals of this project are to identify and isolate airway epithelium progenitor cells and express human CFTR in airway epithelial cells.
PENDING DCB 950000 (Anderson) National Science Foundation Liposome Membrane Composition and Function Principle Investigator 12/01/95-11/30/97 $82,163 20%
The major goals of this project are to define biochemical properties of liposome membrane components and maximize liposome intake into cells.
OVERLAP There is scientific overlap between aim 2 of NSF DCB 950000 and aim 4 of the application under consideration.
If both are funded, the budgets will be adjusted appropriately in consultation with agency staff.
RICHARDS, L. NONE
