Remembering the Korean War: Directions in U.S. Foreign Policy
Doug Bereuter, M.C.
Tuesday, July 18, 2000
Mr. Speaker, fifty years ago, without warning or provocation, hundreds of thousands of North Korean troops invaded South Korea, pouring across the 38th parallel and precipitating the Korean War.
Unprepared South Korean (ROK) forces and the handful of Americans on the ground were incapable of halting this swift and brutal assault.
In a matter of days, the badly-battered U.S. and ROK units had been pushed back to a tiny toe-hold on the southern tip of the Korean Peninsula.
It was only with determination and unbelievable courage that American forces, together with South Korean and allied troops, were able to push back the attacking North Korean army.
The breakout of the Pusan perimeter, the Inchon landing, battles like Pork Chop Hill and Heartbreak Ridge, the terrible fight against overwhelming odds at the frozen Chosin Reservoir on these and countless other unnamed battlefields, we beat back the invaders.
The Korean conflict reflected the absolute determination of the United States to halt the spread of tyranny and totalitarianism.
But the cost was high.
The war that North Korea started resulted in 39,000 U.S. deaths and over 100,000 wounded, and severely undermined U.S. relations with Russia and China.
It took decades for our South Korean ally to recover.
In the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (DPRK), there is certainly a very different and distorted interpretation of the events that occurred fifty years ago.
Incredibly, according the North Korean news agency: The U.S. instigated the ROK Army to start a surprise armed invasion of North Korea on June 25, 1950....
It was commanded by the U.S. military advisory group.
The newscast goes on to explain that, in precipitating this unprovoked attack, the U.S. supposedly indiscriminately carpet bombed throughout North Korea.
Mr. Speaker, these lies from North Korean newscasts are not from some ancient historical record.
No, this was broadcast very recently.
It is worth noting, Mr. Speaker, that this slanderous pack of lies was broadcast after the recent historic meeting between South Korean President Kim Dae Jung and North Korean leader Kim Jong Il.
It was broadcast the day after the United States had announced the delivery to North Korea of an additional 50,000 tons of grain.
And, about the same time that North Korea was reinventing history, Secretary of State Albright was announcing that North Korea is not a terrorist state, or even a rogue state.... but, merely a state of concern.
This Member points this out because of the recent changes in perceptions regarding North Korea.
On the verge of collapse, the hermit kingdom is at least attempting to give the impression that it is reaching out to South Korea and to the West.
If North Korea is in fact sincere in its peaceful overtures, that certainly would be a dramatic, positive development.
However, it would be premature to assume that the DPRK has irrevocably reformed its behavior; it would be naive in the extreme to believe that a few gestures constitute a reversion of fifty years of violently confrontational behavior and terrorism.
And, it would be foolish to pretend that North Korea no longer deserves to be labeled as a terrorist state.
In recent days a historic meeting has occurred between the North and South Korean leaders.
Kim Dae Jung went to Pongyang, and promised to open the spigots of foreign assistance (although, at the Norths insistence, it is called economic cooperation).
That is, the South gives and the North cooperates by accepting.
In return, the North has promised to permit some long awaited family reunions of those who have been torn from their families fifty years ago.
From a public relations standpoint, North Korea scored a remarkable victory.
Kim Jong Il was described as cherubic in the New York Times, and, amazingly, senior Administration officials called him courageous and visionary.
But the question remains has Kim Jong Il and the totalitarian elite that rules North Korea made a commitment to peace? When one examines
North Koreas record on weapons of mass destruction, missiles, and support for terrorism, it is not at all clear that it has made a permanent commitment to peace.
Despite the 1994 Agreed Framework that was touted as capping the North Korean nuclear threat, there is ample evidence that Pyongyang continues to pursue an undeclared nuclear program.
An unclassified 1998 CIA report concludes that North Korea possesses between six and twelve kilograms of plutonium which it acquired before the Yongbyon nuclear reactor was shut down in 1995.
This weapons-grade material has not been accounted for.
In addition, press reports from publications such as Janes Intelligence Review suggest the DPRK has continued its efforts to acquire uranium enrichment technologies.
In 1998, a secret underground facility was discovered that certainly seemed likely to be related to nuclear activities, but U.S. satellites discovered the facility before it could get up and running to such a purpose if that was indeed the intent.
According to the Congressional Research Service, Russian and former East German nuclear scientists are operating in North Korea.
In contrast to the time when the 1994 Agreed Framework was signed, North Korea seems on the threshold of being able to attack the United States with a missile that could deliver chemical, biological, or possibly nuclear weapons.
It has produced, deployed and exported missiles to several countries of great concern to the United States.
The DPRK has launched a three-stage (Taepo-dong 1) missile and continues to develop a larger, longer-range missile (the Taepo-dong 2).
Not only does North Korea now possess a missile capable of reaching U.S. soil, but it is clear that it intends to sell such fully developed weapons systems to the highest bidder.
According to a 1999 National Intelligence Estimate, the proliferation of medium-range ballistic missiles driven primarily by North Korean No Dong sales has created an immediate, serious and growing threat to U.S. forces, interests, and allies, and has significantly altered the strategic balances in the Middle East and Africa.
While individuals in the Executive Branch argue that North Korea has agreed to halt its missile program, it is important to note that the North only has agreed to a moratorium on flight tests.
Design, rocket motor tests, production, and sales to other so-called states of concern can continue.
It was just last week, at negotiations that took place between U.S. and North Korean officials, that the DPRK flatly refused to halt development of missiles.
Instead, they made it clear that development of new and more capable missiles will continue.
In addition, North Korea demanded $1 billion to impose a moratorium on new missile exports.
Unfortunately, this is all too typical of the Norths pattern of threats and extortion.
North Korea insists that it is not a terrorist state, but its past and even recent actions certainly suggest otherwise.
The DPRK has remained a haven for the terrorists of the Japanese Red Army faction.
Pyongyang regularly has infiltrated training and resupply teams into South Korea and Japan.
Other actions include border violations, infiltration of armed saboteurs and spies, hijacking, kidnaping, assassination, and threats against media personnel and institutions.
To finance these terrorist activities, North Korea uses counterfeit U.S. currency.
Recently a Japanese Red Army terrorist was caught while traveling in Southeast Asia with a North Korean diplomatic passport.
This terrorist was carrying over $100,000 in counterfeit currency.
In short, Mr. Speaker, North Korea has not to date behaved like a country wishing to join the international family of nations.
Former Secretary of Defense William Perry, a truly outstanding public servant, was tasked with reviewing U.S. policy toward North Korea.
He concluded that North Korea had two options.
The first option would be the path of engagement.
If the DPRK really sheds its rogue behavior, the United States should respond with a reduction of sanctions, and gradual extension of normal political and commercial activity.
If, however, the DPRK chooses the path of confrontation, the Perry-recommended policy is that the United States and our allies must meet the Norths aggressiveness with firmness, resolve, and military might.
It must be clear that America would respond in that fashion.
Mr. Speaker, it is far too early to tell which path the DPRK will choose.
It is possible that they will opt for peaceful engagement.
America and South Korea obviously hope that it is the path the DPRK will choose, but we must end the cycle of extortion which the North has successfully pursued with the United States.
One insubstantive summit meeting does not guarantee such a sea change in behavior.
This nation must maintain its resolve to preposition 100,000 troops in the Asia-Pacific area, with 37,000 on the Korean Peninsula.
We must resist the temptation to throw even more money at the North without demonstrable progress in reducing the threat.
And, we must continue to aggressively pursue the development of ballistic missile defenses capable of defending this nation against the emerging ballistic missile threat a threat made ever-more immediate by the North Korean missile development program and its missile exports.
Mr. Speaker, this Member genuinely hopes that North Korea will one day become merely a state of concern.
But until this Member sees ample evidence to the contrary, he must continue to view North Korea as a terrorist state and to regard the Korean Peninsula as the place on the globe where American forces might again be attacked and a tragically costly war began again.
___________________________________________________________
Home Page | Welcome Letter | Contacting Congressman Bereuter Biography | News 
Next Previous Speech Speech List Speech
