United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service FY 2002 ANIM AL AN D WILDLIFE SERVICES--VIRGINIA Contact Information: Martin Lowney, Virginia Wildlife Services State Director P.O. Box 130 Moseley, VA 23120 Phone: (804) 739-7739 FAX: (804) 739-7738 Toll-Free Number: 1-866-4USDAWS 1-866-487-3297 E-mail: martin.s.lowney@aphis.usda.gov Web site: www.aphis.usda.gov/ws
WI L
D
E S E RV LIF I EALTH INSP TH EC AN TI PL O
S CE LT UR E
N
E RVIC SE
USDA Resolves Wildlife Conflicts in Virginia Every day, residents, industries, organizations, and agencies call on Virginia Wildlife Services (WS) for expertise in protecting agriculture, property, natural resources, and human health and safety from damage or threats posed by wildlife.
Managed by professional wildlife biologists, WS responds with effective, selective, and humane strategies to resolve wildlife conflicts.
WS protects Virginia's livestock from coyote and black vulture predation at more than 715 farms.
On the barrier islands, WS protects threatened piping plover and endangered Wilson's plover nesting sites from predators.
WS also protects public safety at 23 airports and 5 military bases by keeping wildlife away from aircraft.
In addition, WS prevents beaver damage to Virginia's transportation systems and provides assistance to the general public to protect property from overabundant Canada geese, crows, vultures, starlings, beaver, and muskrats.
WS further protects people by working with local and State health departments to reduce the threat of wildlife-borne diseases, such as West Nile virus, the raccoon strain of rabies, and diseases transmitted by pigeons.
U
Applying Science 
Often, this technical assistance can be provided over the phone.
WS also provides on-site expertise, or direct assistance, to manage complex wildlife problems that cannot be safely resolved by others.
To
Top 5 Major Assistance Activities: · Protecting civil and militar y aviation from wildlife strikes · Protecting livestock from predation · Protecting property and public health from overabundant wildlife populations · Protecting roads and railroads from flooding caused by beavers · Protecting the public from rabies and West Nile virus Top WS Research Projects of Interest to Virginia: · Defining and reducing wildlife hazards to aviation · Managing problems caused by vultures · Managing predators through new methods to protect livestock and wildlife · Controlling wildlife vectors of rabies and West Nile virus
ED IT UN
ST IC AT GR ES FA DEP A RT M E N T O
support this effort, WS conducts scientific research across the Nation to develop answers to new problems posed by wildlife and to ensure the program benefits from the latest science and technology.
Protecting Civilian and Military Aviation--More than 39 million passengers fly out of Virginia's five busiest airports annually.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), more than 1,371 wildlife collisions with aircraft were reported at Virginia's civil airports from 1990 through 2000.
Canada geese pose the largest threat to aircraft because no airplane engine can ingest one of these large birds without sustaining damage.
Risks to aviation safety have increased in Virginia because the population of resident Canada geese has risen significantly since 1991.
Virginia's Canada goose population is now estimated at 225,000 birds according to the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.
WS is recognized internationally for its scientific expertise in reducing wildlife hazards to the aviation industry.
WS' National Wildlife Research Center (NWRC), continually conducts research to understand the nature of wildlife hazards at airports and develop management tools to reduce these hazards.
Virginia WS has conducted wildlife hazard assessments at 6 civilian airports, 2 military bases, and one research airfield so that effective and practical wildlife damage management programs could be implemented to reduce risks to the flying public and military.
Less detailed biological assessments were conducted at 11 local and regional airports.
Wildlife control measures have been implemented by WS at 11 airports and airfields in Virginia, which have resulted in a 33 percent to 95 percent reduction in risk.
Protecting Livestock from Predation--Coyotes and black vultures are significant predators of livestock in Virginia.
According to the Cooperative Sheep Extension Specialist, the number one cause of sheep producers going out of business is coyote predation or the effect of coyote predation combined with low lamb prices.
The number of sheep in Virginia has declined from 165,000 in 1990 to 59,000 in 2002.
WS provides technical information to livestock producers on fencing, husbandry, and guard dogs and removes offending coyotes to protect the $328 million livestock industry in Virginia.
In the last 3 years, WS has significantly reduced average predation losses from 17 sheep per farm to 2 sheep, 10 calves per farm to 2 calves, and 26 goats per farm to 7 goats.
Black vultures, one of two vulture species living in Virginia, are another threat to livestock.
Black vultures are both predators and scavengers.
Calves, cows, and sheep are vulnerable to black vulture predation.
WS has assisted livestock producers by providing technical assistance.
Between 1996 and 2001, WS helped 92 livestock producers get Federal permits to remove black vultures to protect their livestock.
Protecting Residential Property from Canada Geese--WS gets more requests to manage Canada geese problems than any other wildlife species.
Twenty-six percent of all requests for assistance in Virginia involve Canada geese.
Concerns include the accumulation of droppings on turf, feces-contaminated water, and aggressive geese that bite children and the elderly.
The majority of geese live in urban and suburban areas benefitting from nutritious lawns, ample water, and few predators.
In addition to providing technical assistance and educational programs for the public, WS removes flocks of problem geese that cause property damage, harm water quality, and threaten public health in urban and suburban areas.
WS removes about 2,100 resident Canada geese from airports, parks, businesses, retirement communities, medical centers, and residential areas each year.
The captured geese are then donated to local food banks to feed people in need.
Protecting Residential Property from Vulture Roosts--Black vultures and turkey vultures congregate from fall through early spring in large roosts that often contain hundreds of birds.
Vulture problems are the second most common wildlife complaint received by Virginia WS because their roosts are frequently located in residential areas.
The accumulation of fecal droppings and vomit on
homes and vehicles causes property damage and is a health concern to residents.
Black vultures can also cause property damage by removing shingles and window gaskets from homes and businesses.
Virginia WS assists dozens of towns annually by dispersing roosts and helping local officials obtain Federal permits to remove some vultures in an effort to reinforce harassment programs.
WS also provides bird scaring equipment and technical support.
Looking to the Future Several wildlife damage issues are on the forefront in Virginia and need to be addressed.
First, expanding deer, Canada goose, and other wildlife populations are creating an increased risk to aviation safety in Virginia.
Regional and local airports have limited funding and often do not have the resources to address significant wildlife risks to aviation safety.
The second challenge is finding a way to provide wildlife damage management services to low- and middleincome people.
Wildlife damage management is complex, and can be expensive due to many State and Federal laws and regulations.
The final issue involves protecting Virginia's rare natural resources.
Limited State and Federal funding exists to protect threatened and endangered species from other predatory wildlife.
The Nature Conservancy, a private organization, has provided most of the funding to protect Virginia's threatened piping plovers and Wilson's plovers from predation.
Virginia Wildlife Services Funding In addition to receiving federally allocated funds, WS also receives money from cooperators; such as producers; private individuals; businesses; and other Federal, State, and local government agencies who have a vested interest in the program.
In most cases, these cooperators need help to resolve wildlife damage problems or they play a role in wildlife damage management.
FY 2002
USDA is an equal employment provider and employer.
