ADVISORY SECURITY ACTIONS FOR STATE AND CRITICAL FACILITIES, LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE PUBLIC DURING TERRORIST ALERTS OEM Logo N.H.
Department of Safety Richard M. Flynn, Commissioner Division of Fire Safety 
INTRODUCTION
These guidelines are designed to assist state agencies, local governments and private sector organizations to initiate standardized actions as the result of increased terrorist threat levels within the United States and the State of New Hampshire.
The guidelines provide a number of recommendations that may be issued by the State of New Hampshire following a threat level recommendation issued by the National Homeland Security Office in Washington, D.C.
These recommendations have been developed to assist state agencies, local governments and private sector organizations to develop specific implementation procedures appropriate for the size and complexity of the organization.
State agencies and local governments are encouraged to develop additional action steps as appropriate for their jurisdictions.
"Critical facilities" refers to any facility that may be terrorist targets.
Examples include:
Electrical Energy (generation/switching/load dispatch)
Emergency Services (emergency operations centers, fire, law enforcement,
medical)
Gas and Oil production or storage
Telecommunications (9-1-1 centers, critical tower sites, telephone and
communications infrastructure)
Transportation (terminals, bridges)
Water (distribution systems and treatment plants)
Financial Institutions (including processing facilities)
Media (radio and television transmission sites,
EAS activation points)
Office Buildings (especially multi-national corporations)
Religious Institutions
Retail/Public areas/Hotels/Conference Centers
Schools (elementary through colleges)
The Homeland Security Advisory System is binding on the federal Executive Branch and is suggested, although voluntary, to other levels of government and the private sector.
There are five Threat Conditions, each identified by a description and corresponding color.
From lowest to highest, the levels and colors are:
Low = Green
Guarded = Blue
Elevated = Yellow
High = Orange
Severe = Red
The higher the Threat Condition, the greater the risk of a terrorist attack.
Risk includes both the probability of an attack occurring and its potential gravity.
Threat Conditions are assigned by the U.S. Attorney General in consultation with the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security.
Except in exigent circumstances, the Attorney General shall seek the views of the appropriate Homeland Security Principals or their subordinates.
And parties as appropriate, on the Threat Condition to be assigned.
Threat Conditions are assigned for the entire nation, or they may be set for a particular geographic area or industrial sector.
Assigned Threat Conditions shall be reviewed at regular intervals to determine whether adjustments are warranted.
The Director of Central Intelligence and the Attorney General shall ensure that a timely flow if integrated threat assessments and reports is provided to the President and Vice President, Assistant to the President and Chief of Staff, the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and the Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs.
Whenever possible and practicable, these integrated threat assessments shall be reviewed and commented upon by the wider interagency community.
A decision on which threat level to assign shall integrate a variety of considerations.
The evaluation of threat information shall include, but is not limited to, the following factors:
1.
To what degree is the threat information credible?
2.
To what degree is the threat information corroborated?
3.
To what degree is the threat specific and/or imminent?
4.
How grave are the potential consequences of the threat?
This document is provided as guidance to assist planners at all levels of government to develop detailed procedures.
While this guidance is not confidential in nature, the document should be considered restricted, not for release to the public.
Homeland Security Advisory System
OEM Logo
N.H.
Department of Safety,
Office of Emergency Management
T E R R O R I S T T H R E A T C O N D I T I O N S
Threat Condition
Critical and State Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: A terrorist attack has occurred or credible and corroborated intelligence indicates that one is imminent.
Normally, this threat condition is declared for a specific location or critical facility."
S
E
V
E
R
E
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition SEVERE and explain expected actions.
? Deploy security personnel as needed, based on threat assessments.
? Close or restrict entry to the facility to emergency personnel only and restrict parking areas close to critical buildings.
? Maintain a skeleton crew of essential employees.
? Deploy emergency response and security teams.
? Maintain close contact with local law enforcement.
? Be prepared to implement mutual aid agreements with government and with other critical facilities.
? Provide security in parking lots and company areas.
? Report suspicious activity immediately to local law enforcement.
? Restrict or suspend all deliveries and mail to the facility.
Emergency supplies or essential shipments should be sent to an off-site location for inspection.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition SEVERE to employees and to the public and explain anticipated actions that should be taken.
? Deny unauthorized access to critical facilities and infrastructure.
Continue 100% inspections of personnel, vehicles and packages.
? Visually inspect the interior and undercarriage of vehicles entering parking lots and terraces.
? Establish contact with Red Cross or other local voluntary organizations.
? Implement Mutual Aid Agreements as required.
? Continue to assess the vulnerability of key assets and facilities.
Take appropriate action to protect them by deploying armed security forces to these sites.
? Cancel or delay unnecessary employee travel and leave.
? Activate the Emergency Operations Center.
? Control release of information to the public and news media.
? Provide security for personnel dispatched to repair or restore damaged facilities and systems.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
? Report suspicious activities and call 9-1-1 for immediate response.
? Expect delays, searches of purses and bags and restricted access to public buildings.
? Expect traffic delays and restrictions.
? Take personal security precautions to avoid becoming a victim of crime or terrorist attack.
? Avoid crowded public areas.
? Do not travel into areas affected by the attack or is an expected terrorist target.
? Keep emergency supplies accessible and automobile fuel tank full.
? Be prepared to evacuate your home or shelter in place on order of local authorities.
? Be suspicious of persons taking photographs of critical facilities, asking detailed questions about physical security or dressed inappropriately for weather conditions (suicide bomber). .
? Closely monitor news reports and Emergency Alert System (EAS) radio/TV stations.
? Assist neighbors who may need help.
? Avoid passing unsubstantiated information and rumors.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities
Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Credible intelligence indicates that there is a high risk of a local terrorist attack but a specific target has not been identified.
H
I
G
H
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition HIGH to all employees and explain expected actions.
? Place emergency response teams on notice.
? Activate the operations center if required.
? Monitor world and local events.
Pass on credible threat intelligence to key personnel.
? Ensure appropriate security measures are in place and functioning properly.
? Instruct employees to report suspicious activities, packages and people.
? Search all personal bagsand parcels.
? Restrict vehicle parking close to buildings.
? Inspect intrusion detection systems and lighting, security fencing and locking systems.
? Inspect all deliveries and consider accepting shipments only at off-site locations.
? Remind employees to expect delays and baggage searches.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition HIGH to employees and public and explain expectted actions to be taken.
? Restrict or control access to government buildings, critical facilities and infrastructure.
? Erect outside barricades, security checks to deny access to underground parking areas, loading docks and building entrance.
? Require identification, sign-in and escorts as required.
? Restrict parking areas located close to buildings or critical facilities.
? Remove trash containers, dumpsters and mailboxes located near government buildings and facilities.
? Closely monitor available security and intelligence data from state and local law enforcement agencies.
? Instruct employees to be especially watchful for suspicious or unattended packages and articles received through the mail service.
? Inspect buildings and parking areas for suspicious packages.
? Employ armed security at airports, dams, public utilities and critical facilities.
? Test communication plans.
? Secure and regularly inspect all buildings, vehicles, and parking and storage areas for intrusion.
? Conduct 100% verification of deliveries and restrict shipments.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
? Resume normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
? Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
? Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to local law enforcement agencies by calling 9-1-1.
? Avoid leaving unattended packages or brief cases in public areas.
? Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
? Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your children.
? Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Elevated risk of terrorist attack but a specific region of the USA or target has not been identified.
E
L
E
V
A
T
E
D
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees.
? Review vulnerability and threat assessments and revise as needed.
? Identify and monitor governmental information sharing sources for warnings and alerts.
? Update and test call down list for emergency response teams and key employees.
? Review and coordinate and update mutual aid agreements with other critical facilities and government agencies.
? Establish and monitor active and passive security measures.
? Review employee training on security precautions (bomb threat procedures, reporting suspicious packages, activities and people).
? Conduct communications checks to ensure radio contact can be established.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees.
? Review physical security plans for critical facilities.
? Assess potential terrorist targets and develop plans to counteract an attack.
? Conduct vulnerability assessments of each critical facility and government building.
Estimate the consequence of loss and assign a priority for their protection.
? Ensure all buildings are secured to prevent theft or tampering.
? Conduct physical inspection of buildings for suspicious unattended packages.
? Closely monitor current news events and state and federal terrorist advisories.
? Keep the public informed on current threat conditions and advisories.
? Coordinate with adjacent municipalities for mutual aid support in the event of a disaster or terrorist threat.
? Conduct tabletop and functional exercises to ensure that response plans are understood and current.
? Review existing physical security measures employed and install intrusion detection and passive systems as funding permits.
? Conduct weekly radio communication checks.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
? Continue normal activities, but report suspicious activities to the local law enforcement agencies.
? Take a first aid or other emergency preparedness class.
? Become active in your local Neighborhood Crime Watch program.
? Network with your family, neighbors and community for mutual support during a disaster or terrorist attack.
? Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: General Risk with no credible threats to specific targets.
G
U
A
R
D
E
D
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Ensure that key leaders are familiar with the emergency response and business resumption plans.
? Review, update and routinely exercise for functional areas of plans.
? Review and update the call down list for emergency response teams
? Develop or review Mutual Aid agreements with other facilities and/or with local government for use during emergencies.
? Review physical security precautions to prevent theft, unauthorized entry or destruction of property.
Have you provided for:
? Employee picture
ID badges?
? Background
checks on all
employees?
? Access control
and locking of high
security areas at all
times?
? All security keys
marked with "Do
not Duplicate?
? Surveillance
Cameras?
? Backup power?
? An alarm system?
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
? Estimate the threat vulnerability of each critical facility and the countermeasures required to protect them.
? Ensure that each department is familiar with their assigned responsibilities during a disaster as shown in the plan and are prepared to respond.
? Review communications plans and ensure the call-down procedures are current and accurate.
? Conduct emergency management training and exercise emergency response plans.
? Ensure all emergency management and response functions are adequately staffed.
Recruit and train volunteers to augment full time staff.
? Actively support the Neighborhood Watch, Amateur Radio Emergency Service or other voluntary programs
? Remind citizens and employees to be alert for suspicious packages, activities, vehicles and to report these occurrences to the proper authority.
? Secure buildings, unused rooms, storage areas, equipment and vehicles to prevent theft, tampering or destruction.
? Evaluate information available on public websites that could compromise security.
? Encourage all citizens and employees to have necessary immunizations.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
? Continue normal activities but be watchful for suspicious activities.
Report criminal activity to local law enforcement.
? Review family emergency plans.
? Increase family emergency preparedness by purchasing supplies, food and storing water.
? Be familiar with local natural and technological (manmade) hazards in your community.
? Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
? Monitor local and national news for terrorist alerts.
? Update immunizations.
? Volunteer to assist and support the community emergency response agencies.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Low risk of terrorism.
Routine security is implemented to preclude routine criminal threats.
L
O
W
? Develop emergency response and business resumption plans.
? Encourage and assist employees to be prepared for personal, natural and technological emergencies.
? Develop a communications plan for emergency response and key personnel
? Conduct training for employees on physical security precautions.
? Budget for physical security measures.
? Identify critical facilities that may need protection.
? Review Emergency Response Plans.
? Conduct training, seminars, workshops and exercises using the emergency response plans.
? Conduct emergency preparedness training for citizens and employees.
? Encourage response agencies (fire fighters, law enforcement, EMS, public works and elected officials) to take emergency management and American Red Cross first aid and CPR training.
? Provide emergency preparedness information to employees via paycheck stubs tips, newsletters, articles and posters.
? Conduct routine inventories of emergency supplies and medical aid kits.
? Budget for physical security measures.
? Encourage programs for employee immunization and preventive health care
Citizens are advised to:
? Continue to enjoy individual freedom.
Participate freely in travel, work and recreational activities.
? Be prepared for disasters and family emergencies.
(See FEMA and American Red Cross brochures.)
? Develop a family emergency plan.
(See FEMAS and American Red Cross brochures.)
? Know how to turn off your power, gas and water service to your house.
? Know what hazardous materials are stored in your home and how to properly dispose of unneeded chemicals.
? Support the efforts of your local emergency responders (fire fighters, law enforcement and emergency medical service).
? Know what natural hazards are prevalent in your area and what measures you can take to protect your family.
