Privacy and Security Notice Jefferson Lab [corner2.gif] [corner.gif]
Win use WMF.
Always convert text to paths.
Note that gradients may blowout in WMF.)
If you select your gradient and go to Object
You can set the desired tolerance.
This way you can have a gradient in your WMF- or any other software that does not recognize AI's gradients.
For inserting bitmap files into WORD: 1.
Open your file in Illustrator.
File
This bitmaps/rasterizes your drawing file and adds the3-letter TIFF extension '.tif' to the filename.
2.
A 'TIFF Options' window should appear.
For color images, select CMYK in the Color Model box and Resolution: Medium (150dpi) or higher to print to most on-site JLAB printers.
A good rule of thumb when printing to desktop printers is to keep your file resolution about one half the printer's resolution.
For example, a 300 dpi printer can only manage 150 dpi files.
Any extra data is discarded.
Many of the newer model 600 dpi printers on-site print from a 200 dpi file nicely.
Choose 'Color model
Check LZW compression if you need a small, fast-printing file.
For black and white files, choose Color Model
This will greatly reduce the file size.
TIP: The longer the compression time, the better the compression job so relax and take a break while those large color photos are compressing.
Printing resolution choices should be 150dpi or higher.
Screen resolution will keep your file around 72 dpi. (good for web) 3.
Select IBM or Macintosh Byte order and click OK.
Open MS WORD or POWERPOINT.
1.
Insert
Browse to locate your .tif file and click Insert.
Word does not allow image editing but you should be able to scale your image to fit the space.
For proportional scaling, hold down the Shift key while you grab an image box handle and drag.
*A "streaking" pattern may be due to the upsampling PowerPoint attempts to scale the 72dpi screen bitmaps to printer resolution.
No workaround except to use vector graphics.
*The copy/paste process puts both .WMF and bitmap formats on the clipboard .
If you "paste" into PowerPoint you get a bitmap, if you "Paste as ..." and select "Picture (Enhanced Metafile)" you get a scalable vector .WMF drawing.
TIPS: Illustrator 7 and 8 have a *BROKEN* WMF export filter.
A recent issue of Adobe magazine recommended exporting bitmap files for use in PowerPoint.
This makes your presentation resolution dependent, however, which can only be partially compensated for by using a higher resolution (which in turn blows up file sizes and slows down PowerPoint animations).
Illustrator 9 features an "improved WMF export" filter, according to Adobe.
In my experience the output (.WMF format) from I9 indeed works much better in PowerPoint (I7 and I8 really produced just garbage).
Transparency cannot be preserved in WMF files.
If you intend to re-use Illustrator artwork in Word files (as opposed to PowerPoint), just export to EPS.
The downside is that you need either a Postscript printer or Adobe Acrobat to print Word files containing .EPS images.
On the other hand, this method guarantees superior output compared to any other format.
maintained by martz@jlab.org
