May 5, 2003 LBNL-52617 Quantum Dynamics Via Planck-Scale-Stepped Action-Carrying "Graph Paths" Geoffrey F. Chew Theoretical Physics Group Physics Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley, California 94720, U.S.A.
Abstract A divergence-free, parameter-free, path-based discrete-time quantum dynamics is designed to not only enlarge the achievements of general relativity and the standard particle model, by approximations at spacetime scales far above Planck scale while far below Hubble scale, but to allow tackling of hitherto inaccessible questions.
"Path space" is larger than and precursor to Hilbert-space basis.
The wave-function-propagating paths are actioncarrying structured graphs--cubic and quartic structured vertices connected by structured "fermionic" or "bosonic" "particle" and "nonparticle" arcs.
A Planck-scale path step determines the gravitational constant while controlling all graph structure.
The basis of the theory's (zero-rest-mass) elementary-particle Hilbert space (which includes neither gravitons nor scalar bosons) resides in particle arcs.
Nonparticle arcs within a path are responsible for energy and rest mass.
_________________________
· This work is supported in part by the Director, Office of Science, Office of High Energy and Nuclear Physics, Division of High Energy Physics, of the U. S. Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC03-76SF00098.
1
Although fundamental status for Planck scale has been widely conjectured throughout the past century by both physicists and cosmologists, accommodation by continuous quantum dynamics has proved elusive.
We here summarize a proposed dynamics based on Planck-scale-stepped (classical) action-carrying spacetime paths that in important respects resemble Feynman graphs.
These "graph-paths", located within a discretized "path spacetime", define (by "connecting to") an elementary-particle Hilbert space attached to spacelike surfaces that constitute a tiny portion of path spacetime.
(Spacing between successive wave-function surfaces is large on atomic scale although tiny on Hubble scale.)
The wave-function propagator between successive wave-function surfaces (the "global S matrix") adapts the Dirac-Feynman rule (1) to the actions of path portions--open graphs that connect these surfaces.
Path action depends only on the 3 (dimensionful) parameters h, c and path step.
The proposed approach promises not only to enlarge the achievements of general relativity and the standard particle model, through approximations at spacetime scales much larger than Planck scale while much smaller than Hubble scale, but to illuminate hitherto-inaccessible puzzles such as "measurement".
"Path spacetime", the product of a discrete 1-dimensional "age space" and a continuous 3-dimensional "boost space", is a portion of the interior of a forward lightcone-- the set of points whose Minkowski distance from lightcone vertex is a positive-integral multiple of a Planck-unit ( ~ 10­43 sec).
In other words, path spacetime comprises the set of (3-dimensional) hyperboloids whose "age" (since "big bang") is N, with N = 1, 2 ...
("Time arrow" is built into path spacetime.)
"Wave function spacetime" will below be defined as a subset of these hyperboloids.
"Homogeneity of 3-space" amounts to equivalence of point collections related by Lorentz transformations--an idea of Milne.
(2) The "local frame" of a spacetime point is the frame in which that point's positivetimelike 4-vector displacement from lightcone vertex is purely timelike.
In local frame an infinitesimal spatial displacement dx on Hyperboloid N relates to an infinitesimal boostspace displacement d by dx = Nc d. Boost space has curvature of order unity but deviation from flatness is small for spatial displacements small compared to Nc (small on Hubble scale).
Although all statements in this paper recognize curvature of 3-space-- i.e., finiteness of N--physics ("here and now") usually deals with almost-flat spatial regions in the logarithmic age neighborhood of ~1060 Planck units.
Any path is a set of directed and labeled loops of successive c-velocity steps in path spacetime, each step spanning an age interval ± (forward or backward).
The label is 6-valued--a product of 2- and 3-valued labels, a choice that doubles our covering of the Lorentz group while representing electric charge and energy.
Outcomes supporting this label choice are chiral isospin, a 30° elementary Weinberg angle, 3 colors and 3 generations of fermions.
(3) Closing of loops means 6 locally-conserved quantum numbers.
However, only 2 (one of these being electric charge) are superselectedly carried exclusively by elementary particles.
Path-loop constraints tailored to the 3-dimensionality of space require any agemonotonic loop segment (of 2 or more steps) to be accompanied over the entire monotonic-segment extent by exactly 3 other age-monotonic loop segments that are "almost parallel" in the sense that the center of such a path segment quartet is spatially straight (in boost space).
Two quartet members move forward in age while the remaining two members move backward.
Transverse spatial displacements between quartet
2
members, specified by the path step and N, come in 2 patterns, respectively called "fermionic" and "bosonic", that are described in Reference (3).
We shall refer to such a quartet of loop segments as a "structured arc" (or, more often, simply as "arc").
Any arc's spatially straight central axis has a local-frame velocity magnitude dependent only on N-smaller than c by a fraction of order N­2.
"Structure of an arc" refers not only to the transverse spatial pattern of 4 path segments but to the quartet of 6-valued labels attached thereto.
References (3) and (4) place on label patterns constraints (certain of which are relevant to what follows) required by consistency with Hilbert space and representation of energy, rest mass, chirality and photon coupling to electric charge.
The total number of allowed arc label patterns thereby drops below 64 by roughly one order of magnitude.
"Structure of a vertex" refers to the spacetime pattern of connections between 3 or 4 path-segment quartets which there meet.
At a cubic vertex 2 arcs are fermionic while 1 is bosonic.
At a quartic vertex either all 4 arcs are bosonic or all 4 are fermionic.
Reference (4) exhaustively catalogues vertex structures.
Despite vertex structure, vertex spacetime location enjoys precise meaning as the intersection between spatially straight central axes of those arcs joined by the vertex.
Longitudinal arc orientations at a vertex constrain (structured-arc) transverse orientations.
(4) (Vertex location functionally resembles the spacetime label shared by those local fields whose product constitutes one term of a field-theoretic polynomial Lagrangian density; arc transverse orientation functionally resembles a field's spin label.)
The action of a path is the sum of actions separately attached to arcs and vertices.
Vertex actions are 0, ±1 in units h /2 chosen (see below) to conform to Planck's relation between energy and classical angular velocity ("frequency").
An arc carries Poincaréinvariant electromagnetic and gravitational "action at a distance" that is below prescribed through arc orientation and length, relative spacetime separations from other arcs and arc electric charge and energy.
(Gravitational constant is implicit in the energy unit.)
Pathloop labels define arc electric charge, while below-described "trivial" vertices perpetuate spatial straightness in "trivially-extended" arcs and discretely attach energy thereto.
"Electromagnetic vertices", defined by termination thereon of bosonic arcs called "photonic" that are identified by a combination of labeling and termination structure, (4) are unique in carrying no action.
(Although itself actionless, an electromagnetic vertex "inserted" into a charged arc affects electromagnetic action in replacing the single charged arc by a pair of charged arcs that are differently oriented.)
Graph-path action at a distance is lifted from Wheeler and Feynman's ("W-F") fieldless representation of classical electromagnetism (5).
Action of an arc-step is a sum of Poincaré-invariant contributions from past and future "source" arc-steps.
Denoting the spacetime locations of beginning and end of arc-step-s central axis by the 4-vector symbols sb and se, the s displacement in spacetime, l s se ­ sb , (1) is a positive-timelike 4-vector.
The backward lightcone with vertex at se "intersects" another arc step within the same path if the end of the latter step is outside this lightcone and the beginning inside.
Employing the symbol sr to designate such a "retarded-source" arc step and the 4-vector symbol srb to designate the spacetime-location of sr beginning, we define the positive-timelike 4-vector, xsr se ­ srb. (2)
3
Denoting arc-step electric charges by the symbols Qs and Qsr, the W-F increment of action at a distance carried by arc-step s due to the retarded source-step sr is ­½ Qs Qsr ls · lsr / xsr · lsr. (3) In graph-path dynamics the symbol Qs may take values 0, ±, ±, ±1 in units of order h½ which a separate paper will specify by "grand unification" of electromagnetic arc action with weak and strong vertex action.
The formula for an increment of "advanced" action is similar to (3) with the retarded superscript r replaced by an advanced superscript a.
All 4-vectors in the advanced-action formula continue to be positive timelike, with xsa sae ­ sb .
(4) The W-F device works also for gravity.
Gravitational action is given by a formula analogous to (3), where the product of electric charges is replaced by a (positive) Lorentz-invariant inner-product of below-defined energy-momentum 4-vectors that each belongs to a spatially-straight "trivially-extended arc"--a succession of "continuing" arcs separated by "trivial" vertices that is below called a "t " element of the graph.
The aggregate of all t elements encompasses all arc steps without multiple counting.
Wave-function spacetime comprises the subset of path-spacetime hyperboloids of age Nw (M), where Nw = 1,2, ... and M is a huge integer enjoying a stepped-dynamics "fundamental" status like the scale interval spanned by inflation in standard cosmology.
Eventually number theory needs to indicate a unique value for the integral ratio M between wave-function step and path step.
(An example of how number theory can identify a special huge prime is provided by the Mersenne prime sequence, 22-1=3, 23-1=7, 27-1=127, 2127-1.)
S-matrix interpretation for the wave-function step requires M to be large on atomic scale, although tiny on Hubble scale, and characterizable as "setting the scale of measurement" (presumably, thereby, below the scale of "observer consciousness").
A value for M in the logarithmic neighborhood of 1038 (M ~ 10­5 sec) appears satisfactory.
(For a continuous-time field approximation where would serve as "ultravioletdivergence cutoff", M would provide "infrared cutoff".)
Because the (Nw = 1) initial wave function of the universe has age M, a relation between M and the scale interval of cosmological inflation is plausible.
The "global S Matrix" connecting 2 successive wave functions (belonging to successive values of Nw) is built by adapting the Dirac-Feynman rule to the actions of open-graph portions of closed-graph paths--open graphs located within the (simplyconnected) spacetime region between 2 successive wave-function hyperboloids.
The "ends" of these open graphs are the truncated arcs cut by wave-function hyperboloids.
Path constraints forbid graph vertices from locating on wave-function surfaces.
A zero-rest-mass elementary-particle (S-matrix) Hilbert space is based on the intersections between path-graph arcs and wave-function hyperboloids.
Bosonic and fermionic quartets of labeled points in (3-dimensional) boost space, each (Planck-scale) structured quartet with a center and with a spatial orientation, provide coordinate basis for a Fock space: "Pauli symmetrized" functions of SL(2,C) group parameters represent zero-rest-mass vector bosons and spin-½ fermions with standard-model quantum numbers.
(3) A conjugate basis labeled by group invariants (Casimirs) related to particle momentum and angular momentum in local frame, is provided by Fourier-like analysis of wave-function dependence on Lorentz parameters.
(6) Bosonic "particle" arcs enjoy
4
structures allowing "contact" with elementary vector bosons; the structures of fermionic particle arcs permit contact with elementary fermions.
Certain arcs, identifiable by label structure, are forbidden to cross wave-function hyperboloids.
Those bosonic arcs in the "nonparticle" category are called "inertial" because, as explained below, they enable (through "trivial" vertices) the momentum content of graph paths.
(Path momentum and wave-function momentum become approximately related by stationary action.)
Nonparticle fermionic arcs are called "zbw" because of enabling (through quartic fermionic vertices, as discussed below) the zitterbewegung that underpins fermion rest mass.
Any arc (particle or nonparticle, bosonic or fermionic) may connect "continuously" at a "trivial" vertex to another identically-structured arc of the same longitudinal orientation.
The members of such a "trivially-continuing" arc pair (both incoming, both outgoing or one incoming and the other outgoing) differ in transverse orientation--by 90° if bosonic and by 180° if fermionic.
"Handedness" (left or right) of bosonic-arc (discrete) rotation at a trivial vertex is determined by arc structure.
The action attached to any trivial vertex (bosonic or fermionic) is ­ h /2.
A nontrivial-vertex-bounded spatially-straight succession t of (nt + 1) triviallycontinuing arcs connected by nt trivial vertices we call a "trivially-extended" arc.
The age difference between t end points (ending age minus beginning) in units is another nonnegative integer Nt, while the positive-timelike 4-vector symbol xt denotes the spacetime displacement between t central-axis endpoints.
The 4-vector, pt [nth /2(Nt)2] xt, (5) is the "energy-momentum" of the trivially-extended arc.
In the local frame of t midpoint, the energy Et is (almost) the rational number nt /Nt times the Planck energy unit h /2.
For bosonic t, the frequency associated to Et is the mean angular velocity of rotating transverse-orientation.
Gravitational action, attached both to individual particle and to individual nonparticle trivially-extended arcs, is determined by the energy-momentum of such arcs, as defined by (5).
A trivial vertex is cubic if the continuing arc pair is fermionic and quartic if the continuing pair is bosonic.
(A quadratic kinetic energy term within a field-theoretic Lagrangian density fulfills some of the functions of a trivial vertex.)
At a cubic trivial vertex the single other arc is inertial while at a quartic trivial vertex both other arcs are inertial, each terminating at (not "continuing through") the trivial vertex.
The unique set of labels identifying an inertial arc not only endows this arc with zero values for all 6 conserved quantum numbers but distinguishes it from all particle bosonic arcs.
(3,4) Although a path graph displays many features of a Feynman graph, the latter lacks inertial arcs that terminate in trivial vertices.
(The energy-momentum attached to a Feynman-graph arc is an extra label that does not derive significance from the graph itself.)
Nonetheless the wave-function-propagating continuous paths (not Feynman graphs) of standard (Hamiltonian) quantum dynamics (7) share the discretized graph-path feature of traversing a (coordinate-momentum) phase space.
Our essential innovation is a path space with nonparticle "dimensions"--inertial arcs and zbw arcs--that are unrepresented in Hilbert space.
A standard-theory analog to inertial arcs is found in the graviton arcs of a Feynman graph.
Although our Hilbert space contains no elementary gravitons it does include photons and inertial arcs share certain structural features with photonic
5
In a Feynman graph, photon arcs and graviton arcs enjoy parallel status.
How does an inertial arc resemble a graviton? (a) Inertial arcs that are trivially extended by trivial vertices (connecting 4 inertial arcs) themselves carry energymomentum and associated gravitational action.
(b) Stationary action, together with nontrivial vertices that alter longitudinal arc direction, is expected at large scales to select out "gravitationally-curved" paths.
The notion that inertial arcs "generate" energy by "terminating on other arcs" implies a graviton-suggestive converse "path-bremstrahlung" notion: The larger the energy of a (stationary-action) "accelerating arc", the larger is such an arc's "emission rate" of inertial arcs.
("Emitted" inertial arcs, even though never manifested through particles, are not "locally reabsorbed" within the graph-path; "extendable" by intersections with other inertial arcs, they traverse "macroscopic" spatial intervals.)
Label-defined nonparticle zbw fermionic arcs (carrying zero values for the 2 superselected conserved quantum numbers carried by elementary particles), play a role at quartic fermionic vertices that parallels the participation of inertial arcs at quartic bosonic vertices.
(All quartic fermionic vertices involve zbw arcs.)
The analog of a trivial quartic vertex is a "zitterbewegung vertex" in which 2 zbw arcs terminate while two "continuing" fermionic arcs relate to each other by opposite longitudinal directions and "chirally-reversed" labels.
Chirality reversal, defined in Reference (3), corresponds to LR interchange in the standard model (where the triplet of W bosons couples to L fermions).
A zbw vertex resembles a standard-model fermion-Higgs Feynman-graph vertex--a zbw arc pair playing the role of a Higgs scalar.
(Our Hilbert space does not include elementary scalar bosons.)
There are however 9 different label structures for zbw arcs, even though zbw vertex actions are always ±h /2.
Chirality reversal accompanies helicity reversal for an elementary fermion.
Dirac's fermion wave function with nonzero rest mass is a direct sum of oppositehelicity, opposite-velocity zero-rest-mass (Majorana) wave functions--a composition often described as "zitterbewegung".
Presuming the action of zbw vertices to generate fermion rest mass, graph-path dynamics implies calculability of the observed quarklepton mass matrix (in Planck-energy units) without need for arbitrary parameters.
All vertices, apart from electromagnetic, zbw and quark-W vertices, enjoy a "Chan-Paton structure" yielding SU(N) symmetries for strong (N=3), weak (N=2) and GUT (N=5) action.
(4) Rules for the signs of vertex actions imitate the (Yang-Mills) gauge symmetry of local field theory.
Although all graph-path vertices share certain important structural features, an exact Planck-scale supersymmetry would clash with the difference in spacetime structure of fermionic and bosonic arcs.
All vertices exhibit CPT symmetry but a remarkable aspect of W-quark vertex structure is a bosonic asymmetry under inversion of path direction.
In all other vertices bosonic arcs maintain equivalent postures under this inversion.
Because path-direction inversion corresponds to a CP transformation, a special role may be anticipated for Wquark interaction in the breaking of CP symmetry.
The initial (global) wave function is our theory's repository for "spontaneous symmetry breaking"--an issue to which no serious thought has yet been given.
arcs.
(4)
6
This enterprise was engendered by extended 1983-84 discussions with V. Poénaru.
Almost-daily conversations with Henry Stapp over the subsequent two decades contributed enormously to details of our proposal.
Criticism from Jerry Finkelstein has been extremely valuable.
The author would also like to acknowledge the impact on his thinking from the series of renormalization-group-based essays in Physics Today by Frank Wilczek.
These essays suggested the postulate of universal magnitude for vertex (trivial or nontrivial) action.
The only parameters of our theory are h, c and .
Contact between experimental data and the "fundamental" Planck-scale dynamical laws that we are proposing will require computations borrowing heavily from renormalization-group methods.
References 1.
R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 267, 1948.
2.
E. A. Milne, Relativity, Gravitation and World Structure, Clarendon Press, Oxford, (1935).
3.
G. F. Chew, Quantum Cosmology from Discrete Feynman Paths, Berkeley Lab preprint LBNL 52618 (February, 2003), to be published in the book, Quo Vadis Quantum Mechanics, editor Avshalom Elitzur .
4.
G.F. Chew, Elementary Events Within Stepped Paths, Berkeley Lab preprint to be submitted to Physical Review D. 5.
J. Wheeler and R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 21, 425, (1949).
6.
M. A. Naimark, Linear Representations of the Lorentz Group, MacMillan, New York, (1964), p. 210.
7.
S. Weinberg, The Quantum Theory of Fields, Vol.
I, Cambridge University Press, New York (1995), p. 376.
7
