NATIONAL BOOK FESTIVAL T HE FIRST NA TIONAL BOOK FESTIV AL was held on September 8, 2001, on the east lawn of the U.S. Capitol and in the Thomas Jeffer son and James Madison Buildings of the Library of Congress.
Hosted by First Lady Laura Bush and sponsored by the Library of Congress, the festi val drew a crowd of approximately 30,000 people to the nation's capital to meet their favorite authors, have their books signed, listen to music, enjoy sto rytellers and storybook characters, and learn about organizations that promote reading.
All told, sixty nationally known authors and illustrators participated in the event.
On July 31, Mrs. Bush, Librarian of Congress James H. Billington, and Na tional Basketball Association (NBA) player Ray Allen (representing NBA's Read to Achieve national reading campaign) unveiled the festival logo and Web site at a press conference in the Great Hall of the Jefferson Building.
On Friday, September 7, the CBS Early Show featured a split live broadcast from New York and the Library of Congress including interviews with Mrs. Bush, Dr. Billington, and mystery writer Sue Grafton.
Special segments included Li brary experts discussing the collections and a portion of the Back-to-School Program, which featured the first lady reading from Richard Peck's A Year Down Yonder (2001 Newbery Award winner).
During the broadcast, Dr. Billington demonstrated the Library's award-winning Web site for children and families known as America's Library, and NBA star Grant Hill and Women's 7
8
Annual Report of the Librarian of Congress 2001
National Basketball Association (WNBA) star Lisa Leslie read from The Jour nal of Joshua Loper: A Black Cowboy by Walter Dean Myers.
A special program held in the Coolidge Auditorium on the evening of Sep tember 7 included readings by David McCullough, John Hope Franklin, Gail Godwin, J. California Cooper, Larry L. King, and author/newscaster Tom Brokaw.
The evening was attended by President Bush and Mrs. Bush, congres sional representatives, Cabinet secretaries, leaders in the business community, distinguished guests of the White House and Library of Congress, and partici pating authors.
The following morning, a White House breakfast, hosted by the president and Mrs. Bush, honored the authors, who then boarded buses for the Library and the official opening ceremony on Neptune Plaza.
The festival offered something for everyone.
Thousands took tours of the Library's magnificent Main Reading Room in the Jefferson Building.
The Li brary's four area studies reading rooms were open and held displays of interna tional award-winning books.
Many festival participants had their names written in Arabic, Chinese, and other scripts by the Library's area specialists.
Pavilions on the Capitol's east lawn were set up according to genre (Mystery and Suspense, History and Current Events, Fiction and the Imagination, and Books for Children and Young Adults).
Each of these pavilions provided inter preters for people with hearing impairments.
Thirteen current and former pro fessional basketball players, including Michael Curry of the Detroit Pistons, Greg Anthony of the Chicago Bulls, and Nikki McCray of the Washington Mystics, represented the Read to Achieve campaign of the NBA and WNBA by reading and talking about books in the Books for Children and Young Adults pavilion.
More than 2,500 children had their pictures taken with Clifford the Big Red Dog, Arthur, Elmo, and the Cat in the Hat as two dozen storybook favorites wandered the grounds throughout the day.
Another pavilion featured storytellers, who delighted thousands with their Caribbean, Appalachian, East Indian, and Gullah (South Carolina sea islands) tales and music.
They demonstrated the close connection between the ancient and universal tradition of storytelling and the making of books.
The Great Ideas for Promoting Reading pavilion featured more than sixty nonprofit or ganizations that promote reading, literacy, and libraries.
In the Madison Building, long lines waited to hear historians David McCul lough, John Hope Franklin, David Levering Lewis, and Doris Kearns Goodwin discuss their most recent books.
Also located in the Madison Building, the Digital Library Learning Center drew crowds for demonstrations of the Amer ica's Library Web site and the new Web-Braille site.
Panel discussions in the
National Book Festival
9
Coolidge Auditorium on mysteries, poetry, and children's books were also enormously popular.
Book signings by participating authors had to be moved outdoors to deal with the long lines of loyal fans.
Many authors patiently signed books for their fans long past the designated time.
A conservation clinic provided advice on caring for family photographs and documents to many who took advantage of the expertise of the Library's preservation staff.
Representatives from the Copyright Office and the National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped provided informa tion and handouts on their services to a steady stream of customers.
Throughout the day, musicians entertained the crowds with a broad range of America's musical traditions and influences including mariachi, jazz, bluegrass, Dixieland, klezmer, and Scottish and Irish music.
Food from vendors with stands on the Madison Plaza offered cuisine from around the world.
The Library's Sales Shop sold $76,000 worth of books and festival-related merchan dise such as T-shirts, mugs, magnets, and tote bags.
While waiting for author and illustrator Steven Kellogg to sign books at the National Book Festi val, Irwin Slonin reads to daughters Gina, Carly, and Samantha.
(Photo by Christina Tyler Wenks)
10
Annual Report of the Librarian of Congress 2001
The National Book Festival would not have been possible without the gen erous support, totaling more than $1.4 million, of the festival's charter spon sors, AT
Several hundred Library staff members participated in planning the festival and volunteered their ser vices on the day of the event.
PR OGRAM P AR TICIP ANT S The following is a list of National Book Festival participants who have been nominated for, or received, national awards or were special guests of the Li brary of Congress and the White House: Authors and Illustrators Stephen E. Ambrose, historian and best-selling author George Ancona, photographer, filmmaker, and author of books for young people Marie Arana, author and editor of the Washington Post Book World Natalie Babbitt, author and illustrator of children's books Nevada Barr, author of mystery novels Mary Brigid Barrett, author and illustrator of children's books A. Scott Berg, author of biographies Michael Beschloss, historian of the presidency and author of books about the presidents Marc Brown, popular children's author and illustrator Liz Carpenter, author and lecturer Lucille Clifton, author, poet, and former poet laureate of Maryland Harlan Coben, author of suspense thrillers Michael Collier, poet and the new poet laureate of Maryland Billy Collins, poet and the Library of Congress's eleventh poet laureate consultant in poetry Robin Cook, author of popular medical thrillers J. California Cooper, author of plays, short stories, and novels Robert Crais, author and television scriptwriter Christopher Paul Curtis, author of children's books John Feinstein, author of sports books and radio and television commentator
National Book Festival
11
John Hope Franklin, historian, author, and distinguished visiting scholar at the Library of Congress John Whittington Franklin, author Russell Freedman, author of biographies and histories for children and young adults Kinky Friedman, author of mysteries, songwriter, and country music performer Gail Godwin, author Doris Kearns Goodwin, author, historian, journalist, and commentator Sue Grafton, author of mystery novels Jan Greenberg, author of books for young people Stephen Harrigan, author and journalist William Least Heat Moon, travel author and poet Jan Karon, author of the popular Mitford series Steven Kellogg, illustrator and author of books for children and young people Dolores Kendrick, poet and poet laureate of the District of Columbia Larry L. King, author of books, plays, television documentaries, short stories, and magazine essays David Lee, poet and Utah's first poet laureate David Levering Lewis, author and biographer Eden Ross Lipson, children's book editor of the New York Times Book Review David Macaulay, author and illustrator of books for young people Patricia MacLachlan, author of children's books Thomas Mallon, author, essayist, and reviewer Margaret Maron, author of mystery novels David McCullough, biographer, historian, lecturer, and narrator of historical series on television Alice McDermott, author of short stories and novels Patricia and Fredrick McKissack, authors of children's books Barbara Mertz (best known as Elizabeth Peters), author of historical works and mystery-suspense novels E. Ethelbert Miller, poet and author Walter Mosley, author of mystery novels and short stories Walter Dean Myers, author of books for young people Linda Pastan, poet and former poet laureate of Maryland Katherine Paterson, author of books for young people Richard Peck, author of books for young people Nathaniel Philbrick, author of nonfiction Daniel Schorr, author, journalist, and television commentator (Mr. Schorr was hospitalized just before the festival and was represented by his wife, Lisbeth B. Schorr)
12
Annual Report of the Librarian of Congress 2001
Jon Scieszka, author of children's books Grace Simpson, poet and poet laureate of Virginia Gary Soto, author of books for adults and young people, poet, essayist, and film producer Gail Tsukiyama, author of novels, poetry, and short stories Scott Turow, author of popular novels related to law Donald Westlake (also known as Richard Stark and Tucker Coe), author of mystery novels George F. Will, author, columnist, and television commentator Storytellers Alan Chen and the New Arcadia Puppet Troupe performed a traditional folktale, "Grandaunt Tiger," with hand puppets from Taiwan.
Carmen Deedy, a Cuban-American storyteller and author of six children's books, told family stories from her home state of Georgia.
Cathy Fink and Marcy Marxer entertained the audience with family music and stories, from oral literacy to book literacy.
Derek Burrows, a Bahamian-born performer and storyteller, told stories based on island traditions and immigrant life in America.
Joseph Bruchac shared his extensive knowledge of Native American culture through stories, flute music, and the traditional folk stories of the Abenaki Tribe of New York State.
Keith Little and Samuel Smith of the Navajo Code Talkers Association brought oral history to life in an interview on the work of the code talkers during World War II.
Nilimma Devi used the art of Kuchipudi dance to tell ancient East Indian tales with a contemporary meaning or a universal truth.
The Pan Masters Steel Orchestra performed a medley of Caribbean steel band music.
Ron and Natalie Daise celebrated the rich history of the Gullah culture of the South Carolina sea islands through the stories and music of the people who live there.
Sheila Kay Adams and Jim Taylor performed Appalachian traditional folk sto ries and ballads from the mountains of North Carolina.
NBA and WNBA Current and Former Basketball Players Participating in the Children and Young Adults Pavilion for NBA and WNBA' s Read to Achieve National Reading Campaign Greg Anthony of the Chicago Bulls Nate "Tiny" Archibald of the Fayetteville Patriots Elton Brand of the Los Angeles Clippers Michael Curry of the Detroit Pistons
National Book Festival Pat Garrity of the Orlando Magic Nikki McCray of the Washington Mystics Delisha Milton of the Los Angeles Sparks Dikembe Mutombo of the Philadelphia 76ers Theo Ratliff of the Atlanta Hawks Nykesha Sales of the Orlando Miracle Jackie Stiles of the Portland Fire Sam Vincent of the Mobile Revelers Jahidi White of the Washington Wizards Organizations Represented in the Great Ideas for Promoting Reading Pavilion American Foundation for the Blind American Library Association American Poetry and Literacy Project Association of American Publishers Association of American University Presses Barbara Bush Foundation for Family Literacy Between the Lions Book Adventure Foundation Book It! Cartoonists Across America and the World Center for the Book in the Library of Congress Children's Book Council Corporation for Public Broadcasting Council for Professional Recognition District Lines Poetry Project District of Columbia Center for the Book Everybody Wins! D.C.
Favorite Poem Firstbook Friends of Libraries U.S.A.
Girl Scouts of the U.S.A.
Institute of Museum and Library Services International Reading Association KIDSNET Laubach Literacy Lindy Boggs Center for Community Literacy Literacy Volunteers of America LIVE! @ your library
13
14
Annual Report of the Librarian of Congress 2001
National Basketball Association's Read to Achieve campaign National Book Foundation National Center for ESL Literacy Education National Center for Family Literacy National Center for Learning Disabilities National Center on Adult Literacy National Coalition for Literacy National Council for Literacy and Social Justice National Council of Teachers of English National Education Association National Endowment for the Arts National Endowment for the Humanities National Federation of Press Women National Geographic National Institute for Literacy PBS Literacy Link PBS Ready to Learn Poets House Promoting Maryland Metro Area Libraries Promoting Virginia Metro Area Libraries Reach Out and Read, National Center Reading Is Fundamental Recording for the Blind and Dyslexic SIL International Smithsonian Institution Texas Book Festival UNESCO U.S. Department of Education VALUE (Voices for Adult Literacy United for Education) Washington Literacy Council WETA, Reading Rockets Women's National Book Association World Bank
