10.2 Parabolic Interpolation and Brent's Method 395 1 x3=cx if(abs(cx-bx).gt.abs(bx-ax))then Make x0 to x1 the smaller segment, x1=bx x2=bx+C*(cx-bx) and fill in the new point to be tried.
else x2=bx x1=bx-C*(bx-ax) endif f1=f(x1) The initial function evaluations.
Note that we never need to f2=f(x2) evaluate the function at the original endpoints.
if(abs(x3-x0).gt.tol*(abs(x1)+abs(x2)))then Do-while loop: we keep returning here.
if(f2.lt.f1)then One possible outcome, x0=x1 its housekeeping, x1=x2 x2=R*x1+C*x3 f1=f2 f2=f(x2) and a new function evaluation.
else The other outcome, x3=x2 x2=x1 x1=R*x2+C*x0 f2=f1 f1=f(x1) and its new function evaluation.
endif goto 1 Back to see if we are done.
endif if(f1.lt.f2)then We are done.
Output the best of the two current values.
golden=f1 xmin=x1 else golden=f2 xmin=x2 endif return END
Sample page from NUMERICAL RECIPES IN FORTRAN 77: THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING (ISBN 0-521-43064-X) Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
Programs Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Numerical Recipes Software.
Permission is granted for internet users to make one paper copy for their own personal use.
Further reproduction, or any copying of machinereadable files (including this one) to any server computer, is strictly prohibited.
To order Numerical Recipes books or CDROMs, visit website http://www.nr.com or call 1-800-872-7423 (North America only), or send email to directcustserv@cambridge.org (outside North America).
10.2 Parabolic Interpolation and Brent's Method in One Dimension We already tipped our hand about the desirability of parabolic interpolation in the previous section's mnbrak routine, but it is now time to be more explicit.
A golden section search is designed to handle, in effect, the worst possible case of function minimization, with the uncooperative minimum hunted down and cornered like a scared rabbit.
But why assume the worst? If the function is nicely parabolic near to the minimum -- surely the generic case for sufficiently smooth functions -- then the parabola fitted through any three points ought to take us in a single leap to the minimum, or at least very near to it (see Figure 10.2.1).
Since we want to find an abscissa rather than an ordinate, the procedure is technically called inverse parabolic interpolation.
The formula for the abscissa x that is the minimum of a parabola through three points f (a), f (b), and f (c) is x=b- 1 (b - a)2 [f (b) - f (c)] - (b - c)2 [f (b) - f (a)]
396
Chapter 10.
Minimization or Maximization of Functions
parabola through 1 2 3 parabola through 1 2 4 3 Sample page from NUMERICAL RECIPES IN FORTRAN 77: THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING (ISBN 0-521-43064-X) Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
Programs Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Numerical Recipes Software.
Permission is granted for internet users to make one paper copy for their own personal use.
Further reproduction, or any copying of machinereadable files (including this one) to any server computer, is strictly prohibited.
To order Numerical Recipes books or CDROMs, visit website http://www.nr.com or call 1-800-872-7423 (North America only), or send email to directcustserv@cambridge.org (outside North America).
1
2 5 4
Figure drawn at the points
10.2.1.
Convergence to a minimum by inverse parabolic interpolation.
A parabola (dashed line) is through the three original points 1,2,3 on the given function (solid line).
The function is evaluated parabola's minimum, 4, which replaces point 3.
A new parabola (dotted line) is drawn through 1,4,2.
The minimum of this parabola is at 5, which is close to the minimum of the function.
as you can easily derive.
This formula fails only if the three points are collinear, in which case the denominator is zero (minimum of the parabola is infinitely far away).
Note, however, that (10.2.1) is as happy jumping to a parabolic maximum as to a minimum.
No minimization scheme that depends solely on (10.2.1) is likely to succeed in practice.
The exacting task is to invent a scheme that relies on a sure-but-slow technique, like golden section search, when the function is not cooperative, but that switches over to (10.2.1) when the function allows.
The task is nontrivial for several reasons, including these: (i) The housekeeping needed to avoid unnecessary function evaluations in switching between the two methods can be complicated.
(ii) Careful attention must be given to the "endgame," where the function is being evaluated very near to the roundoff limit of equation (10.1.2). (iii) The scheme for detecting a cooperative versus noncooperative function must be very robust.
Brent's method [1 ] is up to the task in all particulars.
At any particular stage, it is keeping track of six function points (not necessarily all distinct), a, b, u, v , w and x, defined as follows: the minimum is bracketed between a and b; x is the point with the very least function value found so far (or the most recent one in case of a tie); w is the point with the second least function value; v is the previous value of w; u is the point at which the function was evaluated most recently.
Also appearing in the algorithm is the point x m , the midpoint between a and b; however, the function is not evaluated there.
You can read the code below to understand the method's logical organization.
Mention of a few general principles here may, however, be helpful: Parabolic interpolation is attempted, fitting through the points x, v , and w. To be acceptable, the parabolic step must (i) fall within the bounding interval (a, b), and (ii) imply a movement from the best current value x that is less than half the movement of the step before last.
This second criterion insures that the parabolic steps are actually
10.2 Parabolic Interpolation and Brent's Method
397
converging to something, rather than, say, bouncing around in some nonconvergent limit cycle.
In the worst possible case, where the parabolic steps are acceptable but useless, the method will approximately alternate between parabolic steps and golden sections, converging in due course by virtue of the latter.
The reason for comparing to the step before last seems essentially heuristic: Experience shows that it is better not to "punish" the algorithm for a single bad step if it can make it up on the next one.
Another principle exemplified in the code is never to evaluate the function less than a distance tol from a point already evaluated (or from a known bracketing point).
The reason is that, as we saw in equation (10.1.2), there is simply no information content in doing so: the function will differ from the value already evaluated only by an amount of order the roundoff error.
Therefore in the code below you will find several tests and modifications of a potential new point, imposing this restriction.
This restriction also interacts subtly with the test for "doneness," which the method takes into account.
A typical ending configuration for Brent's method is that a and b are 2 × x × tol apart, with x (the best abscissa) at the midpoint of a and b, and therefore fractionally accurate to ±tol.
Indulge us a final reminder that tol should generally be no smaller than the square root of your machine's floating-point precision.
FUNCTION brent(ax,bx,cx,f,tol,xmin) INTEGER ITMAX REAL brent,ax,bx,cx,tol,xmin,f,CGOLD,ZEPS EXTERNAL f PARAMETER (ITMAX=100,CGOLD=.3819660,ZEPS=1.0e-10) Given a function f, and given a bracketing triplet of abscissas ax, bx, cx (such that bx is between ax and cx, and f(bx) is less than both f(ax) and f(cx)), this routine isolates the minimum to a fractional precision of about tol using Brent's method.
The abscissa of the minimum is returned as xmin, and the minimum function value is returned as brent, the returned function value.
Parameters: Maximum allowed number of iterations; golden ratio; and a small number that protects against trying to achieve fractional accuracy for a minimum that happens to be exactly zero.
INTEGER iter REAL a,b,d,e,etemp,fu,fv,fw,fx,p,q,r,tol1,tol2,u,v,w,x,xm a=min(ax,cx) a and b must be in ascending order, though the input b=max(ax,cx) abscissas need not be. v=bx Initializations... w=v x=v e=0.
This will be the distance moved on the step before last. fx=f(x) fv=fx fw=fx do 11 iter=1,ITMAX Main program loop.
xm=0.5*(a+b) tol1=tol*abs(x)+ZEPS tol2=2.*tol1 if(abs(x-xm).le.(tol2-.5*(b-a))) goto 3 Test for done here.
if(abs(e).gt.tol1) then Construct a trial parabolic fit.
r=(x-w)*(fx-fv) q=(x-v)*(fx-fw) p=(x-v)*q-(x-w)*r q=2.*(q-r) if(q.gt.0.)
p=-p q=abs(q) etemp=e e=d
Sample page from NUMERICAL RECIPES IN FORTRAN 77: THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING (ISBN 0-521-43064-X) Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
Programs Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Numerical Recipes Software.
Permission is granted for internet users to make one paper copy for their own personal use.
Further reproduction, or any copying of machinereadable files (including this one) to any server computer, is strictly prohibited.
To order Numerical Recipes books or CDROMs, visit website http://www.nr.com or call 1-800-872-7423 (North America only), or send email to directcustserv@cambridge.org (outside North America).
398
Chapter 10.
Minimization or Maximization of Functions
*
1
2
3
if(abs(p).ge.abs(.5*q*etemp).or.p.le.q*(a-x).or. p.ge.q*(b-x)) goto 1 The above conditions determine the acceptability of the parabolic fit.
Here it is o.k.: d=p/q Take the parabolic step. u=x+d if(u-a.lt.tol2 .or. b-u.lt.tol2) d=sign(tol1,xm-x) goto 2 Skip over the golden section step. endif if(x.ge.xm) then We arrive here for a golden section step, which we take e=a-x into the larger of the two segments.
else e=b-x endif d=CGOLD*e Take the golden section step.
if(abs(d).ge.tol1) then Arrive here with d computed either from parabolic fit, or u=x+d else from golden section.
else u=x+sign(tol1,d) endif fu=f(u) This is the one function evaluation per iteration, if(fu.le.fx) then and now we have to decide what to do with our function if(u.ge.x) then evaluation.
Housekeeping follows: a=x else b=x endif v=w fv=fw w=x fw=fx x=u fx=fu else if(u.lt.x) then a=u else b=u endif if(fu.le.fw .or. w.eq.x) then v=w fv=fw w=u fw=fu else if(fu.le.fv .or. v.eq.x .or. v.eq.w) then v=u fv=fu endif endif Done with housekeeping.
Back for another iteration. enddo 11 pause 'brent exceed maximum iterations' xmin=x Arrive here ready to exit with best values.
brent=fx return END
Sample page from NUMERICAL RECIPES IN FORTRAN 77: THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING (ISBN 0-521-43064-X) Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
Programs Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Numerical Recipes Software.
Permission is granted for internet users to make one paper copy for their own personal use.
Further reproduction, or any copying of machinereadable files (including this one) to any server computer, is strictly prohibited.
To order Numerical Recipes books or CDROMs, visit website http://www.nr.com or call 1-800-872-7423 (North America only), or send email to directcustserv@cambridge.org (outside North America).
CITED REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING: Brent, R.P. 1973, Algorithms for Minimization without Derivatives (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall), Chapter 5.
[1] Forsythe, G.E., Malcolm, M.A., and Moler, C.B. 1977, Computer Methods for Mathematical Computations (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall), §8.2.
10.3 One-Dimensional Search with First Derivatives
399
10.3 One-Dimensional Search with First Derivatives Here we want to accomplish precisely the same goal as in the previous section, namely to isolate a functional minimum that is bracketed by the triplet of abscissas (a, b, c), but utilizing an additional capability to compute the function's first derivative as well as its value.
In principle, we might simply search for a zero of the derivative, ignoring the function value information, using a root finder like rtflsp or zbrent (§§9.2­9.3).
It doesn't take long to reject that idea: How do we distinguish maxima from minima? Where do we go from initial conditions where the derivatives on one or both of the outer bracketing points indicate that "downhill" is in the direction out of the bracketed interval? We don't want to give up our strategy of maintaining a rigorous bracket on the minimum at all times.
The only way to keep such a bracket is to update it using function (not derivative) information, with the central point in the bracketing triplet always that with the lowest function value.
Therefore the role of the derivatives can only be to help us choose new trial points within the bracket.
One school of thought is to "use everything you've got": Compute a polynomial of relatively high order (cubic or above) that agrees with some number of previous function and derivative evaluations.
For example, there is a unique cubic that agrees with function and derivative at two points, and one can jump to the interpolated minimum of that cubic (if there is a minimum within the bracket).
Suggested by Davidon and others, formulas for this tactic are given in [1 ].
We like to be more conservative than this.
Once superlinear convergence sets in, it hardly matters whether its order is moderately lower or higher.
In practical problems that we have met, most function evaluations are spent in getting globally close enough to the minimum for superlinear convergence to commence.
So we are more worried about all the funny "stiff " things that high-order polynomials can do (cf. Figure 3.0.1b), and about their sensitivities to roundoff error.
This leads us to use derivative information only as follows: The sign of the derivative at the central point of the bracketing triplet (a, b, c) indicates uniquely whether the next test point should be taken in the interval (a, b) or in the interval (b, c).
The value of this derivative and of the derivative at the second-best-so-far point are extrapolated to zero by the secant method (inverse linear interpolation), which by itself is superlinear of order 1.618.
(The golden mean again: see [1 ], p. 57.)
We impose the same sort of restrictions on this new trial point as in Brent's method.
If the trial point must be rejected, we bisect the interval under scrutiny.
Yes, we are fuddy-duddies when it comes to making flamboyant use of derivative information in one-dimensional minimization.
But we have met too many functions whose computed "derivatives" don't integrate up to the function value and don't accurately point the way to the minimum, usually because of roundoff errors, sometimes because of truncation error in the method of derivative evaluation.
You will see that the following routine is closely modeled on brent in the previous section.
Sample page from NUMERICAL RECIPES IN FORTRAN 77: THE ART OF SCIENTIFIC COMPUTING (ISBN 0-521-43064-X) Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Cambridge University Press.
Programs Copyright (C) 1986-1992 by Numerical Recipes Software.
Permission is granted for internet users to make one paper copy for their own personal use.
Further reproduction, or any copying of machinereadable files (including this one) to any server computer, is strictly prohibited.
To order Numerical Recipes books or CDROMs, visit website http://www.nr.com or call 1-800-872-7423 (North America only), or send email to directcustserv@cambridge.org (outside North America).
