Minnesota Department of Health: Protecting, maintaining improving the health of all Minnesotans.
MDH Logo
MDH Home Main Categories About Us Library Northstar
_______________ Search
Health Technology Advisory Committee Home Publications Links Search [space.gif]
Prostate Specific Antigen as a Routine Screening Test for Prostate Cancer in Asymptomatic Men
June 1995
Prostate specific antigen (PSA), a substance produced by the prostate gland, is found in all males.
Elevations in serum PSA levels may result from conditions that disrupt the prostate gland including: prostate cancer, benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or enlargement, acute and chronic prostatitis, after rectal examination and prostate biopsies.
PSA levels also increase with age.
The prostate specific antigen (PSA) test measures PSA levels in the blood.
Prostate cancer (adenocarcinoma) is the most common carcinoma detected at autopsy in males, being present in up to 30% of males in their 50's, 41% of males in their 70's and 57% of males in their 80's.
Though the second leading cause of cancer deaths among men (exceeded only be lung cancer) and with a lifetime risk of developing the medically-significant disease of about 1 in 10, there is only a 1 in 35 lifetime risk of dying from the disease.
The American Cancer Society estimates that approximately 38,000 American males will die of prostate cancer in 1994.
A relatively small number of men have an aggressive form of prostate cancer, dying within one to two years of diagnosis; most men with prostate cancer live for a decade or more, eventually dying from other causes.
Some men living with prostate cancer suffer from the effects of the disease, including difficulty urinating, bone pain due to cancer metastasis, and the general debilitating effects of cancer that has spread outside of the prostate gland.
Most men with prostate cancer have inactive or medically insignificant disease-that is, prostate cancer that does not cause illness or death.
Issues
PSA's benefit as a screening test for prostate cancer among asymptomatic men is being evaluated.
Two critical questions are being addressed within the context of this health technology assessment:
* What effects do population-based PSA screening and the treatments that follow have on prostate cancer disability, deaths, years of life lost and quality of life? * Are PSA screening and the treatments that are triggered worth the associated financial costs and the potential morbidity associated with prostate cancer diagnosis, staging and treatment relative to the consequences of allowing the disease to be diagnosed in the usual course of care?
As used in this report, population-based mass screening refers to the aggressive recruitment of all men above a certain age (40 or 50 years and older) for the primary purpose of screening, without regard to each individuals risk factors, health status and/or concerns.
It should be expected that a significant portion of the recruited population will respond.
Those conducting the screening must have the fiscal and human resources and the medical knowledge necessary to appropriately follow up and treat those with abnormal rest results.
The health consequences (morbidity) that may occur as a result of prostate cancer includes urinary blockage, bone pain and fracture, other effects of distant cancer spread (colon, liver, etc), general debilitation and degradation in the quality of life.
Morbidity may also occur as a result of cancer screening and treatment and include urinary and fecal incontinence (leakage), impotence, general discomfort, degradation of the quality of life, and unnecessary anxiety.
Rationale
The challenge of an effective prostate cancer screening program is to identify early, clinically significant cancers, those cancers that will progress to cause illness and death, at a stage when the cancers are curable-when the intervention will have a better outcome than that occurring after diagnosis is made in the usual course of care.
Some prostate cancers result in illness and death, some do not.
Traditionally, digital rectal examination (DRE), patient signs/symptoms, or both have been used as indicators for biopsy, the usual method of diagnosing prostate cancer.
Using these patient indicators, only about 65% of patients with newly diagnosed prostate cancer have clinically-localized disease (within the prostate gland) and fewer than half of these patients (about 30% of the total) will be found to have organ-confined disease, based on the microscopic analysis of prostate tissue removed.
PSA testing alone, however, results in a greater proportion (71% versus 30%) of newly diagnosed prostate cancer that is organ-confined.
This is the only stages of prostate cancer that are generally curable by radical prostatectomy (removal of the prostate gland) or irradiation.
PSA is being evaluated as a routine screening tool for the detection of clinically-significant prostate cancer in asymptomatic (without symptoms) males at earlier, potentially curable stages of the disease.
In Minnesota in 1992, 4,215 men 45 years of age or older were newly diagnosed with prostate cancer, along with 3 men between the ages of 20 and 39 years.
In this same year, 611 men died of prostate cancer from a male population 45 years of age or older totaling 613,392-a cancer death rate of about 100 per 100,000 men 45 years and older.
In this same year (1992), no one under the age of 45 years died from prostate cancer.
If 50% of asymptomatic Minnesota males 45 years and older were screened for prostate cancer using PSA and DRE, in the first year of screening, about $239 million in additional costs will be incurred above the costs incurred when prostate cancer is diagnosed in the usual course of care.
This additional money would be sed to diagnose 8,053 additional cases of prostate cancer and treat 4,027 additional men.
With population-based screening, the prostate cancer incidence rate in the first year of screening will rise from 0.7% to about 4.0% of the male population 45 years or older.
Note that the current lifetime risk of developing active disease is 9.5% of 1 out of every 10 or 11 men.
PSA screening would identify some clinically unimportant prostate cancer.
The prostate cancer incidence rate and related costs may go down in the second and subsequent years.
Since 1988, with the increasing use of PSA testing, the annual incidence of prostate cancer in Minnesota has risen dramatically, from 113.5 to 191.6 per 100,000 males (all ages) in 1992.
In this same time period, death rates have remained constant, from a low of 26.1 to a high of 27.8 per 100,000 males of all ages.
It may sell be too early to see a reduction in the prostate cancer death rate, is measurable improvements in outcome will be generated through PSA screening.
However a reduction in cancer morbidity and a decrease in prostate cancer deaths are the ultimate goals.
Summary of the Literature
1.
The PSA test of assay has some inherent limitations.
Standardization of the assay is lacking, creating problems in test interpretation and judgements of abnormal levels.
PSA test values greater than 4.0 ng/ml are generally considered elevated or abnormal, using the most common assays (Hybritech Tandem-R and Tandem-E and Abbott Imx).
However, research studies of men (average ages approximately 63 to 68 years old) with suspicious signs and/or symptoms, subsequently diagnosed through biopsy with prostate cancer, have found that 12% to 27% of these men had "normal" PSA values (less than 4.1 ng/ml).
These PSA test findings are known as false negative test results.
As many as 65% to 85% of asymptomatic, male volunteers (average ages approximately 63 to 67 years old) recruited to participate in several research studies and having an elevated or abnormal single PSA test value of 4.1 ng/ml to 9.9 ng/ml, will not have prostate cancer, based on biopsy results.
These PSA test findings are false positive results.
Biopsy may miss small tumors, but questions remain regarding the significance of cancers not detected by biopsy.
A number of PSA test refinements may improve test accuracy, including interpreting PSA values based on age adjusted ranges of normal versus abnormal levels, calculating PSA-prostate volume/density rates, and calculating the rate of change in PSA values through repeated PSA testing.
2.
PSA testing can detect a higher percentage of organ-confined tumors compared with DRE and TRUS.
3.
Some recent studies have shown that elevated PSA values predicted a higher proportion of early stage prostate cancers that were subsequently found to be aggressive versus nonaggressive.
Controversy still surrounds this issue.
4.
Studies have shown that selected groups of men with untreated, localized prostate cancer, detected through screening, have age-adjusted survival rates which are similar to those of men without the disease.
The factors responsible for the growth and spread of some but not most prostate cancers have not been identified.
5.
The effectiveness of various treatment options, such as watchful waiting, radical prostatectomy and radiation therapy, for early stage prostate cancer has not been established.
Significant debate surrounds these issues.
6.
There is also debate regarding the effectiveness, safety and impact on quality of life of aggressive treatment, such as radical prostatectomies.
Some researchers and clinicians do not recommend aggressive treatment (surgery, radiation therapy) if the patient would not otherwise reasonably expect to live 10 years or longer
.
7.
A determination of PSA levels may lead to early detection of prostate malignancies.
However, this test has not yet been shown to reduce prostate cancer morbidity and deaths.
Conclusions
Detection of prostate cancer through routine screening may trigger a cascade of care.
The effectiveness of that cascade of care is in question.
The effectiveness of PSA screening of asymptomatic men 40 to 50 years of age and above as the initial step in reducing prostate cancer illness and deaths has not yet been determined.
Controversy surrounds early treatment of prostate cancer, with difficulties in distinguishing which men have latent, medically unimportant cancer from those who have active disease.
However, this report did not address the benefit of various prostate cancer treatment options.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Given the significant financial costs to Minnesota citizens and potential negative impact on quality of life associated with aggressive treatment (surgery and radiation therapy) of prostate cancer, widespread population-based screening with PSA of men without symptoms or signs is not recommended.
This report does not call for halting the diagnosis and treatment of prostate cancer.
Integrated Service Networks, public health agencies, and individual physicians may wish to use PSA primarily as a diagnostic and monitoring test rather than as a standard screening test among older, asymptomatic males.
Physicians will need to consider each patient's unique needs and characteristics including disease risk factors such as race (black) and positive family history, in making decisions regarding PSA use for individual patients.
Additionally, both the potential benefits and negative consequences of treating versus carefully following ("watchful waiting") early stage prostate cancer will have to be considered within the context of the patient's age, 10 year survival probability, general health status, and personal factors in making decisions regarding treatment.
Of equal importance, Minnesotans would benefit from educational information on the incidence of both latent and clinically-significant prostate cancer, disease risk factors, signs and symptoms and other characteristics, prognosis and treatment options for prostate cancer, the potential consequences of treating and not treating prostate cancer, and the issues surrounding PSA screening.
Other Issues and Considerations
1.
Minnesota-specific data on the patterns of use for PSA testing are limited.
Linking these data with information on cancer diagnosis, stage, treatment and outcome (disability, deaths, quality of life) would be invaluable in drawing long-term conclusions about PSA's effectiveness in cancer screening and disease, morbidity/mortality reduction.
2.
The Practice Parameters Advisory Committee (PPAC) may wish to develop guidelines to assist physicians in determining which patients are most likely to benefit from PSA testing and to assist physicians in evaluating prostate cancer treatment options, be age, life expectance, health status, tumor stage and tumor grade.
3.
When data from large, prospective randomized controlled clinical trials designed to evaluate impact on death rates, such as that sponsored by the National Cancer Institute, become available, a re-assessment of the role of PSA tests in screening will be warranted.
4.
A significant drop in the number of admissions and surgical procedures for prostate cancer was observed for 1993.
This change may be due to a change in practice patterns, an increased awareness among patients of treatment alternatives, and/or a slowing of the increase in those detected with prostate cancer through PSA screening.
5.
Information regarding prostate cancer screening, diagnosis and treatment should be disseminated throughout the state of Minnesota.
6.
PSA is rapidly evolving and clinical trials are underway.
This technology should be reassessed as new data become available.
For questions about this page, please contact our Health Policy 
MDH HOME | ABOUT US | LIBRARY | NORTH STAR
MAIN CATEGORIES: Health Data 
Comments and Questions | Phone Number, Address and Directions | Disclaimers
Web Page Last Reviewed Thursday, 15-Jan-04 14:42:41
