Revised 4/92 STIPULATIONS In the performance of any operations under the Permit and Agreement for Outer Continental Shelf Exploration, the Permittee shall comply with the following Stipulations: 1.
As part of the requirements of 30 CFR 251.7-3, the Permittee shall submit to the Regional Supervisor, Resource Evaluation (hereinafter referred to as the Supervisor) within 30 days after the completion of the survey authorized under this Permit and Agreement a map at the same scale as that used ordinarily for such maps and showing the coordinates of latitude and longitude.
In addition, each Permittee shall submit one (1) one-half inch, nine-track, final edited navigation tape of all locations in latitude and longitude degrees.
The tape is to be in an ASCII or EBCDIC 1600 BPI format with fixed record length and fixed block size.
Record length, block size, density and whether the tape is ASCII or EBCDIC must be on a label affixed to the tape.
The label must also specify the geodetic reference system (NAD27 or NAD83) used.
A printed tape listing and format statement are to be included with the tape.
2.
As part of the requirements of 30 CFR 251.3-5, if any operation under this Permit and Agreement is to be conducted in a leased area, the Permittee shall take all necessary precautions to avoid interference with operations on the lease and damage to existing structures and facilities.
The lessee (or operator) of the leased area will be notified by letter before the Permittee enters the leased area or commences operations, and a copy of the letter will be sent to the Supervisor executing this Permit and Agreement.
3.
(a) Solid or liquid explosives shall not be used except pursuant to written authorization from the Supervisor.
Requests for the use of such explosives must be made in writing, giving the size of charges to be used, the depth at which they are to be suspended or buried, and the specific precautionary methods proposed for the protection of fish, oysters, shrimp, and other aquatic life, wildlife, or other natural resources.
(b) The following provisions are made applicable when geophysical exploration on the Outer Continental Shelf using explosives is approved: (i) Each explosive charge will be permanently identified by markings so that unexploded charges may be positively traced to the Permittee and to the specific field party of the Permittee responsible for the explosive charge.
(ii) The placing of explosive charges on the seafloor is prohibited.
No explosive charges shall be detonated nearer to the seafloor than five (5) feet. (iii) No explosives shall be discharged within one thousand (1000) feet of any boat not involved in the survey.
2 4.
Any serious accident, personal injury, or loss of property shall be immediately reported to the Supervisor.
5.
All pipes, buoys, and other markers used in connection with work shall be properly flagged and lighted according to the navigation rules of the U.S. Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Coast Guard.
6.
If the Permittee discovers any archaeological resource during geological and geophysical activities, the Permittee shall report the discovery immediately to the Supervisor.
The Permittee shall make every reasonable effort to preserve the archaeological resource until the Supervisor has told the Permittee how to protect it.
7.
In addition to the general provisions above, the following special provisions shall apply: (a) This permit is applicable only to that portion of the program involving Federal OCS lands seaward of the submerged lands of the State of Alaska.
(b) The Permittee shall, on request of the Supervisor, furnish quarters and transportation for a Federal representative(s) or other designated observer to inspect operations.
(c) Operations shall be conducted in a manner to assure that they will not cause pollution, cause undue harm to aquatic life, create hazardous or unsafe conditions or unreasonably interfere with other uses of the area.
Any difficulty encountered with other users of the area or any conditions which cause undue harm to aquatic life, pollution, or could create a hazardous or unsafe condition as a result of the operations under this permit shall be reported to the Supervisor.
Serious or emergency conditions shall be reported without delay.
(d) A final summary report (one copy) shall be submitted to this office within 30 days of completion or cessation of operations.
This report shall include: (i) Program commencement date. (ii) Program completion date. (iii) Field effort in crew weeks (actual work time based on 168-hour weeks). (iv) Line miles of surveys completed.
(v) Summary of incidents or accidents from paragraph 4.
(vi) Date or reasonable estimation of date when data will be available for inspection or selection.
3 (e) The Permittee shall notify the Commander, U.S. Coast Guard and the Commander, 3rd Fleet as to the approximate time and place the work is to be conducted and to keep them informed: Commander, U.S. Coast Guard 17th Coast Guard District Aids to Navigation Branch P.O. Box 25517 Juneau, AK 99801 (907)586-7365 8.
Information to the Permittee (a) Operations authorized under permit are subject to the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 as amended (16 U.S.C. 1361 et seq), the Endangered Species Act as amended (16 U.S.C. 1531 et seq), regulations found in 50 CFR Part 18 (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service), and 50 CFR Part 228 (National Marine Fisheries Service).
Special attention should be given to the prohibition of the "taking" of marine mammals.
"Taking" means to harass, hunt, capture, collect, or kill or attempt to harass, hunt, capture, collect, or kill any marine mammal.
National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (F
Such a taking of marine mammals is controlled through Letters of Authorization issued by NMFS or F
Further information may be obtained from Regional Director U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Alaska Region 1011 East Tudor Road Anchorage, Alaska 99503 telephone (907) 786-3542 National Marine Fisheries Service 222 West 7th Avenue, Box 43 Anchorage, Alaska 99513 telephone (907) 271-5006 (b) It is recommended that you contact the appropriate Regional Supervisor, Commercial Fish Division, Alaska Fish and Game Department, or the National Marine Fisheries Service for information on the fisheries and fishing activities in the proposed area of operations in order to minimize potential conflict between your activities and fishing activities.
We are attaching a list of the Fish and Game offices with addresses and telephone numbers and a map showing the boundaries of the fishing districts for your convenience.
COMTHIRD Pearl Harbor, HI 96860 (808)472-8242 4 THE FOLLOWING DOCUMENT PROVIDES INFORMATION TO THE PERMITTEE ON THE ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT OF 1973, AS IT MIGHT APPLY WHEN CONDUCTING FIELD OPERATIONS.
The Endangered Species Act prohibits harassment of endangered and threatened species whether the harassment occurs through an intentional or negligent act or omission.
Harassment refers to conduct of activities that disrupt an animal's normal behavior or cause a significant change in the activity of the affected animal.
In many cases the effect of harassment is readily detectible: a whale may rapidly dive or flee from an intruder to avoid the source of disturbance.
Other instances of harassment may be less noticeable to an observer but will still have a significant effect on endangered whales.
The Permittee must be prepared to take all reasonable and necessary measures to avoid harassing or unnecessarily disturbing endangered whales.
In this regard, the Permittee should be particularly alert to the effects of boat and airplane or helicopter traffic on whales.
In order to ensure that the Permittee may derive maximum benefits from their operations at a minimum cost to the health and well being of endangered whales, the following guidelines are offered to help avoid potential harassment of endangered whales: (1) (a)
Vessels and aircraft should avoid concentrations or groups of whales.
Operators should, at all times, conduct their activities at a maximum distance from such concentrations of whales.
Under no circumstances, other than an emergency, should aircraft be operated at an altitude lower than 1,000 feet when within 500 lateral yards of groups of whales.
Helicopters may not hover or circle above such areas or within 500 lateral yards of such areas.
When weather conditions do not allow a l,000-foot flying altitude, such as during severe storms or when cloud cover is low, aircraft may be operated below the l,000-foot altitude stipulated above.
However, when aircraft are operated at altitudes below 1,000 feet because of weather conditions, the operator must avoid known whale concentration areas and should take precautions to avoid flying directly over or within 500 yards of groups of whales.
When a vessel is operated near a concentration of whales, the operator must take every precaution to avoid harassment of these animals.
Therefore, vessels should reduce speed when within 300 yards of whales and those vessels capable of steering around such groups should do so.
Vessels may not be operated in such a way as to separate members of a group of whales from other members of the group.
Vessel operators should avoid multiple changes in direction and speed when within 300 yards of whales.
In addition, operators should check the waters immediately adjacent to a vessel to ensure that no whales will be injured when the vessel's propellers (or screws) are engaged.
Small boats should not be operated at such a speed as to make collisions with whales likely.
When weather conditions require, such as when visibility drops, vessels should adjust speed accordingly to avoid the likelihood of injury to whales.
When any Permittee becomes aware of the potentially harassing effects of operations on endangered whales, or when any Permittee is unsure of the best course of action to avoid harassment of 5 endangered whales, every measure to avoid further harassment should be taken until the National Marine Fisheries Service is consulted for instructions or directions.
However, human safety will take precedence at all times over the guidelines and distances recommended herein for the avoidance of disturbance and harassment of endangered whales.
Permittees are advised that harassment of endangered whales may be reported to the National Marine Fisheries Service.
For further information contact the National Marine Fisheries Service, Federal Building, Room C-554, Anchorage, Alaska, 99513, telephone (907) 271-5006.
