CHS Logo: Click to go to the CHS Home Page KY Cabinet for Health Services Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health Legislation 
blank Resource Center blank Hotlines to Health blank Organizations blank Publications blank Articles blank Statistics blank Fact Sheets blank Fast Facts blank Health Days blank Meetings 
Overview ~ 2004 General Assembly ~ Other Legislation
Legislation 
The purpose of the Office is to serve as a "repository for data and information affecting women's health and mental health; analyzing and communicating trends in women's health issues and mental health; recommending data elements affecting women's health and mental health that should be collected, analyzed and reported; and administering a Women's Health Resource Center to focus on targeted preventive and comprehensive health education."
The office officially opened on October 1, 2000 and was renamed the Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health.
KRS Chapter 194A00 # 95 - Office of Women's Health Recently, women's health has been gaining national attention, spurring the development of many state offices of women's health.
Kentucky is no exception, however, we are unique in that our legislation specifically includes the mental component of women's health.
This acknowledgement that women's health is not just a matter of bio-physiology is a giant step in understanding true health and wellness in the lives of women.
Though the leading causes of death for women in Kentucky and the nation continue to be heart disease, cancer and stroke respectively, other illnesses, such as depression, are fast becoming major public health threats.
The more research and attention government and society devotes to these issues, a higher quality of life women will enjoy.
The Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health will look at issues affecting women throughout the life span, not just during their reproductive years.
From "cradle to grave", women in Kentucky deserve to have access to reliable, easily understood information about physical and mental health issues affecting their lives.
It is the goal of this Office and our web page to make this available to you, regardless of the various age or stage of your life.
General Assembly ~ 2004 The following are issues relating to women's health passed by the 2004 General Assembly and/or signed into law by the Governor:
Bill Number Coming Soon ...
Other Legislation: * Insurance Legislation Dealing with Women's Issues ~ 1998/2000 KY General Assembly * Selected Legislation Related to Family Issues ~ 1998/2000 KY General Assembly Updated: 01/14/2004
.
.
blank Comments 
All rights reserved.
