[lady_computer1.gif]
Basking in the significant support the 2001 Report garnered from the Legislature, resulting in adoption of 41 of the first report's action items, the 2002 Report is more focused on steps to advance women's economic standing.
The smaller action agenda also reflects the fiscal-only nature of the upcoming Legislative Session.
"Our primary message this Session is to educate policy makers about the need to reverse the negative factors holding down the status of women living and working in Louisiana," said Rep. Winston.
"Bringing women's views, as represented by the Commission, into the policy process last year helped tremendously in areas of domestic violence and child care, but we need legislators and the Governor to ask themselves in every issue area in which they make a decision 'How will this impact women?'"
Dr. Beth Willinger, Director, Newcomb Center for Research on Women is co-chair of the 27 member Commission that includes: State Senators Diane Bajoie and Paulette Irons; State Representatives Jackie Clarkson and Carla Dartez; Paul Arceneaux, Director, State Office of Elderly Affairs; Susan Beal, Director, LSU/S Center for Business and Economic Research; Linda Brassette, Operations Director, State Department of Health and Hospitals; Attorney Bridgett Brown; Dr. Constance Casente, University of Phoenix; Helen Godfrey, CEO, Shreveport Federal Credit Union; Gwen Hamilton, Secretary, State Department of Social Services; Helena Henderson, Director, New Orleans Bar Association; Don Hutchinson, Secretary, State Department of Economics; Dr. Alice Kemp, Professor Emeritus, UNO; Karen Paterson, State Demographer, Office of Electronic Services; Dr. Janet Pope, Director, Louisiana Tech School of Human Ecology; Kim Rosenberg, Deputy Counsel, Governor's Office; Dr. Joe Savoie, State Board of Regents; Susan Smith, Director, State Office of Contractual Review; Susan Sonnier, Director, Children's Cabinet; Dr. Jill Suitor, Director, LSU Women and Gender Studies; Carol Wallin, Deputy Superintendent of Education; Dr. Melissa Waters, UL/L Economic and Finance Department; and Dawn Watson, Deputy Secretary, State Department of Labor.
The Commission's 2002 report sets these priorities for the remainder of the year, each of which has several outlined action steps for the Legislature and Administration:
· To create within the Office of Women Services a clearinghouse of information on women and women's services, and two positions of employment for the purpose of (a) staffing the Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission and (b) serving as a liaison within the Governor's Office to state departments and agencies on women's concerns and needs;
· To analyze factors associated with women's low economic standing, particularly pay equity and educational and health opportunities that affect one's ability to work, and to make recommendations concerning improvements; and
· To monitor the impact and the implementation of actions by state agencies relative to the 41 recommendations made in the 2001 Report to the Governor;
· To assess the employment patterns and earnings of women and men relative to job classifications and pay equity;
· To increase employment possibilities for mothers with dependent children through access to affordable, quality childcare;
· To increase employment opportunities and access to health care for women by increasing access to public transportation systems or private means of transportation, particularly in rural areas; and
· To increase the representation of women by women as appointed policy leaders and in state government.
Once again, the Commission is seeking specific state actions and programs to deal with: · enforcement of employment discrimination; · employer education on pay equity; · non-traditional job training for women by state employment agencies; · micro-enterprise promotions for women-owned transportation companies serving working women; · prescription equity for working women; and, · the effectiveness of state health education programs.
Rep. Winston said progress on the Commission's 2001 work items was made in the area of domestic violence, improvements to child care, educational and financial supports for working women, and access to health care.
"Our greatest success in 2001 was in raising the debate in both Houses about issues of critical importance to women and their families," said Rep. Winston.
"This year, we have a tighter agenda, but we believe the issues of pay equity and economic development are harder to address."
Placing more emphasis on the state's celebration of the national "Take Our Daughters to Work" Day is part of the Commission's 2002 action plan.
"We want our young girls to see that there is no limit or restriction on the career paths they can choose," said Rep. Winston.
The Commission will issue a status report on the 2002 agenda at the conclusion of this year's legislative session, and is sponsoring a September, 2002 Conference titled "Facing Facts: Research Policy and Grassroots Perspectives on Women in Louisiana", which will bring together national and state leaders dedicated to improving the status of women.
For more information, see www.sisters2002.com
Information can also be obtained by calling the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus, Director Jocelyn Green (225) 342-0334.
[spacer.gif]
[site_info_button.gif] [news_button.gif]
