Alaska Dept. of Fish and Game Home Habitat and Restoration Division
spacer
Welcome | Introduction | Ecosystem Description | Human Dimension | Project Summaries | GIS | Special Topics | Bibliography | Table of Contents
spacer
spacer line
spacer
Human Dimension: Recreational Uses
Preface
Backcountry Trails
Ecotourism
Hunting and Gathering
Pleasure Boating
Sportfishing
Search
Human Dimension: Recreational Uses
Hunting and Gathering
hunting Hunting and fishing are popular activities in Kachemak Bay and the surrounding Watershed.
Hunting and gathering are traditional and popular activities in the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
Big game includes: black bears (Ursus americanus), brown or grizzly bears (Ursus arctos), wolves (Canis lupis), wolverine (Gulo gulo), sheep (Ovis dalli dalli), caribou (Rangifer tarandus), mountain goats (Oreamnos americanus), and moose (Alces alces).
Small game includes waterfowl, spruce grouse (Canachites canadensis), ptarmigans (Lagopus spp.), red squirrels (Tamiasciurus hudsonicus), cranes (Grus canadensis), and snipe (Gallinago gallinago).
Moose are by far the most sought after big-game species, followed by black bears and mountain goats.
Hunters access hunting grounds through a variety of transportation methods, including boats, highway vehicles, off-road vehicles, all terrain vehicles, airplanes, and horses.
State land, including the Kachemak Bay State Park, federal land, and borough land are all open to the public for hunting and gathering.
All lands are open to hunting under state regulations.
Some private landowners have chosen to restrict access to their lands.
The spruce bark beetle infestation has, and will continue to, impact hunting.
The massive die-off of the native spruce forest has resulted in significant alteration to wildlife habitat due to the dead trees, the increases logging, and road construction.
Land subdivision and new home construction often follows the logging.
For some animals, such as moose, the changes may enhance populations.
However, for many species, such as brown and black bears, intensified logging negatively impacts the environment by destroying important forage and increasing human access (Del Frate 1996a).
A more detailed discussion of the effects of the bark beetle infestation is included at the end of this section.
The Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF
There are no regulations for wild plant gathering; only individual landowners manage the use of these species.
The ADF
These reports document management strategies, hunter successes and future management objectives.
There are no records kept for small game harvests in the Kachemak Bay Watershed, and there are minimal records kept for waterfowl statistics (Del Frate, pers. comm.).
To explore distributions of land mammals, plants, and traditional harvesting areas in the Kachemak Bay Watershed as they relate to landcover, human populations, etc., refer to the Hunting and Gathering view of the accompanying ArcView® project file on Recreational Uses.
Bears
black bear Black bears (Ursus americanus) are one of the most sought after species for hunters in the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
Few operational dollars in the ADF
However, ADF
This expenditure is based on human safety issues and on concerns for the sustainability of brown bear populations (Del Frate, pers. comm.).
As more people move into the area, encounters between bears and people become more common and often result in the death of a bear.
Killing an animal in "defense of life and property" is permissible if there is nothing done to provoke the animal and if there is no other way to avoid harm.
However, for the past four years, emergency closures of the brown bear hunting season have been necessary to keep the number of bears within sustainable harvest limits.
The increase in people is accompanied by access to the backcountry, as logging roads and subdivisions proliferate.
Mining sites, recreational areas, roads, and residential areas have reduced effective brown bear habitat by 70 percent on the Kenai Peninsula (Suring et al. 1998).
Kenai Peninsula brown bears were listed as a "species of special concern" in the fall of 1998 by the ADF
This designation is given to species, or populations that are small, isolated, and potentially threatened.
In Kachemak Bay Watershed, brown bears primarily occur on the northern side of the Watershed, although they are occasionally observed on the southern side too.
The Interagency Brown Bear Study Team (IBBST) was established in 1984 with the goal of pooling research expertise and money for the study of brown bears.
More recently (October 1999), a stakeholders group, consisting of representatives from government agencies and general public user groups, was formed with the intent of drafting a Brown Bear Management Plan by January 2000.
Although the input of the group is advisory, all of the agencies involved voluntarily signed a memorandum of agreement stating that they will abide by the Plan.
There are hopes that a combination of education and habitat management will keep brown bear populations from declining further.
Unlike brown bears, black bears are very abundant and widely distributed in the Watershed.
They are hunted regularly on both the northern and southern sides with the number of animals and the amount of meat harvested being second only to moose.
Currently, there is open season on black bears year around.
Hunters are allowed to take two black bears each year, but only one bear in each six-month period.
As part of ADF
Baiting, the springtime practice of using scent to lure bears, has grown in popularity and accounts for nearly 17 percent of the harvest during the five-year period from 1990 to 1994.
Although black bear populations are currently stable, there are some concerns that the combination of habitat degradation from forestry practices and development, along with the increasing popularity of black bear hunting, may make regulatory changes necessary.
Some recommended changes include restricting bag limits and/or restricting bait hunting to archery hunters (Del Frate 1996a).
In general, it is anticipated that management practices provided in Brown Bear Stakeholders Plan will benefit black bears as well since habitat requirements for the two species are similar (Del Frate, pers. comm.).
Moose
moose hunt A successful moose hunt near the headwaters of the Anchor River on the northern side of Kachemak Bay.
Moose are common and abundant on the northern side of the Bay where the extensive upland meadows, alder, willow stands, and spruce forests provide quality habitat year around.
On the southern side of the Bay, the steep mountains limit moose ranges to the valleys.
The ADF
As a consequence, ADF
Moose are managed through hunting regulations that allow the killing of male moose (bulls) only.
Approximately 200 moose are taken annually from the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
Of the 1,200 to 1,400 people that hunt for moose in the Watershed, 75 percent are local residents.
A variety of transportation methods are used to get hunters to moose hunting areas, including airplanes, horses, boats, four-wheelers, and highway vehicles.
Although relatively few hunters use horses and aircraft, those that do, have higher success rates than those using other methods (Del Frate 1995).
Most moose hunting takes place on the northern side because existing roads and trails provide ready access from the population centers.
In addition, moose densities are the highest on the northern side.
On the southern side, moose are hunted in the low valleys and in the subalpine along hillsides.
However, access is limited by the lack of trails and by the need for water or air transportation.
In the early 1990s, a Moose Mitigation Plan was established in the Kachemak Bay area to compensate for habitat loss caused by the construction of the Bradley Lake Hydroelectric Project at the head of the Bay.
The loss was caused by water levels that rose as the Bradley River was dammed to create Bradley Lake.
Three mitigation steps were taken to compensate for the habitat loss.
Two of the mitigation measures involved habitat acquisitions, 456 acres of habitat were purchased on the Homer Bench, and 137 acres were purchased through agreements with the Alaska Energy Authority and the Alaska Department of Natural Resources.
The third measure was a trust fund of $150,000 established to provide money for moose management.
As development on the Homer Bench increased, once traditionally important winter moose habitat has became degraded or disappeared.
In 1991 to 1992, after a moderately severe winter, local residents became upset over the number of starving moose observed in the Bench area.
An antler-less (cow) moose hunt was proposed by ADF
Although there was initial public outcry opposed to the special hunt, the proposal eventually passed.
The event has been held annually since 1995.
In addition, monies from the trust fund were used to enact moose habitat enhancements, such as planting willow shoot cuttings and scarifying abandoned hay fields to encourage brush development (Del Frate 1995) (See related section: Highlighted Species; Moose).
Mountain Goats and Dall Sheep
goat hunting Mountain goat (Oreamnos americanus) hunting takes place in the steep terrain on the southern side of the Bay.
Mountain goats are the denizens of the high, steep, and rocky slopes of the Kenai Mountains on the southern side of the Bay.
Towards the head of the Bay, a small part of the Dall Sheep range overlaps with the mountain goat range.
Since few Dall sheep occur here, sheep hunting is not a significant activity in the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
Since the early 1960s, ADF
The survey areas, which correspond to hunting areas, indicate that the populations of both species are relatively stable at the present time.
However, this was not always the case.
In the early 1970s, increased hunting pressure, combined with severe winter weather, led to local population declines.
In an attempt to develop a program that allowed for maximum hunting opportunities and that maintained sustainable populations, ADF
Hunters may obtain a permit either through drawing in which a limited number of permits are issued, or through registration which is available for anyone.
Hunters who receive a permit through drawing get the opportunity to hunt first.
If the allowable harvest is not reached during the drawing permit season, then the area is opened to registration permit hunters.
Whichever type of permit is used, each hunter may take only one animal.
Once the allowable quota is reached, the season is closed.
The subsistence permit system is similar to the drawing and registration permit system, but it is applied only in state designated subsistence areas.
This permit system has proven to be a very effective way to provide as much hunter opportunity as possible without overharvesting.
In addition, it allows areas to be open to hunting that would otherwise have to be restricted, or closed, due to easy hunter access (Del Frate 1996b; Del Frate, pers. comm.).
An average of 91 permits are issued for the Watershed annually.
Nearly 50 percent of permit holders typically hunt, and 55 percent of those, on average are successful.
More recent information is not available (See related section: Native Communities; Subsistence).
Small Game
ptarmigan Ptarmigan are one of several small game species hunted in the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
Grouse, hares, rabbits, ptarmigans, waterfowl, cranes, snipe and squirrels are all hunted to varying degrees in the Kachemak Bay Watershed.
The ADF
Unfortunately, there is very little information available on the extent and levels of hunting for most small game species because there are no agency records or active management efforts in the Watershed.
However, ADF
There is limited information available on waterfowl hunting.
In the fall of 1997, the USFWS initiated surveys of waterfowl populations and hunting in the Kachemak Bay area as part of the Waterfowl Harvesting Information Program.
The results indicated that approximately 76 hunters harvested roughly 1335 birds.
The majority of the birds taken were seaducks; a limited number of Canada geese were taken as well (Rosenberg, pers. comm.).
Fox River Flats is an important staging area for many ducks and geese.
Much of this area has been traditionally utilized for cattle grazing during the spring, summer, and early fall.
There has been some speculation on the possible impacts of the grazing on waterfowl populations, but additional research is needed to fully understand the relationship between livestock and waterfowl habitat.
Potential impacts include the effects of vegetation trampling, competition for the same foods, changes in plant community composition, increased visibility, and increased plant palatability (Clausen and Sinnott 1993).
As long as funding is available, ADF
The consensus is that overall grazing is light throughout the area, and that under current stocking levels, impacts to wildlife are minimal.
Native Plant Gathering
crowberry Crowberry, (Empetrum nigrum), is a harvested species of berry and is commonly found in alpine areas on the southern side of the Bay.
Local residents in the Kachemak Bay Watershed harvest many edible and medicinal plants.
Traditional native Alutiiq and De'naina cultures in this area are rich with uses for wild plants.
These uses include: recipes used for switches used to enhance circulation during saunas, medicinal teas used for curing rheumatism, and making jellies and jams.
For non-natives, most wild plant harvesting is casual, although there is some commercial sale of berries.
Wildberries are popularly harvested for canning, freezing, and fresh consumption.
Seaweeds are harvested during low tide and are either dried or used fresh as a dietary supplement.
Nettles, beach peas, rosy twisted stalks (also known as watermelon berry), and many other wild plants are harvested in the spring to add local wild flavor to menus (See related section: Native Communities; Subsistence).
Potential Impacts and Concerns
Spruce Bark Beetle Infestation: Prior to the spruce bark beetle infestation, much of the Kachemak Bay Watershed was covered in mixed-age spruce forest.
The huge change in forest structure caused by the beetle kill will profoundly impact wildlife and hunting activities in the years to follow.
Not only will there be direct impacts associated with natural changes in cover, food, and nesting site availability, but there may also be indirect impacts associated with changes in landuse.
With most of the forest now dead or dying, many landowners choose to log their property, either in anticipation of the coming infestation, or to salvage dead wood before it rots, or to reduce damages from wind-throw or fire.
In general, the northern side of the Watershed is more susceptible to logging than the southern side.
The National Wildlife Refuge and the Kachemak Bay State Park occupy much of the land on the southern side and generally discourage timber management.
In general, direct impacts to wildlife may include stream hydrology alteration, habitat fragmentation, habitat loss, and in some cases, habitat gains.
Indirect impacts include increased road building and subdivision development, both of which contribute to habitat fragmentation, and to a greater likelihood of wildlife interactions with people and domestic animals.
For black and brown bears in particular, logging associated with the spruce bark beetle kill is identified as the most important potential impact on population levels (McDonald 1998).
Logging will likely destroy one of the major food sources for black bears, called devils club (Opplopanax horridus), which is an understory shrub requiring shade (Del Frate 1996a).
Not only does logging directly impact bear habitat, it also increases human access, as logging roads are developed in bear habitat.
As more people recreate near bears, there likely will be more conflicts, which often results in the death of a bear.
However, moose may benefit from logging if clean up after logging includes scarification.
Disturbing the topsoil through scarification allows shrubs, such as the willow that moose depend on, to thrive and out-compete grasses that have no value as forage for moose (Del Frate 1995) (See related section: Special Topics; Examining Forest Fragmentation).
moose Residential development has resulted in habitat fragmentation and loss for moose, especially in lower elevation areas.
Habitat Loss and Degradation: Lower elevation areas provide important winter moose habitat, especially in years with heavy snow accumulation (Del Frate 1995).
Important wintering areas in the Kachemak Bay Watershed include the Anchor River, Fritz Creek, the lower reaches of Fox River, Sheep Creek, and the Homer Bench.
Increasing human development in some of these areas, most notably Fritz Creek and Homer Bench, threatens both quality and quantity of winter habitat, which may lead to moose starvation.
ADF
Potential Conflicts Between Non-Hunters and Hunters: In recent years, conflicts between hunters and non-hunters have increased in the Kachemak Bay Watershed, especially on the northern side where there are more people.
In part, the conflicts have arisen because the population density has increased and because the areas that once served as hunting grounds now have posted residential developments.
Attitudes about hunting are changing as the human population becomes less rural and grows less dependent on wild animals for food.
Conflicts generally occur when one group perceives that another group is infringing on their rights.
Since most wildlife resources are limited, these conflicts will continue.
Top of Page ___________________________________
Author
Coowe Moss-Walker, Alaska Department of Fish and Game ___________________________________
Related Websites
ADF
Trails Illustrated: http://www.trailsillustrated.com ___________________________________
Further Information
Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Division of Wildlife Conservation publications: (907) 465-4176 Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Homer Office: (907) 235-8191 Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge Visitor Center: (907) 235-6961 ___________________________________
References
spacer line
spacer
Habitat Home Habitat Home | ADF
Contact: Coowe Moss-Walker (coowe_walker@fishgame.state.ak.us) Copyright ©2000 Alaska Department of Fish and Game.
All Rights Reserved.
OEO Statement - Terms of Use - Privacy
