[JJD_bottom.jpg] Duty calls Pentagon's reliance on Guard, Reserves creates hardship By BRYAN MITCHELL, mitchellb@knews.com October 12, 2003 ROSSVILLE, Ga. - Jason Bowling has been away for nearly half of his 21-month-old son's life, and Bowling doesn't want such separations to continue.
Last month the former Army Reserve sergeant left the military after 12 years of service, including nearly a year in Afghanistan overseeing public works projects.
Despite being only eight years short of qualifying for full retirement benefits, Bowling left the Knoxville-based 489th Civil Affairs Battalion out of concern for his wife and toddler son.
He cited two reasons for his decision: First, he didn't want to leave his wife Laura alone again to care for their only child.
Second, another year away from his job as a cost-analysis manager for Shaw Industries in Dalton, Ga., could spell economic disaster for the family.
"We made it through last year, but we would be hard-pressed to do it again," Bowling said.
His wife said the financial returns from his Reserve service don't amount to enough to justify going through another deployment.
"It was such a strain on us," she said.
As a member of Knoxville's most deployed Army Reserve unit, Bowling chose a good time to leave.
Besides learning that he and his wife are expecting another baby, Bowling could have easily been called up again when the Pentagon sends the 150-member battalion to Iraq.
Bowling's decision to leave the Reserves is an increasingly common one.
Across Tennessee and the country guardsmen and reservists are weighing dedication to their country against responsibility to their families.
Sgt. Hillard Hill of Knoxville, who served with the 489th in Afghanistan and is awaiting orders to go to Iraq, was only half joking last month when he said he should have just joined the regular Army.
"I should have probably just gone active duty, but I wanted to go to school," he said.
The dropout rate has reverberated from individual unit headquarters, where retention and recruiting have taken on increased importance, to the halls of the Congress, where laws have been proposed that would limit deployments and increase benefits.
In the meantime, soldiers, seamen, airmen and Marines are waiting anxiously to see if the Bush administration can garner more international support for the military operation in Iraq.
If not, the men and women who wear civilian clothes during the week and camouflage on the weekends know their turns may come next.
"If the coalition forces don't come through, they will have to mobilize," said Lt. Col Bob Stone, who serves in the Pentagon's Reserve Affairs office in Washington.
Already there have been more National Guard and Reserve deployments in the past two years than at any time since the Korean War, and many people are wondering where another round of activations would leave America's citizen soldiers.
"Hardly anyone who signed up for the Reserve or National Guard thought they were signing up for full-time duty," said U.S. Rep. John J. Duncan Jr., R-Knoxville.
"They didn't expect this, and they did not bargain for it."
Fallout from deployments Military officials in Washington say retention is strong across the board and wholesale defections have yet to occur.
"We have not seen it in the aggregate, but it may happen," said John Goheen, director of communications at the National Guard Association.
Still, Goheen said his office has heard rumblings of troops pulling out.
"We're hearing that 'I've done my mobilization and I don't want to do another,' " said Goheen, who served as a guardsman in Bosnia in 1996.
"A year overseas, living in those conditions - that's a pretty healthy contribution to the nation."
The Bowling family used a similar rationale when Jason Bowling opted not to re-enlist.
"He really wanted to do something for the country," Laura Bowling said.
"And he did that."
Lt. Col. Don Amburn, the 489th's commanding officer, said he could not release exact numbers, but he acknowledged that a deployment to Bosnia in 1999, followed by a tour in Afghanistan in 2002 and a pending tour in Iraq has taken its toll on retention.
Stone, of the Reserve Affairs office, said the 489th is a unique sort of military unit and thus is called on more frequently than other outfits.
The Pentagon is working to build up the number of civil-affairs troops and military police in the regular military, but that's not likely to make a noticeable difference anytime soon.
Guardsmen and reservists still run a serious risk of being called up.
Members of the 489th say the unit now has more than 100 soldiers with experience from previous tours, the battalion has lost enough troops to arouse concern.
Spc. Vince Doane of Knoxville, who served in Afghanistan and recently volunteered for service in Iraq, said deployments work two ways.
"It depends on what you're looking for," Doane said.
"If you're looking for a soldier who wants money for college, then this will hurt recruiting.
But if you want a soldier who really wants to serve, this will actually help recruiting."
Several Marine Reservists who recently served in Kuwait in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom are leaving their unit as well.
Like Bowling, they say one deployment is enough.
At McGhee Tyson Air National Guard Base, members of the Tennessee Air National Guard's 134th Air Refueling Wing say the unit's multiple deployments have not taken a toll on retention.
Their deployments have been short, and the Air Force is widely acknowledged to have the best housing and services for deployed units of the Guard and Reserve.
"I don't think we'll have a retention problem, but we will see a decrease in numbers," said Chief Master Sgt. Jim Honeycutt of the 134th.
The leader of the 228th Combat Communications Squadron, which is also stationed at the airbase, said a recent six-month deployment to Qatar of 33 of its 125 members hasn't hurt retention.
Lt. Col. Ted Williams said morale did suffer temporarily due to the length of the deployment but the unit, "really hasn't seen a mass exodus."
Compassion versus doctrine Increased reliance on National Guard and Reserve troops and subsequent prolonged deployments has raised the ire of several members of Congress.
Late last month Sen. Bill Nelson, D-Fla., told senators that the current rotation plan for guardsmen and reservists is unfair and could force people out of service.
As he spoke, Nelson held a stack of letters and e-mail printouts from the families of National Guard members and some from the members themselves.
Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., complained that guardsmen and reservists are becoming "yearlong soldiers."
Sen. Robert Byrd, D-W. Va., recently proposed limiting Guard and Reserve call-ups to no more than 180 days.
His measure would have also promised reservists they would not be called to active duty more than once every 360 days.
Byrd also said both the troops and their families deserve better projections of when their units will be coming home.
Byrd's proposal was rejected, 64-31.
Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., was among those voting against the Byrd measure.
In a statement, he said he "believes that in a time of serious national-security concerns, Congress should not place restrictions on the president's ability to protect Americans."
Frist said he recognizes the critical role that guardsmen and reservists are playing in Iraq and Afghanistan and he will continue supporting the interests of all who wear the uniform.
All three military associations that represent members of the National Guard and Reserve opposed the Byrd measure.
"We are certainly looking for greater predictability, but we thought (it) would tie the hands of the country's commanders," Goheen said.
"On one hand, we applaud (Byrd) trying to do something, but we don't think it's good for the Reserves."
Michael Cline, executive director of the Enlisted Association of the National Guard, said the amendment runs contrary to the Abrams Doctrine that dictates the Guard and Reserve will be integral components of any large-scale military action.
"It's a slap in the face to the Total Force concept," Cline said.
Duncan was one of six House Republicans who voted against authorizing the use of force in Iraq last October, and he voiced support of Byrd's measure.
He said if the Bush administration is unable to enlist the aid of a larger, multi-nation coalition force, then more guardsmen and reservists will be called to active duty.
"It could cause us some real problems in the future," Duncan said.
Rep. Zach Wamp, R-Chattanooga, also argued for more international involvement in Iraq but was less enthusiastic about limiting deployments.
"Congress needs to weigh in, but I don't know if we should micromanage the deployments," Wamp said.
Still, Wamp acknowledged that something must be done before the weight of the recent string of deployments exacts a heavy burden.
"We are over-deployed; we are spread too thin," he said.
"When I look into the eyes of parents, they are proud but concerned."
Wamp said the United Nations has to become more involved in the Iraq situation, and he criticized some of his fellow Republicans who hold the U.N. in disdain.
"This is a moment of truth for the United Nations," he said.
"I'm sorry for my conservative friends who don't ever want to use the U.N." 'America is feeling this' A few months before Sept. 11, 2001, President Bush spoke to a group of guardsmen at a post in West Virginia.
"The National Guard and Reserves are a vital part of America's national defense."
Bush said.
"As threats to America change, your role will continue to change.
The National Guard and reservists will be more involved in homeland security, confronting acts of terror and the disorder our enemies try to create."
America's security changed dramatically on Sept. 11, and the Guard and Reserve units have become more involved than Bush might have imagined when he spoke in West Virginia.
The Total Force concept has pulled thousands of Reserve and Guard troops from East Tennessee and sent them overseas.
Recruiting officials for all military branches say their efforts haven't been hampered by the stepped-up deployment tempo, but Reserve and Guard units across the country are working harder than ever to retain the troops they have.
"America is feeling this," said Amburn of the 489th.
"This is not like Vietnam where you have a bunch of draftees."
Families are learning to cope with prolonged or even multiple deployments, and employers are seeing a new economic ebb and flow as thousands of troops move about the country and around the world.
"For guardsmen and reservists, I understand their concern," Amburn said.
"It is severe.
We have some real hardship cases.
They do need to rethink the strategy now.
These multiple deployments can't continue."
Col. Max Haston, the Tennessee National Guard's deputy chief of staff for operations, said the new face of America's part-time troops is something that will challenge everyone from the fresh-out-of-boot-camp private to the president.
"That's something our nation and our leadership is trying to get a handle on," Haston said.
Bryan Mitchell may be reached at 865-342-6306.
The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Copyright 2003, KnoxNews.
All Rights Reserved.
