Myths, Legends and Stories about the Northern Lights 1.
Liz Akin: My mom is from a small village off the Bearing Sea, the village is called Shishmeraf.
In Shishmeraf, they have their own idea for the Northern Lights.
The elders would say, "When the Northern Lights are out don't whistle or else they will get brighter and dance harder, and when you still whistle they will snatch off your head and play with it!".
I don't know how they came up with this tale, but I actually believed it until I got older.
Even today the older kids will whistle, just to look cool, while the little kids would run into the house and yell at their older brother or sister to stop and come in.
(Tanana Middle School, Fairbanks) 2.
David Barron The Greenland Eskimos believed that the aurora was the province of children who had either died violently or who had died in child birth.
(Birchwood ABC.)
3.
David Barron The Eyak Indians thought the northern lights prophesied a violent death.
(Birchwood ABC.)
4.
David Barron, Early Norwegians thought the aurora borealis was the sun reflecting off the shields of the valkyries (Birchwood ABC.)
5.
Steph Bedwell Some Eskimos think the aurora is evil.
They believe to ward it off, you should carry a knife around while it is out or throw urine at it.
Several stories involving the aurora say that it is one of the best places to go when being born.
(Tanana Middle School) 6.
LeeAnn Berlin My mom told me not to make whistle or the northern light will chop off my head with its axe, and I believed her.
The elders say if the northern lights are red, it's a warning that something bad is going to happen.
When I was a little girl, I used to think the northern lights were just clouds.
Once I heard my friend's say that the Northern lights were coming closer and closer.
But they weren't, They just looked like they were.
They got so scared that they wanted me to bring them home.
I mostly see green aurora when the aurora borealis is out in the sky.
I mostly see northern lights during the winter.
In Yup'ik, the northern lights are called qiuryaq.
They call them qiuryaqs because they are colorful.
(Akiuk Memorial School) 7.
Josh Bock, Some people think that the Northern Lights are just something to look at, kind of like decorations, but to me, they are something like relics you to give you comfort and support.
To me, I think that they look like people playing basketball.
Bouncing the ball up and down the court and shooting it in the hoop with no Noise at all.
They don't play aggressively, but freely with no fouls at all.
Just playing for fun and entertainment for viewers.
When I watch them while I play basketball, they give me encouragement to make shots that I thought I could never make.
(Ben Eielson Junior High) 8.
Walker Boyle, Folklore has many explanations for the beautiful aurora.
The Inuit people think that Auroras are passages to the spirit world.
They describe the sky as a huge hard dome arcing over the flat earth.
On the outside there is light.
Inside the dome there are many small holes, and through the holes shines the light from the outside when it is dark.
Also through the holes, the spirits of the dead can pass into the heavens.
The path to heaven goes over a thin bridge, which crosses a huge abyss.
The heavenly spirits light torches to guide the new souls across the bridge.
The Inuits believe the lights from these torches are the northern lights.
(Kenai Peninsula Borough School District ) 9.
Walker Boyle The Inuit people think that Auroras are passages to the spirit world.
They describe the sky as a huge hard dome arcing over the flat earth.
On the outside there is light.
Inside the dome there are many small holes, and through the holes shines the light from the outside when it is dark.
Also through the holes, the spirits of the dead can pass into the heavens.
The path to heaven goes over a thin bridge which crosses a huge abyss.
The heavenly spirits light torches to guide the new souls across the bridge.
The Inuits believe the lights from these torches are the northern lights.
(Kenai Peninsula Borough School District) 10.
Susan Brown As a child in a small village, I used to sit outside and watch the Kiiguyat until I was called inside.
I still remember one of the Kiiguyat, it was gigantic and overflowing with magnificent colors.
To me it seemed to dance gracefully in the fields of dark blue sky.
Grandma had always told me, "That's where the angles dance".
(Tanana Middle School) 11.
Nicholas Dale The Tlingis and Eyak Indians of southeastern Alaska believe the Northern Lights were a sign of an upcoming battle.
They also believed that when the cosmic light danced that someone would be killed.
(Chugiak Elementary School) 12.
Samantha Ferguson Some people believe that they can hear the Aurora when it is in the peak of its performance, but this is only a myth.
One of the many other myths I have heard was the Alaska natives believe if you whistle at the Aurora, it will come down and pick you up.
(Chugiak High School) 13.
Abby Grandy Some indian hunters make noises while they are out hunting at night, after they make noises the Aurora will light up so they can see where the animals are.
Also, some of the Indians say that the Aurora lights are the souls of dead indians dancing in the sky.
(Tanana Middle School) 14.
Sonta Hamilton A story told by the northern lights is one that a person's ancestors have heard and witnessed on many blustery nights.
The story is whispered in and out of different souls, each with a different meaning.
All of the colors and resonant light ignites a spark in the many soul seekers of this event.
These are the moments in the wilderness of Alaska that a person can feel fortified with everlasting hope towards a secure future.
Events such as these don't last one single night; a person remembers the northern lights throughout their life.
(Edgecumbe High School) 15.
Tarrah Lynn-Beals To me the Northern Lights are the gates to Heaven.
The spirits run to get to the doors to meet their new world.
When they get there they can see all kinds of people.
All different shapes and sizes and colors too, and that's what makes the colors.
When they leave, they dance, waving goodbye to earth and hello to Heaven.
When the eagles close the gates I know that God has sent a sign, a sign that means the spirits are safe and sound in Heaven and in a better place.(Seward Elementary School) 16.
Arlene M. Pavilla Elders used to tell me that when we are loud outside the northern lights will come get us and we will be gone forever.
Once I heard that a little girl got taken away and she was gone forever, like when we whistle, scream, or yell that they will take us away.
After I used to hear them say that when I was young I used to be scared to play out at night.
Now that I'm older I'm not scared of the northern lights.
We have an Eskimo name for the aurora borealis here in Alaska.
The Eskimo name for it is: Qiugyat.
In an other language from other villages I don't know what they call the aurora.
(Akiuk Memorial School) 17.
Marlayna Peidlow There was a 10 year old girl who was wandering around in the woods by herself while her father was hunting for some food because they were poor.
It was getting dark, so she decided she had better get home soon.
While she was heading back to her house she noticed something in the sky.
They were beautiful bands of green lights.
She was once told by one of her friends (who had disappeared) that if you sing this specific native song, that there would be people coming down from the green lights and give some treasures.
She started to sing the song and the green lights started coming down to the ground.
When they came down they didn't bring the girl any beautiful treasures.
When they came down they had axes in their hands.
The little girl was excited, but when the little people were heading towards her they took their axes and chopped her head off.
The little people are called iminaraq's (little demons).
After the incident the iminaraqs disappeared and left her body lying there for her father to find.
(Tanana Middle School) 18.
Cal Whitehill The Inuit near the Hudson Bay said the flat earth was covered with a hard material dotted with many small holes, through which they could see lights from the outside when it was dark.
It was believed that the dead could pass into the heavens through these holes.
A narrow bridge leads to the heavens and the spirits light torches to guide them.
(Tanana Middle School) 19.
Cal Whitehill In Middle-Age Europe the aurora were thought to be the reflections of the past warriors.
A king's reward was to let the warriors battle in the skies forever.
The warrior's breath was the aurora as they resumed battle each time.
(Tanana Middle School)
[footer.gif]
