Challenges in Incorporating Domestic Violence Legal Issues Throughout Law School Curricula Law school professors confront various challenges when they incorporate domestic violence legal issues into law school curricula.
Some of the challenges arise from the sensitivity of the subject matter, while other challenges simply stem from attempting to integrate non-traditional material into traditional legal education.
Professors and law school administrators may choose to adopt different approaches depending on the institution and the types of courses in which domestic violence legal issues are being raised.
Integrating Domestic Violence Legal Issues into Core Curriculum Courses
To prepare students to competently practice law, domestic violence legal issues must be incorporated into core curriculum courses.
Law school professors who are unfamiliar with these issues may be reluctant to raise them in the classroom, or they may mischaracterize domestic violence.
Domestic violence law professors report that they are frequently called upon to teach the portions of core curriculum courses addressing domestic violence.
While guest speakers provide a temporary solution, all law school professors should participate in continuing legal education programs about domestic violence law or study the emerging field on their own.
Then they will be able to teach comprehensive core curriculum courses without relying on a few individuals.
The pervasiveness of family violence in the United States suggests that some law school professors or students may have difficulty with the subject matter because of the history of violence within their own families.
In addition, because some law students may be abused by their current partners or spouses, it is critical for professors to address domestic violence issues in a sensitive manner.
Updated and comprehensive referral lists for services should be provided to students whenever domestic violence legal issues are raised.
Some students may react in a hostile way or express stereotypes about victims or perpetrators when domestic violence legal issues are raised.
This stems from the fact that law students may have preconceived notions about domestic violence law which have been shaped by their own family experiences or relationships with intimate partners and by cultural images of men and women.
Some law students may also be hostile to domestic violence issues because they perceive these issues as feminist issues that should not be included in a law school curriculum.
The impact of domestic violence on legal practice, however, ensures that it is not only suitable -- but critical -- to integrate the issue into legal education.
Despite these challenges, law school professors have a responsibility to integrate domestic violence legal issues into core curriculum courses in a professional manner.
Professors may need to begin teaching domestic violence legal issues by helping students to overcome their stereotypes of victims or perpetrators.
Local experts, including domestic violence survivors, advocates, counselors, or members of the criminal justice system, can assist professors in presenting the dynamics of domestic violence.
Students should be taught that domestic violence is a criminal matter, rather than a private family concern, and that it is relevant to the area of law covered by the particular course.
Expanding legal education to include domestic violence issues will assist victims to obtain qualified representation in a range of legal fields.
[img32.gif]
Seminar Courses May Raise Additional Issues
Law school professors teaching upper-level seminars on domestic violence law confront additional issues.
Professors report that students with extensive domestic violence legal backgrounds tend to attend the seminars, and it is often a challenge to attract a broader range of students.^(112) Professors can overcome this "preaching to the choir" problem in a variety of ways, including collaboration with community organizations or student groups.
If professors help raise awareness of domestic violence issues within specific law school communities, these events may increase the diversity of students applying for domestic violence seminars, while expanding the breadth of issues covered by the seminars.
Domestic violence law courses may be more likely to appeal to students from various cultural, ethnic, religious, or racial communities, for example, if the seminars examine the impact of domestic violence on victims from varied communities.
Professors may also encounter resistance from their colleagues, who belittle the importance of domestic violence law or object when resources are allocated to domestic violence programs.
Students and professors should recognize that members of their own institution may need to be educated on domestic violence issues.
Experts across the country conduct educational programs with professionals working with victims in the health, law enforcement, judicial and legal professions, among others.
These workshops may need to be conducted with law school faculty members, to update them on current perspectives on domestic violence and its effects on their legal practice.
Additionally, domestic violence professors may choose to assist other professors in integrating domestic violence issues into upper-level seminars.
Challenges Raised By Teaching Domestic Violence Clinical Programs
[img33.gif]
Clinical programs assist law students to integrate theory with the reality of legal practice, raising some unique issues.
Clinical professors report that representing victims or perpetrators may take an emotional toll on students, as well as on faculty members and supervisors.^(113) Initially, students may have difficulty asking clients questions about their intimate relationships, or listening to the graphic details of physical or sexual violence endured by clients.
Professors may need to build time into the class for students to process their emotional reactions to the abuse, and allow students to provide each other with support.
Clinical programs integrating an interdisciplinary approach, such as the George Washington University Law School's clinic which includes a clinical psychologist as a co-teacher, may be better equipped to handle these issues as they arise.
Clinical professors report that it is critical to reshape law student misconceptions about victims or perpetrators of domestic violence.
Students who view battered women as passive or helpless may be unwilling to believe that clients who are angry with their batterers are victims of abuse.
Students in criminal defense clinics may believe that defendants who are very polite could not possibly have abused their partners or children.
Clinical professors can remind students that victims and perpetrators have a variety of different personalities and backgrounds, and that the determinative legal issue is whether an act or pattern of abuse occurred.
Clinical professors may also struggle to teach law students not to impose their own values on clients.
Law students, and lawyers in general, may tell clients what to do, rather than adopting a client-centered approach to lawyering.
In domestic violence cases in particular, because of the perpetrator's potential lethality and the emotional volatility of family violence issues, students may want to tell clients how to "fix" the situation.
Clinical professors must train law students to present clients with their full array of legal and non-legal options, and allow victims to make their own choices.
Law students may fail to understand their clients' economic, religious, or safety concerns, which may force some clients to return to abusers.
When clients decide to return to their abusers or forgo legal relief, students must explore these decisions with clients, without judging clients or assuming that they are making the wrong decisions.
Students may need to address their own disappointment or fear when this occurs, in the classroom or in meetings with supervisors, but outside of the attorney-client relationship.
Clinical professors also face conflicts when some students fail to provide adequate representation to clients.
Supervising attorneys may feel that students have not investigated cases thoroughly or prepared adequately for court hearings.
Alternately, professors may believe that students have fulfilled the technical requirements of representing clients, but have not met their clients' needs for emotional support during legal proceedings -- or have persuaded clients to pursue potentially dangerous choices.
Clinical professors can address these shortcomings in class discussions or individual meetings.
In the unusual event that a student fails to improve his or her performance even after such discussions, a professor may need to become more directly involved in a case if a victim's safety or legal rights are at stake.
Law School Professors or Administrators Face Additional Institutional Challenges
Professors or administrators intending to establish domestic violence seminars or clinical programs may encounter some institutional resistance initially.
Colleagues or administrators may marginalize clinical programs, alternative teaching methods, or "family law" issues, and may be reluctant to accept domestic violence law as crucial to legal education.
As individuals in varied professions across the country begin to respond effectively to domestic violence, however, law schools will be obliged to train future lawyers on this issue or fail to meet national standards.
Domestic violence professors can play a critical role in educating their own institutions of the need to address these issues.
[img34.gif]
Incorporating domestic violence issues into the law school curriculum should not require professors to seek external funding for these courses.
Such courses benefit law students and law schools because students with better lawyering and substantive skills become more competent attorneys.
In addition, domestic violence law courses have become a critical part of legal education because of the impact of domestic violence issues on most legal fields.
Law schools committed to preparing students to practice law have a responsibility to integrate domestic violence law into the general curriculum.
This process includes incorporating domestic violence legal issues into pre-existing core courses, as well as establishing upper-level domestic violence seminars and clinical programs.
Professors report that a number of domestic violence clinics were established initially with external funding, and were funded subsequently by the institution.
While law schools should support the integration of domestic violence legal issues into the law school curriculum, interested professors may be able to create domestic violence programs by seeking outside sources to partially fund clinics during their first year of existence.
Fundraising for clinics should be conducted in conjunction with local domestic violence programs to avoid competition over limited resources.
Clinical professors have been successful in obtaining funding for domestic violence clinics from a variety of sources.
Some programs providing direct services to victims were established in part with funding from the federal sources.
Clinics have successfully obtained funding under the Violence Against Women Act [VAWA].
The Victims of Crime Act [VOCA] may also support clinical programs providing emergency legal assistance to victims.
Other clinics have been created with grants from the United States Department of Education.
Interdisciplinary programs may be able to request resources from alternative federal agencies; at least one clinic received partial funding from the federal Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
Prospective applicants should be aware that federal funds may have particular conditions for disbursement which are outlined in the respective federal regulations.
Domestic violence clinics have also attained funding from parallel state agencies, including state Departments of Health, Public Safety, or Education.
Some programs have been created with resources from state legislatures, specifically allocated to fund crime prevention or domestic violence intervention programs.
Clinical professors should be certain to coordinate fundraising efforts with local domestic violence shelters and programs.
Traditionally, several domestic violence clinical programs received funding from the Legal Services Corporation.
With the massive cuts in funding for the Legal Services Corporation, such programs have been forced to terminate their services or find other means of support.^(114) Clinical programs may choose to seek support from private foundations.
Generally, clinical programs with diverse funding are most likely to survive.
Law school programs have sought innovative ways to fund legal services for victims of domestic violence.
Programs have been established with assistance from law school alumni or regional branches of the National Lawyer's Guild.
Private donors may be interested in supporting a domestic violence clinic, sometimes for personal reasons.
Moreover, at least one clinical program is considering the possibility of litigating income-generating domestic violence tort cases in order to secure funding for its clinical program.^(115) Professors or administrators may also seek funds from local law firms, or organize community fundraising events, to obtain the necessary resources.
Ultimately, however, it is the responsibility of law schools to incorporate domestic violence legal issues into the curricula, including funding these programs.
The substantive and lawyering skills taught in domestic violence programs enhance legal education by preparing students to practice law competently.
In addition, funding from within law schools ensures that domestic violence clinical programs will not have to compete for resources with local emergency services for victims, such as domestic violence shelters.
ENDNOTES:
Institutional support for law school programs addressing domestic violence does more than give continued life to particular courses and clinics; it also sends a message to the community that law schools have a commitment to creating, through their educational programs, resources which can help eradicate the suffering created by abuse in the home.
By incorporating much needed information about domestic violence law and practice into their curricula, law schools can truly be said to be educating to end domestic violence.
Back to Table of Contents
This document was last updated on April 19, 2001
