DIRECTOR'S STATUS REPORT National Institute on Aging February 2003 * Budget and Appropriations * Legislative Update * Staff Changes * Institute-Sponsored Meetings, Workshops, and Conferences * General Information/Staff Awards * Relevant Notices and Initiatives Published in the NIH Guide * Budget Table __________________________________________________________________ BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS Due to a Continuing Resolution, the NIA is currently operating under last year's funding levels for FY 2003.
At this time, we have not received the FY 2003 appropriation.
Therefore, the information below reflects the FY 2003 submission for the President's budget.
The FY 2003 President's Budget for NIH (including AIDS) increases from $23,729,584,000 in FY 2002 to $27,432,075,000 in FY 2003, an increase of 15.6 percent.
A substantial part of this increase will support new initiatives in bioterrorism research at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID).
AIDS funding increases by 10.1 percent in FY 2003, from $2,514,954,000 in FY 2002 to $2,769,997,000.
The FY 2003 President's Budget for NIA (including AIDS) is $971,709,000 an increase of 8.4 percent over the FY 2002 amount of $896,064,000.
Funding for AIDS related research increases from $4,985,000 in FY 2002 to $5,379,000 in FY 2003, an increase of 7.9 percent.
Overall Budget Policy One of NIH's highest priorities is the funding of medical research through research project grants (RPGs).
Support for RPGs allows NIH to sustain the s cientific momentum of investigator-initiated research while providing new research opportunities.
The FY 2003 NIA request provides an average cost increase for competing RPGs at the Biomedical Research and Development Price Index (BRDPI), estimated at 4.0 percent.
Noncompeting RPGs will receive increases of 3 percent on average for recurring direct costs.
NIA FY 2003 President's Budget - Mechanism Discussion The FY 2003 request includes funding for 1,456 research project grants, compared to 1,402 in FY 2002 and 1,276 in FY 2001.
Of these 1,456 awards, 436 will be competing research project grants and 1,020 will be noncompeting awards.
In addition, the request includes funding for 78 SBIR/STTR grants.
Funding for the Centers mechanism increases by 6.0 percent over the FY 2002 level.
Promises for advancement in medical research are dependent on a continuing supply of new investigators with new ideas.
In the FY 2003 request, NIA will support 584 pre- and postdoctoral trainees in full-time training positions.
An increase of 4.3 percent over FY 2002 levels is provided for stipends and training-related expenses (e.g., health insurance, research supplies and equipment, and travel to scientific meetings).
The FY 2003 request includes an increase of 7.8 percent over the FY 2002 level for Other Research.
Most of this increase will support 192 positions in the Research Career Awards Program, including the AD Clinical Research and Training Awards initiative.
Funding for Contracts in FY 2003 increases by 6.9 percent over the FY 2002 level to support NIAs share of the NIH Extramural Clinical Loan Repayment Program.
The FY 2003 request includes an 8.9 percent increase over the FY 2002 level for Intramural Research and an 8.8 percent increase over the FY 2002 level for Research, Management, and Support (RMS).
FY 2004 President's Budget
The President is required to submit a Fiscal Year 2004 Budget to Congress during the first week in February 2003.
(Contact: Mr. Kevin Laser, FMB, 301-496-9147)
LEGISLATIVE UPDATE
Significant Legislative Action * H.J. RES. 1 On January 8, 2003 the House passed by a vote of 404 to 1 a resolution making further continuing appropriations for FY 2003 and for other purposes, sponsored by Representative Bill Young (R-FL), Chairman, House Appropriations Committee.
The Senate passed the measure on January 9.
This measure is the sixth continuing resolution (CR), the first in calendar year 2003, and continued funding for the Federal Government at existing levels through January 31, 2003.
The previous CR expired at midnight on January 11, 2003.
FY 2002 ended at midnight on September 30, and until FY 2003 appropriations for Federal agencies are enacted, continuing resolutions will be needed to keep the Government operating.
* H.J. RES. 2 On January 8, 2003 the House passed by voice vote a resolution making further continuing appropriations for the FY 2003 and for other purposes, sponsored by Representative Bill Young (R-FL), Chairman, House Appropriations Committee.
This measure is the seventh CR and will be the vehicle for an omnibus bill, wrapping up the 11 remaining FY 2003 appropriations bills, including Labor, HHS, and Education, which provides funding for NIH.
STAFF CHANGES
Six New Members Named to the NACA
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Tommy G. Thompson announced the appointment of six new members to the National Advisory Council on Aging (NACA), the group that advises the National Institute on Aging (NIA) on the conduct and support of biomedical, social, and behavioral research and training on the diseases and conditions associated with aging.
The new members are: * Marie A. Bernard, M.D., is the Chairperson in Geriatric Medicine, and Professor and Chairperson of the Donald W. Reynolds Department of Geriatric Medicine at the University of Oklahoma College of Medicine.
She also serves as the Associate Chief of Staff for Geriatrics and Extended Care at the Oklahoma City Veterans Affairs Medical Center and is Director of the Oklahoma Geriatric Education Center.
A clinician, administrator, and researcher, Dr. Bernard's research is focused on protein-calorie malnutrition among the elderly population, particularly in African American and Native American elders, and the implications of vitamin B12 deficiency in the elderly.
She received her medical degree from the University of Pennsylvania and did residency training at Temple University Hospital in Philadelphia.
She was a faculty member in the General Internal Medicine Section at Temple Medical School before appointment to her current position.
Dr. Bernard's honors include: Charter Fellow, Association for Gerontology in Higher Education; Fellow, Association of American Medical Colleges Health Services Research Institute; and Fellow, American College of Physicians.
* F. Michael Gloth, III, M.D., is President of Victory Springs Senior Health Associates and an Associate Professor of Medicine in the Division of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
He also has academic appointments as a Clinical Associate Professor of Medicine at West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine and as a Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine at the University of Maryland School of Medicine.
Dr. Gloth graduated from Wayne State University School of Medicine.
He completed his residency in Internal Medicine at The Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore and a three-year Fellowship in Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology at The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine.
He was recently appointed by the Governor of Maryland to serve on the State Advisory Council on Pain Management.
Dr. Gloth represented the American College of Physicians in the development of the National Osteoporosis Foundation's Guidelines for Osteoporosis, served as the American Geriatrics Society member on the national committee that developed the Non-Malignant Pain in Long-Term Care Clinical Guidelines, and most recently helped to develop the American Geriatrics Society's Guidelines for the Management of Persistent Pain in the Older Adult and the Revised Beer's Criteria on drugs to be avoided in the older adult.
* Eugene M. Johnson, Jr., Ph.D., is the Norman J. Stupp professor of neurology, and professor of molecular biology and pharmacology at Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis.
Dr. Johnson received his undergraduate training in pharmacy and a Ph.D. in medicinal chemistry from the University of Maryland.
Dr. Johnson's major research interests are in the biology of nerve growth (neurotrophic) factors and the mechanisms and prevention of programmed nerve cell death.
Neurotrophic factors are critical in the survival and functional status of neurons.
He is the co-discoverer of the three factors that are currently under investigation as potential therapies in a number of conditions such as Parkinson's disease and certain neuropathies.
He has also studied viral latency and the use of viral vectors to express ectopic genes in neurons.
Dr. Johnson received both a Jacob Javits Neurosciences Investigator Award and a MERIT Award from the National Institutes of Health, as well as the Decade of the Brain medal from the American Association of Neurological Surgeons.
He serves as the co-director of the Washington University Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and on the Medical and Scientific Advisory Council of the Alzheimer's Association.
* Ronald D. Lee, Ph.D., is the Professor and Director of the Center on Economics and the Demography of Aging at the University of California, Berkeley.
Dr. Lee has an M.A. in Demography from the University of California at Berkeley, and Ph.D. in Economics from Harvard.
He spent a postdoctoral year at the French National Demographic Institute.
He taught in the Economics Department at Michigan for eight years and moved to the University of California, Berkeley, where he is Professor of Demography and Economics and Director of the Center on the Economics and Demography of Aging.
His research interests are primarily in the economic demography of intergenerational transfers and in aging, but he also works on methods for forecasting mortality and population, particularly probabilistic forecasts.
He is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, a Corresponding Member of the British Academy, and has received the Mindel Shepps Award and the Taeuber Award from the Population Association of America, of which he was president in 1987.
* Peter W. Nauert, J.D., is founder and president of Insurance Capital Management, Inc., a Chicago-based company he recently formed to provide capital funding and marketing to the insurance industry.
Until June 2003, he also will serve as chairman of the Ceres Group, Inc., a Cleveland-based insurance company with approximately 480,000 insureds.
The company sells major medical health insurance to individuals, associations, and small businesses as well as health, life, and annuity products to people age 55 and older.
Prior to joining the Ceres Group, Nauert founded and served as CEO of Pioneer Financial Services, Inc.
(PFS).
At PFS, he led the company's 12 acquisitions and public financing programs and directed product development and marketing of life and health insurance.
Nauert also served as president of Pioneer Life Insurance Co., a company founded by his father.
Nauert received a bachelor's degree in business administration from Marquette University and a law degree from George Washington University.
* Leon J. Thal, M.D., directs the University of California, San Diego, Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and serves as principal investigator of the Alzheimer's Disease Cooperative Study (ADCS), a consortium of academic medical centers whose activities include the design and conduct of clinical drug trials for patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Results from the ADCS vitamin E and selegeline study have shown that the use of specific antioxidants can delay AD patients' progression to institutionalization.
Thal's study of Premarin showed that this form of therapy does not slow cognitive decline in post-menopausal hysterectomized women with established AD.
His laboratory focuses on the use of gene therapy to ameliorate neurotransmitter deficiencies.
Dr. Thal received his medical degree from Downstate Medical Center, State University of New York in Brooklyn, did his internship at Kings County-State University Hospital in Brooklyn, NY, and was a resident in neurology and a fellow in the Interdepartmental Research Training Program at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
He is currently Professor and Chairman of the Department of Neurosciences at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD).
Dr. Thal received the Lifetime Science Award from the Institute for Advanced Studies in Immunology and Aging, Washington, DC, the UCSD Department of Neurosciences, Clinical Teaching Award, and holds the Florence Riford Chair in Alzheimer's Disease.
Two-thirds of the 18-member Council are from the health and scientific disciplines, particularly the biological and medical sciences, and one-third from the general public, including public policy, law, health policy, economics, and management.
Council members are appointed for overlapping terms of four years.
The NIA, a component of the National Institutes of Health within HHS, is the lead Federal agency supporting and conducting biomedical, social, and behavioral research and training related to aging and the special needs of older people.
Dr. Alessandra M. Bini joined the Scientific Review Office on October 20, 2002, as Health Scientist Administrator.
Dr. Bini joined NIH in 2001 and served one year in the Review Branch of NHLBI.
Previously, Dr. Bini was Associate Laboratory Member of the Laboratory of Blood Coagulation Biochemistry in the Lindsley F. Kimball Research Institute of the New York Blood Center.
The major focus of her research was on the physiology and pathobiology of hemostasis, thrombosis and atherosclerosis.
Prior to that she was Head of the Coagulation and Fibrinolysis Research Unit at Mario Negri Institute in S. Maria Imbaro, Italy.
Dr. Bini received her PhD in Pathobiology from Columbia University in 1987, obtained a Dr. Biol degree from the University of Milano (1980) and specialized in Pharmacology in 1982.
As part of her Dr. Biol.
Degree she received formal training in psychology (behavioral, cognitive).
Further training in counseling was received during a part-time position at the Italian Association for Demographic Education (AIED).
Dr. Bini has participated in the grant review process for agencies such as the American Institute for Biological Sciences (AIBS) and the Veterans Administration (VA) Merit Review Boards.
Dr. William L.R. Cruce joined the Scientific Review Office on January 27, 2003 as a Scientific Review Administrator.
Dr. Cruce came to the NIH from the Northeastern Ohio Universities College of Medicine (NEOUCOM) in Rootstown, Ohio, where he was a Professor of Neurobiology and Pharmacology.
His most recent research was on molecular mechanisms of neuropathic pain in aging rats under grant support from NIA.
Prior to joining NEOUCOM as a member of the founding faculty in 1977, Dr. Cruce was Assistant Professor of Anatomy at Howard University in Washington, D.C.
He received his B.S. in Biopsychology from the University of Chicago in 1964 and his Ph.D. in physiology from Rockefeller University in 1971.
He took postdoctoral training in neuroanatomy at the University of Nijmegen (The Netherlands) and the University of Wisconsin, Madison.
He has been a visiting scientist at the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute, Bethesda, MD; at the Scripps Institute of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego; at the Friday Harbor Laboratory of the University of Washington; and at the Neuronal Gene Expression Unit of the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research.
Dr. Cruce has served on study sections for both the National Science Foundation (NSF) and NIH.
Mr. Michael Valdez joined the NIA as the Information Systems Security Officer on January 26, 2003.
He brings over 20 years of information technology experience from within Government and the private sector.
Mr. Valdez came to NIA from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) where he was instrumental in developing policies and procedures as well as ensuring that security, system development, and contractual efforts met Government standards.
He managed the efforts of the Operational Administrative System (for) Import Support (OASIS) project that deals with import operations and is an FDA nationwide mission critical system.
Mr. Michael Bone joined the Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program as a Program Analyst in November of 2002.
Michael came from the Extramural Division of NIAID, and has degrees in Biology and Theology.
Ms. Lisa Vasquez joined the Behavioral and Social Research Program (BSR) in November 2002.
Ms. Vasquez is working as a Program Analyst, providing scientific and administrative assistance to the Individual Behavioral Processes Branch.
She began her Federal career two years ago as a Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Presidential Management Intern, where she completed rotational assignments with the Health Resources and Services Administration's HIV/AIDS Bureau - Office of Policy and Program Development, the Office of the Inspector General's Office of Evaluation and Inspections, and the NIA's BSR Program.
Ms. Vasquez completed her Masters degree at New York University's Graduate School of Public Service and concentrated in Health Care Policy and Management.
She received her A.B. degree, with a concentration in Community Health/Health and Society, from Brown University.
Prior to joining DHHS, Ms. Vasquez worked as a Program Consultant (Project Officer) monitoring grants for the New York City Department of Mental Health.
Dr. Daniel Berch, Health Scientist Administrator in the Individual Behavioral Processes Branch of BSR, departed from BSR in October 2002.
Dr. Berch is now Program Director of Mathematics and Science Cognition and Learning - Development and Disorders, in the Child Development and Behavior Branch in the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD).
INSTITUTE-SPONSORED MEETINGS, WORKSHOPS, CONFERENCES, AND PUBLIC INFORMATION ACTIVITIES
I. Held since September 2002 Council * Proteomics and Aging Workshop.
The Proteomics and Aging Workshop (advisory) was held on December 10-11, 2002 in Bethesda, Maryland to discuss how existing or emerging proteomics technology could be used to identify and understand changes in protein structure and function that may occur in aging.
This meeting was co-sponsored by the Biology of Aging Program and the Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program.
Presentations by 21 investigators highlighted current research on proteomics technology, and changes in protein expression, protein modification, protein-protein interactions, protein aggregation and degradation that occur with aging in various animal models and tissues.
Research areas in normal and pathological aging that would benefit from a proteomics approach, resources that could facilitate this research, and crosscutting NIH issues in proteomics technology and informatics were discussed at the meeting.
Recommendations from the meeting will be used in the formulation of an initiative in proteomics and aging by the NIA.
A report of the meeting will be prepared and presented to Council.
(Contacts: Dr. Brad Wise, NNA, Ph: 301-496-9350; Dr. Felipe Sierra, BAP, Ph: 301-496-6402) * The Biology of Aging Kidney Workshop was held on January 22-24, 2003, in Lansdowne, VA.
The purpose of this exploratory workshop was to review the current state of research regarding age-related changes in kidney function, and to discuss important and specific gaps in knowledge.
Research areas covered included: epidemiology, human longitudinal studies, kidney physiology, stem cells in the kidney, age changes in kidney biology and physiology.
Speakers addressed [biology of aging] issues relevant to the biology of aging kidney, including cell senescence, telomeres/telomerase, kidney function and pathology in animal models of increased longevity, age-changes in kidney pathology, oxidative damage, and protein glycation.
(Contact: Dr. Frank Bellino, BAP, Ph: 301-496-6402) * Research Needs in the Evaluation of Executive Functions from Cognitive Aging to Dementias.
The objective of this round-table, held on January 27-28, 2003, was to seek advice of selected experts on the comparability of executive functions across different populations, species, and cognitive levels, and the feasibility of using brain imaging to improve measurement.
Specifically, the focus of the workshop revolved around five broad questions: (1) What are the issues that hamper progress toward evaluation and understanding of cognitive changes in higher functions in older individuals? (2) What are the elements of executive functions that are particularly sensitive to and affected by the aging process? (3) What is the feasibility of developing comparable methods and instruments to evaluate specific executive functions along the cognitive continuum from "normal aging" to mild dementia in humans? (4) What is the feasibility of developing comparable methods and instruments to evaluate executive functions across species? (5) What are the values and limitations of using imaging techniques to evaluate specific executive functions in human and non-human models? The rationale for this workshop stemmed from the widely held view that the aging process disproportionately affects higher thought processes such as executive functions.
Yet, the underlying mechanisms of decline in executive functions in older individuals remain poorly understood.
The information gained by this small workshop will clarify the research needs specific to the NIA and will form the basis for future research dialogues.
(Contact: Dr. Elisabeth Koss, NNA, Ph: 301-496-9350)
II.
Planned to take place after February 2003 Council
Defining 
It will include paper presentations by a small group of experts (5-6) plus discussants.
The meeting will explore incorporating environmental factors from the behavioral and social sciences into genetically informative studies of aging.
Development of this area may be critical to understanding central issues surrounding gene expression including gene-environment interactions, gene-environment covariation, and how social contexts and behaviors affect gene expression.
Questions about which environments (e.g., social, physical, cultural) are critical to healthy behavioral or physical aging, how to define and measure these relevant environments, what types of study designs would be needed, what type of methods of development are necessary, and how to foster the required interdisciplinary research will also be discussed.
(Contacts: Dr. Jennifer Harris and Ms. Angie Chon-Lee, BSR, 301-496-3131)
The NIA (Biology of Aging Program [BAP]), along with the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI), the Progeria Research Foundation, and the Office of Rare Diseases (ORD), will sponsor an advisory workshop on The Mechanistic Basis of Hutchinson-Gilford Syndrome (HGS), March 3 - 5, 2003, in Bethesda, MD.
The purpose is to explore further the new finding that HGS is caused by a specific mutation in the gene for lamin A/C, a major component of the nuclear envelope.
The meeting will focus on opportunities for understanding the role of nuclear structure and function in maintaining tissue homeostasis during aging, and how aberrant nuclear structure and function cause HGS and the other six known syndromes related to defects in the lamin A/C gene.
(Contact: Dr. Huber Warner, BAP, 301-496-4996)
A meeting on Apoptosis and Aging Tissues (exploratory) is planned for March 24-25, 2003.
This is the second annual meeting for grantees of the Systems Branch, BAP, and follows on the first meeting that addressed the topic of GH/IGF I and Aging Tissues.
The Apoptosis and Aging Tissues workshop will gather investigators supported by the Branch, along with selected additional experts in this area of research.
It is designed to stimulate discussion across tissue lines and promote collaboration between researchers working on aging research.
Both experienced and junior investigators will be included, with approximately 25 investigators attending.
(Contact: Dr. Jill Carrington, BAP, 301-496-6402)
An advisory Congress on Sleep, Health and Aging: Bridging the Gap Between Science and the Bedside is planned for March 30 and 31, 2003, at the National Academy of Sciences in Washington, D.C.
This congress of invited speakers and attendees will review the knowledge base about sleep, its disorders and impact on health for those with chronic and age-related diseases, and will develop strategies to bridge the gap between science and the bedside.
Speakers will present current research and clinical applications on their topic with emphasis on the role of sleep in the aging patient's health and how sleep interacts with major medical diseases.
Each speaker and workshop leader also will present recommendations on the following: (1) What does the trainee and practitioner need to know about sleep in association with diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions of the elderly; (2) What are key sleep question(s) that every practitioner should include in the medical review of their older patients; and (3) Identifying strategies that facilitate incorporation of this information into training and practice.
(Contact: Dr. Andrew Monjan, NNA, Ph: 301-594-7576)
Longitudinal Data on Aging (LDA) Task Force.
The Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program will convene an exploratory task force in April 2003 comprised of epidemiologists, biostatisticians, and basic researchers from leading longitudinal studies, including studies in youth, middle age, and old age.
Data examined by the task force will be derived from participants of differing initial ages, racial/ethnic and sociodemographic backgrounds.
Among topics to be considered are: potential early markers for the onset/progression of disease; the identification of ongoing cohorts suitable for ancillary studies for identifying markers of disease onset/progression or exceptionally healthy aging; identification of available resources such as data sets or biospecimen repositories for secondary analyses; and identification of potential statistical modeling and analytical needs for exploring rates of changes(s) at various stages in the lifespan.
(Contacts: Dr. Chhanda Dutta, GCG, Ph: 301-496-6975; Dr. Sherry Sherman, GCG, Ph: 301-496-6942; Ms. Winifred Rossi, GCG, Ph: 301-496-3836)
The first annual meeting for grantees of the NIA RFA Biology of Adult Stem Cells in Aging is planned for May, 2003.
This exploratory meeting will also bring together other NIA grantees working in the area of stem cells and additional selected experts in the field.
The meeting will be used to stimulate discussion of stem cell biology and aging from both basic research and clinical perspectives.
Participants will present progress on their research.
Presentations and discussion will inform staff on the most recent status of research and directions in stem cells in aging, to be used to gauge areas for planned initiatives in stem cells in 2004.
(Contact: Dr. Jill Carrington, BAP, 301-496-6402)
An Update-- Vaccine and Immunotherapy for Alzheimer's Disease.
This exploratory workshop planned for spring of 2003 (April or May) is being organized to bring together experts in immunology, vaccine research, neuropathology, and neuroscience to address basic mechanisms that will contribute to a better understanding of the immunological processes involved that, once marshaled and controlled, would reduce or limit the deposition of amyloid or enhance its removal from brain, and do so without adverse effects.
The areas in immunology, which might have the greatest relevance for Alzheimer's disease, include macrophage and microglial biology, lymphocyte trafficking, antigen presentation, potential novel therapeutics, complement activation, and function of the endothelium as an immune signaling site.
Experts in these areas from non-Alzheimer's disease research will be invited to interact with experts on the biology of Alzheimer's disease with the idea that cross fertilization of disciplinary interests will result in new approaches to research on Alzheimer's disease.
This workshop is envisioned to bring together experts in areas including immunology, vaccinology, pathology, and neuroscience from non-Alzheimer's disease and Alzheimer's disease research areas, NIA and NINDS extramural and intramural scientists, and staff.
(Contact: Dr. Stephen Snyder, NNA, Ph: 301-496-9350)
Interdisciplinary Task Force on Comorbidity Research Issues.
The Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program plans to convene an advisory interdisciplinary panel of scientists to identify and address the prominent physiological, pharmacological, and treatment issues related to comorbidity in older individuals.
Beginning in 2003, two or three working group sessions will be held in the Washington D. C. area.
Topics will include: the treatment of chronic diseases and major health problems in health compromised older persons; the effects of comorbidity on the accuracy of diagnostic techniques; polypharmacy-related problems stemming from drug combinations in treating two or more concurrent conditions; and the possible "clustering" of specific comorbid conditions.
(Contact: Dr. Rosemary Yancik, GCG, Ph: 301-496-5278)
Developing Sample Sets for the Analysis of the Genetics of Late Onset of Alzheimer's Disease 2003.
In order to move the field of Alzheimer's disease genetics forward, the NIA has expanded its Alzheimer's Disease Genetics Initiative.
In coordination with the Alzheimer's Association, a workshop on the Genetics of Late Onset Alzheimer's Disease (LOAD) was held in the spring of 2002.
As a result of this meeting, mechanisms to more rapidly collect and share large numbers of samples for genetic analysis through the National Cell Repository for Alzheimer's Disease (NCRAD) have been implemented.
A major component of the Alzheimer's disease Genetics Initiative is the collection of three types of samples.
The first is a family based sample set and its collection is in process.
The second type of sample is a case-control sample set.
This national case-control set of cell lines will serve as a gold standard against which risk factor genes for LOAD can be evaluated.
The third is a population-based sample set in which environmental influences can be assessed.
A subcommittee of the advisory committee to NCRAD is addressing some of the issues relating to the latter two sample sets.
However, an advisory workshop may be necessary to bring together geneticists and epidemiologists to examine what sample sets are needed and what types of samples, numbers of samples, and data should be gathered to provide these sample sets.
The following issues would be reviewed: Appropriate case-control sample set, appropriate population-based sample set; standardization of collection criteria for a minimal dataset for both cases and controls, guidelines for uniformity of sample collection across sites; standard criteria for diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease cases and controls; consideration of the value of plasma collection; assessment of known biomarkers, and quantitative traits; autopsy confirmation; quality assurance, clinical/phenotypic/updates; mechanisms to optimally continue follow-up of affected individuals; sample size of minorities and unique populations; and environmental risk factors.
(Contact: Dr. Marilyn Miller, NNA, Ph: 301-496-9350)
Factors in Youth that Protect Against The Aging Process.
The Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program is planning an exploratory workshop in Bethesda, MD, in the summer of 2003 to address the hypothesis that changes in early life may initiate sequential changes leading to pathology in later life.
The workshop participants will include biologists, epidemiologists, geriatricians, pediatricians, and experts in medical ethics.
Some of the specific issues to be addressed include: the possible presence of protective factors in youth that diminish or disappear after maturity; and the existence and identification of "switches" stemming from transitional changes such as sexual maturity and growth cessation that could aid in predicting subsequent clinically significant changes later in the life span.
In addressing these issues, participants will discuss the feasibility and possible formats of study models that compare individuals from across the life span including older age and younger age groups spanning the period of maturation.
(Contacts: Dr. Chhanda Dutta, GCG, Ph: 301-496-6975; Ms. Winifred Rossi 301-496-3836)
IOM Study on Testosterone Treatment for Older Men.
The NIA in collaboration with the NCI is sponsoring an advisory study on the current state of knowledge of testosterone treatment for older men and to make recommendations about the need for further clinical trials of this treatment.
If such trials are recommended, the panel will comment on issues related to the best scientific and ethical approaches to their design.
The Panel will begin its work with an evidenced-based review of the scientific literature on the topic.
Four meetings will be held, with one open to the public, allowing for broad input of views on the subject.
The IOM Report should be completed by November 2003 and will be made available on the Internet.
(Contact: Dr. Stanley Slater, GCG, Ph: 301-496-6949)
The NIA Intramural Research Program and the Nathan W. and Margaret T. Shock Foundation are cosponsoring a one-day Nathan Shock Aging Symposium (exploratory) entitled Advances in Aging Research 2003.
The symposium is scheduled for September 17, 2003.
The agenda will feature 5-6 prominent speakers in addition to the winner of the Nathan Shock Lecturer award.
(Contact: Ms. Peggy Grothe, IRP, 410-558-8110)
GENERAL INFORMATION/STAFF AWARDS
The Intramural Research Program has added the Laboratory of Experimental Gerontology.
Dr. Donald K. Ingram is the Acting Chief of the Laboratory.
This new laboratory (1) conducts research in experimental models focused on interventions that retard aging processes, which include (a) investigations of the effects of calorie restriction on aging in rodents and nonhuman primates; (b) investigations of various aging interventions (pharmaceuticals, hormones, dietary supplements, genes) in mouse models to assess effects on lifespan, pathology, and functional capacity at older ages; (2) develops behavioral assays of aging in rodents and nonhuman primates with focus on motor and memory performance and conducts research to identify mechanisms of age-related decline in motor and memory performance; and (3) develops and assesses pharmacological, genetic, and nutritional interventions that improve function in aging brain.
Luigi Ferrucci, M.D., Ph.D. was approved for tenure and joined the Intramural Research Program, Clinical Research Branch as the Director of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study on Aging (BLSA), Chief, Longitudinal Studies Section.
Dr. Ferrucci received the M.D. degree in 1980 from the University of Florence, Italy and the Italian Board Certification Geriatrics after postgraduate training in 1984 from the same institution.
Dr. Ferrucci then received his Ph.D. degree in Biology and Pathophysiology of Aging from the University of Florence in 1988.
Dr. Ferrucci is a world leader on the study of interventions that prevent or slow progression of mobility disability.
This is an important future direction for the BLSA
Julian Thayer, Ph.D. was approved for tenure.
Dr. Thayer was recently converted from a tenure track position in the Laboratory of Personality and Cognition to a tenured position as Chief, Emotions and Quantitative Psychophysiology.
Dr. Thayer is a world-class researcher in emotions and psychophysiology.
New Publications from the NIA
Aging Under the Microscope: A Biological Quest - booklet focusing on the biology of aging.
Alzheimer's Disease: Unraveling the Mystery- booklet on Alzheimer's disease research including an animated CD showing the development of AD in the brain, as well as a pdf and other formatted versions of the full text.
Updated and/or Reprinted Publications Age Page: Aging and Your Eyes * Age Page: Alcohol Use and Abuse * Age Page: Dietary Supplements * Age Page: Exercise: Feeling Fit for Life * Age Page: Good Nutrition * Age Page: Health Quackery * Age Page: Menopause * Age Page: Older Drivers * Age Page: Osteoporosis * Age Page: Sexuality in Later Life * Age Page: Urinary Incontinence * Making Your Website Senior Friendly * AD Caregiver Guide * AD Fact Sheet * AD Medications Fact Sheet * Holiday Hints
Publications Newly Translated Into Spanish
The following titles have been translated into Spanish.
Age Page: Alcohol Use and Abuse * Age Page: Choosing a Doctor * Age Page: Depression * Age Page: Health Quackery * Age Page: Hearing Loss * Age Page: Menopause * Age Page: Sexuality in Later Life * Home Safety for People with Alzheimer's Disease
(For more information on these publications contact: Jane E. Shure, Director, OCPL, ph: 301-496-1752.)
Other New Materials and Promotions * Radio Public Service Announcements (PSAs) (English)- Produced six different 60-second PSAs to promote Unraveling the Mystery and a new package of materials, the AD Caregiver Kit.
* Radio Public Service Announcements (Spanish)- Produced two PSAs (one 30-second and one 60-second spot) in Spanish and English translation to promote the Spanish AD Caregiver Kit and the Spanish AD Fact Sheet.
New Exhibits * ADEAR Center Display-Booth-sized panel display for exhibiting at national meetings and conferences and NIH events.
* NIA Display-Booth-size display, with panels that have high visual impact, for exhibiting at national, State, and local meetings and conferences and NIH events.
Publication Awards * NIA's Spanish-language radio public service announcements (PSAs) Ejercicio: Ideal A Todo Edad (Exercise: Good at Any Age) were honored with the 2002 Aesculapius Award of Excellence.
This annual award, named for the Greek God of healing, was established by the nonprofit Health Improvement Institute to promote excellence in informing consumer lifestyle choices and health care decisions.
* AD Caregiver Guide, won a "2002 National Mature Media Award," in the category of Brochure/Booklet.
NEW NOTICES AND INITIATIVES RELEVANT TO THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING (NIA)
From the NIH GUIDE - From September 5, 2002 January 7, 2003 Published since the last National Advisory Council on Aging Meeting.
Also check our NIA website Funding Opportunities (Shown here are selected Notices relevant to NIA and selected Initiatives)
NOTICES
CONFERENCE FOR INSTITUTIONAL BIOSAFETY COMMITTEES
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-016.html RELEASE DATE: January 3, 2003 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-016 The NIH Office of Biotechnology Activities, the NIH Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare, the American Biological Safety Association, and the Applied Research Ethics National Association are partnering to sponsor a conference titled, "The Future Face of IBCs: Evolving Roles and Responsibilities, Upcoming Challenges and Opportunities."
This event will take place February 20-22, 2003 at the Town and Country Resort Hotel in San Diego, California.
Registration is now open.
The main conference will take place February 21-22 and is intended for Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) members, staff, and others who have an interest in the oversight of recombinant DNA research.
SPRING PRIM
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-015.html RELEASE DATE: December 17, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-015 The Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare is pleased to participate in the 2003 Annual IACUC Conference sponsored by Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research (PRIM
The conference will be held March 30 to April 1, 2003 at the Town 
An ARENA IACUC 101 training opportunity will be offered March 29 at the same location.
This one-day course is cosponsored by OLAW and the University of California, San Diego.
ANNOUNCING 2003 NIH REGIONAL SEMINARS IN PROGRAM FUNDING AND GRANTS ADMINISTRATION
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-014.html RELEASE DATE: December 13, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-014 Looking to learn about obtaining and managing NIH grant awards? Two regional seminars covering topics related to NIH extramural program funding and grants administration have been planned for 2003.
The regional seminars provide information about the entire funding process, from opportunity identification and application preparation through post award administration.
April 24-25, 2003 hosted by Stanford University in Palo Alto, California.
The seminar program, on-line registration, cost and logistical information are available at: http://www.stanford.edu/dept/ORA/training/nihconf03/index.html June 11-12, 2003 hosted by University of Maryland in Baltimore, Maryland.
A website with program, registration, cost and logistical information is in development at http://www.ord.umaryland.edu/nih/.
If unable to access the website, please send a message to nih-conference@ordmail.umaryland.edu to be placed on a mailing list for further information.
NIH EXTRAMURAL LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING CLINICAL RESEARCHERS
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-012.html RELEASE DATE: December 4, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-012 APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: 5 PM EST, January 31, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS NOTICE The National Institutes of Health (NIH) announces the extension of the deadline for the 2003 Extramural Loan Repayment Program for Clinical Researchers (LRP-CR).
The original notice was NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-004.
The LRP-CR provides for the repayment of educational loan debt of qualified health professionals who agree to conduct clinical research for two years.
The program provides for the repayment of up to $35,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans.
The program covers the Federal taxes on the loan repayments, which are considered taxable income to program participants.
This year's program is not limited to NIH grantees as was the fiscal year 2002 requirement.
The new deadline is now January 31, 2003.
A full description of the Extramural Loan Repayment Program for Clinical Researchers (LRP-CR) is available at http://www.lrp.nih.gov.
LABORATORY ANIMAL MANAGEMENT AND TECHNOLOGY CONFERENCE, FEBRUARY 2003
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-010.html RELEASE DATE: November 26, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-010 The Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare is joining the American Association for Laboratory Animal Science (AALAS), Florida State University, and Florida A
The conference will be held February 5-8, 2003, in Orlando, Florida.
PUBLICATION OF "PROACTIVE COMPLIANCE SITE VISITS 2000 2002: A COMPENDIUM OF FINDINGS AND OBSERVATIONS"
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-011.html RELEASE DATE: November 26, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-011 The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is pleased to announce the publication of "Proactive Compliance Site Visits 2000 - 2002: A Compendium of Findings and Observations" (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/compliance/compendium_2002.htm).
This newly updated document is available on the Grants Compliance and Oversight website (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/compliance/compliance.htm), which is linked on the Office of Extramural Research (OER) homepage (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/oer.htm) under Grant Topics.
ADDENDUM TO RFA-TW-03-006, GLOBAL HEALTH RESEARCH INITIATIVE PROGRAM FOR NEW FOREIGN INVESTIGATORS (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-TW-03-003.html RELEASE DATE: November 20, 2002 (see RFA-TW-03-006) NOTICE: NOT-TW-03-003 APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: February 18, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS NOTICE The purpose of this addendum is to include language regarding the Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS), Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health.
The following information regards the Authority and Regulations of the ODS.
The Office of Dietary Supplements (ODS) was mandated by Congress in 1994 and established within the Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health (NIH).
The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) [Public Law 103-417, Section 3.a] amended the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act "to establish standards with respect to dietary supplements."
This law authorized the establishment of the ODS.
NIH EXTRAMURAL LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM REGARDING CLINICAL RESEARCHERS
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-004.html RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-004 APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: 5 PM EST, November 30, 2002 (new deadline 5 PM EST, January 31, 2003 See Notice NOT-OD-03-012) PURPOSE OF THIS NOTICE The National Institutes of Health (NIH) announces the 2003 Extramural Loan Repayment Program for Clinical Researchers (LRP-CR).
The LRP-CR provides for the repayment of educational loan debt of qualified health professionals who agree to conduct clinical research for two years.
The program provides for the repayment of up to $35,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans.
The program covers the Federal taxes on the loan repayments which are considered taxable income to program participants.
REMINDERRUTH L. KIRSCHSTEIN NATIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE AWARD (NRSA) STIPENDS AND UNALLOWABLE CHARGES
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-03-003.html RELEASE DATE: October 9, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-03-003 NRSA recipients receive a stipenda subsistence allowance to help defray living expenses during the research training experience.
It is not provided as a condition of employment with either the Federal Government or the institution.
Since NRSA awards are not provided as a condition of employment, it is inappropriate and unallowable for institutions to seek funds for or to charge individual fellowships and institutional training grant awards for costs that would normally be associated with employee benefits (for example FICA, workman's compensation and unemployment insurance).
NIH occasionally receives information that FICA and/or other unallowable costs have been inappropriately charged to NRSA stipends.
This notice should serve as a reminder that such charges are unallowable at all times.
NOTICE OF LIMITED COMPETITION INTEGRATING CANCER AND AGING RESEARCH IN NCI-DESIGNATED CANCER CENTERS
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-CA-02-027.html RELEASE DATE: September 20, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-CA-02-027 The National Institute on Aging and the National Cancer Institute announces a limited competition for Planning Grants (P20s) for developing aging/cancer "Programs" (or equivalently effective models) that will become incorporated as stable components of Cancer Center Support Grants (CCSGs).
CLINICAL RESEARCH CURRICULUM (K30) AWARD ANNOUNCEMENT
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-02-070.html RELEASE DATE: September 13, 2002 NOTICE: NOT-OD-02-070 The National Institutes of Health is extending for one year the Clinical Research Curriculum (K30) Awards that were originally made in 1999.
These awards, which were due to terminate in summer, 2004, will be extended at the same level of funding as currently exists.
As a result of this extension, the K30 awards made in 1999 will end in the summer, 2005, approximately the same time that the K30 awards made in 2000 are scheduled to end.
Next year, NIH plans to solicit competitive applications for the K30 award, which will be scheduled to begin in the summer, 2005.
All domestic, non-Federal institutions with clinical research programs will be eligible to apply.
That is, those who currently have a K30 award (those institutions that originally received an award in 1999 and those that originally received an award in 2000), and those that do not have an award may apply.
INITIATIVES RELEVANT TO THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING (NIA)
From the NIH GUIDE From September 5 January 7, 2003 Published since the last National Advisory Council on Aging Meeting.
Also check our NIA websiteFunding Opportunities available through the NIA Home Page (http://www.nih.gov/nia/)
Listed in order of date released in the NIH Guide
1
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH CENTERS (P50)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-03-006.html
RELEASE DATE: January 6, 2003 RFA: AG-03-006 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: May 28, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative invites applications from qualified institutions for support of Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRCs).
These are designed to support and conduct research on Alzheimer's disease (AD), and to serve as shared research resources that will facilitate research in AD and related disorders and distinguish them from the process of normal brain aging and mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Creighton H. Phelps, Ph.D.
Program Director, Alzheimer's Disease Centers Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 350 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: 301 496-1494 Email: phelpsc@nia.nih.gov
2
COLLABORATIVE STUDIES ON ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND OTHER NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH AGING (R01 
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-03-005.html
RELEASE DATE: December 19, 2002 RFA: AG-03-005 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: March 12, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA The purpose of this RFA is to facilitate collaborative crossdisciplinary and multi-institutional approaches that will contribute new and vital information about the clinical and pathological course of normal aging and the neurodegenerative diseases associated with aging.
This RFA requires the utilization of data and/or samples from at least three currently funded NIA Alzheimer's Disease Centers with the possibility of using additional relevant data outside of the Centers.
The project should use the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) http://www.alz.washington.edu/ for expert advice on planning, study design, statistical analysis and data management of the research projects.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues, Alzheimer's Centers and relationships with NACC to: Creighton H. Phelps, Ph.D.
Program Director, Alzheimer's Disease Centers Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 350 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: 301 496-1494 Email: phelpsc@nia.nih.gov
3
NANOSCIENCE AND NANOTECHNOLOGY IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-045.html
RELEASE DATE: December 12, 2002 PA NUMBER: PAR-03-045 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: February 18 and August 18, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS PA This Program Announcement (PA), issued as an initiative of the trans-NIH Bioengineering Consortium (BECON), is aimed at enhancing nanoscience and nanotechnology research approaches that have the potential to make valuable contributions to biology and medicine.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Winifred K. Rossi, M.A. Special Assistant for Planning Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program, NIA 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3E327 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Tel: (301) 496-3836 Fax: (301) 402-1784 Email: rossiw@nia.nih.gov
4
INNOVATIVE EXPLORATORY STUDIES AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT IN NEUROINFORMATICS RESEARCH (R21)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-036.html
RELEASE DATE: December 4, 2002 PA NUMBER: PAR-03-036 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2003 * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2004 * January 21, May 20, September 22, 2005
PURPOSE OF THIS PA This program announcement (PA) encourages applications for a one-time grant award to support: innovative research directions requiring preliminary testing or development of neuroscience databases or analytical tools (neuroinformatics) research; exploration of the use of approaches and concepts new to a particular substantive area of neuroscience informatics (neuroinformatics) research; or research and development of new technologies, techniques or methods in informatics that will have a high impact upon the advancement of neuroscience research.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: National Institute on Aging Molly V. Wagster, Ph.D. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: wagsterm@nia.nih.gov
5
THE HUMAN BRAIN PROJECT (NEUROINFORMATICS): PHASE I - FEASIBILITY; PHASE II - REFINEMENTS, MAINTENANCE AND INTEGRATION (R01, P01, and P20)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-035.html
RELEASE DATE: December 3, 2002 PA NUMBER: PA-03-035 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2003 * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2004 * January 21, May 20, September 22, 2005
PURPOSE OF THIS PA The purpose of this initiative is to encourage and support investigator-initiated research on neuroscience informatics (neuroinformatics).
This research will lead to the development of new web based databases, analytical tools, and knowledge management systems to foster sharing of data for all domains of neuroscience research.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: National Institute on Aging Molly V. Wagster, Ph.D. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: wagsterm@nia.nih.gov
6
INSTITUTIONAL MENTORED RESEARCH SCIENTIST DEVELOPMENT AWARD FOR NEUROINFORMATICS (K12)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-034.html
RELEASE DATE: December 3, 2002 PA NUMBER: PA-03-034 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2003 * January 21, May 21, September 22, 2004 * January 21, May 20, September 22, 2005
PURPOSE OF THIS PA The purpose of this program announcement (PA) is to encourage and support the development of applications from U.S. educational institutions for Institutional Mentored Research Scientist Development Awards (K12).
These awards are intended to provide funding for departments of institutions of higher education to foster the career development of individuals with interdisciplinary expertise bridging the fields of neuroscience and behavioral science research with that in informatics.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Molly V. Wagster, Ph.D. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: wagsterm@nia.nih.gov
7
BIOENGINEERING RESEARCH PARTNERSHIPS (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-032.html
RELEASE DATE: November 20, 2002 PA NUMBER: PAR-03-032 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: January 23, 2003 and August 22, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS PA This initiative invites applications for R01 awards to support Bioengineering Research Partnerships (BRPs) for basic and applied multi-disciplinary research that addresses important biological or medical research problems.
A BRP is a multi-disciplinary research team applying an integrative, systems approach to develop knowledge and/or methods to prevent, detect, diagnose, or treat disease or to understand health and behavior.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Winifred K. Rossi, M.A. Special Assistant for Planning Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue - Suite 3E327 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 TEL: 301-496-3836 FAX: 301-402-1784 Email: rossiw@nia.nih.gov
8
BRAIN DISORDERS IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD: RESEARCH ACROSS THE LIFESPAN (R21)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-TW-03-007.html
RELEASE DATE: November 7, 2002 RFA: TW-03-007 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: March 11, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This Request for Applications (RFA) solicits applications to plan and develop collaborative research and capacity building projects on brain disorders throughout life relevant to low- and middle-income nations.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Elisabeth Koss, Ph.D. Assistant Director Alzheimer's Disease Centers Program Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 3C307 7201 Wisconsin Ave MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: 301-496-9350 Fax: 301-496-1494 Email: kosse@nia.nih.gov
9
GLOBAL HEALTH RESEARCH INITIATIVE PROGRAM FOR NEW FOREIGN INVESTIGATORS (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-TW-03-006.html
RELEASE DATE: November 4, 2002 RFA: TW-03-006 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: All four NIA Program Areas APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: February 18, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative is intended to promote productive re-entry of NIH-trained foreign investigators into their home countries as part of a broader program to enhance the scientific research infrastructure in developing countries, to stimulate research on a wide variety of high priority health-related issues in these countries, and to advance NIH efforts to address health issues of global import.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Marta Campbell Welsh, Chief Office of International Activities National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 2C227 7201 Wisconsin Avenue MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Phone: (301) 496-0767 Fax : (301) 402-0260 Email: WelshM@nia.nih.gov
10
COMPARATIVE BIOLOGY: MECHANISMS OF AGING (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-03-003.html
RELEASE DATE: October 30, 2002 RFA: AG-03-003 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Biology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: January 23, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative invites applications that use comparative biology approaches to understand the biological mechanisms that lead to changes in human and other animal cells and tissues with age.
The major questions to be addressed under this RFA are: How does increasing age lead to biological changes, especially decrements in cell, tissue and organ function; and what sets the rate of aging such that different organisms have different life expectancies? Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Jill L. Carrington, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 2C231 7201 Wisconsin Avenue Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 Email: carringtonj@nia.nih.gov
11
EDWARD R. ROYBAL CENTERS FOR TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH IN THE BEHAVIORAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCES (P30)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-03-002.html
RELEASE DATE: October 28, 2002 RFA: AG-03-002 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Behavioral and Social Research (BSR) Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: January 21, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative invites both new teams of investigators and continuing centers (funded under AG-97-005) to apply.
The long-range objectives of the Roybal Centers are to improve the health, quality of life, and productivity of middle-aged and older people, through: (1) facilitating the translation of what we have learned about aging processes from the basic behavioral and social sciences (including human factors) to practical outcomes, including new technologies, for the benefit of the aged, and 2) stimulating new "use-inspired" basic research in the behavioral and social sciences.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Sidney S. Stahl, Ph.D.
Behavioral and Social Research Program National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 533 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 402-4156 Email: StahlS@nia.nih.gov
12
ROLE OF SLEEP AND SLEEP-DISORDERED BREATHING IN METABOLIC SYNDROME (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HL-03-008.html
RELEASE DATE: October 16, 2002 RFA: RFA-HL-03-008 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program Application Receipt Date: February 11, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA The goal of this Request for Applications (RFA) is to elucidate the relationship of sleep deprivation and sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) to characteristics of the metabolic syndrome including obesity, high blood pressure, dyslipidemia, insulin resistance, and vascular inflammation.
Specific objectives include identifying the pathophysiological mechanisms and genetic risk factors linking sleep deprivation and SDB to these characteristics.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Andrew A. Monjan, Ph.D., M.P.H. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite C3C07 Bethesda, MD 20892 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: am39m@nih.gov
13
INTERGENERATIONAL FAMILY RESOURCE ALLOCATION (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HD-02-030.html
RELEASE DATE: October 16, 2002 RFA: HD-02-030 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Behavioral and Social Research (BSR) Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: February 20, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative invites research grant applications proposing intergenerational research to help us understand how private behavior is manifest in allocating family resources across the generations and how public policy affects these allocations.
Research is solicited that examines the manner in which private family resource allocation decisions result in improvements in health, wealth accumulation (including human capital), and well-being for children, active adults and the elderly, and how public policy interacts with family processes to alter these results.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Georgeanne E. Patmios Behavioral and Social Research Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 533, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-3138 FAX: (301) 402-0051 Email: Patmios@NIH.GOV
14
IMPROVING DIET AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY ASSESSMENT (R01 
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-009.html
RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 PA NUMBER: PAR-03-009 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: Standard NIH Receipt Dates http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/funding/submissionschedule.htm PURPOSE OF THIS PA The objective of this Program Announcement is to support research to improve diet and physical activity measurement through improved instruments, technologies, or statistical/analytic techniques.
Proposals should be aimed at exploring the optimal combination of objective and self-report measures of physical activity or dietary intake that can capture these behaviors in both general and diverse populations.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Chhanda Dutta, PhD Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3E-327, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 435-3048 FAX: (301) 402-1784 Email: mcd23z@nih.gov
15
NOVEL GENETIC METHODS TO MAP FUNCTIONAL NEURONAL CIRCUITS AND SYNAPTIC CHANGE (R01 
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-03-007.html
RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 PA NUMBER: PAR-03-007 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: February 12, 2003, February 12, 2004, and February 14, 2005.
PURPOSE OF THIS PA This PA solicits applications to develop new genetic-based methods and technologies for the purpose of mapping functional neuronal circuits and synaptic changes in the mammalian nervous system.
Emerging genetic and transgenic technologies can be used to single out functionally related cells or neuronal populations for analysis or intervention.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Dr. Bradley C. Wise Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: wiseb@nia.nih.gov
16
BONE ANABOLIC HORMONES, THEIR RECEPTORS AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION PATHWAYS (R01 
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-03-008.html
RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 PA NUMBER: PA-03-008 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Biology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: Standard NIH Receipt Dates http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/funding/submissionschedule.htm PURPOSE OF THIS PA The objective of this initiative is to elicit grant submissions that focus on systemic hormones, local growth factors and bone-active cytokines with potential bone anabolic effects.
The signal transduction pathways recruited by the receptors of these hormones and growth factors are of particular interest.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Jill Carrington, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 2C231 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 FAX: (301) 402-0010 Email: carringtonj@nia.nih.gov
17
HIV/AIDS AND AGING: BASIC AND CLINICAL RESEARCH (R01 
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-MH-03-004.html
RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 RFA: MH-03-004 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: January 13, 2003 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA The purpose of this initiative is to: (1) focus the attention of basic and clinical scientists on the neurodegenerative processes contributing to the central nervous system (CNS) complications in HIV infection in the elderly; (2) promote the interaction of basic and clinical scientists conducting research in HIV disease in the elderly; and (3) develop integrative research programs that advance our understanding of the substrates underlying CNS complications in HIV disease in the elderly.
The principal CNS complications addressed by this RFA include neurocognitive, neurobehavioral, and neuropsychiatric and drug abuse sequelae of HIV infection (these conditions as antecedents may also be of interest).
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Andrew A. Monjan, Ph.D., M.P.H. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program Chief, Neurobiology of Aging Branch National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Bethesda, MD 20814(for express/courier service) Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: am39m@nih.gov
18
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN TISSUE FUNCTION: UNDERLYING BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS (P01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-02-177.html
RELEASE DATE: October 10, 2002 RFA: DK-03-002 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Biology of Aging Program PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This initiative invites investigator-initiated Research Projects (R01 and R21) to study the life cycle of adipocytes.
The goal of this initiative is to increase our understanding of the life cycle of human adipocytes and to catalyze the development of novel treatments for metabolic diseases including type 2 diabetes, obesity, familial lipodystrophy, and acquired lipodystrophy associated with HIV infection and treatment.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: David B. Finkelstein, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program National Institutes on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 2C231 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 FAX: (301) 402-0010 Email: df18s@nih.gov
19
AGE-RELATED CHANGES IN TISSUE FUNCTION: UNDERLYING BIOLOGICAL MECHANISMS (P01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-02-177.html
RELEASE DATE: September 30, 2002 PA NUMBER: PA-02-177 PARTICIPATING PROGRAM: Three NIA Program Areas PURPOSE OF THIS PA This program announcement is to solicit multi-component applications on biological mechanisms of aging in tissues and organs.
Projects are encouraged that significantly advance basic biology research to understand how and why changes take place in tissues with age and how those changes relate to altered tissue and organ function.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: * Frank L. Bellino, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program /Endocrinology 
Biology of Aging Program/ Cardiovascular Biology National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 2C231 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 FAX: (301) 402-0010 Email : finkelsd@nia.nih.gov * Stanley Slater, M.D. Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3E327 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6761 FAX: (301) 402-1784 Email: slaters@nia.nih.gov * Jill L. Carrington, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program/ Chief, Systems Branch Musculoskeletal Biology National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 2C231 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 FAX: (301) 402-0010 Email: carringtonj@nia.nih.gov * Rebecca A. Fuldner, Ph.D.
Biology of Aging Program/ Immunology National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 2C231 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-6402 FAX: (301) 402-0010 Email: fuldnerr@nia.nih.gov * Bradley C. Wise, Ph.D. Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307 MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: wiseb@nia.nih.gov
20
INTEGRATING AGING AND CANCER RESEARCH (R01)
http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-02-169.html
RELEASE DATE: September 24, 2002 PA NUMBER: PA-02-169 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATES: Standard NIH Receipt Dates http://grants1.nih.gov/grants/funding/submissionschedule.htm PURPOSE OF THIS PA This announcement invites research grant applications (R01s) for studies directed at cancer in older persons.
The majority of cancers affect older persons disproportionately because aging is a high risk factor for malignant tumors.
The focus for this research solicitation is on the older adult age group in the U.S. population in which cancer primarily occurs, that is, persons aged 65 years and older.
Close to 60% of all newly diagnosed malignant tumors and 71% of all cancer deaths occur in persons in this age group according to the NCI Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) program data for 1995-1999.
Research is needed across the scientific spectrum of cancer control for early detection, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, prognosis and survivorship.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Rosemary Yancik, Ph.D. Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Room 3E327 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-5278 FAX: (301) 402 1784 Email: yancikr@nia.nih.gov
21
CAREER DEVELOPMENT IN AGING AND GENETIC EPIDEMIOLOGIC RESEARCH METHODOLOGY (K08 0
http://grants2.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-03-001.html
RELEASE DATE: September 23, 2002 RFA: AG-03-001 PROGRAM PARTICIPATING: Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program APPLICATION RECEIPT DATE: December 18, 2002 PURPOSE OF THIS RFA This announcement invites applications for the Mentored Clinical Scientist Development Award (KO8) or the Mentored Research Scientist award (KO1) for career development in study design, data collection, and analytical methods for genetic epidemiologic research that focuses on aging-related topics.
The purpose of this Request for Applications (RFA) is to develop expertise in genetic epidemiologic methods and techniques that can aid in identifying effects of genetic factors and elucidating gene-environment dynamics, such as gene-environmental interactions, gene-environment correlations, and age-related changes in gene expression on: rates of age-related behavioral, physiologic and pathologic changes, differences in age of onset of diseases and disabilities, and/or broader outcomes not encompassed by disease diagnoses, such as exceptional longevity, in human populations.
Direct your questions about scientific/research issues to: Winifred K. Rossi, M.A. Special Assistant for Planning Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3E327, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 (Express: 20814) Telephone: (301) 496-3836 Email: rossiw@nia.nih.gov
BUDGET TABLE
CAPTION: TABLE II National Institute on Aging EXTRAMURAL GRANTS 
MECHANISM Behavioral 
Dollars Awarded Number Dollars Awarded Number Dollars Awarded Number Dollars Awarded Number Dollars Awarded Research Project Grants 225 $107,464 296 $108,527 148 $81,061 525 $267,989 1,194 $565,041 Small Grants (R03s) 39 2,631 48 3,650 4 300 30 2,260 121 8,841 Small Business Innovation Research Grants (SBIR) 32 8,602 4 1,207 6 2,082 19 7,184 61 19,075 Small Business Technology Transfer Grants (STTR) 1 187 3 958 4 1,145 Center Grants 23 11,345 4 1,207 6 2,082 19 7,184 61 19,075 Research Career Awards 52 5,816 23 2,596 46 5,848 53 6,622 174 20,882 Other Research Projects 14 1,410 6 2,083 6 2,320 9 1,063 35 6,876 Training Grants 28 6,379 12 3,704 9 2,191 22 5,988 71 18,262 Fellowships 9 280 9 390 8 364 33 1366 59 2,400 Contracts/IAGs 18 4,436 8 3,560 1 627 2 1,278 29 9,901 GRAND TOTALS 440 148,363 410 131,003 238 109,311 725 343,433 1,813 732,110 * NOTE: Does not include joint funded awards or NIA secondary assignments.
Source: Budget Office December 2002
CAPTION: TABLE V National Institute on Aging RESEARCH PROJECT GRANTS AS OF SEPTEMBER 30, 2002* (By Program Area in thousands of dollars)
PROGRAM Number Dollars Behavioral and Social Research (BRS) Office of the Associate Director 3 $12,013 Individual Behavioral Processes 175 61,478 Population and Social Process 86 36,604 BSR Subtotal 264 110,095 Biology of Aging (BAP) Genetics and Cell Biology Branch 162 55,108 Systems Branch 176 56,043 Office of Biological Resources and Resources Development 6 1,026 BAP Subtotal 344 112,177 Geriatrics and Clinical Gerontology (GCG) 152 81,361 Neuroscience and Neuropsichology of Aging (NNA) Office of Associate Director 0 0 Neurobiology of Aging 212 76,764 Dementias of Aging 266 166,112 Neuropsychology of Againg 77 27,373 NNA Subtotal 555 270,249 GRAND TOTALS 1,315 573,882 *NOTE: Does not include joint funded awards or NIA secondary assignments.
Source: Budget Office December 2002
