DIRECTOR'S STATUS REPORT National Institute on Aging May 2001 * Budget and Appropriations * Legislative Update * Institute-Sponsored Meetings, Workshops, and Conferences * General Information * Relevant Notices and Initiatives Published in the NIH Guide * Budget Table __________________________________________________________________ BUDGET AND APPROPRIATIONS The Fiscal Year (FY) 2002 President's Budget for NIA (including AIDS) is $879,961,000, an increase of 12.0 percent over the FY 2001 comparable estimate of $786,452,000.
Funding for AIDS-related research increases from $4,386,000 in FY 2001 to $4,985,000 in FY 2002, an increase of 13.7 percent.
The FY 2002 President's Budget for NIH (including AIDS) increases from $20,298,269,000 in FY 2001 to $23,041,902,000 in FY 2002, an increase of 13.5 percent.
AIDS funding increases by 11.5 percent in FY 2002, from $2,243,365,000 in FY 2001 to $2,501,352,000.
Overall Budget Policy One of NIH's highest priorities is the funding of medical research through research project grants (RPGs).
Support for RPGs allows NIH to sustain the scientific momentum of investigator-initiated research while providing new research opportunities.
The FY 2002 NIA request provides an average cost increase for competing RPGs that is less than the Biomedical Research and Development Price Index (BRDPI) due to a one-time adjustment for a major Alzheimer's disease clinical trial to be funded in FY 2001.
Noncompeting RPGs will receive increases of 3 percent on average for recurring direct costs.
In FY 2002, total RPGs expected to be funded will be 1,344 awards, an increase of 69 awards over the FY 2001 estimate, the previous highest annual total ever awarded.
Promises for advancement in medical research are dependent on a continuing supply of new investigators with new ideas.
In the FY 2002 request, NIA will support 572 pre- and postdoctoral trainees in full-time training positions.
An increase of 10 percent over FY 2001 levels is provided for stipends and training-related expenses (e.g., health insurance, research supplies and equipment, and travel to scientific meetings).
NIA FY 2002 President's Budget - Mechanism Discussion The FY 2002 request includes funding for 1,344 research project grants, compared to 1,275 in FY 2001 and 1,196 in FY 2000.
Of these 1,344 awards, 385 will be competing research project grants and 887 will be noncompeting awards.
In addition, the request includes funding for 72 SBIR/STTR grants.
Funding for the Centers mechanism increases by 5.6 percent over the FY 2001 level.
The FY 2002 request includes an increase of 8.3 percent over the FY 2001 level for Other Research.
Most of this increase will support 173 positions in the Research Career Awards Program, including the AD Clinical Research and Training Awards initiative.
Funding for Contracts in FY 2002 increases by 25.4 percent over the FY 2001 level to support an anticipated rise in the amounts that will be assessed under the one-percent set-aside authority for program evaluation, and as support for the Agency for Healthcare Quality and Research and for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The FY 2002 request includes a 9.9 percent increase over the FY 2001 level for Intramural Research and an 11.5 percent increase over the FY 2001 level for RMS.
(Contact: Ms. Karyn Ross, FMISB, 301/496-9147)
LEGISLATIVE UPDATE I. Significant Legislative/Executive Action Legislative Action + S. Res. 19, the Biomedical Revitalization Resolution of 2001 On February 13, Senators Arlen Specter (R-PA) and Tom Harkin (D-IA) introduced S. Res. 19, the Biomedical Revitalization Resolution of 2001, to express the sense of the Senate that funding for the NIH should be increased by $3.4 billion in FY 2002.
On April 4, by a vote of 96 to 4, the Senate passed the bill as an amendment to House Concurrent Resolution 83, the FY 2002 federal budget resolution.
H.C. Res. 83, which is non-binding, originally assumed a $2.8 billion increase for NIH, consistent with the President's request.
Senator Pete Domenici (R-NM), Chairman, Senate Committee on Budget, has indicated that he will move to drop the amendment when members of the House and Senate meet to reconcile their differing versions of the resolution in a conference committee.
+ H.R. 1144, Disease Research Revitalization Act On March 21, Representative Eliot Engel (D-NY) introduced H.R.1144, the Disease Research Revitalization Act, which would increase the federal investment in research on cancer, Alzheimer's disease, and asthma by $2 billion for FY 2002, and express the sense of the House of Representatives that the federal investment in such research should be increased each year from FY 2003 through 2006.
The measure has one cosponsor and was referred to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce for consideration.
+ H.R. 632, Men's Health Act of 2001 On February 14, Representative Randy (Duke) Cunningham (R-CA) introduced H.R. 632, the Men's Health Act of 2001.
The bill, which would establish an Office of Men's Health in the Department of Health and Human Services, is similar to H.R. 4653 of the 106th Congress.
H.R. 632 has 67 cosponsors and was referred to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce for consideration.
+ H.R. 663, National Center for Social Work Research Act On February 14, Representative Asa Hutchinson (R-AR) introduced H.R. 663, the National Center for Social Work Research Act.
The bill would establish a National Center for Social Work Research at the NIH.
The purpose of this Center would be to support and disseminate information about basic and clinical social work research and training, with emphasis on service to underserved and rural populations.
H.R. 663 has 19 cosponsors and was referred to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce for consideration.
Senator Daniel K. Inouye (D-HI) introduced a companion bill, S. 70, in the Senate.
S. 70 has four cosponsors and was referred to the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions for consideration.
+ S. 723, Stem Cell Research Act of 2001 On April 5, Senator Arlen Specter (R-PA), Chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education, introduced S. 723, a bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to provide for human embryonic stem cell generation (derivation) and research.
S. 723, which has 12 cosponsors, was referred to the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions for consideration.
Executive Action + On April 12, Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy Thompson announced that the patient privacy rule, as required by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) (P.L. 104-191), is final.
The Department is currently preparing guidelines for implementing this rule.
II.
Congressional Hearings/Briefings + Meeting with Fisher Foundation and Staff of Congressman Bill Young On January 25, Dr. Richard Hodes, NIA Director, Dr. Donald Lindberg, Director, National Library of Medicine (NLM), and staff from the Alzheimer's Disease Education and Referral Center (ADEAR), briefed officials from the Fisher Foundation and the office of Congressman Bill Young (R-FL).
The purpose of the briefing was to demonstrate the ADEAR web site and the NLM clinical trials database.
+ Remarks at NIA Regional Seminar On February 13, Mr. Steve Jones, District Director for Congressman Ernest Istook (R-OK), spoke on behalf of the Congressman at the Oklahoma City Regional Meeting on Aging Research in Oklahoma City, OK.
The meeting was sponsored by NIA and the University of Oklahoma Donald W. Reynolds Department of Geriatric Medicine + Presentation to Congressman Ralph Regula and Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi On February 27, Dr. Richard Hodes, NIA Director, presented to Congressman Ralph Regula (R-OH), Chairman, House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education, and Congresswoman Nancy Pelosi (D-CA) a member of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education, and subcommittee staff members during their visit to the NIH.
Dr. Hodes demonstrated features of the ADEAR web site and the NIA/NLM Interactive Age Page Project and discussed recent advances in Alzheimer's disease research.
+ Hearing on Demographic Trends and the Federal Budget On February 7, Dr. Ron Lee, Professor of Demography and Economics, University of California at Berkeley, and NIA grantee, testified before the Senate Budget Committee.
The subject of the hearing was "The Impact of Demographic Trends on the Budget and Long-Term Fiscal Policy."
+ Hearing on Alzheimer's Disease On April 3, Dr. Hodes testified before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education at a hearing on Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Dr. Hodes provided the Subcommittee with an update on the latest AD research advances and initiatives.
+ Hearing on Life Span Issues On April 4, Dr. Hodes testified before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services and Education at a hearing on health issues throughout the life span.
Dr. Hodes appeared with his colleagues from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), and the National Institute of Nursing Research (NIHR).
III.
Outreach Activities + Meeting with American Heart Association On January 4, 2001, Dr. Richard Hodes and other NIA officials had a courtesy visit with the leadership of the American Heart Association.
+ Meeting with Association of American Veterinary Medical Colleges On January 17, 2001, Dr. Richard Hodes, Dr. Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad, NIA Acting Deputy Director, and Dr. Huber Warner, Associate Director, NIA Biology of Aging program, met with representatives of the Association of American Veterinary Medical Colleges (AAVMC).
AAVMC requested the meeting to discuss their interest in expanding veterinary research opportunities.
+ Presentation at SPRY Conference On February 27, 2000, Dr. Richard Hodes presented the keynote address at a conference sponsored by the SPRY Foundation, "Older Adults Health Information and the World Wide Web."
+ Meeting with American Academy of Sleep Medicine On March 2, 2001, Dr. Richard Hodes and Dr. Andrew Monjan, NIA Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging program, had a courtesy visit with the leadership of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine.
+ Presentation at Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Conference On April 2, Dr. Richard Hodes provided a scientific update at the 13th annual Alzheimer's Association Public Policy Forum.
+ Meeting with Population Association of America/Association of Population Centers On April 2, Dr. Richard Hodes and Dr. Richard Suzman, Associate Director, NIA Behavioral and Social Research program, had a courtesy visit with the new leadership of the Population Association of America/Association of Population Centers.
+ Meeting with the Department of the Planet Earth On April 16, Dr. Hodes and other NIH officials met with representatives of the Department of the Planet Earth to discuss their interests in AD-related research issues.
+ Meeting with the Restless Leg Syndrome Foundation, Inc.
On April 18, Dr. Hodes and Dr. Andy Monjan, NIA Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program, had a courtesy visit with officials from the Restless Leg Syndrome Foundation, Inc.
(Contact: Ms. Mary Jo Hoeksema, NIA Legislative Officer, 301/496-0261)
INSTITUTE-SPONSORED MEETINGS, WORKSHOPS, AND CONFERENCES I.
Recent Scientific Meetings Cognitive and Emotional Aspects of Parkinson's Disease Working Group Meeting The Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging (NNA) Program cosponsored, with NINDS and NIMH, a two-day working group meeting on "Cognitive and Emotional Aspects of Parkinson's Disease" held on January 25 and 26, 2001.
Seventeen extramural scientists were invited to participate.
This workshop is part of an effort to stimulate research on the non-motor aspects of Parkinson's disease.
Participants were divided into two focus groups: I-Depression and Parkinson's disease; II-Interactions and overlap of psychiatric and cognitive changes associated with Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
Some of the recommendations included: research on clinical trials for the treatment of non-motor symptoms, such as depression; development of new animal models, at all levels from invertebrates to primates; establishment of a national primate facility to facilitate non-human primate research; establishment of a national brain bank for Parkinson's disease patients to allow correlation of neuropathology and clinical symptoms; and development of a minimal dataset for Parkinson's disease to be used by investigators in the field.
Specific recommendations will be formulated in the near future.
(Contact: Dr. Judith Finkelstein, NNA, 301/496-9350) The Biology of Aging Program (BAP) sponsored a Functional Senescence Workshop held April 23-25, 2001, in Louisville, KY.
The purpose of this exploratory workshop was to bring together a group of scientists to discuss what we know and do not know about tissue and organ-specific aging processes and molecular markers of these processes.
(Contact: Dr. Anna McCormick, BAP, 301/496-6402) II.
Planned Meetings, Workshops, Conferences Cognitive and Emotional Health: The Healthy Brain The NIA is co-sponsoring a two-day advisory meeting with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) and the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) on "Cognitive and Emotional Health: The Healthy Brain" July 9-10, in Bethesda, Maryland.
There are now about 45 million Americans over age 60 and 117 million over age 40.
Current evidence indicates that a large number of them are at substantial risk for cognitive impairment from many causes as they age.
The same is true for emotional disorders.
Much is known and publicized about maintaining a "healthy heart" but relatively little about the much more complex "healthy brain."
While research into biological mechanisms and environmental and social effects are yielding promising results in both animal and human studies, much remains to be discovered.
Through the combined efforts of three Institutes - NIA, NINDS, and NIMH - the Cognitive and Emotional Health Project has been launched, the goal of which is to accelerate the pace of scientific advances in the fields of cognition and emotion by development of a workshop and, ultimately, several coordinated trans-Institute initiatives.
The participating institutes are interested in determining the state of epidemiologic research concerning determinants of cognitive, emotional, and mental health among adults and how these domains interact and influence healthy brain aging.
The upcoming workshop will include presentations on biomedical and psychosocial predictors of cognitive and emotional health and relevant methodological issues.
The selected participants will be organized into groups for substantive discussions about the current status of existing knowledge, the potential value of secondary data analyses of existing data, whether there is a need for further instrument development to facilitate future studies, and potential designs of large studies that might be undertaken in the future.
(Contact: Dr. Molly Wagster, NNA, 301/496-9350; e-mail: wagsterm@exmur.nia.nih.gov) The Aged Non-Human Primate Resources Steering Committee will hold an exploratory meeting on July 11, 2001, in Bethesda, MD. BAP and NNA will host the meeting to gather input on developing needs for primate research in the aging field.
(Contacts: Dr. Nancy Nadon, BAP, 301/496-6402; Dr. Molly Wagster, NNA, 301/496-9350) The Biology of Alpha Synuclein and Lewy Bodies Associated with Alzheimer's Disease, Lewy Body Disease and Parkinson's Disease The NNA Program will sponsor a two-day exploratory meeting with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) on "The Biology of Alpha Synuclein and Lewy Bodies Associated with Alzheimer's Disease, Lewy Body Disease and Parkinson's Disease" July 16 and 17, in Bethesda, Maryland.
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Lewy Body disease (LBD) are perhaps the most common causes of dementia in the elderly.
There is a substantial clinical overlap among the dementias associated with AD, LBD and Parkinson's disease (PD).
Dementia develops in 100% of patients with Alzheimer's and Lewy Body disease and in approximately 20 to 30 percent of patients with Parkinson's disease.
A growing body of evidence suggests that a non-beta amyloid component of Alzheimer's disease plaques (NACP), also termed alpha-synuclein, contributes to neurodegenerative processes in AD, LBD, and PD. Alpha-synuclein, a synaptic protein, was first associated with a neurodegenerative disease when NACP was isolated from Alzheimer's brain and it was determined that antibodies to NACP (alpha-synuclein) recognize a significant percentage of diffuse and mature plaques and the Lewy Bodies in AD, LBD and PD.
In addition to alpha synuclein, the Lewy Bodies contain ubiquitin and other proteosomal subunits.
Intracellular degradation of many proteins involves their conjugation with ubiquitin and enzymatic cleavage to amino acid constituents in the proteasome.
The ubiquitins are a family of scavenger proteins found throughout the brain and their presence in the Lewy Bodies probably results from an attempt by ubiquitin to break up the accumulated alpha-synuclein.
This workshop will examine the basic biology of alpha synuclein, the formation of Lewy Bodies, and their role in the dementias associated with AD, LBD, and PD. (Contact: Dr. Creighton Phelps, NNA, 301/496-9350) Healthy Minds: Mental Vitality Across the Life Span The NNA Program, the Behavioral and Social Research (BSR) Program, and the American Psychological Association (APA) Presidential Task Force on Science are co-sponsoring a symposium "Healthy Minds: Mental Vitality Across the Life Span" August 24, in San Francisco, California.
The exploratory workshop will be held in conjunction with the 109th Annual APA Convention.
As we age, complex behaviors of attention, language, learning and memory become vulnerable to insults, resulting in deficits that, although normal, can produce frustration and concern for elders.
This symposium will feature an examination of current knowledge of neural and behavioral changes in cognition with age.
Presentations will highlight state-of-the-art research in neuroimaging and neurogenesis and will include advances being made in interventions ranging from physical and mental activity to nutraceuticals.
(Contact: Dr. Molly Wagster, NNA, 301/496-9350; e-mail: wagsterm@exmur.nia.nih.gov) Grant Proposal Workshop: Demystifying the Application and Funding Process at NIA The NNA Program, the BSR Program, and the NIA Office of Extramural Affairs (OEA) are co-sponsoring a workshop "Demystifying the Application and Funding Process at NIA" August 24, in San Francisco, California.
The exploratory workshop will be held in conjunction with the 109th Annual APA Convention.
The workshop is designed to provide participants with a "nuts and bolts" review of the NIH grant application process and review procedures, with a special emphasis on aging research.
This interactive workshop will show how to optimize success of the application process from start to finish.
Practical considerations, including who to contact and when during the preparation of a proposal, will be discussed in detail.
Information presented will be of interest to the seasoned investigator as well as the funding novice.
(Contact: Dr. Elisabeth Koss, NNA, 301/496-9350; e-mail: kosse@nia.nih.gov) The NIA Biospecimen Repository Oversight Committee will have an initial meeting in summer 2001.
The committee will provide advice on the overall structure of the planned repository and feedback on the Statement of Work for the repository RFA.
The agenda is not yet available.
(Contact: Dr. Nancy Nadon, BAP, 301/496-6402) BAP, the Geriatrics Program (GP), and NNA plan an exploratory workshop in the area of Comparative Biology of Aging.
Tentatively scheduled for September 13-14, 2001, the workshop will bring together investigators who use various aging models and investigators who can pose major issues of interest to human aging to exchange information on the advantages and potential uses of the models for studies of aging and to foster collaborations for mechanistic studies of the basic biology of aging in informative models.
(Contacts: Dr. Jill Carrington, BAP, 301/496-6402; Dr. Evan Hadley, GP, 301/435-3044; Dr. Brad Wise, NNA, 301/496-9350)
GENERAL INFORMATION
Council Member Dr. Mary Starke Harper was honored on May 7 and 8 at the dedication of the Mary Starke Harper Geriatric Psychiatry Center in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
As part of the dedication festivities, over 50 senior scientists from across the country and NIH administrative staff presented issues germane to the theme: Breakthroughs, Consensus and Best practices in the Care of the Elderly in the Past Decade: Implications for the Next Decade.
The NIA was represented by Drs. Richard Hodes, Marcelle Morrison-Bogorad, Taylor Harden, and Miriam Kelty.
Update on Status of the NIH Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering Institute The development of the new National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) at the NIH is proceeding.
The NIBIB was signed into law by President Clinton on December 29, 2000.
An establishment package consisting of a mission statement, initial budget, and organization chart has been prepared and transmitted to the Department of Health and Human Services for approval.
The search for a director will begin shortly.
Information will be posted as part of the NIH Bioengineering Web site until a separate site for the NIBIB is set up.
The new Institute will be functional (e.g., making grants) during early Calendar Year (CY) 2002.
Interim operating guidelines are established.
Buildings and Facilities (B
The major intramural B
$21 million would go toward the repair and renovation of Building 10, the original Clinical Center, as hospital and laboratory components are moved into the new Mark O. Hatfield Clinical Research Center in FY 2003.
Florence Mahoney Lecture NIH had an overflow audience for the 15th annual Florence Mahoney Lecture on Aging on March 7.
Dr. Fred Gage, from the Salk Institute of Biological Studies, Laboratory of Genetics, presented "Neurogenesis and Regeneration in the Adult Nervous System."
Dr. Gage serves on the National Advisory Council on Aging for the NIA.
He is studying the mechanisms of cell death and regeneration underlying recovery of function following brain damage.
Brain Awareness NIA was one of five Institutes that took part in National Brain Awareness Week.
On March 14, Dr. Judith Finkelstein explained to more than 200 Washington, DC, school children "How We Use Our Brain."
The program was held at the National Museum of Health and Medicine at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center.
Dr. Elisabeth Koss did the honors on March 15, letting volunteers test the powers of taste by identifying flavors of jellybeans without the benefit of sight or smell.
The jellybeans and presenters were a hit! Both Drs. Finkelstein and Koss are Health Scientist Administrators in the NNA Program.
The highlight of Brain Awareness Week was a March 14 presentation by Dr. Eric Haseltine, Executive Vice President of Research and Development at Walt Disney Imagineering.
Dr. Haseltine spoke to a crowd of area high school and college students in Natcher Auditorium.
Following Dr. Haseltine's talk, NIA was represented in a panel discussion by Dr. Norm Haughey of the NIA Gerontology Research Center (GRC) who joined with other NIH scientists in describing the benefits of a career in science.
Dr. Devin Gary, also from GRC, represented NIA post docs and answered questions from students.
Birthday Wishes On April 18, Dr. Richard Hodes, Ms. Jane Shure, and Ms. Anne Decker paid a call on Mrs. Florence Mahoney at her Georgetown home.
The occasion was the celebration of her 102nd birthday.
Mrs. Mahoney was instrumental in the founding of the NIA and served as a charter member of the National Advisory Council on Aging from 1974-78.
New Publications from the ADEAR Center- * AD Autosearches of Combined Health Information Database (CHID) are now on the ADEAR web site.
The ADEAR Center Web site offers automated searches of the Alzheimer's subfile ("AZ") on the database.
Previously available as packaged searches in print, online topics so far are: special care units for AD patients, environmental design, multimedia (videotapes, audiotapes, and computer software), and Spanish-language materials.
Searches are updated whenever new acquisitions are uploaded to the database.
This feature is available on the ADEAR Center's home page at: http://www.alzheimers.org/ by selecting "Bibliographic Database," then "Automated CHID Searches on AD." * Hospitalization Happens: A Guide to Hospital Visits for Your Loved Ones With Memory Disorders (brochure) and Acute Hospitalization 
The Center is distributing these short, informative publications from the Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Center at Duke University Medical Center in conjunction with the North Carolina Division of Aging.
They include checklists for family members and hospital staff, respectively, to help make a trip to the hospital less stressful for the patient, caregiver, and emergency room and other hospital personnel.
(A small fee is charged for both items to enable cost recovery.)
New Publications from the NIA * Making Your Web Site Senior Friendly This research-based guideline, which helps website designers make sites more accessible to all adults, especially people over 60, is a collaborative effort by the NIA and the National Library of Medicine.
* Menopause Always in big demand, this booklet has been revised.
It is a resource for women approaching middle age to use in making healthy choices about hormone replacement therapy (HRT), sex, pregnancy, and HIV/AIDS risk.
* Talking With Your Doctor NIA's popular guide for older people has been revised.
It describes ways patients and family members can plan ahead to give useful history and details and get desired information and guidance during a doctor visit.
Suggestions for optimizing communication with the doctor and the short list of additional resources were updated for this reprinting.
* Caloric Restriction's Effects on Aging: Opportunities for Research on Human Implication, containing reports from six panels at the March 1999 meeting of the Caloric Restriction Clinical Implications (CRCI) Advisory Group, was recently published in the Journals of Gerontology: Series A Biological and Medical Sciences, 2001, Special Issue I, Vol. 56A: 5-76.
Caloric restriction has long been of high interest to experimental aging researchers because it is currently the only intervention known to produce these effects and, hence, has unique value as a probe into mechanisms regulating the rate of progression of multiple age-related pathologies which could lead to better methods of preventing multiple age-related diseases.
The meeting of the CRCI Advisory group was held March 8-10, 1999 at Lister Hill Auditorium and co-sponsored by NIA and NIDDK.
The meeting agenda consisted of presentations from different panels: Panel (1) Epidemiologic data on the relationships of caloric intake, energy balance, and weight gain over the lifespan with longevity and morbidity; Panel (2) CR-mimetics: metabolic interventions; Panel (3) CR-mimetics: Anorexiants and neuroendocrine manipulations; Panel (4) CR-mimetics: Physical activity and body composition changes; Panel (5) Genetic variability in responses to CR in animals and in regulation of metabolism and obesity in humans; and Panel (6) Physiologic effects of lowering caloric intake in non-obese persons.
* A compact disc entitled Books on Aging and Health by the US National Academies was issued in December 2000.
This BSR-funded CD contains the complete contents of ten BSR-funded National Academy Press publications (six books and four workshop summaries) in PDF format.
It is an expanded version of a previously issued CD which contains the contents of eight BSR-funded National Academy Press publications.
* Cells and Surveys: Should Biological Measures be Included in Social Science Research? This National Research Council Committee on Population publication, funded by BSR, was released in January 2001.
This publication summarizes the presentations made at "Collecting Biological Indicators and Genetic Information in Household Surveys," an NAS workshop held in Washington, DC, in February 2000.
Workshop topics included: use of bioindicators in demographic and social research; potential for using genetic information in demography; research on aging human subjects; relevance of animal models and studies for human populations; value-added survey research; and consent, privacy, and group harm considerations.
* Preparing for an Aging World: The Case for Cross-National Research, a National Research Council publication, inspired and funded primarily by BSR, was released in March 2001.
The panel of authors included internationally known economists, demographers, and social researchers, many of whom are BSR grantees.
The authors' focus was on: work, retirement, and pensions; private wealth and income security; transfer systems; the health of aging populations; and well-being.
The panel recommended (1) more multidisciplinary research designs; (2) more longitudinal research to disentangle and illuminate complex interrelationships; (3) harmonization, if not standardization, of data design and collection activities to produce comparable data; (4) more cross-national research; (5) more consolidation of data from multiple sources to generate linked databases; and (6) unconstrained access to data by scientific researchers, using statistical and legal methods to preserve confidentiality.
* Four Aging Trends reports are now available to download off the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) web site (http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/): + Trends in Causes of Death Among the Elderly (No. 1) + Trends in Vision and Hearing Among Older Americans (No. 2) + The Oral Health of Older Americans (No. 3) + The Changing Profile of Nursing Home Residents: 1985-1997 (No. 4)
NEW NOTICES AND INITIATIVES RELEVANT TO THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON AGING (NIA ) - From the NIH GUIDE Winter 2001 
Table of Contents
NOTICES -
(These are selected Notices relevant to NIA- also see the NIH Guide for all Notices).
INITIATIVES - by Program Areas
BIOLOGY OF AGING (BAP) -
BIOLOGY OF THE MENOPAUSAL PROCESS AND ASSOCIATED HEALTH CONDITIONS DURING AND AFTER MENOPAUSE (Dr. Frank Bellino)
MIDCAREER INVESTIGATOR AWARD IN MOUSE PATHOBIOLOGY RESEARCH (Dr. Huber Warner)
STRATEGIES FOR GERM-LINE MODIFICATION IN THE RAT (Dr. Nancy Nadon)
DEVELOPMENT OF ZEBRAFISH MUTAGENESIS AND SCREENING TOOLS (Dr. Jill Carrington)
BEHAVIORAL 
DATA ANALYSIS AND ARCHIVING IN DEMOGRAPHY, ECONOMICS, AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH ON AGING (Dr. Rose Maria Li)
INTERNATIONAL CLINICAL, OPERATIONAL AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH AND TRAINING AWARD (ICOHRTA) - (Dr. Rose Maria Li)
GERIATICS PROGRAM (GP) -
CLAUDE D. PEPPER OLDER AMERICANS INDEPENDENCE CENTERS (OAIC) (Dr. Stanley Slater)
NEUROSCIENCE 
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE CLINICAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING PROGRAM: MENTORED CLINICAL SCIENTIST DEVELOPMENT AWARDS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND RELATED DEMENTIAS (Dr. Creighton Phelps)
RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME AND PERIODIC LIMB MOVEMENT DISORDER (Dr. Andrew Monjan)
BIOLOGY OF NON-HUMAN STEM CELLS IN THE ENVIRONMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (Dr. Brad Wise)
GENE DISCOVERY FOR NEUROLOGICAL AND NEUROBEHAVIORAL DISORDERS (Dr. Brad Wise)
INITIATIVES - NIH-wide (NIA is a secondary sponsor on these initiatives)
RESEARCH SUPPLEMENTS FOR UNDERREPRESENTED MINORITIES (Dr. Robin Barr)
RESEARCH SUPPLEMENTS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES (Dr. Robin Barr)
SUPPLEMENTS TO PROMOTE REENTRY INTO BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH CAREERS (Dr. Robin Barr)
Key to Abbreviations for NIH Institutes and Centers __________________________________________________________________
NOTICES RELEVANT TO NIA (in the NIH Guide since the last Council Meeting)
OBESITY, DIABETES AND AGING ANIMAL RESOURCE (ODAAR) http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-AG-01-002.html Release Date: February 16, 2001 Contact: Dr. Nancy Nadon, (301) 496-6402 Email: nadonn@nia.nih.gov NOTICE: NOT-AG-01-002 Announced by the National Institute on Aging The NIA supports a colony of aged rhesus macaques, many of which are obese and/or diabetic.
This is a long-term colony of monkeys housed at the University of Maryland.
They have been extensively and longitudinally characterized for general health variables, blood chemistry, food intake and body weight.
Diabetic monkeys are tested daily for urine glucose and ketone levels, and pre-diabetic monkeys are tested weekly.
Data for some of the monkeys extends as far back as 15 years.
This unique resource is available for collaborative studies.
ODAAR has a significant amount of stored tissue collected at necropsy and stored blood collected longitudinally.
Serial blood collection or tissue collection at necropsy can also be performed prospectively.
Testing and imaging can also be performed on the monkeys.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPLEMENTS FOR HIGH THROUGHPUT TECHNOLOGY IN NIA-FUNDED LABORATORIES http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-AG-01-003.html Release Date: March 5, 2001 NOTICE: NOT-AG-01-003 Contact: Dr. Robin A. Barr, (301) 496-9322 Email: rb42h@nih.gov Announced by the National Institute on Aging The NIA has Fiscal Year 2001 funds available for administrative supplements to NIA-funded awards for the development and/or application of DNA-based or protein-based microarray and other high throughput technology for aging research.
These funds can be used to supplement active R01, R37, P01 or U01 NIA grants.
However, research pilot grants (R03), Career mechanisms (K-awards), training mechanisms (F- and T-awards) and Center grants are not eligible for these supplements.
These funds are not intended to be used for large scale sequencing projects per se or for contracting work out to already established facilities.
The deadline for submission is April 16, 2001.
Full details on this funding opportunity, including contact information, are available from the NIA web site: http://www.nih.gov/funding/htt.htm
ALLOWABILITY OF FACILITIES AND ADMINISTRATIVE (F
The provision of F
In the past, Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) policy prohibited the provision of facilities 
As a result, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the extramural community have had concerns that by not providing some allowance for F
OFFICE OF EXTRAMURAL RESEARCH GUIDANCE REGARDING ADMINISTRATIVE IACUC ISSUES AND EFFORTS TO REDUCE REGULATORY BURDEN http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-01-017.html Release Date: February 12, 2001 NOTICE: NOT-OD-01-017 Announced by the National Institutes of Health This notice provides guidance to Public Health Service (PHS) awardee institutions and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees (IACUCs) concerning the following two administrative IACUC issues: use of alternate IACUC members and IACUC protocol and programmatic review at collaborating institutions.
It further provides an example of an existing drug shelf life extension program that may be utilized to extend the expiration date of certain pharmaceuticals in an animal care and use program.
A renewed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) among USDA, FDA and NIH is also announced.
REGISTRATION INFORMATION AVAILABLE FOR 2001 NIH REGIONAL SEMINARS IN PROGRAM FUNDING AND GRANTS ADMINISTRATION http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-01-018.html Release Date: February 16, 2001 NOTICE: NOT-OD-01-018 Announced by the National Institutes of Health Two regional seminars covering topics related to National Institutes of Health extramural program funding and grants administration have been planned for 2001.
Registration information and agendas are available at the following websites.
March 15-16, 2001 - Houston, Texas - http://www.mdanderson.org/nihseminar (past) June 7-8, 2001 - Portland, Oregon - http://www.ohsu.edu/ra/spa/nih/nih.html
The two-day seminars feature sessions for research faculty and administrators on grant preparation, review, and administration.
Information on upcoming regional seminars is available on the NIH website at: http://grants.nih.gov/grants/seminars.htm
FINANCIAL STATUS REPORTS: REMINDER AND INFORMATION ON TIMELINESS AND ACCURACY REQUIREMENTS http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-OD-01-021.html Release Date: February 22, 2001 NOTICE: NOT-OD-01-021 Announced by the National Institutes of Health Following the streamlining of FSR requirements under SNAP, NIH is increasingly concerned about the prevalence of late reports and the excessive frequency of inaccurate and revised reports submitted by NIH grantees.
As part of its responsibility to provide oversight of the FSR process to ensure compliance with regulatory and policy mandates, NIH has worked to assist institutions in improving the submission of timely and accurate FSRs.
As discussed in the NIH Guide Notices "Closeout Reports Required for NIH Assistance Awards" (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not99-136.html published 8/10/1999), "Modified Financial Reporting Requirements" (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not96-178.html published 7/5/1996), and "Late Financial Status Reports" (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/not93-082.html, published 3/12/1993), grantees must provide the Federal Government all financial, performance, and other reports as required by the terms and conditions of the assistance awards.
NIH grantees are required by 45 CFR 74.71 to submit three closeout reports for every award: Final FSR, Final Invention Report, and Final Progress Report.
Information on updated processing procedures for submitting FSRs will be issued in a future Guide notice.
Future guidance will also be issued to improve compliance with Invention and Progress report requirements.
(See notice for more details).
INITIATIVES - in which NIA is the primary sponsor
NIA INITIATIVES WITH TARGETED RECEIPT DATES NIA - AS PRIMARY SPONSOR (http://www.nih.gov/nia)
ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE CLINICAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING PROGRAM: MENTORED CLINICAL SCIENTIST DEVELOPMENT AWARDS IN ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE AND RELATED DEMENTIAS http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-01-005.html Release Date: May 2, 2001 Contact: Dr. Creighton H. Phelps, (301) 496-9350 RFA NUMBER: RFA-AG-01-005 Application Receipt Date: July 12, 2001 This RFA is to encourage applications for the Mentored Clinical Scientist Development Award (K08) or Mentored Research Scientist Award (K01) in the area of Alzheimer's disease and related dementias research.
NIA will offer the K08 or K01 award to support the development of outstanding academic physician scientists.
These mechanisms provide support for a period of supervised research and study for either clinically trained professionals with little research experience but who have the commitment and the potential to develop into productive, independent investigators (K08) or for clinically trained professionals with substantial research experience who wish to redirect their career to concentrate on Alzheimer's research (K01).
CLAUDE D. PEPPER OLDER AMERICANS INDEPENDENCE CENTERS (OAIC) http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-AG-02-001.html Release Date: April 30, 2001 Contact: Dr. Stanley Slater, (301) 496-6761 E-mail: ss81z@nih.gov RFA: RFA-AG-02-001 Application Receipt Date: November 28, 2001 The general goal of the OAIC program is to increase scientific knowledge that will lead to better ways to maintain or restore independence to older persons.
Specifically, NIA's goal for the OAIC program is to develop or strengthen awardee institutions' programs that focus, and sustain progress, on a key aging research area.
The means by which the OAIC program seeks to achieve this goal is provision of resources to institutions to help them address key research problems, technologic limitations, and needs for trained researchers, on issues in which progress could contribute to greater independence for older persons.
NIA INITIATIVES WITH OPEN RECEIPT DATES NIA - AS PRIMARY SPONSOR (http://www.nih.gov/nia) (Applications due February 1, June 1, and October 1)
BIOLOGY OF THE MENOPAUSAL PROCESS AND ASSOCIATED HEALTH CONDITIONS DURING AND AFTER MENOPAUSE http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-067.html Release Date: March 14, 2001 Contact: Dr. Francis Bellino, (301) 496-4996 Email- FB12A@nih.gov PA NUMBER: PA-01-067 Announced with the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
This announcement invites applications to support research that elucidates molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying the menopausal process, and the pathophysiologic connections of that process with various health problems and conditions of peri- and postmenopausal women.
This program announcement addresses a) the underlying biology of age- and menopause-related changes in the hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian (H-P-O) axis that result in the dramatic hormonal changes experienced across the menopausal transition, and b) how the biology of menopause impacts the menopause-related increase in health problems and conditions associated with the brain, cardiovascular, skeletal, genitourinary and other physiologic systems.
DATA ANALYSIS AND ARCHIVING IN DEMOGRAPHY, ECONOMICS, AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH ON AGING http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-082.html Release Date: April 12, 2001 Contact: For information about the following contact these staff members: Datasets described in this announcement - Ms. Elissa Royal, (301) 496-3138, Email: er110e@NIH.GOV Issues related to the incorporation of biological and genetic information - Dr. Jennifer Harris (301) 496-3138, Email: jh475o@NIH.GOV Inquiries regarding all other programmatic issues - Dr. Rose Maria Li, (301) 496-3138, Email: rl26b@NIH.GOV PA NUMBER: PA-01-082 This announcement seeks small grant (R03) applications to: 1) stimulate and facilitate secondary analyses of data and data archiving related to demography, economics, and behavioral research on aging; 2) provide support for preliminary projects using secondary analysis that could lead to subsequent applications for other research project grant award mechanisms; 3) provide support for rapid analyses of new databases and experimental modules for purposes such as informing the design and content of future study waves; and 4) provide support for the development, enhancement and assembly of new databases from existing data.
The announcement updates and replaces a previous Program Announcement, Secondary Analysis in Demography and Economics of Aging (PA-99-160, issued September 2, 1999).
INITIATIVES - NIH INITIATIVES
NIH INITIATIVES WITH TARGETED RECEIPT DATES NIA - AS SECONDARY OR CO-SPONSOR (Application receipt dates vary)
RESTLESS LEGS SYNDROME AND PERIODIC LIMB MOVEMENT DISORDER http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-086.html Release Date: May 2, 2001 Contact: Dr. Andrew Monjan, (301) 496-9350 E-mail: am39m@NIH.GOV PA NUMBER: PA-01-086 Announced with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, and the National Institute of Mental Health.
This program announcement encourages investigator-initiated research grant applications to study restless legs syndrome (RLS) and periodic limb movement disorder (PLMD).
The etiologies of these disorders are unknown, although there is evidence that central dopamine mechanisms are involved.
Research should be aimed at an understanding of the pathogenesis of RLS and PLMD that will lead to new forms of treatment.
RESEARCH SUPPLEMENTS FOR UNDERREPRESENTED MINORITIES http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-079.html Release Date: April 9, 2001 Contact: Dr. Robin Barr, (301) 496-9322 E-mail: rb42h@nih.gov PA NUMBER: PA-01-079 Announced by the National Institutes of Health This program, originally announced in 1989, was established to address the need to increase the number of underrepresented minority scientists participating in biomedical research and the health related sciences.
Although the NIH currently provides opportunities for minorities through the traditional research grant programs and through special initiatives supported by various components of the NIH there is no evidence that this need has changed.
RESEARCH SUPPLEMENTS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-080.html Release Date: April 9, 2001 Contact: Dr. Robin Barr, (301) 496-9322 E-mail: rb42h@nih.gov PA NUMBER: PA-01-080 Announced by the National Institutes of Health The President's Task Force on Women, Minorities, and the Handicapped in Science and Technology has documented a very low participation rate for Americans with disabilities in the science and engineering work force.
To address this problem for the biomedical and behavioral research workforce, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and its awarding components have developed an initiative that is designed to extend opportunities to individuals with qualifying disabilities who are capable of entering or resuming research careers.
Under this initiative the NIH will offer supplemental awards to certain ongoing research grants to encourage individuals with disabilities to pursue biomedical, behavioral, clinical or social science research careers.
SUPPLEMENTS TO PROMOTE REENTRY INTO BIOMEDICAL AND BEHAVIORAL RESEARCH CAREERS http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-081.html Release Date: April 9, 2001 Contact: Dr. Robin Barr, (301) 496-9322 E-mail: rb42h@nih.gov PA NUMBER: PA-01-081 Announced by the National Institutes of Health and the Office of Research on Women's Health.
The Institutes and Centers of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) along with the Office of Research on Women's Health announce a continuing program for administrative supplements to research grants to support individuals with high potential to reenter an active research career after taking time off to care for children or attend to other family responsibilities.
The aim of these supplements is to encourage such individuals to reenter research careers within the missions of all the program areas of NIH.
This program will provide administrative supplements to existing NIH research grants for the purpose of supporting full-time or part-time research by these individuals in a program geared to bring their existing research skills and knowledge up to date.
INTERNATIONAL CLINICAL, OPERATIONAL AND HEALTH SERVICES RESEARCH AND TRAINING AWARD (ICOHRTA) http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-TW-01-003.html Release Date: February 13, 2001 Contact: Dr. Rose Maria Li, (301) 496-3138 Email: BSRquery@nia.nih.gov (e-mail correspondence is preferred) RFA: RFA-TW-01-003 Application Receipt Date: April 27, 2001 Announced with the Fogarty International Center (FIC) (http://www.nih.gov/fic), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) (http://www.nimh.nih.gov/), National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) (http://www.nida.nih.gov/), National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM) (http://nccam.nih.gov/), and the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR) (http://www.nidr.nih.gov/).
The purpose of this RFA is to solicit applications to support training that will facilitate collaborative, multidisciplinary, international clinical, operational, health services and prevention science research between U.S. institutions and those in developing countries, as well as emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, Russia, and the Newly Independent States (NIS).
The ICOHRTA will address global health problems by extending and enhancing the research of the collaborating U.S. and foreign scientists while increasing the clinical, operational, health services and prevention research capacity of the collaborating foreign scientists and their institutions.
Awards will be made to the U.S. applicant institution to support a clinical, operational and health services research training program that will include training at the U.S. and foreign collaborating sites and mentored clinical, operational, health services and prevention science research carried out mainly at the foreign site.
Applicant institutions can request up to five years support for a standard program or up to three years support to plan and develop a program.
GENE DISCOVERY FOR NEUROLOGICAL AND NEUROBEHAVIORAL DISORDERS http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-NS-02-002.html Release Date: March 26, 2001 Contact: Contact: Dr. Bradley Wise, (301) 496- 9350 Email: WiseB@nia.nih.gov RFA: RFA-NS-02-002 Application Receipt Date: July 10, 2001 Announced with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the National Institute of Mental Health.
The goal of this Request for Applications (RFA) is to promote the identification of genes that cause or contribute to human neurological and neurobehavioral diseases.
It is intended to encourage applications for genetics research projects with one or more of the following objectives: (1) to identify the gene or genes that produce disease susceptibility (2) to identify "modifier" genes that affect disease susceptibility or outcome and (3) to investigate the relationship between genotype and disease phenotype.
Because of the interdisciplinary nature of such projects, collaborative studies are encouraged.
Studies using invertebrate or vertebrate animal models are appropriate if they directly promote the identification of human disease susceptibility genes.
STRATEGIES FOR GERM-LINE MODIFICATION IN THE RAT http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-01-077.html Release Date: April 3, 2001 Contact: Dr. Nancy L. Nadon, (301) 496-6402 E-mail: nadonn@exmur.nia.gov PA NUMBER: PAR-01-077 Application Receipt Dates: October 1, 2001; October 1, 2002 and October 1, 2003.
Announced with the National Center for Research Resources, National Cancer Institute, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
This announcement invites applications for the purpose of establishing methods for the efficient production of rat models that contain germ-line mutations that will facilitate the transfer of biological concepts to human health problems.
Development of rat embryonic stem cell (ESC) technology by modification of current techniques or development of new approaches will meet the needs of researchers using the rat to study human health and disease.
This initiative is designed for rat models only and should not include human subjects or tissues.
NIH INITIATIVES WITH OPEN RECEIPT DATES NIA- AS CO-SPONSOR OR SECONDARY SPONSOR (Applications due February 1, June 1, and October 1)
BIOLOGY OF NON-HUMAN STEM CELLS IN THE ENVIRONMENT OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-078.html Release Date: April 9, 2001 Contact: Dr. Bradley Wise, (301) 496- 9350 Email: WiseB@nia.nih.gov PA NUMBER: PA-01-078 Announced with the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (http://www.ninds.nih.gov), National Institute of Mental Health (http://www.nimh.nih.gov), National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/), and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (http://www.nichd.nih.gov/).
This announcement invites applications for studies on the biology of non-human stem cells and regulation of their replication, development and function in the nervous system.
The tremendous plasticity exhibited by stem and progenitor cells raises the possibility that they can be used to replace components and restore function to parts of the brain that have been compromised by congenital disorders, developmental malfunction, injury or disease.
There is, however, little understanding of the behavior and regulation of these cells in the environment of the healthy brain, or in the nervous system altered by such conditions as stroke, trauma, spinal cord injury, sensory loss, Muscular Dystrophy, Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, Parkinson's Disease, Huntington's Disease, Alzheimer's Disease, Multiple Sclerosis or mental illness.
There are few studies on the long-term fates of transplanted cells within the nervous system or at other sites within the host.
An understanding of environmental cues, age-dependent processes and genetic factors that govern the activities of these cells is crucial in order to develop safe and effective cell-replacement treatments.
This Program Announcement encourages applications for support of ground-breaking research on non-human stem cells that address these issues.
DEVELOPMENT OF ZEBRAFISH MUTAGENESIS AND SCREENING TOOLS http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-01-070.html Release Date: March 19, 2001 Contact: Dr. Jill Carrington, (301) 496-6402 PA NUMBER: PA-01-070 Announced with the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD; http://www.nichd.nih.gov/), National Cancer Institute, (NCI; http://www.nci.nih.gov/), National Center for Research Resources (NCRR; http://www.ncrr.nih.gov/), National Eye Institute (NEI; http://www.nei.nih.gov/), National Human Genome Research Institute, (NHGRI; http://www.nhgri.nih.gov/) National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, (NIAAA: http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/), National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, (NIAMS; http://www.nih.gov/niams/), National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, (NIDCD; http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/), National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, (NIDCR; http://www.nidr.nih.gov/), National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, (NIDDK; http://www.niddk.nih.gov/), National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA; http://www.nida.nih.gov/), National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS; http://www.niehs.nih.gov/), National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS; http://www.nigms.nih.gov/), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH; http://www.nimh.nih.gov/), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS; http://www.ninds.nih.gov/).
This Program Announcement (PA) is to encourage investigator-initiated applications for research designed to exploit the power of mutagenesis screening in zebrafish in order to detect and characterize genes, pathways, and phenotypes of interest in development and aging, organ formation, behavior, and disease processes.
Applications that propose to advance the technologies associated with such phenotyping also are welcome.
This PA is a continuation of the program initiated by RFA HD-00-004, "Mutagenesis Screens/Phenotyping Tools for Zebrafish" (http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HD-00-004.html).
This effort stems from an NIH initiative with participation of the Institutes and Centers listed above, working though the Trans-NIH Zebrafish Coordinating Committee (TZCC; http://www.nih.gov/science/models/zebrafish/) under the co-chairmanship of NICHD and NIDDK.
MIDCAREER INVESTIGATOR AWARD IN MOUSE PATHOBIOLOGY RESEARCH http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PAR-01-064.html Release Date: March 7, 2001 Contact: Huber R. Warner, Ph.D., (301) 496-6402 Email: warnerh@exmur.nia.nih.gov PA NUMBER: PAR-01-064 Announced with the National Center for Research Resources.
The purpose of the Midcareer Investigator Award in Mouse Pathobiology Research is to provide support for established outstanding pathobiologists to allow them protected time to devote to mouse pathobiology research, to relieve them from time consuming service obligations and administrative responsibilities, and to act as mentors for beginning investigators.
The target candidates are scientists engaged in pathobiology research who are within 15 years of their specialty training, who can demonstrate the need for a period of intensive research focus as a means of enhancing their research careers, and who are committed to mentoring the next generation of mouse pathobiologists.
FY 2000 ACTUAL / FY 2001 APPROPRIATION / FY 2002 PRESIDENT'S BUDGET (Dollars in Thousands)
INCLUDES AIDS FY 2000 Actual FY 2001 Appropriation FY 2002 President's Budget Research Grants
No.
Amount
No.
Amount
No.
Amount
Research Projects Noncompeting 741 $296,268 782 $347,763 887 $425,673 Admin.
Suppl (116) 8,956 (110) 7,470 (110) 7,791 Competing 400 136,179 427 155,431 385 140,964 Subtotal 1,141 441,403 1,209 510,664 1,272 574,428 SBIR/STTR 55 15,006 66 18,100 72 19,802 Subtotal, RPG 1,196 456,409 1,275 528,764 1,344 594,230 Research Centers: 66 71,770 67 74,642 67 78,852 Other Research: Research Careers 158 15,961 158 17,810 173 19,569 Cooperative Clin Rsch 3 1,616 5 2,406 5 2,509 MBRS 0 1,173 0 1,215 0 1,267 Other 27 2,724 27 3,107 27 3,241 Subtotal, Other 188 21,474 190 24,538 205 26,586 Total, Rsch Grants 1,450 549,653 1,532 627,944 1,616 699,668 Training: FTTP FTTP FTTP Individual 52 1,752 52 1,871 52 2,034 Institutional 499 15,557 520 17,519 520 19,050 Total, Training 551 17,309 572 19,390 572 21,084 R
