USFWS Emblem U.S. Fish 
Home Page Three-year Review Photo Gallery Publications Notes from the Field News Releases Site for Kids FAQ Wolf Links
Feedback
Ecological Services Home Southwest Region USFWS Home USFWS Search USFWS Offices Disclaimer 
Frequently Asked Questions on the Mexican Wolf Reintroduction Program
Updated: July 1999
What is a Mexican gray wolf? The Mexican gray wolf (Canis lupus baileyi), also called the "Mexican wolf" or "lobo," is the southern-most occurring subspecies of the gray wolf in North America.
Historically, the Mexican wolf was found throughout the mountainous regions from central Mexico through southeastern Arizona, southern New Mexico, and southwestern Texas (see Map 1).
Mexican wolves typically weigh 60 to 80 pounds and measure about 5^1/[2] feet from nose to tail (about the size of an adult German shepherd).
They have a distinctive, richly colored coat of buff, gray, rust and black.
Like other wolves, Mexican wolves have a complex social structure and live in extended family groups, consisting of an adult mated pair and their offspring.
Wolves hunt cooperatively to bring down prey animals usually much larger than themselves.
Native prey for Mexican wolves includes white-tailed deer, mule deer and elk.
What is the current status of the Mexican gray wolf? There are only about 200 Mexican wolves in the world.
Most are part of a captive breeding program in 40 zoos and wildlife sanctuaries located in the United States and Mexico to prevent extinction of the subspecies.
In March 1998, the first 11 Mexican wolves from captive stock were reintroduced into the wild in the Apache National Forest in southeastern Arizona under a program to re-establish the subspecies to a portion of its historic range.
Two additional wolves were released later that year.
Twenty-one wolves have been released in 1999.
Of the 34 wolves released: five have been shot; one disappeared; one was hit by a vehicle; five were returned to captivity; and at least 22 are free-ranging.
The status of released Mexican wolves can change unexpectedly.
For up-to-date information, visit the Mexican wolf web page, .
How did the Mexican wolf become so endangered? Intensive predator removal efforts from the late-1800s to the mid-1900s extirpated the Mexican wolf from the wild in the United States portion of its range.
The Mexican gray wolf was listed as "endangered" on the Federal List of Threatened and Endangered Species in 1976.
Its presence in the wild in Mexico has not been confirmed since 1980.
What is the reintroduction plan? The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, in cooperation with the Arizona Game and Fish Department, the New Mexico Department of Game and Fish, USDA Wildlife Services and USDA Forest Service, began releasing captive-reared Mexican wolves into the designated "primary recovery zone" in the Apache National Forest in eastern Arizona in 1998 (see Map 2).
Released wolves and their progeny have been designated a nonessential experimental population under a special provision of the Endangered Species Act.
These wolves are allowed to disperse into and colonize the entire Apache National Forest and adjacent Gila National Forest in western New Mexico an area of about 7,000 square miles.
This area is referred to as the "Blue Range Wolf Recovery Area."
The reintroduction objective is to re-establish a wild population of at least 100 Mexican wolves.
If the objective of 100 wolves cannot be achieved on the Blue Range area, additional wolves may be released on the "White Sands Wolf Recovery Area."
The White Sands area includes the White Sands Missile Range and additional lands to the west.
Releases will occur through 2002 and the Service predicts that a wild population of 100 wolves will be achieved by 2008.
Why was the Blue Range area selected for reintroduction of Mexican wolves? The Blue Range area, consisting of the Apache National Forest in eastern Arizona and the Gila National Forest in western New Mexico, has a large, multi-species native prey base, is resilient to drought, and contains almost 7,000 square miles of habitat in historic range for wolves to colonize.
Analyses suggest the Blue Range area can support at least 100 wolves; thus, it is likely that the reintroduction objective will be achieved by using the Blue Range area only.
This is a biologically sound approach that is more cost-effective than attempting reintroduction in the White Sands wolf recovery area before the Blue Range area.
The White Sands area of New Mexico can support about 20 wolves, provides only mule deer as native ungulate prey, and is experiencing a recent decline in the deer population because of extended drought.
This area would be used in the future only if necessary to achieve the reintroduction objective of 100 wolves.
How long will the reintroduction program last? The first release of 11 Mexican wolves occurred in March 1998.
Additional releases are planned through 2002 or until natural reproduction in the wild can sustain population growth.
We expect to reach the 100-wolf population objective by 2008.
What is meant by primary and secondary recovery zones, wolf recovery areas, and the experimental population area? Mexican wolves are released into a primary recovery zone within the Apache National Forest in eastern Arizona, and allowed to disperse into a secondary recovery zone comprising both the Apache National Forest and the Gila National Forest of New Mexico.
The two zones combined make up the wolf recovery area (see Map 2).
Mexican wolves are allowed and expected ultimately to re-colonize suitable habitat within the entire wolf recovery area.
Wolves are not allowed to re-colonize the entire experimental population area.
If a member of the nonessential experimental population is found inside the experimental population area, but outside the designated wolf recovery area, it will be captured and re-released within the recovery area, put into the captive population, or otherwise managed according to provisions of a Service-approved management plan.
If a Mexican wolf is found in the United States outside the experimental population area boundary, the Service will presume it to be of wild origin with full "endangered" status under the Endangered Species Act, unless it possesses a radio collar or other identifying mark establishing it as a member of the experimental population.
In the latter case, the Service or an authorized agency will attempt to capture the wolf.
What is an experimental population? The Endangered Species Act provides for the designation of reintroduced populations of threatened or endangered species as "experimental populations" and for the further designation of these populations as "essential" or "nonessential" to the continued existence of the species.
Congress added this provision to the Act in 1982 to increase management flexibility during reintroductions of listed species.
For nonessential experimental populations, consultation provisions of the Act are relaxed and limited taking (e.g., harassing, capturing, or killing) of individual animals can be authorized in a special regulation.
This helps the Service to mitigate specific impacts, respond to particular needs of the reintroduced population, and address concerns of local citizens.
For example, major land use restrictions are not imposed, livestock depredation situations can be addressed immediately, and wolves can be moved, if necessary, without any additional permits (as would be required if the wolves were to retain their "endangered" status).
Are wolves adequately protected with the nonessential experimental designation? Nonessential experimental Mexican wolves are still protected under the Endangered Species Act.
The special rules for the nonessential experimental population are very specific as to if, when, and how management actions can be taken to control wolves that depredate livestock.
Also, the designation allows for greater management flexibility to capture, monitor, or translocate animals.
Many wolf biologists believe that wolf recovery cannot be achieved successfully without management to integrate wolves with human populations and livestock production.
Selective control of individual wolves that depredate livestock encourages wolf populations that focus on wild prey, and fosters tolerance of wolves by livestock producers.
This increases public support for wolves and enhances the success of recovery efforts.
From where are the release animals obtained and how are they selected? Wolves scheduled for release are selected from release-candidate wolves maintained at the Services captive wolf management facility on Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge near Socorro, New Mexico, the Turner Endangered Species Fund facility on the Ladder Ranch in southern New Mexico, and the Wolf Haven International facility near Tenino Washington.
All of the release animals are captive-reared wolves that are "genetically surplus," meaning their genes are already well represented in the captive population.
Wolves that are candidates for release to the wild are kept at these facilities and paired with genetically compatible mates.
The Mexican Wolf Recovery Plan and Mexican Wolf Species Survival Plan call for establishment and maintenance of a captive population of 240 Mexican wolves, and for reestablishment of a wild population within historic range.
Facilities like the above, where Mexican wolves can be held and managed to foster behaviors and characteristics that will enhance their ability to survive in the wild, are needed for the foreseeable future.
Will the public be able to view wolves at these facilities? One of the primary purposes of these management facilities is to foster wild behavior in captive wolves by isolating them from contact with humans.
The facilities are not open for viewing of wolves by the public.
Mexican wolves can be viewed at many other captive facilities, however.
For a list of those facilities, write to the address at the end of this publication or visit the Mexican wolf web site.
How are the release candidates prepared for a wild existence? Wolves are prepared for release by isolating them from human influences, allowing them to live in social groups in a natural setting, and feeding them road-killed native prey, such as deer and elk.
Live prey is not fed to captive wolves.
The opportunity to hunt exists only if small animals enter the pens on their own.
Where are the release sites in the Blue Range area? Seven release sites have been selected to date (see Map 3).
Factors considered in choosing these sites included: distribution and abundance of prey; distribution and timing of livestock grazing; proximity to water; distance from human habitation; potential conflicts with other human activities; accessibility; and distance from recovery area boundaries.
What reintroduction techniques are used? The Service is committed to adaptive management for wolf recovery.
This means that all management techniques are evaluated continually and, if necessary, revised.
Initially, a "soft release" technique is being used, which means that pairs or family groups of wolves will spend up to several months in pens at the release sites to become acclimated to local conditions and develop an affinity for the locality.
All wolves to be released are fitted with radio collars prior to their transfer to the acclimation pens.
During the acclimation period, the wolves are fed road-killed native prey.
Once released at the appropriate time, the wolves are monitored closely and supplementally fed until it is apparent that they are hunting on their own.
How many Mexican wolves will be reintroduced? Several family groups will be released each year through 2002 or until it is apparent that the recovery goal of 100 wolves can be reached by reproduction in the wild population.
A family group includes a mated pair and, potentially, some of their offspring.
The family groups may have two to six individuals, thus 30 to 90 wolves could be released by 2002.
Full evaluations of the success of the reintroduction effort will be conducted in 2001 and 2003, including a decision to continue, modify, or terminate the project.
How are released wolves monitored? All wolves released are fitted with radio transmitter collars.
Systematic telemetry surveys are conducted daily by land or air to monitor locations and activities of released wolves.
Wild-born wolves will be captured and radio-collared during the initial phase (first five years) of the recovery effort, or longer, if necessary, to monitor population growth.
Are there plans to reintroduce grizzly bears or jaguars to the Southwest as part of this recovery effort? The Service has no plans to reintroduce either the grizzly bear or the jaguar to the Southwest.
Reintroduction of Mexican wolves to the Blue Range area of Arizona and New Mexico involved extensive scoping, planning, biological studies, public meetings, and completion of an Environmental Impact Statement, all of which focused solely on the Mexican wolf.
Before any species listed as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act can be reintroduced to portions of its historic range, an extensive array of legal requirements planning, studies, public involvement, and environmental compliance must be met.
This process can occur only after a species recovery team approves the initial concept.
Will wolf reintroduction affect private and tribal lands? Wolf recovery is not proposed or approved on private and tribal lands.
Private landowners and tribal governments can choose to allow wolf recovery on their lands if they so desire.
With the permission of the landowner or tribal government, the Service can provide assistance for managing or controlling wolves.
Although livestock owners and their agents will be allowed to kill wolves that are attacking livestock on their lands and anyone will be allowed to harass wolves to scare them away, other provisions of the special rule would also apply on private and tribal lands.
For example, it is illegal to kill a wolf that is not in the act of attacking livestock.
Will land-use restrictions be necessary under the reintroduction plan? The Service's reintroduction plan for the Mexican gray wolf contains no land-use restrictions or prohibitions on private and tribal lands and no major restrictions on public lands.
If needed, certain uses can be temporarily restricted on public lands within one mile of release pens, dens, and rendezvous sites (specific areas pups use after they leave the den).
Outside these few small areas where temporary restrictions may be imposed, traditional uses of public lands, such as logging, grazing, mining, military activities, hunting, hiking, and camping will be unaffected by Mexican gray wolf reintroduction.
How much livestock depredation is anticipated? Wolves are natural predators of ungulates (hoofed mammals), and will sometimes take livestock.
However, experience in other areas has shown that when adequate numbers of wild prey are available, livestock predation is minimal.
Analysis based on studies of wolves and livestock in other areas and adjusted for southwestern livestock management practices predicts that if 100 wolves are established in the Blue Range area, 1 to 34 head of livestock would be taken annually.
This represents less than one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) of the livestock on the range in the wolf recovery area.
So far there have been three confirmed livestock depredations by released Mexican wolves.
In 1998, one miniature horse colt was attacked but recovered following veterinary treatment.
In 1999, one calf was attacked and injured but recovered, and one calf was killed.
Will ranchers be compensated for livestock killed by wolves? The federal government does not pay direct compensation for livestock losses.
Instead, grazing fees on public lands are adjusted because some loss of livestock to predators, including mountain lions, bears and coyotes, is expected.
Defenders of Wildlife, a private wildlife conservation organization, has established a fund to pay livestock owners market value for verified livestock losses caused by Mexican wolves.
To ensure that an effective notification and response procedure for depredation situations is available to the public, the Service and its cooperators established a toll-free number, 1-888-459-9653, that people can call 24-hours-a-day to report a Mexican wolf sighting or possible depredation.
Will a rancher be allowed to kill a wolf? The special rule for the nonessential experimental population allows for "taking" of wolves that depredate livestock in certain situations.
On private and tribal lands, livestock owners or their agents will be allowed to kill a Mexican gray wolf that is in the act of attacking livestock.
On public grazing lands, livestock owners or their agents may be granted temporary permission to kill a wolf that is attacking their livestock after the wolf population has grown to a specified level and agency efforts to control the depredating wolf have been completed.
Everywhere within the experimental population area, anyone will be allowed to scare away wolves at any time.
On private, tribal, and public lands, wildlife managers can remove any wolves that prey on livestock.
Permission from landowners will be obtained before any management actions are undertaken on private and tribal lands.
Can captive-reared wolves successfully adapt to the wild? Adjustment to the wild presents a challenge for any captive-reared animal being reintroduced.
Although the Mexican wolf is five generations removed from the wild, successful hunting skills were exhibited by all free-ranging wolves within weeks after their release.
Have any pups been born in the wild? In 1998 there was one confirmed pup born in the wild.
It was last seen after its mother was shot in August 1998.
The pup is presumed dead.
As of the July 1999, an unknown number of wild-born pups were confirmed to one family pack.
How will other wildlife populations be affected by wolves? Predator-prey interactions are extremely complex and generally require long-term study; however, some general statements can be made.
Wolves and other predators do not cause their prey to go extinct (if they did, the predators would starve); but predators can limit prey populations.
A major advantage of wolves and other predators to prey populations is that they can reduce nutritional stress on prey animals by keeping populations within the capacity of the habitat to support them; this in turn enhances the health of prey animals, which results in good reproductive and survival rates in the population.
Computer models and expert opinion surveys were used to project the long-range effect of a fully recovered population of wolves in proposed areas.
Models predicted that under favorable environmental conditions, deer and elk populations could still increase with wolves.
Under unfavorable environmental conditions (e.g., a prolonged drought) deer and elk populations would decline even without wolves, but if wolves were present, they could decline an additional 20% in the Blue Range area and 46% in the White Sands area.
Wolves also may affect other predator populations through competition for space and prey.
There are several ongoing studies of the interrelationships between these predators in other areas where wolves are recovering that demonstrate this competition, but it is too early to determine long-term population effects in most areas.
For example, preliminary findings show that coyote populations have declined by about 50 percent in areas of Yellowstone National Park where wolves have been re-established.
Are wolves dangerous to humans? Any wild animal can be dangerous.
Aggressive behavior from wild wolves towards humans, however, is extremely rare.
Wild wolves are generally shy of humans and avoid contact with them whenever possible.
In contrast, domestic dogs, pet wolves, and wolf-dog hybrids are responsible for killing several humans every year in North America.
Wolves and wolf-dog hybrids kept as pets can be unpredictable and dangerous.
Do wolves poise a danger to my pets? To protect both the pet and the wildlife, pets should always be monitored carefully by their owners in areas, such as national forests or parks, where they may encounter native wildlife.
Unsupervised dogs who stray from their owners homes or from their handlers into wolf territories are definitely at risk.
Wolves will treat dogs as interlopers on their territories and can be very aggressive towards them, especially during denning and pup rearing season.
Bear and lion hunters who hunt with dogs may wish to contact the Service or its cooperators to receive additional information on wolf locations before running dogs in Wolf Country.
It is illegal to kill or injure a wolf attacking your pet dog or cat.
How is the public kept informed of the status and progress of the wolf reintroduction? The Service is committed to an open dialogue with local communities and other interested parties as the Mexican wolf reintroduction continues to move forward.
The Service and its cooperators periodically provide written Project Updates to the public and post the same on the Mexican wolf web page (address below).
Notes from the Field are posted bi-weekly in Wolf Country communities, as well as on the web page.
Biologists provide presentations and participate in other public forums that facilitate communication between project staff and affected communities.
Information and interaction activities are developed with input from the public and evaluated with the objective of addressing current needs and concerns.
What is the status of the Law Enforcement investigations of the five wolves shot in 1998? One case is closed.
No charges were brought against the individual.
The other four cases are still under investigation.
What is the status of the lawsuit filed against the Mexican Wolf Recovery Program? The New Mexico Cattle Growers Association; Greenlee County Cattle Growers Association; New Mexico Public Lands Council; Grant County Farm and Livestock Bureau; Catron County Farm and Livestock Bureau; New Mexico Wool Growers, Inc.; New Mexico Farm and Livestock Bureau; Hidalgo County Cattle Growers; and Production Credit Association of New Mexico (Plaintiffs) filed a lawsuit on March 26, 1998, against the Department of the Interior and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Defendants) which seeks to stop the Mexican wolf reintroduction project.
Their legal "complaint" alleges that (1) Mexican gray wolves already inhabit parts of Arizona and New Mexico, which would render the Services use of the nonessential experimental population designation (under Section 10(j) of the Endangered Species Act) illegal; (2) the plaintiffs will suffer irreparable harm because the wolves will prey on livestock, the wolves will invade private lands, uses of private lands will be restricted, and the Service may take or condemn private property; (3) released Mexican wolves are not genetically pure, but rather are a dog or coyote mix; (4) the Services Environmental Impact Statement was inadequate for a variety of reasons; and (5) the Service violated certain provisions of the Endangered Species Act.
All allegations have been denied by the Federal Defendants.
Following their submission of a motion, the following organizations were allowed to intervene in the lawsuit as "Defendant-Intervenors": Defenders of Wildlife; National Parks and Conservation Association; Mexican Wolf Coalition of Texas; Preserve Arizonas Wolves; Southwest Center for Biological Diversity; White Sands Wolf Coalition; Sky Island Alliance: Jeff Williamson; Wildlife Damage Review; National Wildlife Federation; Arizona League of Conservation Voters; Forest Guardians; Sierra Club; and Animal Protection of New Mexico.
All legal pleadings in this case are scheduled to be filed with the Court by the end of September 1999.
The Court will then review both sides arguments and the governments administrative record and decide the case.
This process is expected to take several months.
