[bulb.gif] Chapter 4: Develop a Balanced Domestic Energy Resource Portfolio __________________________________________________________________ (Note: Figures referenced in this chapter have not been included at this time.)
To achieve the goals of increased energy productivity, pollution prevention, and enhanced national security, the Nation must make the most efficient use of a diverse portfolio of domestic energy resources that will allow us to meet our energy needs today, tomorrow, and well into the 21st century.
The Administration continues to promote the economically beneficial and environmentally sound expansion of domestic energy resources.
Our domestic energy resources include coal, petroleum, natural gas, nuclear energy, and renewable energy (primarily hydropower, biomass, geothermal, and wind).
About 85 percent of the energy we consume comes from fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas (see Figure 14).
In the year 2010, we undoubtedly will use greater amounts of renewable energy resources, but still will rely primarily on the energy resources that we use today.
Further into the 21st century, we could rely much more heavily on solar and other renewable resources, and our energy portfolio may include hydrogen and fusion energy.
Sustainable development of energy resources means that we must efficiently use our existing domestic resources today and augment the resources that are available for the future.
Some domestic resources, such as natural gas and oil, must be developed in ways that ensure these resources are not abandoned and are economically accessible.
Developing and deploying advanced energy technologies today will ensure that we will have the necessary means to produce and use our energy resources when we need them.
Maximizing the cost-effective use of our relatively clean energy resources, such as renewables and natural gas, will ensure that future generations will inherit a cleaner environment.
The Federal Role in Helping To Develop a Domestic Energy Resource Portfolio The Federal Government has a vital role to play in the development of energy technology and in the stewardship of our domestic natural resources.
The private sector alone may not provide all of the technology that we will need to find, produce, and use our domestic energy resources and to compete in world energy markets.
Even the largest energy companies often are unwilling to make substantial investments in long-term and high-risk research and development (R
Through partnership with industry, the Federal Government can help develop and demonstrate promising, but still unproven, advanced energy supply and utilization technologies-especially those technologies that have substantial public benefits such as improved environmental performance.
To the extent that the private sector cannot or will not do so, the Federal Government invests at all stages of technology development to ensure that all Americans will have the clean and affordable energy they will need in the future.
In the near term, Federal policy helps ensure that our energy industries remain viable, providing jobs for Americans and energy to the Nation.
By supporting our energy industries through appropriate tax treatment, sound regulatory decisionmaking, and R
To maintain economic growth and enhance national security, we must diversify our energy resources and increase the efficiency of energy use.
To ensure a cleaner environment, we must increase our use of cleaner energy resources, such as renewables and natural gas, and we must develop technologies that will allow us to produce and use existing energy resources in ways that will result in fewer harmful effects on the environment.
To achieve our national goals, the Administration is working to promote the efficient development and use of a domestic energy resource portfolio by-
* Partnering with industry to research, develop, and deploy advanced technologies that will allow industry to explore for, produce, develop, and use our domestic energy resources more efficiently, more safely, with fewer harmful effects on the environment, and in more applications * Providing appropriate tax and other fiscal incentives to support our domestic energy resource industries * Stimulating markets for clean energy technologies, such as natural gas and renewable energy * Reforming and streamlining regulations to make energy markets more efficient, to allow our domestic energy resources to compete in energy markets, and to better weigh costs against risks * Promoting U.S. energy resources and advanced energy technologies abroad
As discussed below, the Administration's policy is to apply the appropriate tools to each sector, and to make the best use of taxpayer dollars by aligning budgetary priorities with national goals.
Oil: Enhancing Domestic Production Capability The growing level of U.S. oil consumption raises potential economic and national security concerns.
In addition to emphasizing efficient use of oil products and enhancing fuel flexibility, national energy policy must address declining domestic production levels with minimum interference with market forces.
The Administration's policy is to improve the economics of domestic oil production by reducing costs, in order to lessen the impact on this industry of low and volatile prices.
Petroleum products account for nearly 40 percent of the energy consumed in the United States, and this share is expected by most analysts to remain constant for the next decade.
Investment in oil exploration and production activity in the United States is related directly to the price of oil in international markets as well as to costs of domestic production.
Exploration and production spending by major U.S. oil companies is increasing overseas, rather than in the United States, and independent producers increasingly are unable to respond alone to the technically demanding and highly volatile price environment that characterizes the oil industry.
U.S. crude oil production decreased for most of the 1970s, stabilized or increased slightly in the early 1980s (mostly because of production in Alaska), and has been decreasing since 1986.
Oil fields are being abandoned at an increasingly high rate, resulting in the loss of billions of barrels of oil reserves each year.
At the same time, industry cost-cutting since 1986 has yielded domestic finding costs similar to foreign finding costs, and technical innovation is increasing production efficiency.
Still, the domestic oil industry is characterized mainly by marginal, high-cost production.
The few areas of high production at lower per-barrel costs-parts of Alaska, the Gulf of Mexico, and deep formations in the Rockies and elsewhere-have not offset the decline in the domestic resource base.
With declining industry profitability caused by low prices and high price volatility, long-term industry R
The consequences of this decline in private R
The price of oil is set by the world market; the U.S. Government cannot exert much influence on this critical component of industry revenues.
Consequently, the best opportunity for the Federal Government to improve the economics of domestic oil production is to help reduce costs.
Throughout the Federal Government, the Administration is pursuing various ways of lowering costs, including R
Partnering With Industry To Develop Advanced Supply Technologies Continued development and deployment of advanced technology can ameliorate the decline in domestic oil production through enhanced recovery in existing fields and increased ability to find new sources.
Advanced technologies reduce operating costs, improve process reliability, develop flexible processes, and meet environmental requirements.
The Administration supports government- industry cost-sharing partnerships to meet high-priority needs.
The Department of Energy's oil R
By 2010, it is estimated that domestic oil production linked to the deployment of advanced exploration and production technologies supported by the Administration will be 1 million barrels per day.
Through the Department of Energy's Advanced Computation Technology Initiative (ACTI), the Federal Government also is making available to domestic oil and gas producers extraordinary computational and modeling skills developed by the Department's weapons laboratories as part of their national security mission.
These cutting-edge computer technologies can aid in the search for new resources and can optimize extraction from existing reservoirs.
Providing Appropriate Incentives To Increase Domestic Exploration and Production Although limited by the need to reduce the Federal budget deficit, financial incentives can provide support and reduce barriers to selected promising activities that the private sector deems too risky to develop or that are at risk of premature abandonment during periods of depressed market prices.
Financial incentives can take many forms, including reductions in Federal income taxes, reduced royalty rates for natural gas or oil production on Federal lands, and assistance to the industry in improving access to capital markets.
One of our best opportunities for adding large new oil reserves can be found in the central and western Gulf of Mexico, particularly in deeper water.
Royalty relief can be a key to timely access to this important resource.
The Administration supports targeted royalty relief to encourage the production of domestic oil and natural gas resources in deep water in the Gulf of Mexico.
This step will help to unlock the estimated 15 billion barrels of oil-equivalent in the deepwater Gulf of Mexico, providing new energy supplies for the future, spurring the development of new technologies, and supporting thousands of jobs in the gas and oil industry and affiliated industries.
The Administration also supports a royalty rate reduction for onshore heavy-oil wells to improve ultimate recovery and increase the domestic oil reserve base.
The Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management (BLM) has proposed a rulemaking that would provide royalty relief for heavy-oil wells.
This relief would reduce the abandonment rate for marginally economic heavy-oil wells and would increase reserves by up to 40 million barrels of oil.
Reforming Regulations To Reduce Uncertainties and Costs Throughout the Federal Government, the Administration is working to streamline regulations governing all industries and, in particular, the oil industry.
These reforms will have significant benefits for natural gas producers as well.
Virtually all aspects of the oil industry are governed by regulations concerning environmental issues, exploration and production activities, royalties, and taxes.
The current Federal and State regulatory framework lacks incentives for cost-effective pollution control and innovation and adoption of promising technologies.
These regulations are often complex, duplicative, and inflexible.
Industry faces increased regulatory uncertainty and high compliance costs, while Federal, State, and local governments also spend more than necessary on implementing and enforcing regulations.
The Department of the Interior's Minerals Management Service (MMS), which manages the leasing of Federal outer continental shelf (OCS) petroleum and natural gas resources, is reviewing its regulations in the following areas: (1) deepwater production rules governing subsea installations and the flaring or venting of small amounts of gas; (2) blowout, safety, and pollution prevention equipment; (3) conservation and diligent development requirements; (4) management of directional survey drilling; (5) requirements regarding construction and removal of platforms; (6) daily pollution inspection requirements; and (7) training.
Regulatory changes may be appropriate for all of these areas, and MMS is studying proposals to address these issues.
MMS has completed a negotiated rulemaking process for gas valuation on Federal leases and initiated similar efforts for Indian leases.
MMS issued final regulations facilitating company recoupment of certain payments associated with OCS leases and is examining regulations to reduce or eliminate certain reporting requirements and to make it easier and cheaper for companies to properly report and pay royalties.
MMS is looking at changes to lease terms and royalty rates that would encourage more domestic production.
The Royalty Management Program, which governs the collection of royalty revenues from Federal onshore and offshore lands, is being reviewed in the following areas: (1) valuation of natural gas from unitized properties, and the responsibilities of payers and lessees; (2) procedures for obtaining refunds and credits for excess royalty payments from OCS production; (3) penalties and assessments for improper reporting; and (4) streamlining of the MMS administrative appeals process.
The BLM has conducted a sweeping review of its oil and gas leasing program to make its onshore leasing program more efficient and responsive.
In April 1995, the review team published its report, which contained a list of proposals for improving the onshore oil and gas leasing program.
Examples of these proposals include the following: simplifying unitization and communications agreements; simplifying requirements related to oil sampling and to gas flaring and venting; eliminating duplicate bonding requirements; developing a pilot program for environmental compliance self-certification; and selectively increasing bonding amounts for problem-prone operations.
The Department of Energy also is funding the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission in an effort to streamline regulations governing the exploration and production of oil and natural gas on Federal lands.
The Commission has convened a working group to examine State and Federal requirements on Federal lands and to recommend ways to reduce duplication, share information and resources, and reduce costs.
This 3-year effort focuses on the States with the greatest amount of production from Federal land: California, Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming.
Removing Artificial Market Barriers The Administration supports lifting the ban on the export of Alaska North Slope (ANS) crude oil.
ANS crude oil is geographically convenient to only 20 percent of U.S. refining capacity.
Since the North Slope reached full production in the mid-1970s, ANS crude oil that cannot be used on the West Coast has had to be shipped more than 13,000 miles to Gulf Coast markets.
Confronted with this expensive option, ANS producers have been forced to sell ANS crude on the West Coast at prices considerably lower than the oil's value to refiners.
Historically, this discount also has helped to depress California crude oil prices.
Removing the ban on exporting ANS crude oil will allow the marginal supply of ANS crude to seek its true value in world markets.
It will create additional employment, raise royalty collection for the Federal Government and revenues for the States of Alaska and California, and lift domestic oil production by roughly 100,000 barrels per day.
ANS exports will contribute to energy production and economic growth, without employment dislocation, environmental degradation, or significant increases in retail petroleum product prices.
In the event of an oil emergency, the President could terminate the exports.
Supporting Exploration and Production of New Supplies in Environmentally Sensitive Ways The Administration supports exploration for and production of oil and natural gas in areas that are not environmentally sensitive.
For example, through technology R
More than 40 million acres of public lands are covered by oil and gas leases, and BLM has issued competitive oil and gas leases on more than 4 million acres of public lands and has approved more than 4,300 drilling permits in the past 2 years.
The Administration continues to oppose opening the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) and certain Outer Continental Shelf areas for oil and natural gas development.
ANWR is just one part of the Alaska North Slope oil exploration and development picture.
There are extensive State and Federal lands that can be developed without the need for development in ANWR, and the Alaska Department of Natural Resources' Oil and Gas Division estimates that about 6.2 billion barrels of oil remain to be developed on the North Slope outside of ANWR.
Reforming the Regulatory Structure Governing Refining Activities The Administration's policy is to simplify the complex regulatory structure governing refining activities and capital investment.
This will speed investment in clean, efficient, and competitive refining technologies.
U.S. refining capacity increased by almost 50 percent during the 1970s, but fell during the 1980s and has remained in the range of 15 million to 16 million barrels per day so far in the 1990s.
The configuration of the industry has changed substantially over this period.
While U.S. refining capacity today is close to what it was in the mid-1970s, the number of operable refineries has dropped by one-third, reflecting the trend away from smaller, more inefficient refineries, and the capacity to process heavier, high-sulfur crude oils has increased significantly.
On a capacity basis, the ability to remove sulfur from petroleum products has doubled.
The net result is that U.S. refineries are able to process heavier, higher sulfur crude oils and make a wider range of light petroleum products than they could in the 1970s or even in the 1980s.
Today's refineries are cleaner, and the products they manufacture are less damaging to the environment.
Lead has been phased out of gasoline; and, as a result of the lowering of its vapor pressure, gasoline is less likely to emit toxic substances such as benzene.
Sulfur content in diesel fuel and residual oils is substantially lower.
Virtually all of these improvements have resulted from Federal and State environmental regulation, but such regulations have become expensive.
The National Petroleum Council estimated that capital expenditures of $37 billion (1990 dollars) will be needed in the refining industry between 1991 and the year 2000 for product quality and stationary source regulatory compliance.
The challenge of the 1990s for the petroleum refining industry is to find ways to become more efficient and clean and to reduce the costs of environmental compliance.
If the regulatory burden on domestic refiners drives the industry offshore, energy security concerns will intensify.
Addressing these issues, the Environmental Protection Agency's Common Sense Initiative is designed to identify "cheaper, cleaner, smarter" ways of achieving our environmental objectives.
The initiative brings together industry, the States, the Federal Government, and public interest groups to identify and implement both short- and long-term opportunities to simplify environmental regulations and policies.
In the oil refinery sector, the initiative will identify the permit, regulatory, and statutory areas of flexibility that will increase the refining industry's flexibility and lower its costs, without sacrificing environmental performance.
Additionally, the Department of Energy's Refinery of the Future initiative is assisting the refining industry to hasten the transition from responding to command and control environmental regulation to developing and adopting pollution-avoidance and resource conservation technologies.
The Department will assist industry in developing and deploying novel or improved high-priority process technologies and an advanced technology base that will (1) maintain or enhance industry competitiveness, (2) foster the evolution of more economic approaches for reducing effluent hazardous and nonhazardous waste streams, (3) improve overall refinery energy efficiency, and (4) promote greater flexibility in utilization of alternative energy, feedstock, and raw material inputs.
__________________________________________________________________
Continue Chapter four
Return to Table of Contents
