[ELPlogo2.jpg] [l
Symptoms include loss of memory, judgment, and reasoning, as well as changes in mood and behavior.
It is not a normal part of aging.
Amino Acid: Any of 20 basic elements that make proteins.
Bacteria: A tiny one-cell organism that reproduces by cell division.
Biologist: A person who studies plants, animals, and humans.
Many biologists now do research on genetics.
Cell (human): In biology, a structure surrounded by a membrane and containing genetic material (DNA) on the inside.
Considered by most biologists to be the basic unit of life.
Chromosome: In organisms without a nucleus (such as bacteria), this is a circular DNA molecule used in genetic engineering.
In organisms with a nucleus (including plants and humans), this is one of the threadlike structures within the nucleus that contains DNA.
Diabetes: A disorder caused by the body's decreased production or use of insulin (a hormone produced by the pancreas cells need to be able to use blood sugar).
Diagnostic test: Tests used to identify a particular disease or characteristic.
DNA: (deoxyribonucleic acid) A molecule in the form of a double helix , found within a structure known as a chromosome, within the nucleus of every living cell.
First discovered in the 19th century, it controls the daily operation of a cell, and provides the genetic "blueprint" for the physical characteristics of all living organisms.
Gene: A small stretch of DNA that directs the production of proteins.
A hereditary unit that occupies a specific position (locus) on the chromosome.
This unit has a specific effect on the physical characteristics of the organism.
Gene mapping: Finding the relative positions of genes on a DNA molecule (chromosome) and of the distance between them.
Genetics: The study of heredity.
Hereditary disease: A physical disorder that is inherited from parents or grandparents rather than caused by environmental factors.
Heredity: The passing of certain traits from parents to their offspring through the genes.
Human genome: The complete set of genes in a cell that creates a living organism.
Human genome project: The scientific project to "read" the DNA of human chromosomes.
Consists of not one project, but rather hundreds of separate research projects conducted throughout the world.
The objective is to create a directory of the genes that can be used to answer questions such as what specific genes do and how they work.
Inherited trait: Ways of looking or being that are caused by the genetic make-up or environment of a living organism.
Learned traits: Ways of looking or being that are caused by the environment of a living organism.
Molecule: A chemical entity consisting of two or more atoms of the same or different elements chemically bonded together.
Nucleus (of a cell): The control center of the cell that contains chromosomes and controls the cell's actions.
Organism: Any living thing, either vegetable or animal.
Protein: The "building blocks" of our bodies that contain substances such as hormones and antibodies to regulate body functions.
RNA: (ribonucleic acid) Like DNA, this is another molecule that is important in genetics.
It is different from DNA because it is single stranded (not double stranded).
Trait: Ways of looking or being.
Traits that are genetic are passed down through the genes from parents to their children
Transforming factor: Something that causes a change.
White blood cells: Cells that circulate in the blood and work as part of the immune system to fight off "foreign bodies" that cause disease.
Appendix B (Printer-Friendly Format)
Handout 1 for Students in Group A
1866
Gregor Mendel, an Austrian monk, described basic elements of heredity (these are now called genes).
1860s
Friedrich Miescher, a Swiss chemist, did research on the chemical composition of white blood cellss.
He discovered two types of molecules in the nucleus of the blood cellsribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
Handout 1 for Students in Group B
1870-1900
There were no major findings during this period.
Scientists knew that DNA played some part in heredity but its structure seemed too simple to play a major role in heredity.
During this period, scientists thought that proteins (with their much more complex structure) played the most important role in heredity.
1902
At Columbia University in New York City, a medical student began to study whether chromosomes were made up of genes and if all cells in the body contained these genes.
Handout 1 for Students in Group C
1920s
Frederick Griffith, an English physician, accidentally discovered a transforming factor while doing experiments with bacteria.
When this factor was taken from one bacteria and put into another, it caused changes in the second bacteria.
1934
Griffiths colleague, Oswald Avery, conducted a 10-year study to identify the transforming factor.
His experiments found that neither proteins nor RNA carry genetic information.
He then wondered if DNA was the transforming agent.
To answer this question, he conducted an experiment.
In it, he destroyed the DNA in the first bacteria.
When the DNA was destroyed, no hereditary information was transmitted to the second bacteria.
Avery then concluded that DNA causes changes in the second bacteria by transmitting traits from the first bacteria.
Handout 1 for Students in Group D
1953
James Watson, an American geneticist, and Francis Crick, a British biophysicist, discovered the structure of DNA.
To do this, they used X-ray photographs of DNA taken by New Zealand biophysicist Maurice Wilkins.
Until this time, it was not known how DNA made a copy of itself in order to transmit genetic information to other cells.
The three men won the Nobel Prize for their discovery in 1962.
1960s
Marshall Nirenberg, an American biochemist, and Har Gobind Khorana, an American biochemist born in India, decoded DNA and discovered the building blocks of DNA.
This code consists of four chemical units, represented by the letters A (adenine), T (thymine), C (cytosine), and G (guanine).
Each string of letters produces a specific Amino Acid.
When these Amino Acids are combined, they create human traits such as eye color and genetic diseases.
Handout 1 for Students in Group E
1977
Frederick Sanger, a British biologist, developed a method to decode the entire DNA strings in one bacteria.
This was the first living organism to be totally decoded.
1990
Agencies of the U.S. government fund a 15-year project to sequence the human genome.
This is a map of the cells inner workings and of all the chemicals produced by DNA that determine human characteristics and behavior.
Handout 1 for Students in Group F
1999
The Human Genome Project finishes sequencing the first human chromosome.
June 2000
Both the U.S. government-sponsored Human Genome Project and a privately funded research group announce that they have a draft of the first human genome.
Appendix C (Printer-Friendly Format)
Handout 2 for Activity 2
1.
How many pages of newspaper would it take to write out all the DNA in one human cell?
a. 10%
2.
How many DNA letters are contained in the genome of a mouse?
b. 99.9%
3.
How many DNA letters are contained in the human genome?
c. between 30,000 and 140,000
4.
How many human genes do scientists estimate there are?
d. less than 5%
5.
What percentage of human genes cannot be understood with current technology?
e. 3,100,000,000
6.
What percentage of all human DNA creates the genes in our body?
f. 2,300,000,000
7.
What percentage of each humans DNA is identical to that of every other human being?
g. 195
8.
How many scientists did it take to decode the entire genome of the common fruit fly?
h. 100,000
Answer Key for Activity 2
h.
1.
How many pages of newspaper would it take to write out all the DNA in one human cell?
f.
2.
How many DNA letters are contained in the genome of a mouse?
e.
3.
How many DNA letters are contained in the human genome?
c.
4.
How many human genes do scientists estimate there are?
a.
5.
What percentage of the genetic code cannot be deciphered with current technology?
d.
6.
What percentage of all human DNA creates the genes in our body?
b.
7.
What percentage of each humans DNA is identical to that of every other human being?
g.
8.
How many scientists did it take to decode the entire genome of the common fruit fly?
Appendix D (Printer-Friendly Format)
Blackboard Layout for Activity 3
Benefits of DNA Research
Tally of Class Opinions
a.
XXX
b.
XXXX
c.
etc.
d.
e.
f.
g.
Handout 3 for Activity 3
_____ a.
Pharmaceutical companies will be able to create drugs tailored to a persons genetic profile.
_____ b. Doctors will be able to describe diseases more clearly (for example, they will be able to determine what type of breast cancer a patient has).
_____ c. Doctors will be able to predict a persons chances of getting serious diseases such as heart disease or Alzheimers.
_____ d. Scientists will be able to predict new technologies such as DNA chips and micro-arrays that show which genes are active in a tissue sample.
_____ e. Scientists will be able to find genes that trigger certain diseases (for example, it will find the genes responsible for diabetes or obesity).
_____ f. Scientists will be able to manipulate the genes for memory, hormones, learning, and human growth and development.
_____ g. Scientists will be able to produce comprehensive data bases of DNA sequences in genes that will assist in genetic research.
Return to Top
This site is maintained by the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, U.S. Department of State.
Links to other sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
