[CAPbanner.gif] Travis Composite Squadron 22 Tomorrow's Leaders [CA%20Wing%20Patch%20WEB.gif]
Visitors FAQs [usflag.gif]
awards_md_wht.gif
Frequently Ask Questions
I'm interested in joining Civil Air Patrol, but how do I get started! When you first join the program, you'll be placed in the flight as a member of an element.
Here you'll learn the basics of drill 
You'll be introduced to the program structure, the chain of command, and the beginning aerospace education subjects that will take you through the program.
Before you are allowed to officially join the unit, you must attend three meetings to make sure you're interested in what we have to offer.
Likewise, it gives us a chance to get to know you and determine if you have that spark we're looking for in our cadet corps - your level of physical fitness has direct impact on your ability to meet all aspects of the cadet program.
More information about CAP's Cadet Physical Fitness Standards is at Squadron 22's Physical Fitness Standards (PDF Format)
On your third meeting, you'll have the opportunity to turn in your paperwork, and we'll process it through National Headquarters, CAP who will send you a membership card and your books several weeks later.
More information about the expectations for a CAP cadet, the orientation phase and the membership phase is at Squadron 22's Orientation-Membership (PDF Format)
How much does it cost to join Civil Air Patrol? Where can I buy my uniform, and how much will it cost?
By the third meeting, we expect you to comply with the basic CAP grooming standards and will attempt to issue you as complete of a uniform as possible from our supply section at minimal cost.
If our supplies are low or we don't have the correct size, you will need to purchase your uniform (or the parts that we are unable to supply you).
This can be from either an Air Force Base's Military Clothing Store, through the mail via the CAP Bookstore Catalog, or from other sources stocking military quality uniform items.
More information about uniforms and what you will need is at Squadron 22's Uniforms and Membership (PDF Format)
How I can access the bookstore via the internet? I would like to order a few items as well as update my subscription to the regulation updates that are mailed semi -annually.
See the CAP Bookstore Catalog at http://www.capnhq.gov/nhq/bookstore/BK2Kcat.pdf For an indexed version of the Bookstore Catalog see http://www.capnhq.gov/nhq/aeroed/ae_web_page/Bookstore-Catalog.pdf New shipping rates for the CAP Bookstore http://www.capnhq.gov/nhq/bookstore/BKnewrates.pdf See CAP Bookstore Catalog 2001 (Black 
I am trying to set up my flight suit.
Where on the site does it show proper placement of rank and patches? You will find the information you are looking for in CAPM 39-1 the uniform manual.
It is available online on the publications page at http://www.capnhq.gov/docs/webregulations/M039_001.pdf Or click on link below and go to CAP flight suit bookmark http://www.capnhq.gov/nhq/aeroed/Knowledgebase/CAPM39-1.pdf
Where is the testing for the general ES 
How old do I need to be to join CAP and how much does it cost? Civil Air Patrol's cadet program is designed for youth age 12 (or attending the sixth grade) through 20 years old.
Once a cadet turns 21 years old they automatically are enrolled in our adult program.
Civil Air Patrol's adult program is designed for those who join that are 18 years old and older.
National cadet dues are $20.
Cadets also pay for their educational materials ($16) at the same time.
Most states (which we call "Wings") also impose dues, which vary from state to state .
There may also be other dues imposed.
For additional information on joining CAP and specifics on wing yearly dues see Travis Composite Squadron 22's Uniforms and Membership (PDF Format)
What regulation prescribes the requirement and procedures for promotion and demotion of Civil Air Patrol (CAP) senior members to officer and noncommissioned officer grades? See CAP REGULATION 35-5 (E) CAP OFFICER AND NONCOMMISSIONED OFFICER APPOINTMENTS AND PROMOTIONS This regulation prescribes the requirement and procedures for promotion and demotion of Civil Air Patrol (CAP) senior members to officer and noncommissioned officer grades.
http://www.capnhq.gov/docs/webregulations/R035_005.pdf
I have searched the CAP web site for personnel names to fill the CAP Chain of Command chart found in CAPR 20-1(E) , page 9 to no avail.
I assume that this information is available ? Could you provide direction for gathering the chain of command names? Civil Air Patrol leaders elected Brig. Gen. Richard L. Bowling as the Air Force Auxiliary's national commander during CAP's 2001 National Board Meeting and Annual Convention in Cincinnati, August 15-18.
Seven other officers were also tapped at CAP's annual meeting.
CAP's National Board members also elected Col. Dwight H. Wheless of Manteo, N.C., to serve as CAP's national vice commander.
The following members were appointed by Brig. Gen. Bowling to fill positions on the CAP National Executive Committee and confirmed by CAP's National Board: Col. Larry D. Kauffman of Mt. Holly, N.J., national chief of staff; Col. Andrew E. Skiba of Lehigh Acres, Fla., national finance officer; Col. George P. Graves of Atlanta, Ga., national legal officer; Col. Joseph C. Meighan Jr. of Knoxville, Tenn., CAP, national controller; Chap.
(Col.) James H. Melancon of Huntsville, Ala., chief of chaplain service; and Col. Duddly L. Hargrove Mesquite, Texas, national inspector general.
CAP's National Board is chaired by the national commander.
Other members of the board include the eight region and 52 wing commanders.
This body also includes an elected national vice commander, chief of staff, legal officer, finance officer, and controller -- all civilian volunteers.
These officers, along with the eight region commanders, form CAP's National Executive Committee.
When the National Board is not in session, the National Executive Committee is vested with all the powers of the board, except those which may be reserved exclusively to the board.
One key position on the board that ties the CAP Corporation to the U.S. Air Force is the senior Air Force advisor.
Air Force Col. Albert A. Allenback, currently holds this position.
CAP's governing body is the CAP Board of Governors.
The board oversees the administration of the all-volunteer Air Force Auxiliary.
The BoG is comprised of 11 governors representing CAP, the U.S. Air Force, and other entities who have an interest in CAP missions.
In addition to the members at-large, CAP National Commander Brig. Gen. Bowling, and Vice Commander Col. Wheless will serve on the Board of Governors.
For additional details including photos see CAP News September 2001 For additional details on the chain of command for CAP, Cadets and the USAF see CAP Chain of Command The CAP and CAP-USAF Phone Book (Key Personnel Directory) has all the chain of command positions and names through wing commander level.
See it at CAP Phone Directory Where can I find information about flight schools and learning to fly? Many aviation-related organizations like the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA) and the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA) have searchable databases that can help you seek out qualified flight schools and instructors in your area.
How do we enter or record information that should be reflected in a members records? i.e. encampments, orientation flights, etc.
The unit receives a print-out each month that reflects what is on the on-line CAPWatch.
Use these print-outs as your guide in making corrections to the reports.
We will update these corrections, once received, which will then show on the CAPWatch database.
To correct the STP, simply follow the guidelines found in CAPR 50-17, CAP Senior Member Training Program (pg 3).
To correct the MML, here is what is needed: a.
Encampments - A copy of the encampment graduation certificate or a copy of the CAPF 20 (we can't certify an encampment until we receive the CAPF 20 from the wing LO). b. Orientation Flights - A copy of the CAPF 7.
c.
Other (COS, Milestone Awards, etc.) - A copy of their certificate.
Where can I find information on the CAP Supply Depot? The Civil Air Patrol Supply Depot was founded in 1968 and is solely owned and operated by National Headquarters, Civil Air Patrol.
Also visit the Aerospace Education web page.
Both sites are now "online ordering" ready.
See the CAP Supply Depot Online Catalog Also see the Aerospace Education Online Catalog
Where can I find details on the senior member training program? CAP REGULATION 50-17(E) CAP SENIOR MEMBER TRAINING PROGRAM covers CAP senior training and professional development.
This regulation outlines the program (see index below) to train senior members in the special skills required for Civil Air Patrol (CAP) mission accomplishment.
The program offers training opportunities to help the senior member learn specific mission-related skills and prepare for leadership positions.
Commanders at each echelon have the responsibility to support the Senior Member Training Program in accordance with the provisions of this regulation.
Is there a regulation pertaining to attendance within a squadron? See CAPR 35-3 Membership Termination Paragraph 3 Causes to Terminate Cadet Membership states "c. Lack of interest demonstrated by failure to attend three successive regular meetings without an acceptable excuse."
Where can I find information on the national cadet competition? The National Cadet Competition [NCC] is an annual program to evaluate the best team of cadets represented at wing, region and national levels for drill teams and color guards.
The NCC enables cadets to model traits of the highest standards of leadership and personal responsibility.
The NCC encompasses the National Drill Team Competition [NDTC] and the National Color Guard Competition [NCGC]
Team come from across America to compete to win the United States Air Force Chief of Staff Sweepstakes Trophy (given to the first place NDTC and NCGC winners), as well as other top awards.
The teams selected to come to the NCC have won their respective wing and region competitions.
See the National Cadet Competition [NCC] web page I am trying to find out if dues can be charged by the local squadron as part of the m
Is it acceptable for a squadron to charge its own dues, above what we already pay to be members? See CAPM 39-2 CIVIL AIR PATROL MEMBERSHIP This manual defines CAP membership categories and prescribes proper administrative procedures for membership application, renewal and non-renewal Does CAP have guidelines concerning the use of profanity or inappropriate language around cadets? While not specifically addressing profanity, CAP REGULATION 52-10 (E) CAP CADET PROTECTION POLICY does address hazing as follows: 1c.
Hazing.
Hazing is defined as any conduct whereby someone causes another to suffer or to be exposed to any activity that is cruel, abusive, humiliating, oppressive, demeaning, or harmful.
Actual or implied consent to acts of hazing does not eliminate the culpability of the perpetrator.
See CAP REGULATION 52-10 (E) CAP CADET PROTECTION POLICY
When can a CAP member use the base exchange and what regulation covers exchange privileges for CAP members? See CAP Regulation 147-1 (E) Army and Air Force Exchange Privileges of Civil Air Patrol Members This regulation states the Army and Air Force Exchange privileges authorized Civil Air Patrol senior and cadet members by joint Air Force Regulation 147-14 and Army Regulation 60-20.
These two regulations will be, referred to whenever it is necessary to quote the source of authority for exchange privileges since this CAP regulation is for information purposes only with regard to these privileges.
1.
Privileges.
The following privileges are accorded under the conditions specified and upon the presentation of the credentials stated: a.
Civil Air Patrol cadets and senior members are authorized to purchase at any time articles of uniform which are authorized for wear by Civil Air Patrol directives.
When purchasing articles of uniform, members will be identified by the official Civil Air Patrol membership card which must be current.
b. Members of the Civil Air Patrol on an official CAP activity are authorized to purchase any exchange item, except for State tax-free items, at the exchange where occupying government quarters.
To make purchases of other than uniform items, members will be identified by their Civil Air Patrol membership card, USAF transportation authorization or military support authorization, and evidence that they are occupying government quarters on a military installation.
(Evidence of occupation of government quarters will usually be furnished by the billeting officer.)
2.
Abuse of Privileges.
Exchange patrons are prohibited from: a.
Making purchases for unauthorized persons or purchasing for the purpose of making a sale, exchange, transfer or other disposition of exchange merchandise or services to unauthorized persons, whether or not for profit.
(Customary gifts of a personal nature are permissable.) b. Using exchange merchandise or services in the conduct of any activity for the production of income.
3.
Protection of Privileges.
In order to protect the privileges which have been authorized, Civil Air Patrol members not occupying government quarters as described in paragraph 1b will not attempt to purchase items in base exchanges other than articles of uniform authorized for wear by CAP members or to use the services of base exchange activities.
To avoid any embarrassment, CAP members seeking to make exchange purchases should contact the manager if a clerk or door checker questions their authorization to enter the base exchange or to make specific purchases.
Where can I find information on CAP protocol? See CAPP 3 GUIDE TO CIVIL AIR PATROL PROTOCOL PROTOCOL GUIDE TO CIVIL AIR PATROL ACTIVITIES, FUNCTIONS AND CEREMONIES Protocol is the accumulation of customs and standards that deal with meetings, conferences, ceremonies and etiquette.
In Civil Air Patrol this code of accepted practices and procedures has paralleled that of the United States Air Force.
This Civil Air Patrol Guide is written to help properly recognize dignitaries (military, CAP, and civilian) who attend and/or participate in CAP activities, functions and ceremonies; to properly recognize recipients of awards, decorations and promotions and give guidance to the presenters; and to create a more professional atmosphere at CAP meetings, activities and ceremonies.
Protocol events are meant to provide recognition of personal and unit contributions and successes.
Also see CAP Pamphlet 151 (E) STANDARDS, CUSTOMS AND COURTESIES Your decision to join Civil Air Patrol (CAP) reflects a dedication and commitment to support this charitable, benevolent, nonprofit corporation.
As a member of an Auxiliary of the United States Air Force, you are expected to follow the traditions, standards, customs and courtesies agreed and accepted by the Air Force and the Civil Air Patrol.
These apply to all of us and reflect our pride and professionalism as members of the Civil Air Patrol.
Where can I find instructions on wear of the new CAP utility and field uniforms? See illustrations posted on the CAPNHQ web site on wearing of the Men's and Women's CAP Utility Uniform (Senior Members and Cadets) and Men's and Women's CAP Distinctive Field Uniform (two -piece, BDU-style) (Senior Members and Cadets) NATIONAL HEADQUARTERS -- At the August meeting of the Civil Air Patrol National Board in Cincinnati, Ohio, two new CAP distinctive uniforms were approved for wear effective Jan. 1, 2002.
The two new uniforms are a dark-blue two-piece field uniform similar to the Air Force-style battle dress uniform and a dark-blue one-piece utility uniform that will eventually replace the CAP blue jumpsuit.
For details see Members May Wear Distinctive Uniforms
CAP Story
Fact Sheet
Request Info.
CAPboard.com
Web WMU
CAPWATCH
Last Modified : 11/25/02 05:02 PM
Please contact our Webmaster for questions or comments about this site.
[safesurf.GIF] [icra.GIF]
