New Mexico WILDLIFE NEWS Published by the New Mexico Department of Game and Fish Public Affairs Division PO Box 25112 Santa Fe, NM 87504 (505) 476-8000 July 21, 2003 STATE GAME COMMISSION TO MEET JULY 30 IN ALBUQUERQUE STATE TO REVIEW PRIVATE LAND ELK HUNTING SYSTEM EAGLE NEST BOAT RAMP HAZARDOUS DUE TO LOW WATER LEVELS WILD PRAIRIE DOGS GENERALLY NOT DISEASE CARRIERS TO HUMANS HUNTERS ALLOWED ONLY 28 DAYS ON NATIONAL FOREST STATE GAME COMMISSION TO MEET JULY 30 IN ALBUQUERQUE ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. - Final recommendations for the 2003-2004 waterfowl rule will be presented at the State Game Commission meeting, scheduled 10 a.m.
July 30 at the Albuquerque Game and Fish office, 3841 Midway Place NE.
The Commission will open the following rules for amendment or adoption: The waterfowl rule has been open for public comment since April 3, 2003.
Based on public comment and the federal frameworks established by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Commission will finalize the waterfowl rule for the 2003-2004 season.
The State Game Commission will consider amending the importation fees in 19.30.9 NMAC for live protected ungulates, furbearers, nongame, and other wildlife.
These animals may be imported only by certain license and permit holders following importation criteria established in 19.35.7 NMAC.
The Department will make recommendations for a non-refundable fee for these types of importations based on costs the Department has incurred for application processing.
A closed executive session is scheduled for the end of the meeting.
A detailed agenda is available on the Department's web site at www.gmfsh.state.nm.us/.
The agenda is subject to change up to 24 hours prior to the scheduled meeting date and time as deemed necessary by the chairman.
To inquire about changes to the agenda, call the office of the director, (505) 4768008.
If you are an individual with a disability who is in need of a reader, amplifier, qualified sign language interpreter or any other form of auxiliary aid or service to attend or participate in the meeting, call Shirley Baker, (505) 476-8027.
Please call her at least three working days before the set date of the meeting.
Public documents, including agenda and minutes, can be provided in various accessible forms.
Contact Ms. Baker if a summary or other type of accessible form is needed.
#
Wildlife News
-2-
July 21, 2003
STATE TO REVIEW PRIVATE LAND ELK HUNTING SYSTEM SANTA FE, N.M. - The New Mexico Department of Game and Fish and New Mexico Gov. Bill Richardson today announced a review of the system for allocating elk hunting licenses among private lands statewide.
This review will take place during the next six months.
A three-member committee, composed of New Mexico Game and Fish commissioners, will conduct the review of the present system and prepare recommendations.
Commission members who will serve include Peter Pino of Zia Pueblo, Alfredo Montoya of Alcalde and Guy Riordan of Albuquerque, who will serve as chairman of the committee.
The review was requested by Gov. Richardson to more fairly and adequately address rancher, landowner and system concerns and to preserve New Mexico wildlife.
The governor stated that the economic and cultural impact that elk hunting has on New Mexico, especially rural New Mexico, is extremely important to our state.
It is important to establish a system that is equitable to ranch owners and also offers more opportunity access to sportsmen.
The system should be based on sound biological science to better manage and protect our elk herd.
#
EAGLE NEST BOAT RAMP HAZARDOUS DUE TO LOW WATER LEVELS EAGLE NEST LAKE, N.M.
-- Boaters wishing to launch at the northern main boat ramp at Eagle Nest Lake must do so at their own risk, Department of Game and Fish announced today.
The ramp is currently out of the water due to low runoff and dropping water levels, causing hazardous launching conditions for boaters.
The New Mexico Department of Game and Fish and New Mexico State Parks are working together to address the situation for boaters as soon as possible.
Maintenance of the current ramp will continue as needed until the ramp can be extended to current water levels.
#
WILD PRAIRIE DOGS GENERALLY NOT DISEASE CARRIERS TO HUMANS SANTA FE, N.M. - Infectious human diseases such as plague and monkeypox can be associated with prairie dogs, according to New Mexico Department of Game and Fish biologists.
Prairie dogs are less efficient carriers of human disease because they often die quickly from the diseases themselves and are not as closely associated with humans as other rodents like rats and mice.
"In general, prairie dogs tend not to be carriers of plague and other diseases because very few individuals survive a disease outbreak," said Chuck Hayes, assistant chief of endangered and nongame species.
Most forms of plague - bubonic, pneumatic and sylvatic -generally are transmitted by fleas containing the plague bacteria, Yersinia pestis.
Plague usually wipes out entire prairie dog colonies, sometimes within days.
However, fleas can survive in the burrows after the prairie dogs have died and will aggressively seek new hosts.
"Squirrels, rats, rabbits, cats and their fleas are more frequent sources of plague," said Hayes.
-more-
Wildlife News
-3-
July 21, 2003
Monkeypox virus recently has been found in prairie dogs; however, the infected prairie dogs were pets.
Federal and state health oficials do not think the monkeypox virus entered wild prairie dog populations.
"There is no evidence of any link between the recent news-making disease `monkeypox' and wild prairie dogs," said Hayes.
"Monkeypox appears to have been transmitted to prairie dogs through a commercial pet facility."
The prairie dogs likely were infected by confinement near a Gambian giant rat or other African rodent, thought to be the original carriers of monkeypox to the United States, said Hayes.
The Gambian rat is believed to be the source of infection to prairie dogs at a Chicago pet distribution center.
Hayes did not know of any current cases of monkeypox which overlap the locations of the four prairie dog species in North America.
"You should have no fear of being exposed to monkeypox through exposure to wild prairie dogs at this time," said Hayes.
Other rodent-borne diseases include tularemia and distemper in addition to plague.
"Rabies is rarely associated with rodents and a rodent bite in New Mexico does not require a rabies prophylaxis," said Pamela Reynolds, vector control specialist for the New Mexico Department of Health.
Tularemia, sometimes called "rabbit fever," has been associated with some deaths of Gunnison's prairie dogs in New Mexico's neighboring states.
Although humans may catch tularemia from rodents, it is generally less a health concern because it lacks human-to-human transmission, said Hayes.
In addition to the long-term consequences of introduced diseases such as plague to wild populations of prairie dogs under normal circumstances, they are very important concerns to human health.
That is why the New Mexico Health Department conducts most investigations into zoonoses - animal diseases that threaten human health.
"Any wild animal encountered that behaves abnormally, or seems to have lost its fear of humans, should be left alone," said Kerry Mower, Department wildlife disease specialist.
Any large-scale mortality of wild animals should be reported to the Health Department at (505) 827-0006 or the Department of Game and Fish at (505) 476-8080.
#
HUNTERS ALLOWED ONLY 28 DAYS ON NATIONAL FOREST SANTA FE, N.M. - New Mexico's big game hunting seasons begin Aug. 1, the opening day of bear season in many management units around the state.
Hunters should remember they are not allowed to remain in one campsite for more than 14 days, nor on any National Forest for more than 28 days in any 45-day period.
"This both protects the resource and allows more campers to enjoy the forest," said Victor Apodaca, Law Enforcement officer with the Santa Fe National Forest.
"Some groups want to stay in one place from the beginning of hunting season to the very end and that could result in serious resource damage.
We have hunting seasons from August through March."
-more-
Wildlife News
-4-
July 21, 2003
Apodaca says that hunters may stay in one location for 14 days, then need to move at least one-quarter mile away.
After their 28 days on the forest, they must not camp on that forest for an additional 17 days.
Day use is permitted.
Registered outfitters are exempt from this rule, Apodaca says, however, their campsites must be preapproved by the Forest Service.
This action is consistent with 36 CFR-261.58 (a), federal code.
#
