2000 ACO #387 STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION JAMES L. HARVEY, PLAINTIFF, V AUTOALLIANCE INTERNATIONAL, INCORPORATED, f/k/a MAZDA MOTOR MANUFACTURING (USA) CORPORATION, SELF INSURED, DEFENDANT.
APPEAL FROM MAGISTRATE MacLEAN.
DENISE L. CLEMMONS FOR PLAINTIFF, CHARLES W. PALMER FOR DEFENDANT.
OPINION SKOPPEK, CHAIRPERSON Defendant Auto Alliance International, Incorporated appeals the decision of Magistrate Patrick J. MacLean, mailed May 6, 1999, granting plaintiff an open award of benefits based on a last day of work injury, commencing May 25, 1995.
Plaintiff James L. Harvey was born on July 17, 1947, and at the time of trial was fifty years of age.
He first injured his left knee playing football in 1965, necessitating surgery.
He testified that after recovering from surgery, he did not have any knee problems or symptoms until he had a workrelated injury on June 12, 1991.1 In the interim between his football injury and becoming employed with defendant, plaintiff performed various jobs and completed a tour in the Air Force.2 Plaintiff commenced employment with defendant on August 24, 1984.
He was hired as a "team member" and was placed in the plastics and paint department.
He performed approximately seven or eight jobs in that particular department on a regular basis.
His duties required forceful gripping, kneeling, crawling, squatting, and repetitive lifting and fastening.
He worked in this department for about three and one-half years before he was transferred to the molding department.
The physical requirements of his jobs in the molding department were of the same nature as his previous jobs in the plastics and paint department, with the addition of more fastening duties.
DOCKET #99-0246
1
Transcript of Hearing I, p 25.
Id., p 13.
2
On June 12, 1991, plaintiff was showing maintenance workers and the unit leader how to remove an instrument panel, when he "stepped on a plastic cut out, pivoted, and went down", injuring his left knee.3 He went to the defendant's health center for treatment and was referred to Dr. Kevin Sprague.
Dr. Sprague first treated plaintiff on June 19, 1991.
The doctor's initial impression was that of a "new strain."4 Dr. Sprague began conservative treatment of plaintiff, but there was no improvement and an MRI was performed.
The MRI revealed arthritic and degenerative changes throughout the knee as well as evidence of a previous lateral meniscectomy (from the football injury and resulting surgery), evidence of degenerative changes at the lateral meniscus, and injury both to the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments.5 Ultimately, surgery was performed on October 3, 1991.
Following the surgery, plaintiff returned to work in early 1992 at his position in the molding department, with the restrictions of no kneeling or squatting.6 In early 1994, plaintiff began having trouble with his right upper extremity, which he reported on April 20, 1994.7 He testified that his problems included tingling, numbness, and problems gripping.8 After reporting the problem he went to the health center for treatment and was referred to Drs. Burke and Olson.
Plaintiff testified that after he started treating with Dr. Burke, he received restrictions and was taken off his regular job and placed in material handling.9 He performed this job for about one month until he was placed into defendant's "re-entry" program for work-related injuries.10 For the next few months plaintiff performed an assortment of jobs, including troubleshooting and "fill in" positions, as his restrictions would allow.11 About one month prior to his last day of work on May 25, 1995, Dr. Tartar, the company doctor (based on a recommendation from Dr. Burke), removed plaintiff's restrictions and placed him into a gradual return to work program.12 Plaintiff was to start out at two hours of work per day and gradually increase his hours
3
Id., p 25.
Deposition of Dr. Sprague, p 5.
Id.; Plaintiff's Exhibit #2.
Trial transcript I, pp 27, 56; Plaintiff's Exhibit #1.
Trial transcript I, p 27.
Id. Id., p 29.
Id., p 30.
Id.
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Dr. Burke's recommendation of removing plaintiff's upper extremity restrictions was based on a video depicting the jobs he thought plaintiff would be performing.
Plaintiff, however, testified that the video did not accurately reflect his job duties and the magistrate accepted this testimony as credible.
Therefore, Dr. Burke's removal (continued...)
12
2
over a period of eight to twelve weeks.13 Plaintiff testified that he did not fare well in the program and began again having tingling, numbness, and problems gripping.14 He never lasted a full eight hour day in the program.
On May 4, 1995, while plaintiff was performing physical therapy prescribed by Dr. Tarter, he re-injured his left knee.15 He again went to the defendant's health center and then to Dr. Sprague.
Plaintiff's last day of work was May 24, 1995.
On August 31, 1995, Dr. Sprague performed surgery on his left knee, which included an arthrosporic debridement, and a high tibial osteotomy.16 Dr. Sprague placed a permanent restriction of sit-down work only following the surgery.17 In January of 1997, plaintiff underwent a total knee replacement and Dr. Sprague opined that after the knee replacement plaintiff would forever need a sit-down job.18 On September 25, 1996, at the request of plaintiff's attorney, plaintiff was examined by Dr. Jerry Taylor.
Dr. Taylor diagnosed plaintiff with ulnar nerve entrapment at the ulnar groove of the right elbow, which is referred to as cubital tunnel syndrome.19 Dr. Taylor was of the opinion that plaintiff requires a light job restriction favoring the upper right extremity, that would allow him to avoid pressure on the right elbow and flexion and extension of the elbow as well as avoid forceful grasping, pushing, pulling or twisting with the right hand.20 He also recommended the use of an elbow brace.
Plaintiff testified at hearing that due to the condition of his left knee and upper right extremity, he was unable to return to work after May 24, 1995.21
(...continued) of restriction's cannot be considered as a true representation of such.
See Plaintiff's Exhibit #4a; Trail transcript II, pp 121-23, 125-27.
13
12
Trial transcript I, p 31.
Id., p 32.
See id., p 34.
Deposition of Dr. Sprague, p 8.
Id., p 10.
Id., p 23.
Deposition of Dr. Taylor, pp 12-13.
Id., p 13.
See Trial transcript I, pp 39-40.
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
3
The magistrate, after an extensive and detailed review of the medical and lay proofs presented by the parties, determined that plaintiff's left knee condition and upper right extremity condition were both causally related to plaintiff's employment.
An open award was granted based on a last-day-ofwork injury date of May 24, 1995.
The magistrate's findings were in part as follows: . . .
Regarding the alleged knee injury of June 12, 1991, it is clear in looking at the Seaway Hospital x-ray reports that significant degenerative changes occurred in the knee from June 19, 1991 to October 23, 1991.
It is equally clear that both Dr. Sprague and Dr. Drouillard overlooked the June 19, 1991 x-ray and the significant change that showed up on the October 23, 1991 x-ray when they testified concerning the status of plaintiff's knee in 1991.
As such given the significant changes referred to on the June and October 1991 x-ray reports, the only logical inference is that same resulted from the June 12, 1991 incident and resulting surgery.
Accordingly, I find that plaintiff aggravated his pre-existing knee condition June 12, 1991, which disabled him until he returned to work with restrictions against squatting and kneeling in early 1992.
These restrictions were still in effect when plaintiff again injured his knee in May 1995 while doing leg exercises prescribed by defendant's own health center.
Although the May 24, 1995 injury occurred as a result of attempted rehabilitation of plaintiff's knee condition, which had previously been injured June 12, 1991, and thus did not directly arise out of and in the course of employment, but was a consequence of plaintiff's earlier work-related injury, plaintiff is entitled to benefits due to the traceable relationship between plaintiff's June 12, 1991 injury and his medical care in May 1995.
Staggs v. Genesee District Library, 197 Mich App 571 (1992).
Nevertheless, the applicable date of injury is June 12, 1991, not May 24, 1995.
Sanders v General Motors Corp, 137 Mich App 456 (1984).
Additionally, although Dr. Drouillard felt plaintiff could return to work with only prophylactic restrictions, I find Dr. Sprague, who as the treating doctor was in the best position to assess plaintiff's capabilities, more credible than Dr. Drouillard on the issue of plaintiff's continuing symptoms and disability.
Moreover, regarding whether the "significant manner" test of MCL 418.301(2) applies to plaintiff's knee-related claims, I find it does not apply since plaintiff's pre-existing knee condition stemmed from his injuries in 1964 and reinjury in 1965, as well as aggravation of same June 12, 1991, and, as such, does not constitute a condition of the aging process.
Nevertheless, even if the significant manner test applied, I would find that the significant aggravation and acceleration of plaintiff's condition caused by the June 12, 1991 injury, as shown by comparing the 1988, June 19, 1991, and October 23, 1991 Seaway Hospital x-ray reports, satisfy the test.
4
As such, the May 24, 1995 injury would allow for workers' compensation benefits under the significant manner test because of its traceable relationship to the June 12, 1991 injury.
Staggs, supra.
Regarding plaintiff's right upper extremity claims, I note that although Dr. Tartar returned plaintiff to work without any arm restrictions April 8, 1995, as based on Dr. Burke's correspondence that plaintiff could do the job depicted in plaintiff exhibit #4B, Dr. Burke's correspondence merely refers to a job, not the several jobs depicted in the video.
As such, it is unclear whether Dr. Burke viewed the entire video and whether plaintiff could do all the jobs shown therein.
At any rate, as plaintiff unrefutedly and credibly disputed the accuracy of the jobs shown in the video, and as Dr. Burke did not testify concerning his treatment of plaintiff, I am not persuaded that Dr. Burke meant for plaintiff to return to work without any restrictions, especially as the May 31, 1995 EMG report and his June 13, 1995 imply otherwise.
In this matter, as well as in all other matters concerning his injuries, I found plaintiff to be credible.
I do note, however, that based on plaintiff exhibit #4B, it appears plaintiff exaggerated the weight of instrument panels.
Additionally, as between Dr. Taylor and Dr. Drouillard, I find Dr. Taylor more credible since his diagnosis and treatment were consistent with the EMGs and Dr. Burke's course of treatment.
Moreover, the mere fact that Dr. Drouillard's examination of February 28, 1997 was six months after Dr. Taylor's examination does not persuade me that as of that time plaintiff no longer had a work-related disability, especially since Dr. Drouillard's December 15, 1995 examination also did not reveal any work-related disability, contrary to Dr. Taylor's more credible findings and assessment.
Moreover, although Dr. Taylor conceded that cubital tunnel syndrome can be idiopathic, I find his opinion that plaintiff's condition is work-related to be credible, especially in light of his testimony that use of power tools and forceful pushing with the arm most commonly cause said condition.
Accordingly, based on plaintiff's and Dr. Taylor's credible testimony, as well as the May 31, 1995 EMG report and Dr. Burke's reports, I find that plaintiff sustained a work-related injury to his right elbow and right wrist as of April 20, 1994, as to which he has needed continuing restrictions since then.
Therefore, even though plaintiff was not on any restrictions regarding the right upper extremity his last date of work, I find that he should have been on restrictions said date.
As such, I find that he was disabled from his right elbow and right wrist conditions from April 20, 1994 and continuing, per Haske, supra, even though his compensable disability did not begin until after his last date of work of May 24, 1995, and even though he stopped working May 24, 1995 because of his knee.
Because plaintiff's right upper extremity conditions were not attributable to a single event, the applicable date of injury is May 24, 1995, the last day of work in the employment in which plaintiff was last subjected 5
to the conditions that resulted in his right upper extremity related disability.
MCL 418.301(1).
On appeal, defendant argues that the magistrate committed legal and factual error in making his determination that the 1991 sprain to the plaintiff's left knee caused or aggravated the degenerative process in the left knee.
We agree in part with defendant's challenge.
The magistrate was correct to hold that the "significant manner" contribution standard established in §301(2) of the Act is not applicable in this case, because defendant failed to prove that plaintiff's condition was one of the aging process.
Trauma induced arthritis is not subject to the higher standard of significant contribution, which §301(2) requires when the condition is one of the aging process.
See Baldwin v Thorrez C. Industries, Inc., 2000 ACO #149.
Therefore, because plaintiff's pre-existing knee condition was not shown to be anything but trauma induced, it is compensable if there was any work-related aggravation or acceleration.22 We are troubled, however, by the magistrate's attribution of plaintiff's ongoing knee complaints to the 1991 sprain injury.
The magistrate relied upon x-ray reports when making the determination that the 1991 sprain and resulting surgery aggravated plaintiff's pre-existing knee condition.
As quoted above, the magistrate found the changes supposedly evidenced by the 1991 xray reports of great importance.
We agree with defendant that the magistrate erred in determining that the 1991 sprain and subsequent surgery, deemed necessitated by the sprain injury, aggravated plaintiff's pre-existing condition.
The June 19, 1991 x-ray report stated as follows: LEFT KNEE: Examination in multiple projections shows evidence of osteoarthritis change involving the left knee joint.
There are osteopathic changes present at the tibial plateau and also at the medial malleolus.
There is narrowing of the medial joint space identified.
There have been no other findings at this time.23 Contrary to the magistrate's statement that the only logical inference to be made by looking at the June 19, 1991, and October 23, 1991, x-ray reports is to attribute causation to the strain, the more logical conclusion from the two reports is that the sprain did not aggravate plaintiff's pre-existing condition.
After all, the June 19, 1991, x-ray, taken shortly after the June 12, 1991, work-related incident, did not show any of the hypertonic spurs that are present in the October 23, 1991 x-ray.24 Further, Dr. Sprague and Dr. Drouillard both opined that the sprain did not cause any degenerative changes in the knee.
Dr. Sprague testified:
See Deposition of Dr. Sprague, p 11; Deposition of Dr. Drouillard, p 38.
Both opining that plaintiff's knee condition stemmed from his previous football injury.
23
22
Defendant's Exhibit #2.
It is also worth noting that the two reports were prepared by two different doctors.
The x-rays themselves were not introduced and the testifying doctors made no comparison of the two.
24
6
Q. A. Q.
Now that slip didn't cause these degenerative changes did it? No.
And as you have indicated, it appears that the 1991 slip was just a new strain; is that correct? Correct.
And that's more of a soft tissue inflamation type condition; is that correct? Correct.
That's not any type of unchanging arthritic or bony process in the knee; is that correct? Correct.
25
A. Q.
A. Q.
A.
Dr. Drouillard consistently stated: Q. Doctor, in your opinion, within reasonable orthopedic medical certainty, did the degenerative changes within his left knee have any relationship by way of cause, aggravation, acceleration, or contribution to the employment experience that he told you of at Autoalliance [sic] or Mazda? *** A.
Not in my opinion.26
Further, the assumption made by the magistrate that Dr. Sprague overlooked the June 19, 1991, x-ray report is not supported in the record.
Dr. Sprague's report indicated that he did review the June 1991, x-rays.
He stated: "[x]-ray demonstrates some advanced degenerative changes of his knee, no evidence of fractures.
There are calcifications of the lateral meniscus."27 Given the fact that Dr. Sprague did not overlook the June 19, 1991, x-ray, combined with Dr. Sprague's and Dr. Drouillard's testimony about the impact of the strain, we find there is not competent, material, and
25
Deposition of Dr. Sprague, p 12.
Deposition of Dr. Drouillard, pp 39-40.
Plaintiff's Exhibit #2.
26
27
7
substantial evidence to support the magistrate's determination that the June 12, 1991, "strain" aggravated plaintiff's pre-existing condition.
However, based upon the evidence found persuasive by the magistrate, the conclusion must be reached that plaintiff's pre-existing knee condition was aggravated by the work he performed at Auto Alliance.28 The magistrate accepted plaintiff's history of his complaints.
Most critically, the magistrate relied on the testimony of Dr. Sprague, who opined as follows: Q. Doctor, I want you to assume that Mr. Harvey will testify at trial that he did have an injury playing football in 1965.
He had surgery in 1966 at William Beaumont Hospital.
Shortly after the surgery, successfully passed a physical and entered the Air Force for four years, and after getting out of the Air Force then worked a variety of different jobs until he started working for the Defendant, Autoalliance [sic] or Mazda, in 1987.
I want you to assume that between 1987 and June of 1991, he worked continuously in the plastics department and in particular he worked anywhere from 40 to 60 hours a week; that the work involved constant standing, walking, and was generally a very physical assembly line job.
If you assume further, Doctor, if you assume the history that he gave you as correct in terms of the incident in 1991, and as well as the aggravating factor of his physical therapy he was undergoing work in 1995, if you assume the accuracy of that information and the history provided to you, and you combine that with your findings and knowledge of this patient, do you have an opinion as to whether Mr. Harvey's degenerative arthritis in his left knee was either accelerated or aggravated in a significant manner by his employment? *** A.
Any repetitive prolonged standing, squatting, twisting would aggravate his underlying condition.
Because we find there is competent, material, and substantial evidence supporting a finding that plaintiff's work aggravated his condition, defendant's second argument that the restrictions placed upon plaintiff when he returned to work in 1992 were not attributable to the 1991 "strain" is moot.
Plaintiff's restrictions for the knee after 1992 were for his knee condition, a condition that was aggravated by work.
28
8
Q.
If the legal standard for aggravation of the arthritic process is that the aggravation must be significant, Doctor, do you have an opinion as to whether the aggravation by his employment was significant? Yes.29
A.
Based upon this testimony, plaintiff's knee condition is work-related.
Therefore, because June 12, 1991, was the last date where plaintiff was performing the unrestricted work that aggravated his pre-existing trauma-induced degenerative condition (and which required the subsequent surgery), he is entitled to benefits based upon his average-weekly wage at that date.
His benefits are subject to offset for the periods when he was working in restricted work until his last day of work on May 24, 1995, and he is entitled to benefits from May 25, 1995, onward until further order of the Bureau.
Defendant also argues that plaintiff had recovered from any right upper extremity condition by the time he returned to work without restriction in April 1995, and therefore, is not entitled to benefits based upon that condition.
Dr. Taylor opined that plaintiff's upper extremity condition was work-related.30 The magistrate found Dr. Taylor's testimony to be credible and also found his testimony to be the most persuasive.
The magistrate is free to select the medical testimony he finds most persuasive as long as his choice is not unreasonable.
Miklik v Michigan Special Machine Co, 415 Mich 364 (1982).
Further, the mere fact that the plaintiff was taken off restrictions by Dr. Tartar does not indicate that he had recovered.
Testimony given by the plaintiff, whom the magistrate found credible, indicates that the reason for removing the upper extremity restrictions was based on Dr. Burke's recommendation.
However, Dr. Burke based his recommendation on mis-information because the video tape used to make his recommendation did not adequately depict plaintiff's job.
Lastly, although the magistrate noted that Dr. Drouillard's examination was performed six months after Dr. Taylor's last examination, this did not persuade him that plaintiff no longer had a compensable upper extremity disability at that later time.
The magistrate's findings of fact are binding upon this Commission if supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the whole record.
Dr. Taylor's testimony, combined with the credible testimony of plaintiff, provides competent, material, and substantial evidence to support the finding of a compensable upper extremity condition.
MCL 418.861a(3).
Plaintiff's upper extremity condition was the result of work-related activities and was not attributable to any single event.
Therefore, the magistrate correctly found that the last day of work in the employment which resulted in his upper extremity condition was May 24, 1995.
As of that date, plaintiff was disabled by two work-related conditions.
We find defendant's efforts to overturn plaintiff's entitlement to an ongoing award unpersuasive.
Because plaintiff suffered an earlier injury by aggravating his pre-existing knee condition, he is entitled to benefits based on the average weekly wage at the earlier date of injury.
29
Deposition of Dr. Sprague, pp 9-10.
Deposition of Dr. Taylor, pp 17-18.
30
9
Finally, defendant argues that the magistrate failed to apply §301(5)(d) as it relates to the creation of a new wage earning capacity.
We disagree.
Plaintiff did not lose his job for nonoccupational reasons.
Section 301(5)(d) is not applicable when the employee loses his job as a result of incapacity due to work-related injury.
Therefore, whether plaintiff established a new wage earning capacity is irrelevant because he was unable to continue working in any capacity because of his workrelated injuries.
With the exception noted above, the analysis of the magistrate is supported by the requisite record evidence for our affirmance.
In accordance with our analysis above, we affirm the magistrate's decision.
Commissioners Przybylo and Kent concur.
Jürgen Skoppek, Chairperson Gregory A. Przybylo James J. Kent Commissioners
10
STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION JAMES L. HARVEY, PLAINTIFF, V AUTOALLIANCE INTERNATIONAL, INCORPORATED, f/k/a MAZDA MOTOR MANUFACTURING (USA) CORPORATION, SELF INSURED, DEFENDANT.
This cause came before the Appellate Commission on appeal by defendant from the decision of Magistrate Patrick J. MacLean, mailed May 6, 1999, granting plaintiff an open award of benefits.
The Commission has considered the record and briefs of counsel, and believes that the magistrate's decision should be affirmed.
Therefore, IT IS ORDERED that the decision of the magistrate is affirmed in accordance with the attached opinion.
Jürgen Skoppek, Chairperson Gregory A. Przybylo James J. Kent Commissioners DOCKET #99-0246
