M INNESOTA S ENTENCING MEETING M AY GUIDELINES C MINUTES 18, 2000 OMMISSION The Commission meeting was held on May 18, 2000 in Room 500 South of the State Office Building in St. Paul, Minnesota.
Commission members attending included Chair Sheryl Ramstad Hvass, Scott Swanson, Kristine Zajac, Justice Russell Anderson, Dr. Mary T. Howard, and Judge Roger Klaphake.
Commission members Ray Schmitz, Laurie Dudero, Judge Edward Wilson, and Robert Knickerbocker did not attend.
Public attendance included Jeff Shorba, Minnesota Department of Corrections; Charlene Wash, Minnesota Corrections Association; and Natalie E. Hudson, Office of the Attorney General.
Jim Early of the Attorney General's Office also attended.
I.
Call to Order
The meeting was called to order at 3:08 p.m.
II.
Approval of April 20, 2000, Meeting Minutes MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to approve the April 20, 2000 meeting minutes as presented.
MOTION carried.
III.
New Business !
PROPOSED MODIFICATION TO THE SENTENCING GUIDELINES BASED UPON 2000 CRIME LEGISLATION
ASSIGNMENT OF SEVERITY LEVEL RANKINGS TO NEW CRIMES The commission discussed new and amended crime legislation and proposed modifications to the sentencing guidelines that will be presented in the public hearing notice for the July public hearing.
C
LAWFUL GAMBLING FRAUD - M.S. § 609.763 - Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
This bill created a new felony, Lawful Gambling Fraud (M.S. § 609.763) with a statutory maximum of three years/$6,000 if the dollar amount is more than $2,500; a gross misdemeanor if the dollar amount is more than $500 but not more than $2,500; and a misdemeanor if the dollar amount is $500 or less.
A person is guilty of this crime if they knowingly claim a lawful gambling prize using altered or counterfeited gambling equipment or by means of fraud, deceit, or misrepresentation, or if the person manipulates or tampers with any gambling equipment, or knowingly places false information on a prize receipt or any other form used by the gambling control board of the alcohol and gambling enforcement division of the department of public safety.
The Legislative Subcommittee reviewed this offense and discovered that this behavior is similar to State Lottery Fraud ranked at Severity Level I.
However, the statutory penalty provisions differ for State Lottery Fraud in that it is a felony regardless of the value of any winnings illegally obtained and carries a statutory maximum of ten years.
In addition, other sophisticated State Lottery Fraud Approved Minutes Page 1 May 18, 2000
offenses are unranked.
Since this is a new offense with little background information as to what is the "typical" offense, the subcommittee recommended placing it on the unranked offense list to learn more about what is involved with the "typical" offense.
MOTION was made by Judge Klaphake and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose placing Lawful Gambling Fraud (M.S. § 609.763) on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
C
SPORTS BOOKMAKING - M.S.§ 609.76, SUBD. 2-7 -Effective for crimes committed on or after April 7, 2000
This bill provided technical modifications and created several new felonies relating to Sports Bookmaking.
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd. 2 was amended to change the title for bookmaking crimes from "Felony Gambling" to "Sports Bookmaking."
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd 3 is added to create a new felony provision for cheating.
A person will be guilty of a felony if the person holds a license related to gambling or is an employee of the licensee or any person who is a repeat offender.
Acts classified as cheating in a game include: misrepresenting the outcome of a game or event on which wagers have been made after the outcome has been determined but before the outcome has been revealed to players; placing, canceling, or changing a bet after acquiring knowledge not available to other players of the outcome of the game or of events affecting the outcome of the game or subject of the bet; claiming or collecting money or anything of value from a game or an authorized gambling establishment not won or earned from the game or establishment; manipulating a gambling device or associated equipment to affect the outcome of the game or the number of credits or plays available on the game; or otherwise altering the elements of change or methods of selection or criteria that determine the amount or frequency of payment of the game.
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd. 4 is added creating two new felony offenses related to devices and keys.
It is a felony to use or possess a probability-calculating or outcome-affecting device at an authorized gambling establishment.
It will also be a felony to use, or possess with intent to use, a key or other instrument for opening, entering, and affecting the operation of any game or gambling device or for removing money, chips, tokens, or other contents from therein.
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd. 5 creates a new subdivision prohibiting the use of counterfeit chips; it is a felony to intentionally use counterfeit chips or tokens to play a game at an authorized gambling establishment.
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd 6 creates two new felonies.
It is prohibited to manufacture, sell, distribute, or otherwise provide cards, chips, tokens, dice, or other equipment or devices intended to be used to violate this section.
It is also prohibited to mark, alter, or otherwise modify lawful associated equipment or gambling devices.
Minn.
Stat. § 609.76, subd. 7 creates a new subdivision that makes it a felony to instruct another person to violate the provisions of this section, with the intent that the information or knowledge conveyed be used to violate this section.
The subcommittee suggested proposing to continue ranking M.S. § 609.76, subd. 2 at severity level Approved Minutes Page 2 May 18, 2000
4 and placing the newly created felonies (M.S. § 609.76, subd. 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7) on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION was made by Justice Anderson and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose the continued ranking of M.S. § 609.76, subd. 2 at severity level 4 and placing M.S. § 609.76, subd, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
C
INSURANCE TAX LAWS: RE-CODIFIED FAILURE TO FILE OR PAY - M.S. § 297I.90 -Effective January 1, 2001
This bill re-codified insurance tax laws and moved the criminal penalties into the newly created M.S. § 297I.90.
Currently, criminal provisions for failure to file returns are found in M.S. § 60A.15, subdivision 9d and reference criminal penalties in M.S. § 289A.63.
It is a gross misdemeanor if a person required to file a return, report, or other document with the commissioner, knowingly fails to file it when required.
It is a felony if a person required to file a return, report, or other document willfully attempts in any manner to evade or defeat a tax by failing to file it when required.
It is a gross misdemeanor if a person required to pay or to collect and remit a tax, knowingly, rather than accidentally, inadvertently, or negligently, fails to do so when required.
It is a felony if a person required to pay or to collect and remit a tax, willfully attempts to evade or defeat a tax law by failing to do so when required.
It is a felony to file with the commissioner a return, report, or other document, known by the person to be fraudulent or false concerning a material matter.
It is also a felony to knowingly aid, assist, advise in the preparation or presentation of a return, report, or other document that is fraudulent or false concerning a material matter, whether or not the falsity or fraud committed is with the knowledge or consent of the person authorized or required to present the return, report, or other document.
Felonies related to fraudulent returns listed above are currently listed in M.S. § 289A.63 but are not referenced in M.S. § 60A.15, subd. 9d as applicable to insurance tax laws.
This bill re-codified these criminal penalties and put them into the newly created M.S. § 297I.90, subds.
1 and 2.
The bill expands the criminal penalties to include a "surcharge" along with a "tax" and broadens the scope of taxpayers for whom the penalty provisions would apply.
The subcommittee noted that the current ranking for Tax Evasion Laws is Severity Level III; the commission will need to assign a severity level ranking to Failure to File or Pay Insurance Tax (M.S. § 297I.90, subd. 1) and False or Fraudulent Returns (M.S. § 297I.90, subd. 2).
The Department of Revenue indicates that the re-codification of this statute is for clarity and consistency purposes.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose ranking Failure to File or Pay Insurance Tax (M.S. § 297I.90, subd. 1) and False or Fraudulent Returns (M.S. § 297I.90, subd. 2) at Severity Level III.
MOTION carried.
C
POSSESSION OR SALE OF STOLEN OR COUNTERFEIT CHECKS - M.S. § 609.528 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000 Page 3 May 18, 2000
Approved Minutes
The penalties for this new offense, Possession or Sale of Stolen or Counterfeit Checks, are based on the theft statute (M.S. § 609.52).
It is a misdemeanor if the offense involves a single direct victim and the total combined loss to the direct victim and any indirect victims is $250 or less.
It is a gross misdemeanor if the offense involved a single direct victim and the total, combined loss to the direct victim and any indirect victims is more than $250 but not more than $500.
It is a felony with a statutory maximum of five years/$10,000 if the offense involves two or three direct victims or the total combined loss to the direct and indirect victims is more than $500 but not more than $2,500.
It is a felony with a statutory maximum of ten years/$20,000 if the offense involves four or more direct victims, or if the total combined loss to the direct and indirect victims is more than $2,500.
Since this offense is similar to Identity Theft (M.S. § 609.527), the subcommittee recommended that this offense be ranked similarly at severity levels II and III based upon the number of victims and the monetary loss experienced.
MOTION was made by Justice Anderson and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose ranking M.S. § 609.528, subd. 3 (3) at a severity level II and M.S. § 609.528, subd. 3 (4) at a severity level III.
MOTION carried.
C
FAILURE TO REMIT MOTOR VEHICLE TAX - M.S. § 297B.10 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After April 14, 2000
Under M.S. § 297B.10 (1), it is currently a gross misdemeanor to file false or fraudulent motor vehicle purchaser's certificates or to fail to complete or submit a certificate and it is a felony if the tax involved exceeds $300.
This bill created a new felony penalty in M.S. § 297B.10 for collecting from the purchaser the tax imposed under the chapter and willfully failing to remit that tax.
The subcommittee suggested placing this new offense on the list of unranked offenses since it is difficult to determine the extent of the typical behavior involved in this type of offense.
The existing felony Motor Vehicle Excise Tax is unranked and Motor Vehicle Taxes (M.S. § 289A.63) and Excise Tax on Alcoholic Beverages (M.S. § 297C.13, subd. 1) are ranked at severity level I. MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to continue to place Failure to Remit Motor Vehicle Tax (M.S. § 297B.10) on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
C
NON-PAYMENT FOR IMPROVEMENT (MECHANICS LIEN PENALTIES) - M.S. § 514.02, SUBD. 1 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
This bill created new felonies for failure to pay subcontractors and suppliers and is punishable under M.S. § 609.52.
A mechanics lien is a type of lien that builders and material suppliers can place on real property if they are not paid for work or supplies they contribute to the property.
Currently, any theft subject to the mechanics lien is punishable as a gross misdemeanor.
The subcommittee suggested that the commission propose placing Non-Payment for Improvement Approved Minutes Page 4 May 18, 2000
on the Theft Offense List (offenses with monetary value of $2,500 or less are ranked at severity level II and offenses with monetary value over $2,500 are ranked at severity level III).
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Kristine Zajac to propose placing M.S. § 514.02, subd. 1 on the Theft Offense List.
MOTION carried.
C
PREDATORY OFFENDER REGISTRATION - M.S. § 243.166, SUBD. 5 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
This provision amends M.S. § 243.166 (Registration of Predatory Offender) to require that certain offenders register with the state.
Currently the first offense involving failure to follow the registration requirements or providing false information is a gross misdemeanor and a second or subsequent violation is a felony.
The new language provides that all violations would be felonies with a statutory maximum of five years/$10,000.
The new language states that offenders convicted of a first offense shall be committed to the custody of the Commissioner of Corrections for not less than one year and one day and offenders sentenced for a second or subsequent violation are subject to a two-year mandatory minimum sentence.
The bill does state that the court may, on a motion by the prosecutor or its own motion, sentence the person without regard to the mandatory sentence if the court finds substantial and compelling reasons to do so.
The language provides that sentencing without regard to the mandatory minimum constitutes a departure from the sentencing guidelines.
This offense is currently unranked; the subcommittee recommends that this offense remain unranked because of the type of offender who fails to register may be worse in one case than in another (e.g. a high-risk offender not registering versus a low-risk offender not registering).
Currently, courts have assigned severity levels of I, II, and III for the felony second or subsequent offenses.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose placing Predatory Offender Registration (M.S. § 243.166, subd. 5) on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
C
ENHANCED MALICIOUS PUNISHMENT OF A CHILD - M.S. § 609.377, SUBD. 3 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
Malicious Punishment of a Child (M.S. § 609.377, subd. 3) was created allowing this offense to be enhanced to a felony if the offender has a prior conviction or adjudication of delinquency for malicious punishment, assault (including Fifth Degree and Domestic Assault), criminal sexual conduct, or terroristic threats.
The statutory maximum for this offense is five years/$10,000.
In addition, Malicious Punishment of a Child (M.S. § 609.377) was restructured and is now divided into subdivisions.
The subcommittee recommends that this enhanced offense be ranked at a severity level IV.
In addition, the subcommittee recommends that the commission take this opportunity to readdress Malicious Punishment of a Child offenses due to the new enhanced felony and structural changes Approved Minutes Page 5 May 18, 2000
to the statutes.
Currently, Malicious Punishment of a Child - under age 4 resulting in bodily harm is ranked at severity level I.
This behavior is normally punishable as a misdemeanor, but because of the victim's age, the Legislature elevated it to a felony.
The subcommittee recommends increasing this severity level to IV.
This recommendation will go into effect August 1, 2001, after review by the 2001 Legislature.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose ranking Malicious Punishment of a Child - Enhancement (M.S.§ 609.377, subd. 3) at a severity level IV and propose increasing Malicious Punishment of a Child - Child Under Age Four (M.S. § 609.377, subd. 4) to a severity level IV.
MOTION carried.
C
TAMPER/THEFT/TRANSPORT ANHYDROUS AMMONIA - M.S. § 18D.331, SUBD. 5 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The Legislature created a new felony of knowingly tampering with, theft of, or transporting anhydrous ammonia.
Anhydrous ammonia is normally used as an agricultural fertilizer and refrigerant but can be used as a key ingredient to manufacture methamphetamine.
The subcommittee recommended that the commission place this offense on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Kristine Zajac to propose placing Tamper/Theft/Transport Anhydrous Ammonia - M.S. § 18D.331, subd. 5 on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
OTHER AMENDED CRIMES REQUIRING CONSIDERATION Ms. Dailey stated that the Legislature has slightly amended the following crimes and the commission needs to decide whether or not they want to continue with the current severity level rankings and if the amended offenses are on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List, the commission needs to decide also if they should remain on the list despite the amendments that have been made to the offenses.
C
VIOLATION OF A DOMESTIC ABUSE NO CONTACT ORDER - M.S. § 518B.01, SUBD. 22 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The Domestic Abuse Act was amended to include violations of domestic abuse no contact orders.
It is a misdemeanor to knowingly violate a domestic abuse no contact order.
Currently, there are misdemeanor and gross misdemeanor penalties for violating orders for protection (M.S. § 518B.01, subd. 14) and this offense is on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List.
The subcommittee recommends keeping Violating an Order for Protection (M.S. § 518B.01, subd. 14) on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List and adding Violation of a Domestic Abuse No Contact Order (M.S. § 518B.01, subd. 22) to the list.
MOTION was made by Judge Klaphake and seconded by Justice Anderson to propose adding Violation of a Domestic Abuse No Contact Order (M.S. § 518B.01, subd. 22) to the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List.
Approved Minutes Page 6 May 18, 2000
MOTION carried.
C
FIRST DEGREE MURDER W HILE COMMITTING DOMESTIC ABUSE - M.S. § 609.185 (6) -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
First Degree Murder while committing domestic abuse has been amended to include situations where the perpetrator has engaged in a past pattern of domestic abuse against another family or household member, rather that just the murder victim.
Ms. Dailey indicated that the commission has to consider whether or not to maintain the current policies for Attempts/Conspiracy to commit Murder in the 1st Degree as outlined in Section II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to propose maintaining the current policies for Attempts/Conspiracy to Commit Murder in the 1st Degree as outlined in Section II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers.
MOTION carried.
C
DOMESTIC AND FIFTH DEGREE ASSAULTS - M.S. § 609.224 AND M.S. § 609.2245 HARASSMENT/STALKING (SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT AND AGGRAVATED) - M.S. § 609.749 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The Legislature made language changes to these offenses, including allowing prior juvenile adjudications to be used as prior offenses to enhance these offenses.
The commission needs to reaffirm the continued rankings of these offenses and listings on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List MOTION was made by Dr. Mary T. Howard and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose maintaining the current rankings and placement on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List for Domestic Assault (M.S.§ 609.2242), Assault 5th Degree (M.S.§ 609.224), and Harassment/Stalking - Second or Subsequent and Aggravated (M.S. § 609.749).
MOTION carried.
C
FOURTH DEGREE ASSAULT AGAINST A PEACE OFFICER AND ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY - M.S. § 609.2231, SUBD. 1 AND M.S. § 609.485 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After April 26, 2000
The statutory maximum was increased from 2 to 3 years and the fine was increased from $4,000 to $6,000 for a felony physical assault against a peace officer that results in demonstrable bodily harm (M.S. § 609.2231, subd. 1).
This bill also increased the penalty from a misdemeanor to a gross misdemeanor for a physical assault against a peace officer that does not result in demonstrable bodily harm.
Also, Escape from Custody (M.S. § 609.485) was amended and clarifies that a person may be charged with Escape while held "pursuant to a lawful arrest" in addition to lawful custody on a charge or conviction of a crime, or while held in lawful custody on an allegation or adjudication of a Approved Minutes Page 7 May 18, 2000
delinquent act.
Currently, Escape from Custody does not appear to apply unless a person has been charged with or convicted of a crime.
The subcommittee recommends that the severity level for Fourth Degree Assault Against a Peace Officer remain at I and that there be no other changes to the Escape from Custody severity levels.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Kristine Zajac to propose keeping Fourth Degree Assault Against a Peace Officer (M.S.§ 609.2231, subd. 1) at severity level I, Escape (M.S. § 609.485, subd. 4(a)(1) at level III, Escape, Mental Illness (M.S. § 609.485 subd 4(a)(2) at level I, and Escape with Violence (M.S. § 609.485, subd. 4 (b) at level VII, and keeping gross misdemeanor Assault in the Fourth Degree on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List.
MOTION carried.
C
FLEEING PEACE OFFICER IN MOTOR VEHICLE - M.S. § 609.487 RACKETEERING - M.S. § 609.902 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The definitions of both Fleeing a Peace Officer in a Motor Vehicle and Racketeering were amended.
Fleeing a Peace Officer in a Motor Vehicle (M.S. § 609.487) is expanded to include refusing to stop the vehicle and the definition of "peace officer" is broadened to include employees of law enforcement agencies of federally recognized tribes.
Racketeering definitions (M.S. § 609.902) now include the felony-level crimes of Possession or Sale of Stolen or Counterfeit Checks (M.S. § 609.528).
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to propose continuing the current rankings for Fleeing a Peace Officer in a Motor Vehicle (M.S. § 609.487) and keeping RICO (M.S. § 609.902) on the list of unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
C
EXPAND SOLICITATION OF CHILDREN TO ENGAGE IN SEXUAL CONDUCT - M.S. § 609.352, SUBD. 1 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The definition of Solicitation of Children to Engage in Sexual Conduct (M.S. § 609.352, subd. 1) has been expanded to define "child" as someone 15 years of age or younger, rather than "under 15."
The definition of "solicit" was expanded to include events that do not occur in person and new language amends the prohibited acts to include solicitation of "someone the person reasonably believes is a child."
MOTION was made by Dr. Mary T. Howard and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose keeping the current severity level ranking of III for Solicitation of Children to Engage in Sexual Conduct (M.S. § 609.352, subd. 1).
MOTION carried.
C
FELONY AND GROSS MISDEMEANOR HARASSMENT/STALKING - M.S. § 609.749, SUBD.
Page 8 May 18, 2000
Approved Minutes
2 MISDEMEANOR HARASSMENT CRIMES - M.S. § 609.795, SUBD. 1 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000 Harassment/Stalking (M.S. § 609.749, subd. 2) was amended to clarify that harassment crimes also prohibit harassment by electronic means.
Currently, the stalking provisions contain a subdivision dealing with repeatedly mailing or delivering or causing to be delivered letters, telegrams, messages, packages, or other objects.
The new language explicitly states that delivery of these items by any means, including electronically, is covered by the statute.
Harassment (M.S. § 609.795, subd. 1) was also amended to clarify that harassment crimes also prohibits harassment by electronic means.
MOTION was made by Justice Anderson and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose keeping the current severity level rankings for Felony Harassment/Stalking (M.S. § 609.749, subd. 3, 4, and 5) and to continue placing Harassment/Stalking (M.S. § 609.749, subd. 2 and 8) and Harassment (M.S. § 609.795) on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List.
MOTION carried.
C
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS EXPANDED - M.S. § 628.26 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The statute of limitations has been expanded to include more offenses for which there is an unlimited statute of limitations.
It has been expanded to include kidnaping offenses and all homicide offenses resulting in the death of the victim.
The provision also amends the statute of limitations for criminal sexual conduct, broadening the time for which indictments or complaints may be found or made and filed in court for first through third degrees.
The subcommittee is recommending that no changes be made to the severity levels of the affected felonies.
MOTION was made and seconded to propose keeping the current severity level rankings for the crimes affected by the change in Statute of Limitations (M.S. § 628.26).
The crimes affected by this amended statute include Accidents Resulting in Death, Adulteration Resulting in Death, Criminal Vehicular Homicide, Death of Unborn Child, Fleeing a Peace Officer Resulting in Death, Murder, Manslaughter, Kidnaping, and Criminal Sexual Conduct first through third.
MOTION carried.
C
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR PIMPS AND PATRONS OF JUVENILE PROSTITUTES - M.S. § 609.322, SUBD. 1 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The penalties for pimps and patrons of juvenile prostitutes ages 16 and 17 has been increased.
Currently, it is a felony with a statutory maximum penalty of 20 years for someone to solicit or induce someone under the age of 16 to practice prostitution, promote the prostitution of an individual under the age of 16, or receive profit from the prostitution of an individual under the age of 16.
These Approved Minutes Page 9 May 18, 2000
same offenses are felonies with a statutory maximum of 15 years if committed with prostitutes 16 or older.
This amendment creates the same penalties for 16 and 17 year old prostitutes as prostitutes under age 16.
The subcommittee recommends that the inclusion of prostitutes ages 16 and 17 not impact the current severity level VIII ranking for this offense.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose continuing to rank M.S. § 609.322, subd. 1 at severity level VIII.
MOTION carried.
C
DEFINITION OF HARASSMENT: RESTRAINING ORDER - M.S. § 609.748, SUBD. 1 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After July 1, 2000
This definition of harassment was amended to include a single incident of physical or sexual assault or repeated incidents of intrusive or unwanted acts, words, or gestures that have a substantial adverse effect or are intended to have a substantial adverse effect on the safety, security, or privacy of another, regardless of the relationship between the actor and the intended target.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose the continued placement of Harassment - M.S. § 609.748, subd. 1 on the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List and propose maintaining the current ranking for Violation of Restraining Order - M.S. § 609.749, subd. 6(d) at severity level IV.
MOTION carried.
OTHER STATUTORY CHANGES REQUIRING POSSIBLE MODIFICATIONS C
CRIMINAL SEXUAL CONDUCT 1ST PRESUMPTIVE 144 MONTH SENTENCE - M.S. § 609.342, SUBD. 2 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st (M.S.§ 609.342, subd. 2) has been amended creating a presumptive sentence of at least 144 months; it will be a departure for judges to sentence apart from the new presumptive duration.
Currently, this offense is ranked at severity level VII and VIII and the presumptive sentence for an offender with a zero criminal history score is 86 months.
At a prior commission meeting, the commission directed the subcommittee to further investigate the following: 1) putting an asterisk in the sentencing guidelines next to Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree indicating that it has been left off of the grid and giving an explanation for this in a comment section and 2) taking more time to examine the bigger picture and prepare a more comprehensive response that addresses such things as proportionality and consistency.
Ms. Dailey indicated that the commission will need to consider attempts and conspiracies to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree as they are not specifically addressed in the new statutory language.
Typically, for attempts and conspiracies, the presumptive duration is divided by two according to section II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers.
The Legislature did not specify how attempts were to be addressed under the new Approved Minutes Page 10 May 18, 2000
legislation; however, the subcommittee believed that the current policy should be consistent for Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree offense also.
The suggested guidelines language modifications to address the statutory change in M.S. § 609.342, subd. 2 is: II.C. Presumptive Sentence: ....
The line on the Sentencing Guidelines Grid demarcates those cases for whom the presumptive sentence is executed from those for whom the presumptive sentence is stayed.
For cases contained in cells above and to the right of the line, the sentence should be executed.
For cases contained in cells below and to the left of the line, the sentence should be stayed, unless the conviction offense carries a mandatory minimum sentence.
......
Pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2, the presumptive sentence for a conviction of Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is an executed sentence of at least 144 months.
The presumptive duration for an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree must be at least 72 months.
Sentencing a person in a manner other than that described in M.S. § 609.342 subdivision 2 is a departure.
II.C.08.
When an offender has been convicted of M.S. § 609.342, the presumptive duration is that found in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, any applicable mandatory minimum sentence, or the minimum presumptive sentence pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2, whichever is longer.
According to M.S. § 609.342, subd. 2, the presumptive sentence for a conviction of Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is an executed sentence of at least 144 months.
The minimum presumptive duration for an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is 72 months.
II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers: For persons convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree (M.S. § 609.342), the presumptive duration is one-half of that found in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, any applicable mandatory minimum sentence, or one-half the minimum presumptive sentence pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2 (72 months), whichever is longer.
V. VIII OFFENSE SEVERITY REFERENCE TABLE
Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (sexual penetration) - 609.342 (See II.C. Presumptive Sentence Page 11 May 18, 2000
Approved Minutes
and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers).
VII Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (sexual contact - victim under 13) - 609.342 (See II.C. Presumptive Sentence and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers).
Numerical Reference of Felony Statutes Statute 609.342 609.342 C Offense Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (Sexual Penetration) Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (Sexual Contactvictim under 13 Severity Level 8* 7*
See II.C. Presumptive Sentence and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers.
Approved Minutes
Page 12
May 18, 2000
Attach copy of GRID
Approved Minutes
Page 13
May 18, 2000
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose acceptance of the subcommittee's recommendations to address the statutory language changes for Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree (M.S. § 609.342, subd. 2.)
Judge Klaphake made a motion to amend the motion on the floor to remove reference to presumptive sentences for attempts and amend any other commentary in the proposal relating to attempts.
There was concern that the presumptive duration for an attempted severity level VIII Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree was too close to that for other completed severity level VIII offenses.
Motion failed for lack of second.
Members discussed the great disparity in sentence length between Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st and 2nd Degrees and agreed that the Legislature should be made aware of the issues of proportionality with this offense now that the presumptive sentence given in statute is 144 months for Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st in comparison not only to other criminal sexual conduct offenses but to other offenses ranked at severity level VIII.
MOTION was made by Judge Klaphake and seconded by Scott Swanson to amend the motion on the floor to propose continuing the current attempt or conspiracy policy of one-half the respective cell time on the sentencing guidelines grid for Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st Degree.
The proposed language and modifications to the Offense Severity Reference Table and grid are as follows: C. Presumptive Sentence: The offense of conviction determines . . . .
Pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2, the presumptive sentence for a conviction of Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is an executed sentence of at least 144 months.
Sentencing a person in a manner other than that described in M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2 is a departure.
The presumptive duration for an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is one-half of the time listed in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, or any mandatory minimum, whichever is longer.
....
II.C.08.
When an offender has been convicted of M.S. § 609.342, the presumptive duration is that found in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, any applicable mandatory minimum sentence, or the minimum presumptive sentence pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subdivision 2, whichever is longer.
According to M.S. § 609.342, subd. 2, the presumptive sentence for a conviction of Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is an executed sentence of at least 144 months.
The presumptive duration for an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is one-half of the time listed in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid, or any mandatory minimum, whichever is longer.
G. Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers: For persons convicted of attempted offenses or conspiracies . . . .
For persons convicted of an attempt or conspiracy to commit Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree (M.S. § 609.342), the presumptive duration is one-half of that found in the appropriate cell of the Sentencing Guidelines Grid or any Approved Minutes Page 14 May 18, 2000
mandatory minimum, whichever is longer.
V. Offense Severity Reference Table Severity Level VIII Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (sexual penetration) - 609.342 (See II.C. Presumptive Sentence and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers).
Severity Level VII Criminal Sexual Conduct 1 (sexual contact -- victim under 13) - 609.342 (See II.C. Presumptive Sentence and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers).
Addition of a Footnote to Severity Level VIII on the Sentencing Guidelines Grid: ²Pursuant to M.S. § 609.342, subd. 2, the presumptive sentence for Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First Degree is a minimum of 144 months (see II.C. Presumptive Sentence and II.G.
Convictions for Attempts, Conspiracies, and Other Sentence Modifiers).
The amended MOTION carried.
C
CRIME PUNISHABLE UNDER DIFFERENT PROVISIONS - CRIMINAL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH FORCE OR VIOLENCE - M.S. § 609.035, SUBD. 6 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
Minn.
Stat. § 609.035, subd 6 was created making Criminal Sexual Conduct 1st through 4th with force or violence a crime for which the offender can be prosecuted and punished in addition to any other crime committed by the defendant as part of the same conduct.
It also provides that a judge can impose consecutive sentences in such situations without departing from the sentencing guidelines.
The subcommittee recommended that the language in section II.F. Concurrent/Consecutive Sentences be amended to be consistent with the law change.
The suggested language follows: Permissive Consecutive Sentences Except when consecutive sentences are presumptive, consecutive sentences are permissive (may be given without departure) only in the following cases: . . .
5.
A current felony conviction for Fleeing a peace Officer in a Motor Vehicle as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 609.487.
or Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First through Fourth Degrees with force or violence as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 609.342 through 609.345.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose the subcommittee's suggested language to amend language in Permissive Consecutive Sentences allowing for consecutive sentences for Criminal Sexual Conduct in the First through Fourth Degrees with force or violence MOTION carried.
Approved Minutes Page 15 May 18, 2000
C
EXTENDED JURISDICTION JUVENILE (EJJ) JAIL CREDIT - M.S. § 260B.130, SUBD. 5 -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The allowance of EJJ jail credit under M.S. § 260B.130, subd. 5 was amended to provide that no jail credit be granted for time spent in a juvenile facility custody prior to a summary hearing when an extended jurisdiction juvenile offender has a stayed sentence executed.
The subcommittee recommended that the guidelines not be amended at this time awaiting outcomes from any sentencing appeals.
No motion was necessary.
TECHNICAL MODIFICATIONS C
DWI RE-CODIFICATION -Effective for Crimes Committed on or After August 1, 2000
The DWI statutes have been re-codified by the Legislature.
Accordingly, statutory references contained in the custody status section (II.B.2) and the misdemeanor/gross misdemeanor point section (II.B.3) of the guidelines will need to be changed to conform to the new statutory citations and language.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose the technical modifications to address the DWI re-codification.
MOTION carried.
!
SEX OFFENDER MANAGEMENT REPORT - M.S. § 253B.185 -Effective April 12, 2000
This report requires that the Commission of Corrections, in consultation with the Commissioner of Human Services, the Attorney General, the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, and the Sentencing Guidelines Commission, report to the Legislature by December 15, 2000 on a plan for establishing a sex offender management oversight group to monitor, review, and evaluate all aspects of the state's system of responding to sexual offenses.
No Motion was necessary.
ADDITIONAL MODIFICATIONS TO THE SENTENCING GUIDELINES AND COMMENTARY - EFFECTIVE AUGUST 1, 2000 PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS PREVIOUSLY DISCUSSED BY THE COMMISSION Language addressing crimes motivated by bias was previously drafted by the subcommittee on bias motivated crimes and presented to the commission.
The suggested language to address bias motivation as an aggravating factor is:
C
BIAS MOTIVATION AGGRAVATING FACTOR
Approved Minutes
Page 16
May 18, 2000
Section II.D.2.b.
Aggravating Factors: ... (9) The offender intentionally selects the victim or the property against which the offense is committed, in whole or in part, because of the victim's, the property owner's or another's actual or perceived race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, disability, age or national origin.
Commentary Language: II.D.206.
The aggravating factor involving bias motivation under section II.D.2.b.(9) cannot be used when a person has been convicted under a statute that elevated the crime to a felony offense because of bias motivation, e.g., Minn.
Stat. §§ 609.2231, subd. 4 (fourth-degree assault), 609.595, subd. 1a(a) (criminal damage to property); 609.749, subd. 3(1) (harassment/stalking).
The Commission intends that a penalty for a bias-motivated offense be subject to enhancement only once.
Additionally, in determining when domestic violence, sexual assault and sexual abuse cases are motivated by a victim's sex and may be appropriately enhanced, proof must be shown of at least one factor, such as: Offender makes abusive or derogatory references based on gender; offender states hatred for a gender as a class; crime involves excessive violence, including mutilation; or victims are multiple and all of the same gender.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to propose adding the provided language to address crimes motivated by bias.
MOTION carried.
PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS TO CLARIFY POLICIES C
SENTENCING ORDER WHEN MULTIPLE OFFENSES ARE SENTENCED
When multiple offenses are sentenced at the same time, the Commission's policy is that they should be sentenced in the order in which they occurred.
This policy is stated in the section of the Guidelines dealing with consecutive sentences (II.F.) and in the commentary in the criminal history section (II.B.101) but not in the Guidelines in the criminal history section.
It was suggested that the policy be stated in the Guidelines in a place where it is apparent that it applies to all multiple current offenses.
MOTION was made by Judge Klaphake and seconded by Scott Swanson to propose amending the Guidelines language in II.B. to: The offender's criminal history index score is computed in the following manner: 1.
Subject to the conditions listed below, the offender is assigned a particular weight for every extended jurisdiction juvenile conviction and for every felony conviction for which a felony sentence was stayed or imposed before the current sentencing or for which a stay of imposition of sentence Page 17 May 18, 2000
Approved Minutes
was given before the current sentencing.
Multiple offenses are sentenced in the order in which they occurred.
For purposes of this section, prior extended jurisdiction juvenile convictions are treated the same as prior felony sentence . . . .
MOTION carried.
C
INCLUSION OF STAYS OF IMPOSITION IN FELONY CRIMINAL HISTORY
This proposed amendment is to clarify confusion that may arise regarding including stays of impositions given for felony level offenses that are included in the felony section of the criminal history score, particularly if the stay of imposition is for less than three years of probation.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Kristine Zajac to propose amending the language in II.B.101 of the guidelines as follows to provide clarification: II.B.101.
The basic rule for computing the number of prior felony points in the criminal history score is that the offender is assigned a particular weight for every felony conviction for which a felony sentence was stayed or imposed before the current sentencing or for which a stay of imposition of sentence was given for a felony level offense, no matter what period of probation is pronounced, before the current sentencing.
. . .
MOTION carried.
C
SUGGESTED LANGUAGE TO ADDRESS THE KENARD DECISION
The commission had requested staff prepare language for the commission's consideration reflecting the Supreme Court decision (State v. Kenard, ______N.W.2d _____ (Minn.
Feb. 10, 2000) indicating that trial courts need to specify the reasons for its assignment of a severity level in a case of an unranked offense.
The suggested language is: Comment II.A.05.
The other offenses were excluded because prosecutions are rarely, if ever, initiated under them or because the underlying conduct included in the offense covers such a wide range of severity.
When persons are convicted of offenses excluded from the Offense Severity Reference Table, judges should exercise their discretion by assigning an offense a severity level which they believe to be appropriate.
Judges should specify on the record the reasons a particular severity level was assigned.
Factors which a judge may consider when assigning a severity level to an unranked offense include but are not limited to: 1) the gravity of the specific conduct underlying the unranked offense; 2) the severity level assigned to any ranked offense whose elements are similar to those of the unranked offense; 3) the conduct of and severity level assigned to other offenders for the same unranked offense; and 4) the severity level assigned to other offenders engaged in similar conduct.
If a significant number of future convictions are obtained under one or more of the excluded offenses, the Commission will determine an appropriate Approved Minutes Page 18 May 18, 2000
severity level, and will add the offense to the Offense Severity Reference Table.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose acceptance of the additional language in II.A.05 to address rankings for unranked offenses.
MOTION carried.
REQUEST FOR REVIEW OF CURRENT POLICY C
CONSECUTIVE SENTENCES FOR OFFENSES COMMITTED W HILE ON ESCAPE STATUS
Ms. Dailey explained that practitioners have expressed concerns regarding staff's interpretation of the current presumptive consecutive sentencing language as it relates to sentences for an inmate who escapes from an executed prison sentence and, while on escape status, commits additional felony level offenses.
Staff's interpretation of the existing language is that it is presumptive for the sentences for Escape and the other new offenses to be consecutive to the offense for which the offender had been confined.
She indicated that the language does not appear to allow the sentence for the offense committed while on escape status to be consecutive to the escape without departing.
MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Dr. Mary T. Howard to propose the following language to address this concern: Permissive Consecutive Sentences Except when consecutive sentences are presumptive, consecutive sentences are permissive (may be given without departure) only in the following cases: ....
5.
A current felony conviction for a crime committed while on felony escape from lawful custody, as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 609.485, from an executed felony sentence may be sentenced consecutively to the sentence for the escape.
A current felony conviction for Fleeing a Peace Officer in a Motor Vehicle as defined in Minn.
Stat. § 609.487.
65.
Consecutive sentences are permissive under the above criteria numbers 1-4 only when the presumptive disposition for the current offense(s) is commitment to the Commissioner of Corrections as determined under the procedures outlined in section II.C.
In addition, consecutive sentences are permissive under 1.
above, involving a current felony conviction for a crime against a person and a prior felony sentence for a crime against a person which has not expired or been discharged, only when the presumptive disposition for the prior offense(s) was commitment to the Commissioner of Corrections as determined under the procedures outlines in section II.C.
If the judge pronounces a consecutive stayed sentence in these circumstances, the stayed sentence is a mitigated dispositional departure, but the consecutive nature of the sentence is not a departure if the offense meets one of the above criteria.
The consecutive stayed sentence begins when the offender Approved Minutes Page 19 May 18, 2000
completes the term of imprisonment and is placed on supervised release.
Consecutive sentences are always permissive under the above criteria numbers 5 and 6.
II.F.04.. . . .
If the presumptive disposition for an escape conviction from a nonexecuted prison sentence is commitment to the Commissioner of Corrections, it is permissive for the sentence to be consecutive to the offense for which the offender was confined regardless of whether the other sentence is for a crime against the person.
The presumptive duration for the escape is found at the zero criminal history column and the appropriate severity level.
In addition to making the sentence for the escape offense consecutive to the sentence for which the offender was confined, it is also permissive to pronounce a sentence for any offense committed while on escape status that carries a presumptive disposition of commitment to the Commissioner of Corrections, consecutive to the sentence for the escape conviction or consecutive to the sentence for which the offender was confined.
Sentences for offenses committed while on escape status from an executed sentence which have presumptive dispositions of commitment to the Commissioner of Corrections are presumptive consecutive to the sentence being served by the offender at the time of the escape.
In addition, it is permissive to sentence any offense committed while on escape status from an executed sentence consecutive to the escape.
MOTION carried.
PROPOSED TECHNICAL MODIFICATIONS Ms. Dailey indicated that the following three changes are technical modifications.
C
CORRECTION TO II.B.1.A TO CHANGE "POINT" TO "POINTS"
Subject to the conditions listed below, the offender is assigned a particular weight for every extended jurisdiction juvenile conviction and for every felony conviction for which a felony sentence was stayed or imposed before the current sentencing or for which a stay of imposition of sentence was given before the current sentencing.
For purposes of this section, prior extended jurisdiction juvenile convictions are treated the same as prior felony sentences.
a.
The weight assigned to each prior felony sentence is determined according to its severity level, as follows: Severity Level I - II = ½ point; Severity Level III - V = 1 point; Severity Level VI - VII = 1 ½ points; Severity Level VIII - X = 2 points; and Murder 1st Degree = 2 points.
C
CORRECTION TO II.F.03
The example cited in the guidelines for concurrent and consecutive sentencing does not reflect the Approved Minutes Page 20 May 18, 2000
durations now in effect.
II.F.03.
. . .
In certain situations a concurrent sentence would result in an offender serving longer in prison than a consecutive sentence and in such situations a concurrent sentence is presumptive.
For example, an inmate has four months left to serve before release on the first offense.
The new offense is a severity level IV crime and the inmate's criminal history score is five.
If sentenced concurrently, the presumptive duration would be 3227 months, the term of imprisonment would be 21 1/3 18 months and because the sentence runs concurrently with the first offense, the total time to be served would be 21 1/3 18 months.
If the new offense were sentenced consecutively, the presumptive duration would be 15 months, the term of imprisonment would be 10 months and adding the 10 months to the four months left to serve on the first offense would equal 14 months or 7 1/3 4 months less than the time to be served under concurrent sentencing.
In a situation like this example, concurrent sentencing would be presumptive.
C
CHANGE THE OFFENSE TITLES LISTED FOR M.S. § 617.246 AND 617.247
Possible Modifications to the Unranked Offense List: II.A.03.
The following offenses were excluded from the Offense Severity Reference Table: Prohibiting promotion of minors to engage in obscene works 617.246; 617.247 Possession of Pictorial Representations of Minors - 617.247 ...
Use of Minors in Sexual Performance Prohibited - 617.246 Warning subject of investigation - 609.4971 Warning subject of surveillance or search - 609.4975 Wire communications violations - 626A.02, subd. 4; 626A.03, subd. 1(b)(ii); 626A.26, subd. 2(1)(ii)
.
Possible Modifications to the Numerical Reference Table: 617.246 617.247 617.246 617.247 Use of Minors in Sexual Performance Prohibited Possession of Pictorial Representation of Minors Obscenity re: Minors Obscenity re: Minors unranked unranked unranked unranked
MOTION was made and seconded to propose making the three technical changes as presented.
MOTION carried.
INADVERTENTLY UNRANKED OFFENSES -Effective August 1, 2001, after review by the 2001 Legislature MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to propose Approved Minutes Page 21 May 18, 2000
placing Sale of Membership Camping Contracts/Registration Requirement (M.S. § 82A.25 and M.S. § 82A.03) and Prohibited Practices (M.S. § 82A.13) and Issuing a Receipt for Goods One Does not Have (M.S. § 227.50) on the list of unranked offenses and to place Theft of Registered Bicycles (M.S. § 168C.09) on the Theft Offense List.
MOTION carried.
ISSUES FOR FUTURE CONSIDERATION C DWI OFFENSES
The commission received a request from a probation officer to consider modifying the Commission's policy on custody status points for traffic offenses.
This year the Legislature did not create a felony level DWI offense; however, they did create a DWI Felony Working Group (including the Executive director of the Sentencing Guidelines) to study and make recommendations on the implementation of a felony DWI.
The group's final report is to be forwarded to the Legislature by September 1, 2000.
Ms. Dailey indicated that the Commission may want to await the outcome of that report, and the 2001 Legislature's response and at that time reconsider all its policies regarding how prior DWIs are counted in criminal history.
C
MISDEMEANOR AND GROSS MISDEMEANOR OFFENSE LIST ISSUES
Over the last year there have been requests to consider adding offenses to the Misdemeanor and Gross Misdemeanor Offense List.
The offenses requested include Dishonored checks and other property offenses with felony level offenses (M.S. § 609.535), Overworking or Mistreating Animals (M.S. § 343.21), and Poisoning Animals (M.S. § 343.27).
The Commission had indicated an interest in thoroughly reviewing that list in its entirety at a future meeting so it is suggested that the Commission inform the interested parties that such a review will be undertaken in the next year and invite their further input.
The Public Hearing will be July 13, 2000 at 4:00 p.m. in Room 500 South of the State Office Building and the meeting when the commission will vote on the proposals will be July 20, 2000 at 3:00 p.m. in the Orville Pung Conference Room #1 at the Central Office of the Department of Corrections.
The public hearing record will remain open for five days following the public hearing meeting.
! CONDITIONAL RELEASE INFORMATION ON SENTENCING WORKSHEET
The commission members briefly discussed the importance of the court being made aware of the conditional release period of five and ten years for sex offenders, as mandated by law.
It had been suggested that a check-off box for conditional release be added to the sentencing worksheet.
The electronic sentencing worksheet program will be available by the end of June 2000 and members recognized that this would be a good opportunity for additional training regarding the mandated conditional release for sex offenders.
Members indicated that judges need to make it clear that particular offenders fall under the conditional release mandate so that the Department of Corrections knows that this supervision is needed for particular offenders.
Members also noted that the absence of documenting conditional release requirements are Approved Minutes Page 22 May 18, 2000
sometimes purposely ignored when negotiating sentences.
Members agreed that all parties involved in the process should be made aware of the necessity and requirement of conditional release time through training.
IV.
Adjourn MOTION was made by Scott Swanson and seconded by Justice Anderson to adjourn the meeting.
MOTION carried.
The meeting adjourned at 4:59 p.m.
Approved Minutes
Page 23
May 18, 2000
