Study of the Effects of Federal Devolution on State Joint Legislative Audit Committee Report No. 98-9 December 1998 Study of the Effects of Federal Devolution on State and Local Government Services Table of Contents Page Executive Summary ................................
................................
..........................
Introduction Impetus for the study ................................
................................
.................
Background ................................
................................
................................
..
Objectives of the study ................................
................................
................
Scope and methodology ................................
................................
.............
Characteristics of Devolution Devolution appears in several forms ................................
............................
General observations about devolution in Oregon ................................
.......
Examples of Devolution 1996 Federal Welfare Reform contains many examples ............................
Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) ................................
.......
Welfare Reform eliminated benefits for many non-citizens ..........................
Food Stamp benefits are reduced ................................
...............................
Adoptions and Safe Families Act of 1997 ................................
....................
Cuts to the Social Services Block Grant (SSBG) ................................
........
Changes in Medicaid Disproportionate Share funding ................................
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 ................................
..............................
HUD changes to housing services ................................
...............................
Conclusions and Recommendations ................................
................................ .
Appendix 1 Human Services Devolution Work Group Participants ................
Appendix 2 Human Services Work Group Response Matrix ..........................
Appendix 3 Non-Citizen Eligibility for Benefits Before/After Welfare Reform ................................
................................
........... v 1 1 2 2 5 6 9 9 12 14 15 17 17 18 19 21 23 25 31 iii Executive Summary Devolution appears in several forms Devolution has been defined as the transference of rights, powers, or responsibilities to another, especially from a central government to local authorities.
However, this concept holds different meanings for different people.
Some view it as the federal government abdicating its responsibilities, while others view it as a way for states and local governments to have greater freedom and flexibility in how they deal with issues affecting their populations.
This review leads to several general observations about how federal devolution is perceived in Oregon.
We found that devolution takes more than one form and is not always easily recognized or categorized.
It is found in the form of unfunded mandates, block grants with restrictions on spending, and severe reductions in spending that leave the state responsible for resolving on-going situations.
We also found that, except in the human services program area, most state agencies in Oregon are not "tuned in" to the devolution issue.
In addition, local governments are currently more focused on state to local issues, such as administration of the property tax system, funding for district attorneys and court facilities, county transportation issues, crime prevention, economic development, and land management issues.
We found that non-profit service providers are acutely aware of devolution, but find it difficult to isolate and quantify the direct consequences.
Additionally, most major devolution actions are phased-in over time, so the ultimate consequences will not be fully understood for several years.
And, along with flexibility and opportunity, devolution often brings significant fiscal risks.
General observations about devolution in Oregon The Welfare Reform A major change brought about by federal welfare reform was the Act has significant elimination of Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and several related programs and their replacement with the impact Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grant.
The TANF grant is set at a fixed amount for six years, regardless of caseload, inflation, or other changes.
While it gives the state greater flexibility in responding to local needs and determining how best to use the funds, it leaves the state vulnerable to caseload and cost shifts over which it may have little control.
v Welfare Reform also ended access for legal non-citizens to a wide range of means-tested benefit programs, including Food Stamps.
The result is a shift of responsibility and cost from the federal government to state and local safety net programs.
For example, Food Stamp data and information from the Oregon Food Bank clearly indicate that, as Food Stamp usage was restricted, usage of food banks increased.
It will fall to state and local providers to meet the basic needs of those low-income persons who have no other source of support.
Other acts will have a significant impact on state expenditures
Welfare Reform eliminated benefits for many noncitizens Federal welfare reform ended access for legal non-citizens to a wide range of means-tested benefit programs.
The result is a shift of responsibility and cost from the federal government to state and local safety net programs.
Although not yet implemented, it is included as an example of devolution to both inform legislators about the changes the law brings and to caution them that the "devil may be in the details," since the regulations governing its implementation are not yet written.
Conclusions and Recommendations There are many ways by which the federal government devolves responsibility to the State.
Devolution needs to be looked at prospectively, with potential alternatives identified before federal funding is lost.
The Joint Legislative Audit Committee recommends that legislative committees dealing with both budget and policy issues build into their hearings process a review of relevant federal policy and funding changes and how they are affecting the issues under consideration.
We also recommend that the Joint Committee on Ways and Means focus attention during the 1999 legislative session on the uses and sustainability of programs financed with Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grant and that outcomes, rather than caseload count, be the ultimate measure of program success.
Other recommendations are for substantive and budget committees to examine options, policy issues, and the fiscal impact of specific federal legislation.
vi Introduction Impetus for the study State budget and policy-making practices have tended to ignore or de-emphasize proposed federal actions until they have already taken place and the consequences are apparent.
This often results in uncoordinated, crisis driven responses to specific, narrowly defined issues.
Attempts to balance the federal budget, coupled with a shift in social and political philosophy that focuses more on local solutions and control, have accelerated the transfer of responsibility from the federal government to the states.
It is increasingly important that the legislature be aware of this shift and how it affects state and local governments, non-profit providers of services, and the people being served.
In November 1997, the Joint Legislative Audit Committee initiated this study to facilitate that awareness.
Background The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Welfare Reform) and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 are examples of federal legislation that has resulted in the transfer of responsibility for programs and services from the federal government to the states.
Welfare Reform eliminates or severely restricts access by legal noncitizens to assistance from historically federally funded programs and reduces Food Stamp benefits for both citizens and non-citizens.
Legislation designed to achieve a balanced federal budget also devolves responsibility or severely reduces funding for many programs.
States have addressed this transfer of responsibility in a variety of ways.
Some have restored benefits using state resources.
Others have partially or selectively restored benefits; and others have taken no action.In Oregon, the current budget does not adequately address how the state should deal with these changes, either fiscally or in terms of policy development.
For example, estimates of the value of lost benefits to non-citizens due to Welfare Reform ranged from $20 million to over $100 million.
This wide range demonstrates the differing views concerning the effects of reform and the consequences for service providers and individuals who lose benefits.
With this review the Joint Legislative Audit Committee hopes to heighten awareness of devolution and initiate a process for more effectively dealing with the fiscal risks that it brings.
1 Objectives of the study The objective of the study is to help the Legislative Assembly be better prepared to respond to the effects of devolution by: identifying affected programs and services; evaluating the consequences for service recipients and providers; developing and prioritizing policy choices and/or recommendations for dealing with the effects of devolution; and assuring that the information and policy choices are available for 1999-01 budget considerations.
Scope and methodology In its broadest context, the concept of devolution involves a wide range of public policy issues that affect all levels of government and much of the private sector.
The scope of this study was limited to the consequences that result from the transfer of responsibility from the federal government to the state and its governmental subdivisions.
Specifically, the study attempted to identify areas of devolution that have taken place or are scheduled to take place under federal welfare reform and appropriation bills for federal fiscal years (FFY) 1997, 1998 and, to the extent known, 1999.
As the study proceeded, it became apparent that several of the original objectives would not be met.
Although it was possible to identify many devolution issues, in most cases information was not available upon which to base an evaluation of the consequences for service recipients and providers.
Inevitably, the scope of the study shifted--or devolved--into a look at the forms devolution has taken and actions the legislature might take to raise awareness of the issue.
The study focused on the fiscal risks that result from devolved responsibility.
To the extent possible, the information includes concrete and quantifiable consequences of specific devolution issues.
The study did not attempt to delve into the pros and cons of the political and philosophical bases for devolution.
The process of identifying the effect of devolution on state agencies was initiated with an informal survey conducted by the Legislative Fiscal Office.
State agencies were asked to: 2 identify programs or services that were previously supported with federal funds that have devolved to state and/or local government responsibility, indicating which are affected in the current biennial budget and those scheduled for devolution that will affect future budgets; indicate if the federal government mandates continuation of the program or service, even though it will no longer provide funding; indicate if continuation of the program or service is mandated by the state legislature; and, if so, whether funding was provided and at what level; estimate the fiscal impact on the state resulting from the responsibility transfer; identify programs that have not yet, but are scheduled for devolution in the coming years; and identify programs they know of that devolve directly from the federal government to local government entities.
To obtain information about devolution issues affecting local government, non-profit service providers, and benefit recipients, we participated in a two-day, social support devolution retreat sponsored by the Oregon Coalition of Community Non-Profits.
Also participating in the retreat were local government officials and members and the Governor's Social Support Investment Strategy Steering Committee.
We also established and met with a work group of organizations and individuals to help identify human services devolution issues.
Members of that group are listed in Appendix 1.
Finally, we relied heavily upon the research and publications of the National Conference of State Legislatures, Issue Briefs published by the Federal Funds Information for the States, and the "new federalism" research of The Urban Institute.
3 Characteristics of Devolution Devolution appears in several forms The dictionary defines devolution as "the transference (as of rights, powers, or responsibility) to another; especially the surrender of powers to local authorities by a central government."1 This concept holds different meanings for different people.
Some view it as the federal government abdicating its responsibilities, while others view it as a way for states and local government to have greater freedom and flexibility in how they deal with issues affecting their populations.
The focus of this report--devolution that results in fiscal risks--takes several forms.
The most obvious are restrictions on the use of federal funds and eliminating or severely reducing funding for programs previously supported at the federal level.
The block grant is increasingly used as a means of empowering states.
Generally, block grants provide a set amount of money and allow greater flexibility in how it is used to address a broadly defined problem or issue.
What frequently occurs; however, is that, in spite of the overall greater flexibility, either the law itself or subsequent regulations governing its implementation restrict usage in a way that leaves the state responsible for dealing with how, or whether, to fund the excluded element.
The exclusion of non-citizens from most social support programs under Welfare Reform is a prime example of the transfer of responsibility through a block grant that increases flexibility concurrent with restricting usage.
Another aspect of block grants is that the amount of funding does not automatically change when conditions affecting program costs change.
The grant is not adjusted upward to meet the added costs of rising caseloads or cost increases due to inflation or other factors.
Furthermore, because there is no match for state dollars, there can be a powerful incentive for states to spend less, rather than more, on affected programs.
This negates one of the primary goals of devolution, which is to transfer a greater share of responsibility to the state and local level.
In spite of the fact that the state may have greater flexibility in the way it spends the federal dollars, if the state reduces its share of overall program costs, then the de1 Block grants are increasingly used to devolve responsibility Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, copyright 1986 by Merriam-Webster, Inc. 5 centralization goals of devolution have not been achieved.
Rather, the central (federal) government actually increases its role in financing the program.
Devolution also results from major budget reductions Although not normally identified with devolution, severe reductions, the elimination of funding for programs, and changes in federal regulations can result in the transfer of responsibility.
This occurs when the need for the program or service does not cease simply because federal support does.
Several of the issues identified in this report fall into this de facto devolution category.
In addition to the more detailed program-related issues that follow this section, the study revealed several general conclusions about how federal devolution is affecting Oregon.
We found that: Devolution takes more than one form and is not always easily recognized or categorized.
It is found in the form of unfunded mandates, block grants with restrictions on spending, and severe reductions in spending that leave the state responsible for resolving on-going situations.
Except in the human services program area, most state agencies in Oregon are not "tuned in" to the devolution issue.
Of the agencies we surveyed, few outside the human services area could identify any devolution issues.
Although concerned about the trickle-down affect of federal devolution (primarily in the human services area), local governments are currently more focused on state to local issues.
These include issues such as administration of the property tax system, funding for district attorneys and court facilities, county transportation issues, crime prevention, economic development, and land management issues.
Non-profit service providers are acutely aware of devolution, but find it difficult to isolate and quantify the direct consequences.
Most major devolution actions are phased-in over time, so the ultimate consequences will not be fully understood for several years.
And, along with flexibility and opportunity, devolution often brings significant fiscal risks.
General observations about devolution in Oregon 6 The following section of this report provides examples of a few of the major fiscal risks facing the State as a result of devolution.
The examples are not all encompassing, and in most cases the consequences are yet to be fully realized.
The hope is that these examples, and others that come to light, will be pursued further during the 1999 legislative session, and that legislators and state agencies will have a heightened awareness of devolution and its potential consequences--both positive and negative.
7 Examples of Devolution The examples that follow are not intended to be a complete listing of devolution issues.
As noted earlier, few state agencies outside the human services area were able to identify any devolution issues.
For that reason most of our examples are drawn from the human services area.
Information about the human services issues identified by the Human Services Devolution Work Group is presented in Appendix 2.
1996 Federal Welfare Reform contains many examples Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) The most obvious example of devolution in recent years is the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (Welfare Reform).
Even though Oregon has a waiver to operate its own version of welfare reform (called the Oregon Option), many aspects of the federal law apply here too.
The most significant change brought about by federal Welfare Reform was the elimination of the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), Emergency Assistance, and Job Opportunities and Basic Skills (JOBS) programs and their replacement with the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grant.
Like its predecessor, TANFprovides cash assistance grants to very low-income families with children.
It is predominantly a single-parent program, but two-parent families also qualify under certain conditions.
The benefits are based on family size and income.
The AFDC cash assistance grant that most people associate with "welfare" was based on an entitlement to benefits.
The focus, both administratively and from the perspective of the benefit recipients, was on determining eligibility and assuring that the benefit was delivered in the right amount and on time.
Under TANF, there is no entitlement to benefits, and the focus is on helping people get and maintain jobs that lead to economic selfsufficiency.
Many of the resources that under AFDC would have gone into cash assistance payments are now directed toward support services, such as job training and child care, that help clients get and keep jobs.
The Adult and Family Services Division of the Department of Human Resources (AFS) understandably takes pride in the fact that cash assistance caseloads have decreased 58 percent in the past five years.
The number families receiving cash grants dropped from 43,272 in June 1993 to 18,382 in June 9 1998.
In spite of this success, the TANF program poses a fiscal risk for the state and its local government and non-profit partners, as well as for benefit recipients.
In spite of dramatic caseload reductions, TANF poses significant fiscal risks While TANF gives the state greater flexibility in responding to local needs and determining how best to use the funds1, it leaves the state vulnerable to caseload and cost shifts over which it may have little control.
The block grant is fixed at $168 million a year through the federal fiscal year (FFY) ending in 2002, regardless of caseload, inflation, or other changes.
Thereafter, funding and grant conditions are unknown.
In the meantime, the state and other social service safety net providers are vulnerable in the following ways: Although there are fewer cash assistance recipients, those who remain are more costly to deal with because they include a higher percentage of people with multiple barriers to employment, such as no work history, illiteracy, and substance abuse.
Unless TANF clients are able to move into significantly higher paying jobs, they continue to need public assistance through childcare, Medicaid, Food Stamps, and other publicly funded support.
There can be a disincentive for employed TANF clients to move into marginally higher paying jobs because the loss of child care benefits, Medicaid, and other public assistance makes them worse off economically than if they had remained at the lower wage level.
If there is an economic downturn, or some other circumstance that causes a TANF caseload increase, there will be no corresponding increase in federal funding to help absorb the cost.
Even though they are no longer on welfare, many families continue to qualify for Food Stamps and other public assistance Questions remain about the relationship between reduced welfare caseloads and reductions or increases in the demand for other public support services.
It is not always clear if the same populations are being studied.
A recent report entitled Comparing Recent Declines in Oregon's Cash Assistance Caseload with Trends in the Poverty Population, conducted by ECONorthwest, concludes that "exits from cash welfare are not equivalent to exits from poverty."
It is noteworthy that Oregon, under its grandfathered, Oregon Option welfare reform waiver, already had the spending flexibility that was granted other states through the 1996 federal legislation.
1 10 Using Food Stamp data, their research indicates that, even though cash assistance caseloads have dropped dramatically, the number of families who continue to live at or below the poverty level has not declined proportionately.
As one indicator they point out that even though families have exchanged their cash assistance grant for a paycheck, many still live at a level of poverty that qualifies them for Food Stamps and other public assistance.
Loss of the child support pass-through reduced cash assistance benefits for some TANF recipients One aspect of the TANF program that resulted in more funding for the state but reduced the benefit payment for TANF recipients was the elimination of the child support pass-through that had been required under AFDC.
Prior to Welfare Reform, the division passed through $50 of the child support collected from non-custodial parents directly to the custodial AFDC parent.
This was in addition to the cash assistance grant.
The remaining part of the collection was used to offset the state and federal cost of the cash grant.
The federal share of the pass-through ($30) was eliminated under Welfare Reform.
The 1997-99 budget for the Adult and Family Services Division (AFS) of the Department of Human Resources also eliminated the state's share, thereby reducing the benefit for affected TANF recipients by $50 per month.
This action increased the amount of revenue from support recoveries that would be available to offset state costs for the cash assistance program by $4.1million.
On the other hand, TANF families lost the same amount in pass through benefits.
This loss of income exacerbates families' efforts to rise out of the ranks of poverty and could increase the potential for reliance by lowincome families on the services of local governments and charitable organizations.
The flexibility that came with Oregon's welfare reform waiver and the TANF program gives the state authority to determine how much of the funding will be used for cash assistance grants and how much will be used for child care and work-related services.
This flexibility, along with the recent passage of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (mentioned later in this report), gives the state an ideal opportunity to reexamine the wide range of employment and training opportunities available to assist TANF families toward higher paying jobs and true selfsufficiency.
11 Congress considered a reduction in TANF funding for FFY 1999 As noted earlier, the TANF block grant is supposed to remain at a fixed amount through FFY 2002.
In an effort to find savings to finance a tax cut, Congress considered a proposal to reduce the TANF block grants by $10 billion nationwide.
Details about how that would be accomplished and the effect that such a reduction would have on Oregon's grant are unknown.
Ultimately, the proposal was not adopted, but its serious consideration demonstrates the vulnerability of the block grant.
If the state were faced with a significant TANF caseload increase and were unable or unwilling to offset the fixed block grant with state funds, it would result in increased demand on local governments and non-profit service organizations to help families meet their basic needs.
Welfare Reform eliminated benefits for many noncitizens Federal welfare reform ended access for legal non-citizens to a wide range of means-tested benefit programs.
The result is a shift of responsibility and cost from the federal government to state and local safety net programs.
The reform categorizes non-citizens in two major ways.
It distinguishes between "qualified" and "not-qualified" aliens and between those who arrived in the U.S. before and after August 22, 1996.
Qualified aliens include immigrants admitted for permanent residency, refugees, certain parolees, and those granted asylum or similar relief.
Not-qualified aliens are those who are unauthorized or who reside here temporarily under statutory authority or administrative discretion.Generally, legal immigrants who arrived before August 22, 1996 continue to be eligible for most means-tested benefits.
Not-qualified aliens and legal immigrants who arrived after that date are barred from all but emergency assistance for five years,2 and then are subject to deeming3 until they attain citizenship or have worked for 40 quarters (10 years).
States have the option to either bar or provide state funded programs for current and new immigrants.
2 Exceptions to the five-year ban include: Refugees, asylees, and persons whose deportation is withheld for their first seven years in the U.S. (including Cubans, Haitians, and Amerasians) Non-citizen veterans, those on active duty, and their spouses and unmarried, dependent children Immigrants who have worked in the U.S. for 40 qualifying quarters (10 years).
3 Deeming means that the sponsor's income and that of the sponsor's spouse are counted as income to the immigrant when determining eligibility for means-tested benefits.
12 A number of emergency, health-related and education programs are exempt from both the deeming and five-year bar requirement.
Otherwise, the rules barring benefits fall into two major categories: 1) those that are barred permanently, and 2) those that can be offered at the state's option.
Appendix 3 presents an overview of non-citizen eligibility for human services benefits.
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits are eliminated for most noncitizens Permanently barred programs include federal Food Stamps and Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which provides cash assistance for needy elderly, blind, or disabled persons.
The original 1996 welfare reform legislation barred most legal immigrants from SSI benefits.
The law was amended in 1997 to continue eligibility for non-citizens who were already receiving the benefit as of August 22, 1996 based on either their disability or age.
The amendment also allows future SSI eligibility for legal immigrants who were here by August 22, 1996 and who subsequently become disabled.
However, the following noncitizens remain ineligible for SSI benefits due to Welfare Reform: Legal immigrants who were in the U.S. prior to August 22, 1996 who subsequently reach the age of 65 and are impoverished, but not disabled.
Legal immigrants who enter the U.S. after August 22, 1996, regardless of their income, age, or disability status.
Food Stamps were also eliminated for most noncitizens Except for immigrants who are exempted from the residency and work requirements, non-citizens are also no longer eligible for federal Food Stamp benefits.
Immigrants already in the country when welfare reform was implemented lost their benefits effective August 22, 1997--one year after passage of the legislation.
Recent federal legislation restores the benefits for those who were legally in the country prior to August 22, 1996.
New arrivals are ineligible until they meet the residency and work requirements.
As noted earlier, it is difficult to quantify and verify the consequences of these changes.
However, Food Stamp data and information from the Oregon Food Bank (OFB) indicate clearly that as access to Food Stamps was restricted, usage of food banks increased.
13 TANF/ Medicaid/ and SSBG benefits are optional for certain noncitizens States have the option of offering TANF, Medicaid and Social Services Block Grant (SSBG) benefits to non-citizens who entered the country prior to passage of welfare reform legislation.
Immigrants entering after the effective date of reform must meet the five-year residency and 40 quarters of work requirements and, thereafter, are subject to deeming of their sponsors' incomes, as described earlier.
If states choose to offer new immigrants cash assistance and other benefits normally available under the TANF program, they must do so entirely with state funds.
Oregon has elected to fund these services with the goal of helping non-citizens become selfsufficient as quickly as possible.
The 1997 Legislative Assembly responded to the loss of SSI and Food Stamp benefits by establishing a reservation of $3 million within the general purpose Emergency Fund.
It also provided a $1.9 million special appropriation to the Emergency Board in the event the federal government did not restore SSI for elderly and disabled non-citizens who were in the country prior to passage of welfare reform legislation.
As mentioned earlier, those benefits were restored, so the $1.9 million was not allocated.
The $3 million reservation was allocated to the Department of Human Resources by the Emergency Board in November 1997.
Within that amount, $1.5 million was used to establish the Temporary Assistance Program (TAP).
TAP pays $275 of the $494 lost SSI benefit.
The Department estimates that 361 persons will receive TAP grants by the end of the biennium, at which time the program ends and the people will be without benefits.
The remaining funds went to a naturalization assistance program ($600,000) and as a one-time grant to the Oregon Food Bank Network ($900,000).
As the current and future population of non-citizens grows older or becomes disabled, it will fall to state and local providers to meet the basic needs of those low-income persons who have no other source of support.
This could prove to be one of the major fiscal consequences of Welfare Reform.
Food Stamp benefits are reduced Welfare Reform has severely restricted access to food stamps for able-bodied adults without dependents.
To qualify, these applicants are required to work at least half-time or be involved in a work-related training program.
The state may waive the work requirement for a region or the entire state if the unemployment rate in the region or state exceeds 10 percent.
14 Applicants who do not meet the work requirements are limited to three months of benefits within a three-year period.
Able-bodied adults must meet work requirements The Department of Human Resources estimates the value of lost Food Stamp benefits to be as high as $36 million a biennium.
They report that most food stamp recipients in this age group who have no dependents are disabled and unable to work, but approximately 3,500 will need to meet the work requirements in order to continue receiving food stamps.
Food Stamp benefits were further reduced, and in some cases eliminated, by no longer allowing applicants to offset income with an energy allowance when determining eligibility for the program.
For TANF clients, the state responded by increasing the cash assistance payment to make up for the loss.
The increase was automatic through March 1997.
After that, it was replaced by a series of employment incentives.
As Food Stamp caseloads have been reduced, use of the Oregon Food Bank Network (OFB) has increased.
In a recent report to the Emergency Board, the OFB and the Department of Human Resources reported that, although there had been a decline in food bank usage just prior to Welfare Reform, the number of persons using food banks increased over five percent in the year following its implementation.
In addition, the average frequency of usage went up 18.4 percent.
The Josephine County Food Share, which distributes its services through 15 non-profit and/or church-based organizations, reported a 59.9% increase in the number of emergency food boxes it distributed between June 1996 and June 1997.
Although the Food Stamp program is federally funded, there are additional costs to the state associated with the work eligibility requirements.
For recipients of the benefits, the reduction shifts resources away from housing and other basic needs to pay for food.
When these shifts occur, the likely result is more demand for the emergency support services of local governments, nonprofits providers and charitable organizations.
Energy Allowance eliminated from income determination Food bank distributions increase Adoptions and Safe The Adoptions and Safe Families Act of 1997 (ASFA), signed into law in November 1997, changes and clarifies the 1980 Families Act of Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare Act, which serves as the 1997 major federal law governing the protection and care of abused and neglected children.
15 The legislation includes mandates that will have a major impact on state policies and funding for programs of the State Office for Services to Children and Families (SCF) and the Judicial Branch.
Failure to meet certain provisions of the law would make Oregon ineligible for funds that currently provide $82 million to cover the costs of the foster care system and provide family preservation and support services.
Implementation of the legislation, which imposes stringent timelines for compliance, must begin by October 1999.
SCF indicates that legislation will be required during the 1999 legislative session to bring the state into conformity with the law regarding permanency issues, termination of parental rights, and assurances that the safety of children will be the paramount concern.
Parts of the bill that are expected to significantly affect the child welfare and judicial systems include: A requirement that a permanency hearing be held within 30 days after a finding of "extreme conduct"; An expansion in the scope of what is considered "extreme Shortening the time for implementing a permanency plan for children in substitute care who cannot be returned home from 18 months to 12 months; A requirement that the state file a petition for termination of parental rights for any child who has been in care for 15 of the last 22 months, unless certain conditions apply; A change in the method of determining the date that a child is considered to have entered care; A new requirement to provide notice and opportunity to be heard to foster parents and any pre-adoptive parent or relative providing care for the child; and A requirement that a state agency provide criminal records checks for any prospective foster or adoptive parent before the placement can be finalized.
The 1999-01 General ASFA is projected to almost $12 million.
yet to be determined, Fund cost to SCF of complying with be almost $6 million, with a total cost of The fiscal impact on the judicial system is but is expected to be substantial.
16 Cuts to the Social Services Block Grant reduce funding for child protective services The Social Services Block Grant (Title XX) is used in Oregon as a major source of funding for child protective services and employment related day care.
The grant was reduced by 15 percent in 1996, 10 percent in 1997, and an additional 3.3 percent in 1998.
Further reductions are scheduled through the year 2002.
Most of the grant is used by SCF and the Commission on Children and Families for child protective services.
The grant is also used by the Adult and Family Services Division for employment related day care, which is an integral part of its selfsufficiency effort.
The loss affects services critical to meeting the needs of the state's abused and neglected children.
Compounding the problem is the fact that, as the funds are being reduced at the federal level, the demand for foster care services is increasing.
The responsibility for maintaining or improving services for these children falls to the state.
This devolution of responsibility and the fiscal obligations it transfers become even more critical as the Adoptions and Safe Families Act of 1997 is implemented.
The estimated impact of the grant reduction in 1999-01 is $12 million.
Changes in Medicaid Disproportionate Share Hospital funding The Balanced Budget Act of 1997 reduced funding available to states for the Disproportionate Share Hospital Adjustment (DSH).
The funds, referred to as DSH payments, are used to compensate hospitals that treat a disproportionate share of indigent patients.
The reduction takes two forms: 1) a reduction in the cap on federal DSH funds and 2) a limitation on the amount of available DSH money that can be used for Institutions of Mental Disease (IMD).
Although there is no shift in responsibility from a policy perspective, the placement of a cap and restrictions on use of the funds creates a de facto devolution situation, primarily because Oregon has used a large share of its DSH funds to run its state mental institutions.
DSH payments for Oregon have been capped at $20 million annually for each of the next five years.
In the past, the state has been able to increase DSH payments to offset the General Fund cost of operating the Oregon State Hospital and Eastern Oregon Psychiatric Center.
This will no longer be possible.
The change was addressed mid way through the 1997-99 biennium by devising a rather complicated method of shifting funds among (a) the Office of Medical Assistance Programs, 17 which administers the Medicaid program; (b) the Oregon Health Sciences University, which also gets a substantial portion of the state's DSH money; and (c) the Mental Health and Developmental Disability Services Division, which operates the mental hospitals.
This arrangement, and a small General Fund shift from savings elsewhere in DHR's budget, offset the loss of $10.8 million in DSH funds for the mental hospitals in the 1997-99 biennium.
The projected loss in 1999-01 is approximately $14 million.
As the percentage of DSH funds that can be used in mental hospitals decreases over time, as called for in the legislation, the hospital shortfalls will increase.
Either the fund shifting arrangement with OHSU will need to continue indefinitely, or there will have to be another way to address this problem.
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 consolidates 60 current programs into three block grants, replaces current programs including JTPA On August 7, 1998 the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 was signed into law.
The Act consolidates funding for 60 current programs, including the Job Training Partnership Act, into three block grants: adult employment and training, disadvantaged youth employment and training, and adult education and family literacy.
Although not yet implemented, we include this example of devolution to both inform legislators about the changes the law brings and to caution them that the "devil may be in the details," since the regulations governing its implementation are not yet written.
The block grants give states greater flexibility and responsibility for making decisions related to job training needs.
The program is organized into five titles: 1) job training; 2) adult education ; 3) amendments to Wagner-Peyser and related Acts; 4) amendments to the Vocational Rehabilitation Act; and 5) general provisions.
The law establishes a one-stop delivery system for access to employment and training services, meaning that all basic services must be offered in one physical location.
As written, the Act has a neutral fiscal impact.
There is a measure of uncertainty about this, however, since the Act has not been funded.
It will be competing with many other discretionary spending needs and desires, so there is the potential for reduced funding of the system.
In addition to uncertainty about overall funding for the Act, questions remain about several provisions that could have a significant fiscal impact.
For example, will sufficient funding be made available to transition to the one-stop delivery mandate? 18 What will be the fiscal impact of the performance measures and related incentives and sanctions? How will the requirement for a voucher system for certain training programs affect costs? And so on.
Undoubtedly, this bill and similar examples of sweeping federal legislation will be the central focus of related substantive and budget committees during the 1999 legislative session.
HUD is in the process of reinventing the way housing services are delivered For the past several years the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) has been in the process of reinventing the way it delivers its services.
The need for a change was stimulated in part by the frequent failure of federal housing projects designed to provide affordable housing for the poor.
Similar to the reinvention of workforce programs described earlier, it has been proposed that 60 major housing programs be consolidated into three programs: Housing Certificates for Families and Individuals, Community Opportunity Fund, and Affordable Housing Fund.
The Affordable Housing Fund would consolidate 18 current programs, including, among others, shelter projects, housing for the elderly and disabled, and the Section 8 low income housing subsidy program.
The details of any future HUD consolidation or reorganization will need to be observed carefully for the potential impact at the state and local levels.
Following are examples of current housing concerns that are affected by federal action, or inaction, related to the availability of affordable housing.
Many affordable housing projects were developed with only 20year commitments to provide affordable units.
As the contracts have expired, the Section 8 subsidy may or may not have been renewed.
At this juncture, those projects that opted not to renew the subsidy contract have been lost from the affordable housing stock of the state.
Those projects that have renewed contracts only received subsidy on a year by year basis.
Loss of additional affordable units is subject to the option of HUD and congressional budget action.
Housing projects that have Section 8 rent subsidy like those cited above, but whose use contract has not expired, will some day face the same situation.
In advance of the occurrence, "preserving" the properties with subsidy is occurring around the state through acquisition by new owners.
Significant resources of the state are being called upon to facilitate the transition.
Federal policies threaten the availability of low income housing 19 The rents that HUD subsidizes in many housing developments exceed that of market rate units in the neighborhood.
In order to reduce the subsidy amount, HUD is seeking to lower the rent level in these projects.
This activity is being called "mark to market."
In the course of this activity, state resources may be called upon to offset the existing debt on the project.
An additional result may be that project owners will opt out of the subsidy program; affordable units will thereby be lost from the state inventory.
The numerous housing units owned by local housing authorities rely upon federal subsidies for operating expenses.
Over the years, repeated efforts have, and continued to be, initiated by HUD to reduce the level of subsidy.
HUD has also encouraged public housing units be sold to the occupants.
In each case, the ability to maintain decent quality housing is threatened by HUD's actions.
If the units fall into disrepair, they will become local public detriments rather than community assets.
There is instability in the Low Income Energy Assistance Program Congress annually threatens the level of federal appropriation for wintertime energy assistance payments through the Low Income Energy Assistance Program.
Although the major funding reduction of this program has already taken place, and Congress recently backed off a threat to eliminate funding altogether in 1999, there is no assurance of program stability.
Significant decreases in federal support for this program would limit the ability to assist poverty households with paying their heating bills.
The housing issues described above affect households with incomes less than 50 percent of median income.
The availability of affordable housing is essential for low income persons to achieve self-sufficiency.
The effect on state government of recent federal housing policies is the necessity of staff time to respond to crisis situations, devise local response plans, and provide state resources to mitigate or resolve housing dilemmas.
20 Conclusions and Recommendations Conclusions There are many ways by which the federal government devolves responsibility to the state.
It is found in the form of unfunded mandates, block grants with restrictions on spending, and reductions in spending that leave the state or local government responsible for an on-going situation.
State agencies in the human services area, local governments, and non-profit service providers are acutely aware of devolution, but find it difficult to quantify the consequences.
Other state agencies do not appear focused on the issue.
In most cases, they are unable to identify any devolution issues.
In both cases, budget and policy-makers tend to de-emphasize federal actions until they have already been implemented.
The results are often manifested in requests for additional General Fund support to replace lost federal funding.
It is difficult to access the consequences of devolution, because it tends to be implemented over a period of several years.
Nevertheless, the subject needs to be looked at prospectively, with potential alternatives identified before federal funding is lost.
Recommendations 1.
The Joint Legislative Audit Committee recommends that legislative committees dealing with both budget and policy issues build into their hearings process a review of relevant federal policy and funding changes and how they are affecting the issue under consideration.
At a minimum, the state agencies should be required to: a) Explain how federal laws, policies and budgets relate to the particular budget or policy issue; b) Describe current and pending federal legislation regarding the issue; c) Describe, in general terms, any relevance for local governments or private service providers; d) Describe how the agency is planning to respond to any federal legislation that may significantly alter its funding or program implementation; and 21 e) Describe what the agency is doing to establish ongoing operating procedures that facilitate greater and more timely awareness of and planning for pending federal actions.
2.
In an effort to minimize the state's vulnerability in the event of caseload increases or grant reductions, we recommend that the Joint Committee on Ways and Means focus attention during the 1999 legislative session on the uses and sustainability of programs financed with the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grant and that outcomes, rather than caseload count, be the ultimate measure of program success.
3.
We recommend that appropriate substantive committees examine options, including those that may be made available through the passage of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998, to move former TANF clients into higher paying jobs that will move them more quickly toward total economic self-sufficiency.
.
As the current and future populations of legal non-citizens grow older or become disabled, it will fall to the state and its local partners to meet the basic needs of those low-income persons who have no other source of support.
We recommend that the Department of Human Resource assist the appropriate legislative committees in the development of a policy and plan for how this challenge will be met.
5.
We recommend that the appropriate substantive and budget committees closely examine provisions of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 to determine its policy and fiscal impact on the state and its job training partners.
22 Appendix 1 Human Services Devolution Work Group Participants Robert Cantine, Executive Director Association of Oregon Counties Pam Curtis Governor's Office Phillip Fell, Legislative Director League of Oregon Cities George Gilman, Executive Director Foster Grandparents Program Jacqueline Henshaw, Program Director Oregon Naturalization Services Michael McCracken Association of Oregon Counties Sharon Morris Oregon Coalition of Community Non-Profits Bob Repine, Director Oregon Housing and Community Services Doug Wilson Department of Human Resources Budget and Management Analysts Department of Administrative Services Legislative Fiscal Office Analysts 23 Appendix 2: Human Services Work Group Response Matrix Affected Population Effect on State Government Effect on Local Government 
Up to 500 may lose SSI benefits .
Estimated 250 SDSD clients will lose Medicaid benefits Estimated 100 persons affected.
15-20 persons in Adult Foster Care (AFC) will lose Medicaid benefit and ability to pay AFC room 
3,500 elderly/disabled1 and 2,500 TANF clients will lose food stamp benefits Pass on fewer food stamp benefits Costs associated with verifying citizenship and/or work requirements Loss of SSI/Medicaid benefits for legal noncitizens in the country as of 8/22/96 who become 65, but are not disabled Loss of SSI benefits for legal non-citizens who immigrated after 8/22/96 Loss of Medicaid benefit for legal non-citizens who immigrated after 8/22/96 (five-year ban, followed by deeming until citizen or 10 years of work Non-qualified PRUCOL aliens who were receiving benefits prior to 8/22/96 lose SSI and Medicaid eligibility 10/1/982 Loss of SSI benefit will mean that 15-20 persons who are currently in AFC will be unable to make room 
State must replace room 
2 This action has been reversed resulting in no immediate impact.
25 Issue: Undocumented immigrants are ineligible for federal, state and local funded programs Affected Population Approx.
200 undocumented immigrants continue to utilize Federal CWEMA program for emergency medical care for life threatening conditions Approx.
3,250 new immigrants will not be eligible for TANF in `97-'99 Effect on State Government Effect on Local Government 
29,000 persons in this age group w/o dependents.
The majority have a disability that precludes work.
Approx.
3,500 in this group must meet the work requirement TANF households lose an average $40/mo.
In Food Stamp benefits.
Approx.
1,365 SDSD General Assistance (GA) clients lost an average $48/mo.
In Food Stamp benefits No participants are affected Minimal impact on job search and workfare Increased case management demand to assist with work search and develop workfare sites Increased need for low cost housing Increased demand at food banks Increased demand for services at non-profit and charitable organizations Energy allowance for Food Stamp benefits eliminated AFS increased the TANF payment to make up for the Food Stamp loss through 3/97.
After 3/97 loss replaced by a series of JOBS incentives SDSD provided a $48/mo.
Food Stamp supplement through 6/30/97.
GA grants were increased by $48/mo AFS expects to be under the 15% cap on administrative expenditures - No impact Reduced funding for administration (FFY 1999) S.1150 26 Issue: Affected Population Effect on State Government Effect on Local Government 
Expected to lose $3.6 million in `99-'01 Approx.
14,000 children are affected by reductions to SSBG Increases amount from support recoveries that can be used to offset TANF grant costs.
Increases workload for other local social service agencies Increases applications for assistance to other non-profit and charitable social services Increased planning, contracting and administrative costs Instability in staff trainer program while funding issues are being resolved Increased homeless shelter and crisis counseling demands Minimal direct affect on SCF clients Unfunded mandate ($590,933) to establish 4 regional panels; 1 central office program tech; administrative costs for panels 
7,000 ADP) Requires conforming state legislation Requires SCF to begin implementation with fiscal impact of $26 million ($14.5 GF) Backfilled with TANF at January 1998 E-Board Social Services Block Grant (Title XX) reductions to date (Balanced Budget Act of 1997) Social Services Block Grant (Title XX) FFY 1999-FFY2000 Community Based Family Resource and Support Grant Program (CAPTA) mandates establishment of citizen review panels and annual reports an unfunded mandate Adoptions and Safe Family Act of 1997 require harmony between state and federal laws on timelines for termination of parental rights and permanency Prohibition against use of Title IV-E for respite services for foster parents $1.0 million reduction in 199799 $7.1 million reduction in 199901 SCF Foster Parents 27 Issue: Affected Population Effect on State Government Effect on Local Government 
282 (29%) of the affected beneficiaries were enrolled in AOD treatment programs Other eligible disabilities are observed in higher numbers among this group Estimated that up to 75% of disqualified persons "requalified" with eligible disabilities Increased homelessness and resultant impact on social support system Medicaid Issues (other than related to immigrants): Reduction and change in usage of disproportionate share hospital (DSH) payments Reduced funding for Medicaid administration (FFY 1999) Unresolved issues related to dual (Medicare/Medicaid) eligibility Changes in funding for medical education Approx.
600 patients in state mental hospitals Funding used to support OHP and its 350,000 enrollees State must replace approx. $14 million of lost FF in SFY `99'01 $750,000 reduction (3%) in funds available to support OHP administrative functions Public Health Issues: Reduced HIV Surveillance Program funding concurrent with state and federal mandates to control HIV Eliminated federal funding for Childhood Lead Screening program State currently conducts approx.
400 screening tests each month Funding has been reduced by $1.1 million, reducing the program by 2/3 State law mandates HIV Surveillance Program A 3-month EPA grant extends the program.
If other attempts to secure backfill-funding fail, the program will be eliminated at the end of the EPA grant 28 Housing Issues: Section 8 Housing reductions (HR 3579) A large portion of ADC caseload affected.
Section 8 administered by HUD.
Section 8 subsidized housing is not considered income for ADC recipients Loss of housing subsidy will significantly increase shelter costs for many clients Loss of home heating subsidies increases the cost of subsistence for many AFS clients with marginal income Reductions in home heating program (FFY 1999) A large portion of the ADC caseload affected 29 Appendix 3: Non-Citizen Eligibility for Benefits Before/After Welfare Reform TANF (formerly AFDC) 
In Oregon, the Title XX Social Services Block Grant (SSBG) is used primarily for child care programs.
2 Immigrants admitted as permanent residents.
3 4 Aliens admitted to the country on a temporary basis 31
