History of Census Content and Procedure (Slightly) Excerpted From "Historical Background" http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/census/background/ Information in [brackets] is my paraphrasing or commentary.
­M. Hayslett, State Library of North Carolina The census of 1820 covered the subject of population in somewhat greater detail than the preceding one.
This census is notable for having obtained, for the first time, the numbers of inhabitants engaged in agriculture, commerce, and manufacturing.
The 1830 census related solely to population, but its scope concerning this subject was extended substantially.
The marshals and their assistants began using uniform printed schedules; before that, they had to use whatever paper was available, rule it, write in the headings, and bind the sheets together.
The census act for 1840 authorized the establishment of a centralized census office during each enumeration and provided for the collection of statistics pertaining to "the pursuits, industry, education, and resources of the country."
The new population inquiries included school attendance, illiteracy, and type of occupation.
Through the census of 1840, the household, rather than the individual, was the unit of enumeration in the population census, and only the names of the household heads appeared on the schedules.
There was no tabulation beyond the simple addition of the entries the marshals had submitted, and there was no attempt to publish details uniformly by cities or towns, or to summarize returns for each State, other than by county, unless the marshals had done so. ...For the first time, in 1850, the marshals collected additional "social statistics" (information about taxes, schools, crime, wages, value of estate, etc.) and data on mortality.
Noteworthy features of the 1870 census were the introduction of a rudimentary tallying device to help the clerks in their work, and the publication of maps, charts, and diagrams to illustrate the most significant census results.
The general scope of the 1880 census was expanded only slightly over that of 1870, but much greater detail was obtained for many of the items -- such detail, in fact, that beyond the basic counts, which were made and released promptly, it took almost until the 1890 census (because of budget constraints) to tabulate and publish some of the 1880 data.
The census act for 1880 replaced the marshals and their assistants with specially appointed agents (experts assigned to collect technical data, such as on manufacturing processes), supervisors, and enumerators, every one of whom was forbidden to disclose census information...For the first time, enumerators were given detailed maps to follow so they could account for every street or road and not stray beyond their assigned boundaries.
The National Archives' Cartographic and Architectural Branch has a collection of these maps.
Again, in 1890, there was a slight extension of the decennial census's scope, and some subjects were covered in even greater detail than in 1880.
Data were collected in supplemental surveys on farm and
1
home mortgages and private corporations' and individuals' indebtedness.
The 1890 census also used, for the first time in history, a separate schedule for each family.
Herman Hollerith, who had been a special agent for the 1880 census, developed punchcards and electric tabulating machines in time to process the census returns, reducing considerably the time needed to complete the clerical work.
Hollerith's venture became part of what is now the IBM Corporation.
...[1890 also saw the end of the Western frontier.]
The censuses that followed 1890 reflected the filling in, rather than the expansion of, the colonized areas and this meant a turning point in American life.
The 1900 census was limited to those questions asked for all the population in 1890, with only minor changes in content.
The period, however, featured the first U.S. censuses outside the continental States and territories: Following its annexation in 1898, Hawaii...was included in the 1900 census, which also had the first count of the U.S. population abroad (Armed Forces and Government civilian employees, and their households).
In some censuses, there were supplemental questionnaires for American Indians; in 1980, enumerators used these forms only on reservations to collected additional information about households with one or more American Indian, Eskimo, or Aleut residents.
From the 1840 through the 1900 censuses, a temporary census office had been established before each decennial enumeration and disbanded as soon as the results were compiled and published.
Congress established a permanent Bureau of the Census in 1902 in the Department of the Interior, so there would be an ongoing organization capable of taking frequent censuses throughout the decades instead of concentrating all the work in the years ending in "0."
The Bureau moved to the new Department of Commerce and Labor in 1903 and continued with the Commerce Department when the Labor Department was split off in 1913.
The 1910 census had several notable features.
First, prospective census employees took open competitive examinations administered throughout the country (since 1880, appointees had been given noncompetitive tests).
Second, the way in which results were published was changed.
Those statistics that were ready first -- and especially those in greatest demand (such as the total population of individual cities and States, and of the United States as a whole) -- were issued first as press releases, then in greater detail as bulletins and abstracts, the latter appearing 6 months to a year before the final reports were issued.
In 1920 and also in 1930, there were minor changes in scope.
A census of unemployment accompanied the 1930 census; data were collected for each person reported to have a gainful occupation but who was not at work on the working day preceding the enumerator's visit.
Sampling.
In many ways, 1940 saw the first contemporary census.
One of its major innovations was the use of advanced statistical techniques, such as probability sampling, that had only been tried experimentally before, such as in crop sampling in the 1920's, a trial census of unemployment carried out by the Civil Works Administration in 1933-1934 and surveys of retail stores in the same decade, and an official sample survey of unemployment in 1940 that covered about 20,000 households.
Sampling in the 1940 census allowed the addition of a number of questions for just 5 percent of the
2
persons enumerated without unduly increasing the overall burden on respondents and on data processing, and also made it possible to publish preliminary returns 8 months ahead of the complete tabulations.
The Bureau was able to increase the number of detailed tables published and, also by sampling, to review the quality of the data processing with more efficiency.
Most population and housing inquiries included in the 1940 census were repeated in later years, and a few were added, for example, place of work and means of transportation to work (1960), occupation 5 years before the census (1970 and 1980 only), and housing costs (1980).
In 1940 and 1950, the sample population questions were asked only for those persons whose names fell on the schedules' sample lines.
Sampling was extended to the housing schedule in 1950, with a few questions asked on a cyclic basis: One pair of questions for household 1, another pair for household 2, etc., until household 6, when the cycle was started again with the first pair of questions.
In the 1960 census, the sampling pattern was changed for population and housing questions alike: If a housing unit was in the sample, all of the household members were in the sample too.
This scheme yielded sufficient data for accurate estimates of population and housing characteristics for areas as small as a census tract (an average of 4,000 people).
The only population questions asked on a 100-percent basis (name and address, age, sex, color or race [and beginning in 1980, Spanish/Hispanic origin, marital status, and relationship to the householder) were those necessary to identify the population and avoid duplication.
The sampling pattern changed in later censuses.
For 1970, some sample questions were asked of either a 15-percent or a 5percent sample of households, but some were asked for both, thus constituting a 20-percent sample.
There was no "split sample" for 1980, but it was used at every other household (50 percent) in places with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants and at every sixth household (17 percent) elsewhere.
For 1990, the sample was tailored even more to population size....
New inquiries.
Reflecting the concerns of the Depression years, the 1940 census asked several questions to measure employment and unemployment, internal migration, and income.
It was also the first to include a census of housing; this obtained a variety of facts on the general condition of the Nation's housing and the need for public housing programs.
(Prior to this, the housing data collected as part of the population censuses generally were limited to one or two items.)
At the time of the 1950 census, a survey of residential financing was conducted as a related, but separate, operation, with information collected on a sample basis from owners of owner-occupied and rental properties and mortgage lenders.
Similar surveys accompanied the subsequent censuses.
There also were surveys of components of housing change with the 1960, 1970, and 1980 censuses (but not 1990, when the survey was scheduled for 1989 and 1991); these measured the quantitative and qualitative impact of basic changes that occurred in the Nation's housing stock during the previous decade.
The survey also offered a measure of "same" units, i.e., the preponderant part of the housing inventory that was not affected by the basic changes.
The first survey of this type had been a key part of the National Housing Inventory in 1956....
The major innovation of the 1950 census was the use of an electronic computer, UNIVAC (for Universal Automatic Computer) I, the first of a series, delivered in 1951 to help tabulate some of the statistics.
Nearly all of the data processing was done by computer in the 1960 census, now with the
3
further aid of FOSDIC (film optical sensing device for input to computers), an electronic device for "reading" the data on the returns instead of having clerks prepare punchcards...
The 1960 census was the first in which the mails were used extensively to collect population and housing data...
Self-enumeration had been used on a very limited scale previously, but this was the first time it had been made a major part of the decennial procedure...
The 1970 census marked the use everywhere of separate, FOSDIC-readable household questionnaires -- approximately 70 million of them -- rather than the large schedules that contained information for four or more households.
Thus, respondents could mark the appropriate answer circles on their questionnaires, which then could be processed directly without transcription.
Subsequent censuses were taken principally by mail -- approximately 60 percent of the population in 1970, 90 percent in 1980, and 94 percent in 1990...
For 1970, extensive discussions with census data users led to a major increase in the amount of statistics to be tabulated, especially for small areas.
As part of the 1970 census program, the Bureau published 100-percent (but not sample) data for each of 1.5 million census blocks (including all blocks in urbanized areas), as compared with 1960, when block data were provided for 750,000 blocks within the city limits of places with 50,000 or more inhabitants.
For 1980, there were data for 1.8 million blocks, with the population limit lowered to include incorporated places with populations of 10,000 or more; several States were blocked in their entirety.
For 1990, the block statistics program was expanded to cover the entire country, or approximately 7.5 million blocks...
The 1970, 1980, and 1990 population and housing census data appear in series of printed reports -either on paper or microfiche, or both -- similar to those issued after the 1960 census, with accompanying maps where appropriate.
In addition, the Bureau issued public-use microdata tapes, usually containing much more detail than the printed reports, for users with electronic computer facilities.
After 1980, some data were made available on diskettes for microcomputers as well as "on line" through commercial computer networks, and later in the decade, on compact discs with readonly memory (CD-ROM)."
[For the 2000 Census, data is available online through the Census Bureau's web database, American FactFinder (http://factfinder.census.gov), and on public-use DVDs and CD-ROMs.]
4
