THE LEGISLATIVE AUDITOR'S SUMMARY 
This employer may be a public entity or a private company.
The four (4) statutes referred to are: 1) 2) 3) 4) R.S. 23:967 ­ Labor 
R.S. 30:2027 ­ Department of Environmental Quality/Environmental violations reported by employees; reprisals prohibited.
Although these four (4) statutes are separately laid out in Louisiana law, there is some overlap.
In other words, an employee who is a whistle-blower under R.S. 46:4403 might also sue under the more general provisions of R.S. 23:967, which deals with labor and worker compensation issues.
In all of these statutes, if an employee is fired, laid-off, loses benefits, or receives any other discriminatory treatment by his/her employer, that employee may have a cause of action, which he/she must bring within one year of the alleged discriminatory treatment.
The types of employee action which are characteristic of whistle-blowers are the following: 1.
2.
3.
Whistle-blower discloses or threatens to disclose a work place act or practice that is in violation of state law; Whistle-blower provides information to or testifies before a public body conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into a violation of law; Whistle-blower objects to or refuses to participate in an employment act or practice that is in violation of law.
If any of these actions occur, the whistle-blower may file a cause of action and subsequently may receive compensatory damages, backpay, benefits, reinstatement, reasonable attorney's fees, and court costs.
An employee involved in medical programs may bring his/her action against the employer or the healthcare provider.
The medical whistle-blower who is successful will also receive exemplary damages.
A Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) employee or any other person working in the environmental arena may bring his/her whistle-blower action under R.S. 30:2027 mentioned above.
If this employee is successful, the damages awarded shall be tripled, in addition, the employee would receive all costs of preparing, filing, prosecuting, appealing, or otherwise conducting a lawsuit including attorney's fees.
It appears from the statutes that this environmental employee may also sue in the alternative under R.S. 23:967 or any other Federal whistle-blower statute, which might apply.
As noted above, there is also a whistle-blower provision noted in the Code of Governmental Ethics.
That particular statute is R.S. 42:1169.
The courts seem to hold that this statute applies to violations of the Code of Governmental Ethics only.
However, there does not appear to be a prohibition that an employee who is an "ethics whistleblower" could not also sue under the more general law, R.S. 23:967.
In this more general section, the employer must have committed a violation of state law, which the employee attempted to disclose or refused to participate in.
The Ethics Code whistle-blower has two (2) years to bring his/her action to the Ethics Board.
If the Ethics Board finds that the employer has retaliated against the employee, the Ethics Board can fine the employer.
This overview of the whistle-blower law should be read in conjunction with two (2) significant Louisiana cases.
They are: 1) Bear vs. Pellerin Construction Company (806 So 2nd 984) - In this matter, former employees sued their former employer alleging they were terminated in retaliation for reporting certain environmental violations.
Purig vs. Greater New Orleans Expressway Commission (772 So 2nd 842) - In this action, there is discussion of the general whistle-blower statute R.S. 23:967 as well as the ethics whistle-blower provision R.S. 42:1169.
This action was brought by a former police officer who was employed by the Greater New Orleans Expressway Commission.
The officer alleged retaliatory discharge claiming he was fired after he issued a traffic citation for speeding to the son of the chairman of the commission.
2)
In summary, these whistle-blower statutes give substantial clout to the injured employee.
The courts appear to interpret these statutes favorable to the employees who have specific claims, which they can substantiate.
JS/pm
#450WB
