Name: ________________________________________ Business Management Directions: Evaluate the student by checking the appropriate number or letter to indicate the degree of competency.
The rating for each task should reflect employability readiness rather than the grades given in class.
Rating 3 2 1 N 3 Scale: Mastered ­ can work independently with no supervision Requires Supervision ­ can perform job completely with limited supervision Not Mastered ­ requires instruction and close supervision No Exposure ­ no experience or knowledge in this area 2 1 N A. Apply Economic Concepts 1.
Compare and contrast basic economic systems 2.
Describe current economic environment and its effect on business 3.
Identify economic differences between rural and urban environments 4.
Describe development of the free enterprise system 5.
Identify components of the free enterprise system 6.
Explain the relationship between supply and demand 7.
Analyze the impact of change in the economy (e.g., taxes on supply and demand) 8.
Interpret stock market quotes 9.
Interpret the effect of the stock market on business 10.
Describe importing and exporting and explain why businesses enter into international trade Other: 3 2 1 N B. Identify Management Responsibilities 1.
Discuss various roles of management (e.g., figurehead, spokesperson, problem solver) 2.
Identify situations in which managers perform in these various roles 3.
Describe various functions of management (e.g., planning and delegating) 4.
Apply the functions of management that are needed to complete a given task 5.
Identify different leadership styles and their characteristics 6.
Write goals that meet appropriate criteria: Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic, Time bound 7.
Develop an action plan that states goals, strategies, and objectives 8.
Demonstrate organizational skill 9.
Apply problem-solving approach in making decisions 10.
Investigate the impact of new technology on the workforce Notes: Notes:
Business Management Competency Profile (5/01)
1
11.
Demonstrate proficiency in computer software applications (word processing, spreadsheets, and databases 12.
Investigate current trends in business (e.g., acquisition/downsizing, e-commerce, data mining, labor market, social issues) 13.
Analyze the physical layout of an office or business for its maximum efficiency Other: 3 2 1 N C. Use Communication Skills 1.
Demonstrate effective communication skills (e.g., verbal, nonverbal, and technological communications and effective listening skills) 2.
Apply communication skills to produce clearly written traditional and electronic documents 3.
Explain the types of international communication issues 4.
Deliver an oral presentation with appropriate media and aids 5.
Produce an agenda for conducting an effective meeting 6.
Demonstrate facilitating techniques 7.
Demonstrate the ability to dialogue with supervisors and staff 8.
Differentiate levels and relationships on an organizational chart 9.
Read and interpret information Other: NOTE: Refer to Personal Characteristics Competencies in this profile.
3 2 1 N D. Demonstrate Interpersonal Skills 1.
Work appropriately with others with diverse backgrounds 2.
Work cooperatively with others by contributing ideas, suggestions, and effort 3. Use problem-solving techniques in dealing with others 4. Use negotiation skills to resolve conflicts 5.
Consider other points of view 6.
Justify viewpoint logically and appropriately 7.
Demonstrate credibility through competence and integrity Describe ways to satisfy clients' or customers' needs Other: Notes: Notes:
Business Management Competency Profile (5/01)
2
3
2
1
N E. Define Elements of Marketing 1.
Describe the marketing mix elements 2.
Analyze the importance of marketing and its role in business 3.
Describe promotional strategies (e.g., telemarketing and e-commerce) 4.
Identify options for entering the international marketplace (e.g., establish a new business in another country, relocate an existing U.S. company to another country) 5.
Describe how global competition has affected how American businesses operate Other:
Notes:
3
2
1
N F. Explain Financial Issues 1.
List and explain sources of capital 2.
Forecast future budgetary needs and prepare a budget 3.
Identify ways that companies can control costs 4.
Describe the purpose of insurance for business 5.
Analyze financial statements 6.
Identify the effects of taxes on business Other:
Notes:
3
2
1
N G. Explore Human Resources 1.
Identify career opportunities in business management 2.
Outline procedures for getting a job 3.
Explain various hiring processes used in business 4.
Analyze résumés to select employees 5.
Evaluate compensation programs/plans 6.
Investigate various benefit plans 7.
Identify employee training techniques (e.g., handson, coaching, seminars) 8.
Outline the procedures for conducting employee evaluations 9.
Explain the importance of employer/employee relations 10.
Explain the role of labor unions and management 11.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of union membership 12.
Explain grievance processes Other:
Notes:
Business Management Competency Profile (5/01)
3
3
2
1
N H. Discuss Legal, Ethical, and Social Aspects 1.
Identify current laws and regulations affecting the establishment and operation of businesses 2.
Explain the elements of federal legislation relevant to staffing 3.
Discuss ethical behaviors in the workplace 4.
Display characteristics of an acceptable work ethic (e.g., attendance, attire) 5.
Identify business' responsibilities in the community and society Other:
Notes:
Business Management Competency Profile (5/01)
4
