Professional-Technical Education # 356 Technical Committee Report and Curriculum Guide for Housing, Interiors and Furnishings This report was prepared by the Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Family and Consumer Sciences Education Boise, Idaho August, 1999 Idaho State Board for Professional -Technical Education Thomas Dillon Tom Boyd Caldwell Genesee Harold Davis Idaho Falls Jerry Hess Nampa Curtis Eaton Twin Falls Marilyn Howard Boise Karen McGee Pocatello James Hammond Post Falls Gregory G. Fitch Executive Director Boise _______________________________
Mike Rush, State Administrator Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Nancy Walker, Program Manager Family and Consumer Sciences Education (208) 334-3216
The Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education is an equal opportunity employer.
Hiring is done without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or disability.
Appropriate consideration shall be given to veterans in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
*Costs associated with this publication are available from the Idaho Division of ProfessionalTechnical Education in accordance with Section 60-202, Idaho Code.
INTRODUCTION The curriculum development process undertaken by the Idaho Division of ProfessionalTechnical Education involves active participation of family and consumer sciences educators at the secondary and postsecondary levels.
For development of the Housing, Interiors and Furnishings curriculum the majority of committee members were educators who have taught Housing, Interiors and Furnishings and were recommended by their colleagues.
Industry personnel were consulted where their expertise and opinions were required.
The new Housing, Interiors and Furnishings curriculum framework was developed by state staff and university personnel using the National Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences Education and resources from other state guides.
The curriculum team wrote, reviewed and revised the curriculum framework.
This report was prepared upon completion of the committee's assignment.
The list of key competencies and performance indicators prepared by committee members reflects the knowledge and skills currently recommended for students in the Housing, Interiors and Furnishings course.
Students who complete this course will be better prepared to meet the challenges of living and working in today's society in the areas related to housing, interiors and furnishings occupational areas.
The result of the work of the curriculum committee members is this statewide curriculum guide.
These individuals have written overall outcomes, key competencies, and performance indicators.
The committee prepared materials in a competency-based format to have an effective and efficient methodology for determining student progress.
The statewide guides are designed as the primary determiner of the program content.
It is not the intent of the State Division of Professional-Technical Education that all programs are designed exactly the same, but assurance is needed that the program meets the minimum standards for operation.
Schools offering Family and Consumer Sciences Education should use program advisory committees to reflect local and community needs.
The Curriculum Guide is also used as the primary list for generating student profiles.
The profile is used as a cumulative record of each student's progress and serves as proof of instruction for articulation purposes.
They have performance scales for each indicator so that student competence can be recorded.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The curriculum committee process involved personnel from Idaho high schools, business and industry consultants, the University of Idaho, and the Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education.
The curriculum team members serve with the approval of their employers.
The Division of Professional-Technical Education provides reimbursement for travel and meal expenses.
The Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education is appreciative of the opportunity to meet with these committee members and to their employers for permitting them to do so.
The following people gave their time, energy and expertise in the development of this curriculum framework: Curriculum Project Director Yvonne S. Gentzler, Ph.D.
Family and Consumer Sciences Teacher Educator University of Idaho Moscow, Idaho Curriculum Project Manager Miskee Gendall University of Idaho Moscow, Idaho
Curriculum Team Members
Marcia Farrar, Educator Family and Consumer Sciences Horseshoe Bend High School Horseshoe Bend, Idaho
Family and Consumer Sciences Rexburg, Idaho
Carolyn Lage, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Timberline School Weippe, Idaho
Daylene Petersen, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Notus High School Notus, Idaho
Norma Peterson, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Meridian High School Meridian, Idaho Jana Watson
Nancy Walker, Program Manager Family and Consumer Sciences Education Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Boise, Idaho
HOUSING, INTERIORS AND FURNISHINGS COURSE DESCRIPTION: Housing, Interiors and Furnishings is a one or two semester/trimester course designed to provide students with information about planning, building, purchasing and designing a home for living, working and relaxing.
Principles of design are applied to the structure, interior rooms and the exterior and landscaping.
This course introduces students to a wide range of occupations within the housing, interior and furnishings industry.
This two-semester course combined with it's prerequisite and a one or two-semester work experience constitutes an occupational sequence.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION Delivery of the Housing , Interiors and Furnishings Curriculum It is recommended that this course emphasize full-class participation, teamwork and individual projects and/or study.
The teachers is the facilitator and the manager of the classroom environment.
The focus is on problem-based instruction that is designed to enable and inspire students to plan and take actions for the well-being of self and others in the home, workplace, community and world.
Students also practice action through participation in FCCLA, Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America, a co-curricular student organization.
Teacher Qualifications The teacher of this course must be vocationally certified in Family and Consumer Sciences Education.
It is highly recommended that teachers have industry experience or a recent internship experience to gain knowledge about career opportunities in housing, interiors and furnishings occupational areas.
Length and Level of this Course This course is a minimum of two semesters/trimester experience preferably at the 11th or 12th grade level.
The recommended program sequence includes Career and Personal Development as a prerequisite to Housing, Interiors and Furnishings.
Students will also need to complete a work experience in the areas of housing, interiors and/or furnishings.
Recommended Resources Housing, Interiors and Furnishings Activity/Resource Guide, 1999 Materials from the current curriculum material list for Family and Consumer Sciences Career Pathways This course is recommended for students who have selected Human Resources and/or Arts and Communications as their Career Pathways choice .
Occupations associated with this curriculum would include graphic designer, interior designer, architect, realtor, builder and landscape architect.
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
PROGRAM AREA:
Family and Consumer Sciences
IDAHO DIVISION OF PROFESSIONAL TECHNICAL EDUCATION EFFECTIVE DATE: August, 1999 PROGRAM TITLE: Housing, Interiors and Furnishings
IDAHO CODE NUMBER: OF 0570
I.
MAJOR CONCEPTS/CONTENT: Homes are a reflection of our lives.
Housing is the creation of an environment in which people live and grow.
It includes the dwelling and all that is within and surrounds the dwelling.
Housing provides shelter, security, privacy, prestige and a means of selfexpression.
Housing is an important part of people's lives.
COURSE DESCRIPTION: Housing, Interiors and Furnishings is a one or two semester/trimester course designed to provide students with practical information about planning, building, purchasing and designing a home for living, working and relaxing.
Principles of design are applied to the structure, interior rooms and the landscaping.
This course introduces students to a wide range of occupations within the housing and interior industry.
This two-semester course combined with a one or two-semester work experience constitutes an occupational sequence.
INTENDED OUTCOMES : After successfully completing this program, the student will be able to: Examine housing needs and choices for individuals and families 01.
02.
Analyze components of housing design and construction 03.
Analyze components of interior space and planning 04.
Analyze the components of a safe and attractive environment 05.
Analyze career paths within the housing, interiors, and furnishings industry Demonstrate design and presentation skills 06.
II.
III.
Housing, Interiors and Furnishings (10%)01.
Examine housing needs and choices for individuals and families -identify universal housing needs -explore factors influencing housing decisions -explore factors to consider when choosing a place to live -describe methods of housing acquisition -analyze factors involved in renting -analyze factors involved in buying (15%) 02.
Analyze components of housing design and construction -analyze influences on architectural and furnishing design -evaluate house and floor plans -demonstrate floor planning techniques -explore housing construction techniques -identify systems within the house Analyze components of interior space and planning -identify elements of design -identify principles of design -assess the use of textiles in the home -examine the use of interior backgrounds in design planning -develop skills to arrange furnishings -explore furniture styles, construction, and selection -explore the use of lighting and accessories in design planning -explore various household equipment and appliances
(25%) 03.
Analyze the components of a safe and attractive ( 15%) 04.
environment -explore methods of planning outdoor living space -identify methods of creating a safe and secure environment -explore home improvement and maintenance techniques -explore trends in the housing and interiors industries (15%) 05.
Analyze career paths within the housing, interiors, and furnishings industry -explore career opportunities in planning and design -explore career opportunities in building trades -explore careers in allied occupations -explore general procedures for business and career success Demonstrate housing design and presentation skills -evaluate client's needs, goals, and resources -demonstrate design and presentation skills -demonstrate housing design ideas through visual presentations
(20 %) 06.
Housing, Interiors and Furnishings Family and Consumer Sciences Education Curriculum Framework 01.
EXAMINE HOUSING NEEDS AND CHOICES FOR INDIVIDUALS AND FAMILIES.
01.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Identify universal housing needs.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe how housing satisfies basic physical and psychological needs 2.
Compare and contrast different housing needs throughout the life span Describe the affects of housing on quality of life 3.
Analyze the impact of housing needs and wants 4.
5.
Describe the ways housing reflects cultural views and values 01.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore factors influencing housing decisions.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Identify social trends affecting housing decisions 1.
2.
Identify governmental influences on housing decisions Explore various types of available housing 3.
Explore housing options in relation to resources 4.
01.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore factors to consider when choosing a location PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify regional areas Compare and contrast types of community environments 2.
3.
Analyze the factors to consider when selecting a neighborhood 4.
Evaluate the importance of public services available Identify special needs to consider when choosing housing 5.
01.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Describe methods of housing acquisition.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of renting and home ownership Assess different types of home ownership 2.
3.
Describe financial guidelines to determine a realistic housing budget 5.
Identify different types of housing programs
01.05 KEY COMPETENCY: Analyze factors involved in renting.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : 1.
Identify factors to consider when assessing rental requirements Analyze costs involved in renting 2.
List sources of information available about rentals 3.
4.
Give guidelines for evaluating rental units Analyze the features and conditions of rental agreements 5.
Explain the roles and responsibilities of tenant and landlord 6.
01.06 KEY COMPETENCY: Analyze factors involved in buying.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Identify factors to consider when assessing home purchase requirements 1.
Examine guidelines for determining a realistic price range for a home 1.
2.
Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of new and existing homes 3.
Identify conditions that affect the resale value of a home Compare and contrast various ways to finance the purchase of a home 4.
5.
Describe the steps in the home-buying process
02.
ANALYZE COMPONENTS OF HOUSING DESIGN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : 1.
Examine different architectural characteristics of housing exteriors 2.
Explore the background and history of housing styles Examine influences on furniture design 3.
4.
Explore future trends in housing styles 02.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Evaluate house and floor plans.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : Practice reading house plans and symbols 1.
Examine how rooms are grouped according to function and circulation 2.
3.
Determine the utility of a floor plan in relationship to a family's needs Practice drawing symbols commonly used on floor plans 4.
Evaluate storage needs and space 5.
6.
Identify ways to modify housing for people with physical disabilities Examine the role of CAD in housing design 7.
02.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Demonstrate floor planning techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Draw interior space to scale using architectural symbols and drafting skills 2.
Examine the impact of lifecycle on choosing a functional floor plan Evaluate a floor plan for zoning, traffic patterns, circulation, storage 3.
adequacy, placement of doors, windows, appliances and energy efficiency 4.
Plan safe and convenient traffic patterns 02.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore housing construction techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Describe how a house is constructed 1.
2.
Identify the parts of the foundation and frame of a house 3.
Compare and contrast types of materials used for exterior construction Evaluate basic types of windows used in houses 4.
5.
Distinguish between different types of doors
02.05 KEY COMPETENCY: Describe systems within a house.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe components and safety features of electrical systems Explain a plumbing system according to basic guidelines 2.
3.
Describe types of heating and cooling systems 4.
Explain ways to conserve energy, water, and other resources
03.
ANALYZE COMPONENTS OF INTERIOR SPACE AND PLANNING 03.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the elements of design.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the use of different types of line 2.
Discuss the different types of form Explain how space is used in design 3.
4.
Identify high mass and low mass 5.
Describe tactile texture and visual texture Explain the use of color in design planning 6.
7.
Describe the relationships between colors on the color wheel 8.
Develop pleasing color harmonies 03.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the principles of design.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Describe how proportion and scale are related to objects 1.
2.
Explain formal and informal balance Explain how emphasis creates a focal point 3.
Identify the different types of rhythm 4.
5.
Describe the goals of design Identify examples of sensory design 6.
03.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Assess the use of textiles in the home.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Distinguish between natural and manufactured fibers 2.
Identify characteristics of various fibers Describe the fabric construction processes 3.
4.
Specify the difference between structural and applied designs 5.
Identify various types of fabric finishes and their affects on the performance of the fabric Evaluate the appropriateness of textiles for various household uses 6.
7.
Select appropriate care methods for various fibers 8.
Evaluate various types of fibers and textiles for energy efficient properties Explain the benefits of textile laws 9.
03.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the use of interior backgrounds in design planning.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the use of the room Compare floor treatments 2.
3.
Describe several wall material and wall treatments 4.
Explain how ceiling treatments serve as interior backgrounds Describe various types of window treatments 5.
6.
Describe the planning for satisfying interior backgrounds 03.05 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore furniture styles, construction, and selection.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Examine various furniture styles 1.
Evaluate the quality furniture of construction 2.
3.
Explain consumer protection of home furnishings purchases Explain guidelines for selection and care of furniture 4.
Identify financial aspects of furniture acquisition 5.
6.
Compare furniture outlets and stores 03.06 KEY COMPETENCY: Develop skills to arrange furnishings.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Explain the use of a scale floor plan for furniture arrangement 1.
2.
Identify factors to consider when arranging furniture 3.
Practice furniture arrangements 03.07 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore the use of lighting and accessories in design planning.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Examine available lighting options 2.
Plan residential lighting for visual comfort, safety, beauty and use Identify types and functions of accessories 3.
4.
Examine guidelines for using accessories
03.08 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine household equipment, appliances, and technology.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify factors to consider when selecting household appliances Describe styles and features of various kitchen, laundry, and climate control 2.
appliances 3.
Explore appliance and equipment technology 4.
Examine equipment purchasing and warranty
04.
ANALYZE COMPONENTS OF A SAFE AND ATTRACTIVE ENVIRONMENT 04.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore methods of planning outdoor living space.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : 1.
Discuss the goals of landscaping 2.
Identify natural and manufactured landscaping resources Determine zones in a landscape sight 3.
4.
Select furnishings for outdoor living 5.
Identify conservation measures for landscaping Design an outdoor living space 6.
04.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Identify methods of creating a safe and secure living environment.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : 1.
Identify the types and causes of the most frequent home accidents Describe ways to keep air in the home clean 2.
Explore ways to make the home safe and secure 3.
4.
Describe housing design for individuals with special needs Explain home security systems.
5.
04.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore home improvement and maintenance techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS : 1.
Identify cleaning tools and products 2.
Develop a schedule for house cleaning and yard maintenance Identify basic tools for home repairs 3.
4.
Determine estimated life of house parts and appliances 5.
Identify ways to improve storage and organize space Explore redecorating options 6.
7.
Examine the advantages of remodeling 8.
Identify resources for home care, maintenance, and improvements 04.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore trends in the housing and interiors industries.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the impact of technology on housing 2.
Identify ways to provide and conserve energy Explore the importance of a healthy environment 3.
Describe ways to provide for a healthy environment 4.
5.
Explore recent developments in the housing industry
05.
ANALYZE CAREER PATHS WITHIN THE HOUSING, INTERIORS, AND FURNISHING INDUSTRIES 05.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore career opportunities in planning and design.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe career opportunities related to housing planning and design 2.
Explain job skills and personal qualifications required for each career Identify the educational requirements and qualifications 3.
4.
Identify resources for career information 05.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore career opportunities in building trades.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Describe career opportunities in building trades 1.
Explain employability skills and personal qualifications 2.
3.
Identify the educational requirements and qualifications Identify resources for career information 4.
05.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore careers in allied occupations of government, real estate, and materials and furnishings sales.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe career opportunities related to allied occupations Explain which job skills and personal qualifications are required for each career 2.
Identify the educational requirements and qualifications necessary 3.
4.
Identify resources for career information
06.
DEMONSTRATE HOUSING DESIGN AND PRESENTATION SKILLS 06.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Evaluate client's needs, goals, and resources in creating design plans for housing, interiors and furnishings.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Determine budget requirements of client 2.
Examine personal needs and wants 3.
Explore client's personal tastes 4.
Explore client's goals for the housing environment 06.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Demonstrate design and presentation skills.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Demonstrate the use of CAD software 1.
Develop skills in reading blueprints 2.
3.
Practice space planning techniques Demonstrate a drawing to scale 4.
06.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Demonstrate interior, exterior and landscape design ideas through visual presentations.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Examine how presentation methods can help design professionals communicate ideas Identify materials and methods used for visual presentations 2.
Prepare renderings, presentation boards, models, elevations and/or slides to 3.
help a client visualize a finished project 4.
Utilize a variety of presentation media such as pencil, marker, photography, video, and computer software for client presentation
Student's Name
School _____________________________ Grade ______________
HOUSING, INTERIORS AND FURNISHING
OF 0570
Directions:
Evaluate the student using the rating scale below and check the appropriate number to indicate the degree of competency achieved.
The numerical ratings of 3, 2, 1, and 0 are not intended to represent the traditional school grading system of A, B, C, D, and F.
The descriptions associated with each of the numbers focus on level of student performance for each of the competencies listed below.
0123No Exposure - no information nor practice provided, complete training required.
Exposure Only - general information provided with no practical application time, additional knowledge/skills required.
Moderately Competent - has performed independently during the program, limited additional practical application and knowledge may be required.
Competent - can apply content knowledge and skills independently with no additional practice.
1.
Number of Competencies Evaluated 2.
Number of Competencies Rated 2 or 3 3.
Percent of Competencies Attained (2/1)
Rating Scale:
Letter Grade Instructor Signature Date
01.0 0123
Examine Housing Needs and Choices for Individuals and Families The student will be able to: 01.01 01.02 01.03 01.04 01.05 01.06 Identify universal housing needs Explore factors influencing housing decisions Explore factors to consider when choosing a location Describe methods of housing acquisition Analyze factors involved in renting Analyze factors involved in buying
GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG 02.0 0123
GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG 04.0 0123
03.05 03.06 03.07 03.08
Explore furniture styles, construction, and selection Develop skills to arrange furnishings Explore the use of lighting and accessories in design planning Examine various household equipment, appliances, and technology
Analyze Components of a Safe and Attractive Environment The student will be able to: 04.01 04.02 04.03 04.04 Explore Identify Explore Explore methods of planning outdoor living space methods of creating a safe and secure living environment home improvement and maintenance techniques trends in the housing and interiors industries
Analyze Components of Housing Design and Construction The student will be able to: Analyze influences on architectural and furnishing design and development Evaluate house and floor plans Demonstrate floor planning techniques Explore housing construction techniques Describe systems within a house
GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG 05.0
GGGG 02.01 GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG 03.0 0123 02.02 02.03 02.04 02.05
Analyze Career Paths Within the Housing, Interiors and Furnishings Industries The student will be able to: Explore career opportunities in planning and design Explore career opportunities in building trades Explore careers in allied occupations of government, real estate, and materials and furnishings sales Explore general procedures for business profitability and career success
0123
GGGG 05.01 GGGG 05.02 GGGG 05.03 GGGG 05.04 06.0 0123
Analyze Components of Interior Space and Planning The student will be able to: 03.01 03.02 03.03 03.04 Examine elements of design Examine principles of design Assess the use of textiles in the home Examine the use of interior backgrounds in design planning
GGGG GGGG GGGG GGGG
Demonstrate housing design and presentation skills The student will be able to: Evaluate clients' needs, goals, and resources in creating design plans for housing, interiors and furnishings Demonstrate design and presentation skills Demonstrate interior, exterior, and landscaping design ideas through visual presentations
GGGG 06.01 GGGG 06.02 GGGG 06.03
