STATE OF CONNECTICUT STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES Terrorist Threat Condition SEVERE: A terrorist attack has occurred or credible and corroborated intelligence indicates that one is imminent.
Normally, this threat condition is declared for a specific location or critical facility.
Threat Condition Critical Facilities Protective Action Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce Threat Condition SEVERE and explain expected actions.
¨ Deploy security personnel based on threat assessment.
¨ Close or restrict entry to the facility to emergency personnel only and restrict parking areas close to critical buildings.
¨ Maintain a skeleton crew of essential employees.
¨ Deploy emergency response and security teams.
¨ Activate state EOC.
¨ Maintain close contact with state and local law enforcement.
¨ Be prepared to implement mutual aid agreements with government and with other critical facilities.
¨ Provide security in parking lots and company areas.
¨ Report suspicious activity immediately to state and local law enforcement.
¨ Restrict or suspend all deliveries and mail to the facility.
Emergency or essential shipments should be sent to an off-site location for inspection.
Local Government Actions Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce threat condition SEVERE to employees and to the public explaining anticipated actions that should be taken.
¨ Deny unauthorized access to critical facilities and infrastructure.
Continue 100% inspections of personnel, vehicles and packages to the extent allowed by law.
¨ Visually inspect the interior and undercarriage of vehicles entering parking lots and terraces.
¨ Deploy equipment assets and ensure physical security measures be afforded to critical sites.
¨ Assemble trained volunteers to include Citizen Corps, USAR and the American Red Cross.
¨ Implement Mutual Aid Agreements as required.
¨ Continue to assess the vulnerability of key assets and facilities.
Take appropriate action to protect them by deploying appropriate security forces to these sites.
¨ Cancel or delay unnecessary employee travel and leave.
¨ Activate the Emergency Operations Center.
¨ Control release of information to the public and news media.
¨ Send a Public Information Officer to the EOC.
¨ Provide security for personnel dispatched to repair or restore damaged facilities and system.
Public Response Guidelines Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Closely monitor news reports and Emergency Alert System radio/TV stations.
¨ Be suspicious of persons taking photographs of critical facilities, asking detailed questions about physical security or dressed inappropriately for weather conditions (suicide bomber).
Report these incidents immediately to state and local law enforcement.
¨ Report suspicious activity and call 911 for immediate response.
¨ Avoid repeating unsubstantiated information and rumors.
¨ Expect delays, searches of purses and bags and restricted access to public buildings.
¨ Expect traffic delays and restrictions.
¨ Take personal security precautions to avoid becoming a victim of crime or terrorist attack.
¨ Avoid crowded public areas and gatherings.
¨ Do not travel into areas affected by the attack or to an expected terrorist target.
¨ Keep emergency supplies accessible and automobile tanks full.
¨ Be prepared to evacuate your home or shelter-in-place on order of local authorities.
¨ Assist neighbors who may need help.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES
Terrorist Threat Condition HIGH RISK: Credible intelligence indicates that there is a high risk of a local terrorist attack but a specific target has not been identified.
Threat Condition Critical Facilities Protective Action Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce Threat Level HIGH to all employees and explain expected actions.
¨ Place emergency response teams on notice.
¨ Activate the operations center if required.
¨ Monitor world and local events.
Pass on credible threat intelligence to key personnel.
¨ Ensure appropriate security measures are in place and functioning properly.
¨ Instruct employees to report suspicious activities, packages and people.
¨ Search all personal bags, parcels to the extent of the law and require personnel to pass through magnetometer, if available.
¨ Restrict vehicle parking close to buildings.
¨ Inspect intrusion detection systems, lighting, security fencing and locking systems.
¨ Inspect all deliveries and consider accepting shipments only at off-site locations.
¨ Remind employees to expect delays and baggage searches.
Local Government Actions Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce Threat Condition HIGH to employees and public and explain expected actions to be taken.
¨ Test Communication plan.
¨ Restrict or control access to governmental buildings, critical facilities and infrastructure.
¨ Erect outside barricades, security checks to deny access to underground parking areas, loading docks and building entrances.
¨ Require identification, sign-in and escorts as required.
¨ Restrict parking areas located close to buildings or critical facilities.
¨ Remove trash containers, dumpsters and mailboxes located near government buildings and facilities.
¨ Closely monitor available security and intelligence data from state and local law enforcement agencies.
¨ Instruct employees to be especially watchful for suspicious or unattended packages and articles received through the mail service.
¨ Inspect buildings and parking areas for suspicious packages.
¨ Implement rumor control to avoid public panic.
¨ Employ appropriate security at airports, dams, public utilities and critical facilities.
¨ Based on threat assessment, define level, scope and role of emergency response personnel.
¨ Secure and regularly inspect all buildings, vehicles, and parking and storage areas for intrusion.
¨ Conduct 100% verification of deliveries and restrict shipments.
Public Response Guidelines Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Resume normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
¨ Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
¨ Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to state and local law enforcement agencies by calling 911.
¨ Avoid leaving unattended packages or briefcases in public areas.
¨ Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
¨ Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your family members.
¨ Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES
Terrorist Threat Condition Elevated risk of terrorist attack but a specific region of the USA or target has not been identified.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees.
Review vulnerability and threat assessments and revise as needed.
¨ Identify and monitor governmental information sharing sources for warnings and alerts.
¨ Update and test call list for emergency response teams and key employees.
¨ Review and coordinate and update mutual aid agreements with other critical facilities and government agencies.
¨ Establish and monitor active and passive security measures.
¨ Review employee training on security precautions (bomb threat procedures, reporting suspicious packages, activities and people).
¨ Conduct communications checks to ensure radio contact can be established.
Local Government Actions Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees and to the public.
¨ Review physical security plans for critical facilities.
¨ Assess potential terrorist targets and develop plans to counter-act an attack.
¨ Conduct vulnerability assessments of each critical facility and governmental building.
Estimate the consequence of loss and assign a priority for their protection.
¨ Ensure all buildings are secured to prevent theft or tampering.
¨ Conduct physical inspections of buildings for suspicious unattended packages.
¨ Develop a cadre of trained volunteers.
¨ Closely monitor current news events and state and federal terrorist advisories.
¨ Keep the public informed on current threat conditions and advisories.
¨ Coordinate with adjacent municipalities for mutual aid support in the event of a disaster or terrorist threat.
¨ Conduct tabletop and functional exercises to ensure that response plans are understood and current.
¨ Review existing physical security measures employed, and install intrusion detection and passive systems as funding permits.
¨ Conduct weekly radio communication checks.
Public Response Guidelines Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Continue normal activities, but report suspicious activities to local law enforcement agencies.
¨ Take a first aid class.
¨ Become active in your local Neighborhood Crime Watch program.
¨ Network with your family, neighbors and community for mutual support during a disaster or terrorist attack.
¨ Learn what critical facilities are located in your community and report suspicious activities at or near these sites.
¨ Attend your local emergency planning committee meeting to learn more about local hazards.
(Call the city/town emergency manager to learn dates and locations of the meetings.)
¨ Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES
Terrorist Threat Condition GUARDED: General Risk with no credible threats to specific targets.
Threat Condition Critical Facilities Protective Action Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Ensure that key leaders are familiar with the emergency response and business resumption plans.
¨ Review, update and routinely exercise for functional areas of the plan.
¨ Review and update the call list for emergency response teams.
¨ Develop or review Mutual Aid agreements with other facilities and/or with local government for use during emergencies.
¨ Review physical security precautions to prevent theft, unauthorized entry or destruction of property.
Have you provided for: a) Employee picture ID badges? b) Background checks on all employees? c) Access control and locking of high security areas at all times? d) All security keys marked `Do Not Duplicate'? e) Surveillance cameras? f) Back-up power? g) An alarm system?
Local Government Actions Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Estimate the threat vulnerability of each critical facility ant the countermeasures required to protect them.
¨ Ensure that each department is familiar with their assigned responsibilities during a disaster, as shown in the plan, and are prepared to respond.
¨ Review communications plans to ensure the call-down procedures are current and accurate.
¨ Conduct emergency management training and exercise emergency response plans.
¨ Ensure all emergency management and response functions are adequately staffed.
Recruit and train volunteers to augment full time staff.
¨ Actively support the Neighborhood Watch, Community Emergency Response Team and Amateur Radio Emergency Service programs.
¨ Remind citizens and employees to be alert for suspicious packages, activities, vehicles and people and report these occurrences to the proper authorities.
¨ Secure buildings, unused rooms, storage areas, equipment and vehicles to prevent theft, tampering or destruction.
¨ Evaluate information available on public websites that could compromise security.
¨ Encourage all citizens and employees to have necessary immunizations.
Public Response Guidelines Continue all precautions from lower Threat Level.
¨ Continue normal activities but be watchful for suspicious activities.
Report criminal activity to local law enforcement.
¨ Monitor local and national news for terrorist alerts.
¨ Review family emergency plans.
¨ Increase family emergency preparedness by purchasing supplies, food and storing water.
¨ Be familiar with local natural and technological (man made) hazards in your community.
¨ Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
¨ Update immunizations.
¨ Volunteer to assist and support the community emergency response agencies.
STATE OF CONNECTICUT STATE OF CONNECTICUT DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES DIVISION OF PROTECTIVE SERVICES
Terrorist Threat Condition LOW RISK: Low Risk of terrorism.
Routine security is implemented to preclude routine criminal threats.
Threat Condition Critical Facilities Protective Action ¨ Develop emergency response and business resumption plans.
¨ Encourage and assist employees to be prepared for personal, natural and technological emergencies.
¨ Develop a communications plan for emergency response and key personnel.
¨ Conduct training for employees on physical security precautions.
¨ Budget for physical security measures.
Local Government Actions ¨ Identify critical facilities that need protection.
¨ Review Emergency Response Plans.
¨ Conduct training, seminars, workshops and exercises using the emergency response plans.
¨ Conduct emergency preparedness training for citizens and employees.
¨ Encourage response agencies (fire fighters, law enforcement, EMS, public works and elected officials) to take emergency management and American Red Cross first aid and CPR training.
¨ Provide emergency preparedness information to employees via pay check stub tips, newsletters, articles and posters.
¨ Conduct routine inventories of emergency supplies and medical aid kits.
¨ Budget for physical security measures.
¨ Encourage programs for employee immunization and preventive health care.
Public Response Guidelines Citizens are advised to: ¨ Continue to enjoy individual freedom.
Participate freely in travel, work and recreational activities.
¨ Be prepared for disasters and family emergencies.
(See DEP ­ Dept. of Environmental Protection, DPH - Dept. of Public Health, and American Red Cross brochures.)
¨ Develop a family emergency plan.
(See DEP, DPH and American Red Cross brochures.)
¨ Know how to turn off the power, gas and water to your house.
¨ Know what hazardous materials are stored in your home and how to properly dispose of unneeded chemicals.
¨ Support the efforts of your local emergency responders (firefighters, law enforcement and emergency medical service).
¨ Know what natural hazards are prevalent in your area and what measures you can take to protect your family.
