ADVISORY COUNCIL ON GAME AND FISH MINUTES TUESDAY, APRIL 25, 2000 Richardson and Robbins Building Auditorium 89 Kings Highway, Dover, Delaware, 19901 Phone 302-739-5297, FAX 302-739-6157 ADVISORY COUNCIL David J. Healey, Chair (Absent) Edward Montague, Vice Chair (Absent) Mrs. Verna Price J. Richard Berry John W. Stewart Joseph E. Calhoun (Absent) Garrett H. Arai Ross Harris (Absent) Ted Palmer DIVISION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE Andy Manus Greg Moore Lloyd Alexander Robert Hutchins Bill Meredith Rob Hossler Tom Moran Scott Newland _PUBLIC 13 Visitors
Taped micro-cassettes of this meeting are available for listening at the Richardson 
For further information contact the Wildlife Section.
The meeting was called to order by Mrs. Verna Price at 7:35 PM. Chairman Dave Healey was absent.
Agenda Item 1.
Changes to Waterfowl Hunting Procedures.
(Greg Moore, Rob Hossler) Mr. Rob Hossler reviewed proposed changes to waterfowl hunting procedures for the Augustine and Cedar Swamp Wildlife Areas.
He started his presentation by discussing current regulations for the Cedar Swamp Area.
Rob stated that waterfowl hunting at the Cedar Swamp Area currently occurs on opening days, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
Hunting is permitted from ½ hour before sunrise until 2:00 PM with hunters vacating the area by 3:00 PM.
Rob went on to discuss a proposal to expand waterfowl hunting opportunities.
The proposed change would extend the hours of waterfowl hunting from ½ hour before sunrise until sunset.
Hunters must vacate the area 1hour after sunset.
Hunting days will remain the same, opening days, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays.
A special allowance will be made for the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays that do not fall on the hunting day schedule.
As in previous years, special efforts will be made to accommodate late snow goose hunting on the area.
The proposed change is recommended due to difficulties hunters are experiencing in accessing blinds at low tide.
Rob continued his discussion by next reviewing proposed changes for the Augustine Wildlife Area.
Currently, waterfowl hunting is permitted during all legal hunting days from ½ hour before sunrise until sunset.
Due to requests by several hunters, observation data collected
by the Regional Manager and hunter participation data collected at both Augustine and Cedar Swamp Areas, Rob proposed the following change.
Waterfowl hunting will be on an alternate day schedule to include all opening days, Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays.
As with the Cedar Swamp Area, a special allowance will be made for the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays.
Legal hunting hours will remain ½ hour before sunrise until sunset.
Similar to the Cedar Swamp Area, special provisions will be made to accommodate late snow goose hunting and early teal hunting opportunities.
Rob concluded his presentation by summarizing the rationale for the proposed changes.
Rob indicated that with increasing length of waterfowl seasons in recent years (60 hunting days), there is a corresponding increase in hunting pressure.
Establishing "refuge days" will help conserve the waterfowl resources while improving the quality of hunting on permitted days.
Hunter harvest information indicates that at the Augustine Wildlife Area Tuesdays and Thursdays are proportionately unattended.
However, the impact of a few hunters using this area has a dramatic effect on waterfowl utilization.
By alternating days of permitted waterfowl hunting at the Augustine and Cedar Swamp Areas, hunters in New Castle County will still have the opportunity to hunt on one of these areas every day during the open waterfowl season.
Mr. Moore continued the discussion of proposed changes to the waterfowl hunting program by reviewing
some modifications suggested for the Little Creek Wildlife Area.
These changes have been requested by area hunters and an adjacent landowner and are endorsed by the Division.
These changes consist of modifications to both hunting days and hours.
Mr. Moore stated that the Division is recommending changing the current hunting system at Little Creek from Monday through Saturday, 1/2 hour before sunrise until sunset to opening days, Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays 1/2 hour before sunrise until 2:00 PM with hunters vacating the area by 3:00 PM.
This change if accepted would make the hunting regime of Little Creek and Logan Lane compatible except for opening days.
Mr. Moore reported that the Little Creek Wildlife Area is one of the most popular waterfowl management areas as exemplified in the number of hunters registering for permits.
On many days the hunter demand for this area far exceeds our supply of blinds.
This popularity is due to good numbers of waterfowl using the area, a liberal hunting program and the close proximity of Little Creek to the Dover area.
Currently, the Division offers waterfowl hunting at the Little Creek Area six days a week during the season (hunting Monday through Saturday) from ½ hour before sunrise until sunset.
Recent changes to the waterfowl seasons have further liberalized hunting opportunities.
In the last few years, waterfowl seasons have been expanded from 50 days (44 actual hunting days) to 60 days.
Counting procedures, which no longer include Sundays account for more hunting days then, the face value of the increase.
Including the snow goose season, the Little Creek Area can potentially be hunted from October 1 through early March, resting on Sundays.
These season changes have resulted in increased pressure on public areas already heavily hunted such as Little Creek.
With the addition of hunting days and an associated increase in hunting pressure, we are also witnessing an increase of illegal activities.
Several incidences of late shooting, unauthorized entry and trespass were reported last year.
We are proposing changes to the current hunting system at Little Creek to reduce pressure/disturbance on the resource and to curb illegal activity while enhancing the quality of the hunting experience.
Mr. Moore stated that we understand that these proposed changes might not be popular.
We are reducing the quantity of hunting opportunities, however we are doing so in an effort to protect the resource and enhance the quality of hunting opportunities.
These changes are
contingent upon a written agreement with the landowner within the Port Mahon impoundment.
Agenda Item 2.
West Nile Virus Presentation.
(Tom Moran) Tom Moran of the Division's Mosquito Control Section gave a presentation on West Nile Encephalitis Virus (WNEV).
The presentation defined what WNEV is, where it came from, how it is transmitted, what happened in NYC last year, some statistics on illness and death tolls for birds, horses and humans, what people can do to protect themselves and what Delaware is doing to prepare.
WNEV is a virus that is native to the Middle East, northern Africa and temperate Europe.
It is capable of causing encephalitis--a viral disease that attacks the brain/central nervous system causing fever, nausea, aches, pains, stiffness, headaches and rarely, coma or death.
It is a virus that is carried by wild birds and is transmitted to other birds and mammals by the bite of an infected mosquito.
It was first discovered in Uganda in 1937.
It showed up again during a polio survey in Egypt in the early 1950's.
There were also more recent outbreaks in Israel, Italy, Romania and New York City (1999).
The New York outbreak began in mid-July with wildlife officials responding to many dead bird complaints.
At the same time, some exotic birds at the Bronx Zoo were also dying from unknown causes.
In late August, several doctors in the Borough of Queens reported several suspect encephalitis cases.
Further testing proved a "West Nilelike encephalitis".
More extensive testing showed the disease to indeed be West Nile Encephalitis Virus--a disease never before documented in the western hemisphere.
Once it was determined what the disease was and how it was transmitted, it was time for mosquito control.
Only problem was that NYC had no organized mosquito control.
They initiated control measures by borrowing knowledge, manpower and equipment from neighboring New Jersey, Connecticut and Long Island mosquito control agencies to reduce mosquito populations and break the virus transmission cycle.
In the end, the virus was responsible for 8 human deaths and hundreds ill; 22 horse cases (of which 13 died) on Long Island and hundreds of dead birds within the NY tri-state area.
Major concerns still exist because there is no vaccine.
Delaware is preparing by implementing massive surveillance measures aimed at detecting the virus when it first appears in the bird or mosquito populations.
We also have a dead bird collection and transport network set up for the public to report suspect birds which will be
collected and tested.
We are also targeting control measures at a special type of mosquito breeding habitat that breeds the species of mosquito that has been shown to be a very capable vector of the disease.
If the disease does show up again this year, Delaware is prepared to do large scale mosquito spraying to reduce the number of mosquitoes to such a level as to reduce the possibility of disease transmission.
In the meantime, citizens can reduce their risk by sanitizing their yards and neighborhoods.
Be sure to remove any water from all containers or devices that could hold water; fill in tire ruts and low lying areas on property whenever feasible/possible, and finally, call the Delaware Mosquito Control Section to report any suspect mosquito breeding areas that are beyond your realm of treatment.
1.
2.
3.
Turkey/Deer Harvest data.
Proposed Changes To Augustine, Cedar Swamp and Little Creek Waterfowl Hunting.
Wildlife Area Report.
There being no further business, a motion was made, seconded and carried that the meeting be adjourned at 8:45 PM.
Sincerely, Karen Kennedy Recording Secretary
Agenda Item 3.
Delaware Sportsmen Against Hunger Progress Report.
(Lloyd Alexander) The 1999-2000 deer seasons provided record donations of venison to the Delaware Sportsmen Against Hunger Inc. program.
A total of 12,666 pounds were donated and distributed during the year.
This figure compared to the record of 8342 pounds collected in 1998.
Over the eight year history of the program more than 53,800 pounds of venison has been donated and distributed to feed hungry people.
Funds to pay for the butchering is generously provided by the Delaware Chapter of Buckmasters.
Some of the organizations that use the venison include Nanticoke Church, Christian Storehouse, U.S. Food Rescue, Tiberi Youth Center, House of Pride, Murphy School, Sunday Breakfast Mission, Delmarva Rural Ministries, Whatcoat Shelter, Shepherd Place, Salvation Army, Home of the Brave and Mom's House.
A grant was received from the penalty fund of DNREC to produce a ten minute video about the program.
This video will be used to promote DSAH to community, service and church groups.
Thirty second public service announcements will also be developed for use in the fall.
The video will be produced by mid-summer.
The cost of the video was partially underwritten by discount from Dave Tiberi's T.N.T. Productions.
The Division of Fish and Wildlife provides logistical support to DSAH.
No administrative charges are taken for any part of the DSAH program.
Cash donations are welcomed and should be sent to the Dover Salvation Army with a notation on the check for Delaware Sportsmen Against Hunger, Inc.
AGENDA FOR THE 5/30/00 ADVISORY COUNCIL MEETING
