January 15, 2003 Austin plan to protect Hoosiers from e-mail spam gets committee OK INDIANAPOLIS -- Legislation co-authored by State Rep. Terri Austin (D-Anderson) that will protect Hoosiers from unsolicited e-mail, better known as "spam," has been approved by an Indiana House committee.
House Bill 1083, passed today by the House Technology, Research and Development Committee, is the latest step in efforts to protect the interests of consumers.
It follows in the path of a state law that created a "no call" list enabling Hoosiers to avoid the constant irritation caused by telemarketers.
"Now that e-mail has become a commonly-used means for making personal and business contacts, people have started using the system as a means to sell goods and services," Austin said.
"The problems begin when these people misrepresent who is actually sending the e-mail or when they provide misleading information in the subject line of the e-mail in order to get a person to open the message."
Austin's legislation, based on a law already in effect in the state of Washington, would not prohibit someone from sending an unsolicited commercial e-mail.
It would prevent someone from transmitting a commercial electronic mail message if they misrepresent or obscure any information that identifies the point of origin of the e-mail.
The bill would require anyone sending an unsolicited commercial e-mail to provide a code in the subject line identifying it as an advertisement or an advertisement targeted to adults only.
Violations would be handled through the state's deceptive consumer sales statutes, which could lead to fines of up to $500 per offense.
"Anyone sending unsolicited commercial e-mail would be required to remove a person's name from an electronic mail if that person requests its removal," Austin said.
"Spammers would be required to give them every chance to delete their names from a list and be prevented from selling addresses if requested to do so."
Austin said the legislation is not designed to prevent people from selling items over the Internet and through e-mail, but to make sure they do not engage in fraud and deception.
"This is the first in a series of initiatives that will be pursued by Indiana House Democrats through these opening weeks of the 2003 legislative session," she said.
"Our agenda is designed to pass legislation that helps to protect the interests of Hoosiers of all ages, and I believe curbing e-mail spam is an excellent way to begin that program."
