News [newspapr.gif] from Congressman Jack Murtha Murtha Notes Tourism Developments in Cambria JOHNSTOWN, August 17, 1999 -- Congressman John Murtha today highlighted local progress in expanding regional tourism by inspecting three sites under construction or in design.
Tourism is an $18 billion a year industry in Pennsylvania and is clearly a growing component of our local economy because our area is so rich in historical and natural resources, Murtha said, noting that the tentative findings of a soon-to-be-published report will show that leisure travel now supports 1,200 jobs in Cambria County.
With three new sites coming on board in the immediate area, well have a much stronger group of attractions that will provide a shot in the arm for our tourism businesses, while also enhancing our quality of life, which helps us attract other companies to the area.
Murtha began the day inspecting construction at the Johnstown Heritage Discovery Center, then inspected the oldest railroad tunnel in America, the Staple Bend Tunnel, where the National Park Service will begin restoration next year, and then examined plans for the Path of the Flood Trail and adjoining trails.
Murtha is an honorary chairman of the Capital Campaign for the Johnstown Heritage Discovery Center, which will be a state-of-the-art, interactive museum showcasing the lives of immigrants working in the local mills around the turn of the last Century.
The capital campaign of Johnstown Area Heritage Association has raised approximately $4 million toward its $7 million goal, including a $1 million gift from the late Frank Pasquerilla.
This is the first time an area heritage site has attempted to raise a significant portion of their capital from private sources rather than government sources.
We have to admire that kind of pioneering spirit, the kind of pioneering spirit that typifies Johnstowners, said Murtha, who is supporting JAHAs efforts to obtain government grants to supplement the private fundraising.
Murtha then accompanied NPS personnel to Staple Bend Tunnel just below the village of Mineral Point.
The tunnel is being restored with $2.4 million of federal funds he supported through the National Park Service.
As the oldest railroad tunnel in America and located not far from the Altoona Railroaders Memorial Museum, Horseshoe Curve and the Gallitzin Tunnels, I think Staple Bend Tunnel could be the biggest addition to our tourism base, Murtha said.
And with the Path of the Flood Trail passing right through this tunnel, itll also help to attract trail use, which will add to the economic impact.
Then Murtha visited a trail-head built with a small grant he helped to obtain from the U.S. Forest Service in Ehrenfeld, where a plaque thanking him has been placed on a pavilion.
The Ehrenfeld trail-head will provide access to the northern terminus of the Path of the Flood Trail, which will be built next year using a $1.1 million federal Transportation Enhancement grant.
The project is going into design now with a $150,000 grant from the state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.
The project includes Kane Run Spur Trail in Portage.
This trail will run from Ehrenfeld through Staple Bend Tunnel to Franklin, so itll attract people to the community at the same time it enhances the quality of life for people living near the trail by providing a very inexpensive means of recreation and exercise, Murtha said.
Plans are to extend the Path of the Flood Trail northeast via the Mainline Trail to the Allegheny-Portage Railroad National Historic Site, and southwest through the City of Johnstown, where it will incorporate a short segment of trail from the Downtown past Cambria Iron Works National Historic Landmark.
It will also enable non-motorized transportation between the Johnstown Flood National Memorial at Saint Michael and the Johnstown Flood Museum in Downtown Johnstown.
The $400,000 Cambria Iron Works trail segment has been funded by the Army Corps of Engineers and another DCNR grant, with construction anticipated in the year 2001 as the final piece of work on the reconstruction of the Johnstown Flood Control Project.
Murtha noted that preliminary data developed in a study, soon to be published by the Southwestern Pennsylvania Heritage Preservation Commission, show that leisure travel in Cambria County has grown from a $32 million a year business to a $39 million dollar a year business from 1993 to 1998.
The data show that leisure travel now supports 1,200 jobs, an increase of 200 since 1992.
He added, Leisure travel brings 83 million people a year across Pennsylvania and generates over $12 billion in direct spending.
But the real key is that 33 percent of the dollars spent on leisure travel are spent by outdoor travelers, and 25 percent are spent by core heritage travelers.
By developing our trails and exciting historical resources, our area can capture a growing share of Pennsylvanias travel business.
bar
[News], [Sitemap]
bar
