U.S. Coast Guard
[action1.gif]
HOME RECRUITING
Find Your Local Recruiting Office U. S. Coast Guard Retention Coast Guard Magazine News and Information U.S. Coast Guard and Guard Reserve U.S. Coast Guard Scholarships
U.S. Coast Guard Academy U.S. Coast Guard U.S. Coast Guard Auxillary U.S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue U.S. Coast Guard Search and Rescue Emergencies
Homeland Security
[afpresserv1.jpg] DoD Working on Retention Challenges Do
PHOTOS
Air Station San Francisco celebrates 60 years Air Station San Francisco celebrates 60 years Coast Guard personnel take a break from duty and train, train, train Coast Guard personnel take a break from duty and train, train, train Trying to keep the logs from rolling Trying to keep the logs from rolling Elizabeth City Coast Guardsmen get extra shadows for the day Elizabeth City Coast Guardsmen get extra shadows for the day OCS students learn skills with "hands on" training OCS students learn skills with "hands on" training
Download the Coast Guard Recruiting Poster pdf file for Coast Guard Recruiting
U. S. Coast Guard Recruiting Offices
Find Your Local Recruiting Office The U.S. Coast Guard has Recruiting Offices located in all 50 states, the U.S. territories, and overseas.
The people in each office are trained to assist you in finding a specialty that will help you Be A Part of the Action! Find
U.S. Coast Guard Magazine
Homeland Defense Begins at the Water's Edge Production Editor David Vergun participated in several Coast Guard patrols on the Potomac River near Washington, D.C., and on the Elizabeth River, near Hampton Roads, Va., to gather information for this article.
Two force-overlay maps dramatically depict the U.S. Coast Guard's rapid response to the terrorist attacks on 11 September.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Steers New Course In Attack's Wave The Sept. 11 terrorist attacks marked a turning point for the U.S. Coast Guard, which has elevated port security to its top priority and is sure to become a major player in the new push for homeland security.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Protects, Patrols The Coast Guard works while others train.
The Army, Navy, Air Force and Marines have many things in common.
They are part of the Department of Defense and they spend most of their time, energy and resources honing skills they hope they never have to use.
And for good reason.
What they train for is deadly and gruesome.
Full Story Top Keeping the Coast Guard Afloat Everyone loves the U.S. Coast Guard.
Its cutters, with their white-painted hulls and orange stripes, offer the world a kinder and gentler image of American military power.
It rescues seafarers in distress, protects marine life, oversees safety in ports and coastal waters, and combats illegal immigration and drug trafficking, making for an exceedingly lengthy list of duties.
The Coast Guard, which legally is an armed service, is the sole federal law enforcement agency at sea.
It is at once humanitarian, policeman and fighting sailor.
Full Story Top U.S. Coast Guard U.S. Coast Guard Every hour, every day, around the clock and around the world.
Full Story Top Homeland Security The United States Coast Guard's homeland security mission is not new to us.
It is more visible today than it was prior to the tragic events of September 11, 2001, but it is just as important as it was when we first began protecting our national sovereignty 211 years ago.
The Coast Guard maintains a clear vision and a keen sense of vigilance while keeping watch for threats to our security and those who would do us harm.
Go To Website Top U.S. Coast Guard Retention All of us consider throughout our careers whether to stay active duty Coast Guard, go into the Reserve, or pursue life as a civilian.
This tool is here to assist you to make that decision.
We are presenting an objective look at the various benefits, compensation, and perks we receive as Coasties so you can make an informed decision about your future.
Full Story
News and Information
Coast Guard Issues Anti-Terrorist Safety Message And Encourages Recreational Boaters To Enjoy 2002 Boating Season WASHINGTON, Feb. 7 -- Now as we begin a new year, it is time for recreational boaters to think about getting back on the water and enjoying the many opportunities and rewards our marine environment offers, said Captain Scott Evans, Chief of the U.S. Coast Guard's Office of Boating Safety in Washington, D.C.
Full Story Top Coast Guard And FURA Join Forces To Rescue Five People ASAN JUAN, Puerto Rico, Feb. 4 -- The Coast Guard and Forces for Rapid Action (FURA) rescued five people from the water at about 3:00 a.m. Sunday after their vessel capsized in the South Coast of Puerto Rico.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Rescues 2nd Injured Seattle Fisherman In Two Days JUNEAU, Alaska, Feb. 1 -- For the second time in as many days, a Coast Guard rescue helicopter crew airlifted an injured man from a fishing vessel in the Bering Sea Thursday night.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Cutter From Oregon Recovers More Than 4,000 lbs.
Of Narcotics SEATTLE, Wa., Jan. 31 -- The Coast Guard Cutter Steadfast (WMEC-623) from Warrenton, Ore., accompanied by a helicopter from Coast Guard Station San Franciso, recovered more than two tons of marijuana on Jan.26.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Appoints Director of Intelligence WASHINGTON, Jan. 30 -- The United States Coast Guard has named Frances Fragos-Townsend as its Director of Intelligence.
In this position, Ms. Fragos-Townsend leads the service's Intelligence Directorate, the Intelligence Coordination Center and act as Program Manager for the Coast Guard's national intelligence effort.
She is charged with enhancing inter-agency and maritime awareness in the war on terrorism.
Full Story Top Coast Guard Announces New Waterfront Facility Guidelines ALAMEDA, Calif., Jan. 30 -- The U.S. Coast Guard implemented new security guidelines Monday for commercial waterfront facilities in its Pacific Area.
Full Story Top International Marine Community Leaders Meeting To Discuss Maritime Security On The Great Lakes CLEVELAND, Jan. 29 -- More than 300 U.S. and Canadian government, commercial, environmental and boating officials are meeting to discuss the state of the Great Lakes for a two-day summit beginning Wednesday, Jan. 30 at the Sheraton City Center on St. Clair Ave.
The summit, called Marine Community Day, is an annual meeting where the leaders of the Great Lakes marine community meet to exchange information, discuss issues and make plans for the future.
Full Story Top
U.S. Coast Guard and Coast Guard Reserve
U. S. Coast Guard Reserve Full Story U.S. Coast Guard Scholarships Full Story Top [uscgacademy.jpg] Academy History The modern academy began with the School of Instruction for the Revenue Marine in 1876.
Nine cadets began their training aboard the schooner Dobbin which operated out of Fisher Island near New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Full Story Go To Website Top
Recruiting Videos [video.gif]
U.S. Coast Guard's new recruitment and retention program.
o Jobs That Matter o You Can Make a Difference o Stop Drugs, Save Lives, Protect the Environment U.S. Coast Guard History Historian's Office Full Story Top
BMC Anthony Petit Heroes: The World's Best Coast Guard BMC Anthony Petit Feb. 15, 1903 to April 1, 1946 A couple of hours after midnight on April Fool's Day, 1946...
Full Story Top
Daily Chronology of Coast Guard History
Daily Chronology Of Coast Guard History Historic "daily" events in Coast Guard history, listed by month Full Story Top
U.S. Coast Guard Auxillary U.S. Coast Guard Auxillary Welcome to the Coast Guard Auxiliary's national Web site (CGAUXWEB).
The Coast Guard Auxiliary is the civilian volunteer arm of the United States Coast Guard - 35,000 men and women who donate their time and expertise to support the Coast Guard and improve boating safety.
Full Story Top Coast Guard's Search and Rescue Search and Rescue Search and Rescue (SAR) is one of the Coast Guard's oldest missions.
Minimizing the loss of life, injury, property damage or loss by rendering aid to persons in distress and property in the maritime environment has always been a Coast Guard priority.
Full Story Top Search and Rescue Emergencies To report a Search and Rescue Emergency.
Full Story Top
TOP
