Main Site Navigation Header * Science Fiction * you are here: homepage 
Look for these authors on the science fiction shelves, and don't forget to check the New Books section of the Library for the latest by the Current Stars.
Classic Authors: Isaac Asimov: Asimov's galaxy-spanning Foundation trilogy, consisting of Foundation, Foundation and Empire, and Second Foundation, is considered by many science fiction fans to be the best science fiction series ever.
His Caves of Steel masterfully mixes the mystery and science fiction genres, and has several sequels.
Both series are best read in order.
Alfred Bester: The Stars My Destination is an incredibly smoothly written fast read that leaves you thinking afterwards.
The Demolished Man is a clever story about murder in a world with telepathic detectives, in which Bester makes clever use of typography to give the feel of telepathic communication.
Ray Bradbury: Fahrenheit 451 is an anticensorship classic, making its point in a way that sometimes only science fiction can.
Gordon Dickson: Dorsai, Soldier, Ask Not, and Tactics of Mistake are the classic works in military science fiction.
Dickson has a crisp, neat style that makes these books a delight.
One can start with any of the above books.
On a lighter note, Dickson also wrote some wonderfully humorous science fiction, such as the popular "Hoka" series, cowritten with Poul Anderson (Hoka! Hoka! Hoka!; Hokas Pokas) - adventures among an annoyingly imitative race of deceptively cuddly aliens.
William Gibson: Credited with the invention of "cyberpunk", his stories are just as fresh and suspenseful now as when they first came out.
The classic Virtual Light and Neuromancer are also available on cassette.
Robert Heinlein: Widely considered the best science fiction author ever.
Double Star is a kind of spy novel, Starship Troopers is military science fiction, and Stranger in a Strange Land was one of the 1960's counterculture, showing Heinlein's remarkable versatility.
Most of his other books are of very high quality as well.
Frank Herbert: Dune is the book Herbert will always be remembered by, and he wrote several sequels.
Read in order, but definitely read at least Dune.
Ursula K. Leguin: In addition to her popular fantasy works (The Wind's Twelve Quarters), Leguin is recognized as one of the finest writers in science fiction, entertainingly exploring the possibilities of biology and society among humans and aliens.
The Left Hand of Darkness (also available on cassette) is a groundbreaking examination of sex roles - among a differently-sexed alien race.
The Dispossessed is both a suspense story and dystopian vision, set against two contrasting but complementary societies.
Walter Miller: Miller had a short but glorious career.
The Best of Walter M. Miller, Jr. contains most of his short stories.
A Canticle for Leibowitz was his only novel and is considered by many to be the best science fiction book ever.
The sequel, Saint Leibowitz and the Wild Horse Woman, published after his death, was completed by Terry Bisson, but showcases Miller's style throughout.
Larry Niven: Niven was and is at his best as a short-story writer, and his best short stories are collected in N-Space.
The novel The Mote in God's Eye blends Niven's talent as a visionary with co-writer Jerry Pournelle's talent as a novelist, and is another book frequently rated by fans as the best ever.
Niven writes hard, science-driven fiction.
Niven is also capable of adding a note of whimsy to his science, as in the classic Ringworld (and sequels).
Frederik Pohl: Gateway and Man Plus both show the cynical but sharp vision of Fred Pohl.
Both have sequels.
Jack Vance: His Cadwal Chronicles (Araminta Station; Ecce and Old Earth; Throy) are rich in adventure and that "sense of wonder" typical of classic science fiction.
Current Stars: Lois McMaster Bujold: Bujold's Miles Vorkosigan saga is remarkably varied for a series: Memory is a top-rate mystery, The Vor Game won a Hugo award and is straight military science fiction, and her latest, A Civil Campaign, was given top ratings by a widely-visited site for romance readers.
Start either with Shards of Honor or Warrior's Apprentice, and expect the series, unlike most, to get better and better.
Falling Free is an excellent book and the only science fiction book she has written that is not about Miles Vorkosigan or his mother Cordelia.
Orson Scott Card: Ender's Game, his most famous and best work, spawned several sequels, of which Speaker for the Dead is notably good.
Ender's Game is one of those books that can't be put down once you start.
He is also adept writing short stories, which are collected in Maps in a Mirror.
Jerry Oltion: Oltion is a hard-science writer who creates a sense of wonder without getting bogged down in technical details.
His Abandon in Place is a sometimes madcap, sometimes thought provoking adventure set in the near future.
Kim Stanley Robinson: Red Mars won just about every major science fiction award.
The sequels Green Mars and Blue Mars were also published to great acclaim, and complete this epic of human colonization on our neighboring planet.
A short story collection, The Martians, explores further dimensions of Robinson's "Mars universe" in ways that contain some surprises for readers of the trilogy.
(Green Mars and Red Mars are available on cassette.)
Robert Sawyer: A writer with a great deal of appeal to mature readers.
The Terminal Experiment, Frameshift, Factoring Humanity, and Calculating God all feature serious plots, deep characters, and well-reasoned science.
Charles Sheffield: Sheffield is one of those writers who thinks that the genre is Science Fiction rather than Science Fiction, and he's got the background to pull it off.
Even to nonscientists, however, his works are witty and entertaining.
Try Georgia on my Mind, and Other Places for his short fiction.
The novel Cold as Ice is also recommended.
Dan Simmons: Hyperion combines a mastery of traditional science fiction elements with a remarkably literary bent.
His books are best read in pairs, since they are really novels divided into two volumes.
Read Hyperion and The Fall of Hyperion first, and then Endymion and The Rise of Endymion.
Neal Stephenson: Stephenson made a splash with Snow Crash, a cyberpunk thriller with a cult-like following.
He followed it up with the Hugo award winning The Diamond Age.
Cryptonomicon, his latest, draws extensively on the author's knowledge of the history of cryptography, and is alternately funny, insightful, and even educational.
Michael Swanwick: Swanwick's work is often difficult to classify as to whether it's Science Fiction or Fantasy, but he's always brilliant and usually disturbing.
Iron Dragon's Daughter tells the story of a young girl in a dragon factory sweatshop.
Stations of the Tide is an espionage story on a strange planet.
Jack Faust is about a man who makes a satanic deal that greatly accelerates the acceptance of technology on Earth.
His books all stand alone.
Read any.
Vernor Vinge: The Peace War and Marooned in Realtime contain the story of a future changed by just one invention, bubbles which allow one to travel forwards (but never backwards) in time.
A Fire Upon the Deep is a novel that manages to combine the best galaxy-spanning traditions of science fiction with the elements of cyberspace more exploited by current writers; set in the same universe, A Deepness in the Sky is also excellent.
Read in any order.
Look for The Collected Stories of Vernor Vinge.
Connie Willis: Widely acknowledged to be the best science fiction short-story writer currently writing, her short stories are collected in Impossible Things, Fire Watch, and Miracle and other Christmas Stories.
Bellwether is a brilliant short novel, marginally science fiction but well worth reading for its social satire.
Her three long novels, Doomsday Book, To Say Nothing About the Dog, and Passage are all excellent.
Read in any order.
Science Fiction book awards
[USEMAP:footer_TOP.gif] [footer_CAP.gif]
____________________ submit Top of Page
[USEMAP:footer_BOTTOM.gif]
Please e-mail suggestions for Library services and comments about the Web site to the FCPL Web Site Coordinator
Last Modified: Monday, December 01, 2003
