Main Site Navigation Header * Celebrity Readers * you are here: homepage 
Here are a few of the celebrities you can listen to on recorded books from the Fairfax County Public Library: F. Murray Abraham Gillian Anderson Kathy Bates Gil Bellows Ed Begley, Jr.
Elayne Bennett William Bennett David Birney Claire Bloom Bruce Boxleitner Amy Brenneman Beau Bridges Blair Brown Orson Scott Card John Cleese Stephen Collins Lindsay Crouse John Cunningham Tim Curry Vondie Curtis-Hall Willem Dafoe David Dukes James Farentino Albert Finney Robert Forster Jodie Foster Megan Gallagher Daniel Gerroll Whoopi Goldberg Stephen J. Gould Peter Graves Michael Gross Anne Heche Charlton Heston Ken Howard William Hurt Jeremy Irons Arte Johnson James Earl Jones Simon Jones Perry King Stephen King Tabitha King Rob Lowe Joe Mantegna Roddy McDowall Rita Moreno Kathy Najimy Jack Nicholson Daniel Parker Robert B. Parker Tonya Pinkins Brad Pitt Kathleen Quinlan Deborah Raffin Lynn Redgrave Burt Reynolds Joan Rivers Stefan Rudnicki Yeardley Smith Paul Sorvino Kevin Spacey Frances Sternhagen Meryl Streep Richard Thomas Cicely Tyson Nana Visitor Betty White William Windom Oprah Winfrey James Woods Efrem Zimbalist Jr. F. Murray Abraham The Grass Crown by Colleen McCullough Academy-Award-winner F. Murray Abraham ("Amadeus") presents McCullough's novel of power struggles in Republican Rome.
Red Storm Rising by Tom Clancy Using the latest advancements in military technology, the world's superpowers battle it out on land, sea, and air for the ultimate global control.
Interview With the Vampire by Anne Rice F. Murray Abraham seems to inhabit the Vampire as he pours out the erotically charged confessions of his first 200 years as one of the living dead.
Gillian Anderson Exit to Eden by Ann Rice (Writing as Anne Rampling) " X-Files" T.V. and film star Gillian Anderson reads an Ann Rice novel about a couple's visit to The Club, an erotic vacation paradise where nothing is taboo.
Also narrated by Gil Bellows.
Kathy Bates Her Mother's Daughter by Marilyn French Academy-Award-winner Kathy Bates ("Misery," "Titanic") presents French's story of four generations of magnificent women.
Blood Shot by Sara Paretsky Kathy Bates narrates this V.I. Warshawski mystery.
Ed Begley, Jr.
Gunman's Rhapsody by Robert B. Parker Spencer creator Robert B. Parker turns his eye to the Old West with this stirring rendition of the legendary exploits of Wyatt Earp, Doc Holliday, The Clanton Gang, and the fateful meeting of blood and bullets that became known as the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral.
Gil Bellows Exit to Eden by Ann Rice Gil Bellows and film star Gillian Anderson read an Ann Rice novel about a couple's visit to The Club, an erotic vacation paradise where nothing is taboo.
The Beach House by James Patterson The tale of one man's search for his brother's killer.
Elayne Bennett The Moral Compass: Stories for a Life's Journey by William J. Bennett Author William Bennett; his wife, Elayne; T.V. and film actors Stephen Collins ("7th Heaven," "First Wives Club"); Vondie Curtis-Hall ("Sirens," "Eve's Bayou"); T.V. actress Megan Gallagher ("Hill St. Blues," "China Beach"), veteran film star Charlton Heston ('Gideon," "Planet of the Apes"); film veteran Rita Moreno ("West Side Story," "Resurrection"), daytime series regular Tonya Pinkins ("All My Children"); film and T.V. star Richard Thomas ("Swiss Family Robinson," "The Waltons") and Emmy-Award-winner Betty White ("Golden Girls," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" ) narrate William Bennett's companion to his bestseller, The Book of Virtues.
Also read by Simon Jones.
William Bennett The Moral Compass: Stories for a Life's Journey by William J. Bennett Author William Bennett; his wife, Elayne; T.V. and film actors Stephen Collins ("7th Heaven," "First Wives Club"); Vondie Curtis-Hall ("Sirens," "Eve's Bayou"); T.V. actress Megan Gallagher ("Hill St. Blues," "China Beach"), veteran film star Charlton Heston ('Gideon," "Planet of the Apes"); film veteran Rita Moreno ("West Side Story," "Resurrection"), daytime series regular Tonya Pinkins ("All My Children"); film and T.V. star Richard Thomas ("Swiss Family Robinson," "The Waltons") and Emmy-Award-winner Betty White ("Golden Girls," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" ) narrate William Bennett's companion to his bestseller, The Book of Virtues.
Also read by Simon Jones.
David Birney Murder on the Aisle edited by Mary Higgins Clark T.V. actor David Birney ("St. Elsewhere," "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine,"); former "Laugh-In" regular Arte Johnson; T.V. series actor Perry King ("Riptide"), the late film actor Roddy McDowall "Planet of the Apes," "How Green Was My Valley") and comic Joan Rivers read award winning mysteries from this Mystery Writers Association of America anthology.
Claire Bloom The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher by Beatrix Potter (cassette 
The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy-Winkle by Beatrix Potter (cassette 
Prince Caspian by C. S. Lewis How Caspian and his army of talking beasts conquered the Telemarines unfolds in Book Four of the Chronicles of Narnia.
Hansel and Gretel: and Other Fairy Tales by the Brothers Grimm.
Retold by Amabel Williams-Ellis.
Hansel and Gretel -- The golden goose -- Mrs. Owl -- Shiver and shake.
Romeo and Juliet by Williams Shakespeare Shakespeare's tragic play about two star-crossed lovers and their feuding families is brought to life.
All's Well That Ends Well by William Shakespeare This adaption from the Boccaccio Decameron of Shakespeare's "dark" comedy eloquently explores human virtue and gullibility.
Bruce Boxleitner Message in a Bottle by Nicholas Sparks Film actress Kathleen Quinlan ("A Civil Action," "Apollo 13") and T.V. actor Bruce Boxleitner ("Babylon 5") narrate Sparks bestseller.
When a love letter is found inside a bottle on the shores of Cape Cod, it changes the life of a single mother forever.
The Holy Road by Michael Blake A dramatic sequel to the tale of army Lt. John Dunbar (Dances With Wolves) and his life with the Comanche Indians on the Great Plains.
Amy Brenneman Heart of the West by Penelope Williamson " Judging Amy" star Brenneman reads Williamson's frontier saga of Clementine Kennicutt, a ladylike New Englander who comes to the wilds of Montana in 1879 with her new husband.
Beau Bridges Black Light by Stephen Hunter Film actor Beau Bridges ("The Fabulous Baker Boys," "Seven Hours to Judgement") reads Stephen Hunter's thriller about a former combat soldier investigating the forty-year-old murder of his father.
Montana 1948 by Larry Watson The events of that small-town summer forever alter David Hayden's view of his family: his self-effacing father, a sheriff who never wears his badge; his clear sighted mother; his uncle, a charming war hero and respected doctor; and the Hayden's lively, statuesque Sioux housekeeper, Marie Little Soldier, whose revelations are at the heart of the story.
It is a tale of love and courage, of power abused, and of the terrible choice between family loyalty and justice.
Blair Brown Rose Madder by Stephen King The author and film actress Blair Brown ("The Bad Seed," "Altered State") narrate this thriller about Rosie Daniels, who abruptly leaves a nightmare marriage and must hide in a new identity to keep her husband from tracking her down.
All Is Vanity by Christina Schwarz At once darkly comedic and moving, this witty exploration of female friendship, envy, and misguided ambition by the author of the number-one bestseller Drowning Ruth, deliciously satirizes the desire to shine in the world.
Portrait In Sepia by Isabel Allende Portrait in Sepia, Isabel Allende's third book in a loose trilogy about a Chilean extended family in the 19th and 20th centuries, is a full bottle of wine -- warm, robust, and intoxicating -- a mesmerizing bildungsroman of one young woman's journey of self-discovery.
Rainbow Fish And The Big Blue Whale by Marcus Pfister Rainbow Fish's third exciting adventure is available in this mini book and audio package.
In this tale, when a terrible misunderstanding escalates, Rainbow Fish and his friends are in great danger, and Rainbow Fish must make peace with a big blue whale to save them all from disaster.
Back When We Were Grownups: A novel by Anne Tyler Nineteen-year-old Rebecca didn't just fall for Joe Davitch, she drowned in his turbulent family during 30-plus years of marriage that squelched her once-ardent idealism and ambition.
Now, at 53, she resolves to set things right in Back When We Were Grownups, a wise, moving, and sublimely lyrical novel from the Pulitzer Prize-winning author of The Accidental Tourist, and Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant.
The Great Good Thing by Rod Townley Twelve-year-old Princess Sylvie's storybook kingdom really is a storybook, where nothing ever changes, even the character's mad scramble to reach their places whenever the book is opened, until Sylvie discovers she can enter new worlds with the Reader, and find new adventures.
Daughter of Fortune: A Novel by Isabel Allende From acclaimed international bestselling author Isabel Allende, comes this dazzling historical novel, a sweeping portrait of an unconventional woman carving her own destiny in an era defined by violence, passion, and adventure.
When The Wind Blows by James Patterson James Patterson (Cat and Mouse, Audio Reviews, LJ 10/1/98) brings together three interesting characters in this story of genetic testing, abuse of power, and murder.
Sun 
After the death of his grandmother, ten-year-old Spoon observes the changes in his grandfather and tries to find the perfect artifact to preserve his memories of her.
Unnatural Exposure by Patricia Daniels Cornwell Virginia's chief medical examiner, Kay Scarpetta, is called in to examine the remains of a woman found in a landfill, her body dismembered in the same expert way she'd seen before.
And while Scarpetta is investigating, the bold killer contacts her through the Internet, inviting her to download the police photos, and signs off with the chilling name, deadoc.
Airframe by Michael Crichton On the heels of several timely successes (e.g., The Lost World, Audio Reviews, LJ 11/15/95) comes this latest novel from Michael Crichton, which, contrary to what you may have been led to believe by the hype, should reassure even the most jaded U.S. air traveler; read by film actress Blair Brown ("The Bad Seed," "Altered State").
Cause Of Death by Patricia Daniels Cornwell From the New York Times bestselling author of From Potter's Field and The Body Farm comes a mesmerizing new thriller that takes Dr. Kay Scarpetta into the very vortex of evil--far beyond anything she has heretofore encountered as Chief Medical Examiner.
A Long Fatal Love Chase by Louisa May Alcott A romantic suspense novel about a reclusive woman.
She marries a charming man and finds intrigue, cruelty, and deceit.
She flees him and he chases her across Europe, for she has become his obsession.
From Potter's Field by Patricia Daniels Cornwell Dr. Kay Scarpetta, on assignment with the FBI, gets involved in a Christmas Eve murder in New York City.
She must identify the dead female before the serial killer whose work this is finds Scarpetta's niece.
The Client by John Grisham Eleven-year-old Mark Sway witnessed the suicide of a New Orleans attorney.
Before he died he told Mark a deadly secret about the recent murder of a Louisiana senator whose accused killer, a Mafia thug, is about to go to trial.
Mark hires a lawyer, Reggie Love, who loves helping kids overlooked or abused by the system.
Orson Scott Card Maps in a Mirror: the Short Fiction of Orson Scott Card Professional narrator Scott Brick; author Orson Scott Card; film actors Robert Forster ("The Black Hole," "Delta Force"); Michael Gross ("Avalanche," "Tremors"), Roddy McDowall, Grammy-Award winner Stefan Rudnicki ("Best Spoken Album," 1999), horror star William Windom ("Children of the Corn IV: The Gathering"), and T.V. actor Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. ("77 Sunset Strip," "Remington Steele") present eight short stories by the sci-fi master Orson Scott Card.
John Cleese Did I Ever Tell You How Lucky You Are? by Dr. Seuss A children's morality tale on how to appreciate one's lot in life.
Read by John Cleese.
The Screwtape Letters by C.S. Lewis " Monty Python" actor John Cleese narrates Lewis' classic spiritual allegory.
Stephen Collins The Moral Compass: Stories for a Life's Journey by William J. Bennett Author William Bennett; his wife, Elayne; T.V. and film actors Stephen Collins ("7th Heaven," "First Wives Club"); Vondie Curtis-Hall ("Sirens," "Eve's Bayou"); T.V. actress Megan Gallagher ("Hill St. Blues," "China Beach"), veteran film star Charlton Heston ('Gideon," "Planet of the Apes"); film veteran Rita Moreno ("West Side Story," "Resurrection"), daytime series regular Tonya Pinkins ("All My Children"); film and T.V. star Richard Thomas ("Swiss Family Robinson," "The Waltons") and Emmy-Award-winner Betty White ("Golden Girls," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" ) narrate William Bennett's companion to his bestseller, The Book of Virtues.
Also read by Simon Jones.
Lindsay Crouse Trial by Fire by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg Dallas D.A. Stella Cataloni has been haunted by her inability to solve the murder of her parents, especially since she is the prime suspect.
Mitigating Circumstances by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg When District Attorney Lily Forrester's daughter is raped in their own home, she takes matters into her own hands in her search for justice.
Gerald's Game by Stephen King Gerald and his wife Jessie are consenting adults, but his kinky little game takes an unforeseen twist, leaving Jessie trapped, locked to her bed and alone.
The Witching Hour by Anne Rice Two people with special powers are drawn together to attempt to unlock the mystery of the woman's past and the secret of the man's unwelcome gift.
John Cunningham The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher by Beatrix Potter (cassette 
All the animals are fast asleep in their animal homes.
Slowly they awake.
They open their eyes and sniff.
They run.
And in the middle of the forest they find a bright yellow flower growing in the snow--and they dance and laugh with joy at this first sign of spring.
Tim Curry Nightmares 
This short story collection features stories of vampires, lurking spirits and ordinary individuals driven to unthinkable extremes by the perversities of fate.
Abhorsen by Garth Nix Abhorsen-In-Waiting Lirael and Prince Sameth, a Wallmaker, must confront and bind the evil spirit Oranis before it can destroy all life.
The Ersatz Elevator by Lemony Snicket The woeful saga of the Baudelaire orphans continues as evil Count Olaf discovers their whereabouts at Esme Squalor's seventy-one bedroom penthouse and concocts a new plan for stealing their family fortune.
The Carnivorous Carnival by Lemony Snicket On the run as suspected murderers, the unlucky Baudelaire orphans find themselves trapped in the Caligari Carnival, where they must masquerade as freaks in order to hide from the evil Count Olaf.
The Hostile Hospital by Lemony Snicket On the run after being falsely accused of murder, the three Baudelaire orphans find themselves in the Heimlich Hospital, with the evil Count Olaf in close pursuit.
The Vile Village by Lemony Snicket Under a new government program based on the saying "It takes a village to raise a child," the Baudelaire orphans are adopted by an entire town, with disastrous results.
Lirael: Daughter Of The Clayr by Garth Nix When a dangerous necromancer threatens to unleash a long-buried evil, Lirael and Prince Sameth are drawn into a battle to save the Old Kingdom and reveal their true destinies.
Sabriel by Garth Nix Sabriel, daughter of the necromancer Abhorsen, must journey into the mysterious and magical Old Kingdom to rescue her father from the Land of the Dead.
The Reptile Room by Lemony Snicket After narrowly escaping the menacing clutches of the dastardly Count Olaf, the three Baudelaire orphans are taken in by a kindly herpetologist with whom they live happily for an all-too-brief time.
The Bad Beginning by Lemony Snicket After the sudden death of their parents, the three Baudelaire children must depend on each other and their wits when it turns out that the distant relative who is appointed their guardian is determined to use any means necessary to get their fortune.
Morgan's Run by Colleen McCullough From the bestselling author of "The Thorn Birds" comes the saga of Australia's first settlers, based on the extraordinary life of one man.
This is the story of Richard Morgan, a roistering, down-on-his-luck, 18th-century hero, irresistible to women and full of wily charm.
Jewels by Danielle Steel Awaiting the arrival of her family on her 75th birthday, Sarah Whitfield recalls the years and events that have brought her to this moment.
The Horse You Came In On by Martha Grimes Inspector Jury leaves Scotland Yard to visit an old friend in America, and the two encounter clues involving three seemingly unrelated murders.
The Old Contemptibles by Martha Grimes Grimes' British-based whodunits are all have been authentic successes with American readers.
Scotland Yard Superintendent Richard Jury is drawn into a passionate affair--and becomes a suspect in a murder investigation.
Vondie Curtis-Hall The Moral Compass: Stories for a Life's Journey by William J. Bennett Author William Bennett; his wife, Elayne; T.V. and film actors Stephen Collins ("7th Heaven," "First Wives Club"); Vondie Curtis-Hall ("Sirens," "Eve's Bayou"); T.V. actress Megan Gallagher ("Hill St. Blues," "China Beach"), veteran film star Charlton Heston ('Gideon," "Planet of the Apes"); film veteran Rita Moreno ("West Side Story," "Resurrection"), daytime series regular Tonya Pinkins ("All My Children"); film and T.V. star Richard Thomas ("Swiss Family Robinson," "The Waltons") and Emmy-Award-winner Betty White ("Golden Girls," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" ) narrate William Bennett's companion to his bestseller, The Book of Virtues.
Also read by Simon Jones.
To Top of Page.
To Next Page.
To next page
[USEMAP:footer_TOP.gif] [footer_CAP.gif]
____________________ submit Top of Page
[USEMAP:footer_BOTTOM.gif]
Please e-mail suggestions for Library services and comments about the Web site to the FCPL Web Site Coordinator
Last Modified: Monday, November 10, 2003
