2 AMERICAN HISTORY AND LITERATURE American Information Resource Center United States Consulate Chennai 600 006 Tel: 811 2000 December 2002 AMERICAN HISTORY AND LITERATURE 1) 2) 3) 4) American American American Heroes of History (1991) Business History (1993) Authors (1991) Democracy (1995) P.3 P.6 P.8 P.10 AMERICAN HISTORY (1991) This award-winning series traces some of the major events in America's first two centuries, including the colonial lifestyle and economy, the drive to explore the West, the Civil War and Reconstruction, the rise of an industrial economy, immigration, World War I, the paradoxical decade of the 1920s, the New Deal, and World War II.
Episode 101 Synopsis
"COLONIAL AMERICA: THE BEGINNINGS" 24 Minutes At a time when life for the 16th century English farmer was harsh and hopeless, rich merchants were looking for colonists for the New World.
The United States had its political beginnings with English colonists, from the first settlement at Jamestown, Virginia, to later, more successful colonization by "Pilgrims" seeking religious freedom.
"THE COLONIAL WAY OF LIFE" 26 Minutes Diverse colonial cultures made up America's early "melting pot," but those differences became less striking as a common language and lifestyle evolved which distinguished the new Americans from Europeans.
"THE COLONIAL ECONOMY " 25 Minutes Economic ties bound the American colonies together through trade among themselves and with England.
"WESTWARD EXPANSION" 25 Minutes The existence of a vast frontier wilderness had a profound effect on the American character.
"NEGRO SLAVERY" 26 Minutes The institution of Negro slavery divided the nation and helped create tensions that would explode into the Civil War.
"THE CIVIL WAR: A HOUSE DIVIDED" 25 Minutes The Civil War remains the most traumatic event in American history, which left a permanent impact the entire, reunited nation.
102
103
104
105
106
107
"YEARS OF RECONSTRUCTION: 1865-1877" 25 Minutes 3
The chaotic era of Reconstruction was one of the most troubled and confused periods in American history.
Although the nation had been prepared to make war, it was unprepared for a proper peace.
108 "IMMIGRATION" 25 Minutes Immigrants seeking economic prosperity and religious freedom flocked to the United States during the 19th century.
Unchecked immigration put tremendous pressure on American society and led to some of the world's first immigration laws.
"AMERICA BECOMES AN INDUSTRIALIZED NATION" 26 Minutes At independence, America was a sparsely populated land of farms and villages.
By the centennial, the nation had experienced unparalleled growth.
The population had swelled, great cities had arisen, and the agrarian republic had become the world's leading industrialized nation.
"THE The economy dominated by of a powerful RISE OF INDUSTRIAL GIANTS" 26 Minutes of the newly industrialized and urbanized America was initially trusts and monopolies that concentrated the nation's wealth in the hands elite.
109
110
111
"TRUSTS AND TRUST BUSTERS" 25 Minutes As America entered the 20th century, industrial power became concentrated in the hands of fewer and fewer people, namely, industrialists and financiers who were immune to government interference.
At the turn of the century, America developed laws and institutions designed to challenge the economic power of the social elite and control economic development in the broader national interest.
"THE PROGRESSIVES" 25 Minutes Reacting to the contradictions between what America was and what it purported to be, the Progressive movement inspired passage of an impressive body of social legislation in the early 20th century.
"THE U.S. BECOMES A WORLD POWER" 27 Minutes The Spanish-American War signaled the emergence of the United States as a major world power and marked the beginning of America's experiment with overseas empire.
"WORLD WAR I" 27 Minutes The United States' participation in a European war was a departure from American traditions and a sign of growing world power.
112
113
114
115
"THE TWENTIES" 26 Minutes 4
Known both as the "Age of Normalcy" and the "Era of Wonderful Nonsense," the 1920s witnessed major movements in politics, religion, literature, and lifestyle.
116 "THE NEW DEAL" 26 Minutes Franklin Delano Roosevelt took office at a time of unprecedented economic and social crisis.
Through the activist policies of the "New Deal," he used the Federal government on an unprecedented scale in an attempt to solve the nations problems.
"THE AMERICAN PEOPLE IN WORLD WAR II" 26 Minutes Millions of Americans fought on the home front during World War II - from men and women who found well-paying jobs in shipyards and munitions plants to children who planted victory gardens and saved tin cans.
The common goal of winning the war united Americans as never before and resulted in the Second World War's "Miracle in Production."
"FDR: THE MAN IN THE WHITE HOUSE" 114 Minutes This program is a one-man performance by Robert Vaughn, dramatizing the life of Franklin Roosevelt, from his battle with polio through his election victories, the New Deal, his attempt to "pack" the Supreme Court, and his leadership during World War II.
The program was filmed before a live audience at Washington's National Theater.
117
118
5
AMERICAN BUSINESS HISTORY (1993) The story of American business resonates with famous names - Carnegie, Rockefeller, Morgan and Ford.
Their legacies include revolutionary manufacturing processes and marketing strategies, enduring nationwide infrastructures, and cutting-edge technological innovations.
But their contributions also include major philanthropic monuments - art museums, libraries, universities, and charitable foundations which contribute significantly to the American character.
This ten-part series documents the earliest days of the American industrial revolution and highlights its top "revolutionaries."
Episode 101 Synopsis
"THE BROWNS OF PROVIDENCE AND MERCHANT CAPITALISM" 28 Minutes The industrial revolution would not have been possible without the precision machine tools invented and manufactured the Joseph Brown family.
For example, the micrometer caliper, a Brown invention from 1867, is still used widely today, as is his universal grinding machine, patented ten years later.
"SAMUEL SLATER AND THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION" 28 Minutes Skilled in English cotton manufacturing, Samuel Slater immigrated to the United States and founded the American Cotton Textile Industry in Pawtucket, Rhode Island.
"JAMES J. HILL AND THE TRANSPORTATION REVOLUTION" 28 Minutes James J. Hill turned a small, failing railway line into one of history's most powerful transportation conglomerates.
He then used his merger-and-acquisition talents to transform the banking industry.
"ANDREW CARNEGIE AND BUSINESS IDEOLOGY" 28 Minutes This episode profiles Andrew Carnegie, a true-life Horatio Alger and founder of one of the largest and most innovative steel companies in the world.
The program also discusses Carnegie's legacy as one of the 19th century's greatest philanthropists.
"JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER AND THE RISE OF OLIGOPOLY" 28 Minutes Standard Oil Company, founded by Rockefeller in 1870, became America's first great business trust, and promoted the U.S. Congress to pass the Sherman Antitrust Act.
This program examines Rockefeller as a businessman and philanthropist.
102
103
104
105
6
106
"J.P. MORGAN AND FINANCE CAPITALISM" 28 Minutes John Pierpoint Morgan amassed one of the greatest business fortunes the world had ever soon.
Using his connections with the London financial world, he provided essential expansion capital to American industrialists.
His financial power was revealed for all to see when he salvaged the U.S. banking system after the stock market panic of 1907.
"HERBERT HOOVER AND POLITICAL CAPITALISM" 28 Minutes Herbert Hoover eschewed activist government, vetoing interventionist legislation and reducing income taxes.
However, he relented somewhat at the end of his four-year term to establish the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to make emergency loans to business.
"HENRY FORD AND THE MASS CONSUMPTION SOCIETY" 28 Minutes Henry Ford personified the American Automobile Industry.
Founder of Ford Motor Company and producer of the famous Model T, Ford's business innovations included the assembly line, the V-8 engine, and the first United Auto Workers labor contract.
"ALFRED SLOAN AND CORPORATE President and Chairman of General Motors working for an auto industry supplier.
An General Motors organization that is still in BUREAUCRATS" 28 Minutes for over 25 years, Alfred Sloan got his start administrative genius, he defined the place today.
107
108
109
110
"IBM AND THE COMMUNICATIONS REVOLUTION" 28 Minutes Created in 1911 as a conglomerate of office machine companies, IBM has become a world leader in computers and information systems.
Once the largest producer of time clocks and the developer of the first electric typewriter, the company has always been a strong believer in research and development.
7
AMERICAN AUTHORS (1991) The United States has been home to some of the world's greatest poets, novelists, essayists and short story writers.
This 10-part series surveys the works of such famous American writers as Emily Dickinson, Edgar Allan Poe and Ernest Hemingway.
The programs feature biographical profiles as well as extensive readings from the authors' works.
Episode 101 Synopsis
"EDGAR ALLAN POE: THE LITERATURE OF MELANCHOLY" 29 Minutes Through dramatization and discussion, this program examines Poe's personality and his view of the intellectual as a superior but isolated being.
It also investigates Poe's invention of the detective story, his understanding of horror, violence and paranoia, and his use of poetry to exalt melancholy and romantic love.
"AMERICAN GOTHIC: HAWTHORNE AND MELVILLE" 26 Minutes Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman Melville, 19th century New England contemporaries, were both innovative symbolists whose focus on harsh realities and basic conflicts laid the foundations for later developments in the American novel.
Readings and discussions of their major works are presented against the backdrop of archival prints and paintings, original graphics, and photography.
"THE PRIVATE WORLD OF EMILY DICKINSON" 26 Minutes Although she rarely left her front garden, Emily Dickinson wrote poetry that was an open letter to the world.
Her exposure to transcendentalism, her personal relationships, and her self-willed isolation colored her passionate, precise work.
This program explores Dickinson's writings through excerpts from her verse, letters and notes.
"THE VISION OF STEPHEN CRANE" 26 Minutes Dramatized readings and biographical narrative reveal Crane as a literary pioneer who explored strikingly modern themes with honesty, economy, and irony.
His experiences as a journalist and Civil War correspondent produced a poignant pacifist novel, The Red Badge of Courage.
This program relates Crane's life to his works.
"WALT WHITMAN: AN AMERICAN ORIGINAL" 26 Minutes Extensive readings, critical insights, and biographical details develop a portrait of Walt Whitman and demonstrate his innovative influence on American 8
102
103
104
106
literature.
The program also explores his visions of democracy, social harmony, and sensual joy in nature.
107
"JACK LONDON: A LIFE OF ADVENTURE" 26 Minutes Jack London writing explored discipline, social justice, adaptability, and individual survival.
Readings from his works - combined with his own photographs - help viewers comprehend the life experiences that shaped his writing.
His influence on the action-adventure genre is also analyzed.
"STREETS, PRAIRIES, AND VALLEYS: THE LIFE OF CARL SANDBURG" 29 Minutes This program offers a profoundly human portrait of Carl Sandburg through excerpts from the poet's autobiography, readings of his poems, and photographs of locations he described.
Included are excerpts from his writings on world peace and the brotherhood of man, as well as discussion of his fascination with Abraham Lincoln, which led him to write a critically-acclaimed biography of the 16th President.
"ERNEST HEMINGWAY: THE MAN" 26 Minutes Ernest Hemingway, who used the themes of violence, bravery, and self-discipline throughout his works, is one of America's best-known and widely-read authors.
Leading Hemingway authority Carlos Baker documents the close relationship between Hemingway's life and his fiction.
108
110
9
HEROES OF DEMOCRACY (1995) Noted American authors and educators, including David McCullough, Maya Angelou and Alan Dershowitz, discuss the origin and expansion of democracy in the United States with students from around the country in an interactive format familiar to WORLDNET Dialogue viewers.
Four hour-long programs illuminate the far-sighted wisdom of these revolutionary heroes.
From the Founding Fathers in the 18th century to Martin Luther King, Jr., a late 20th century icon, they have come to represent the political and social heart, soul and conscience of the United States.
E PISODE
101
SYNOPSIS "BIRTH OF A NATION: THE PRINCIPLES OF FREEDOM" (57:31) These principles have framed the philosophical tenets of our society and shaped the civil rights debate on a worldwide scale.
Government leaders and eminent historians discuss the parallels between the principles of freedom during the birth of our nation and the principles of freedom today as history closes the book on the Cold War.
A video tour of Mount Vernon, home of the first President of the United States George Washington, is included.
"DEMOCRACY AND CITIZENSHIP: THE 250TH CELEBRATION OF THOMAS JEFFERSON'S BIRTHDAY" (57:43) Pulitzer Prize-winning author David McCullough, Ambassador Sol M. Linowitz (personal representative of President Carter to the Middle East) and renowned architectural historian and Yale Professor Vincent J. Scully answer questions from students about the responsibilities of citizenship, the creation of the Declaration of Independence and the current state of U.S. foreign policy.
Professor Scully also conducts a video tour of Monticello, the home Thomas Jefferson built for himself and his family.
"THE DEMOCRATIC PROCESS" (57:59) Jazz musician Wynton Marsalis, then U.S. Surgeon General Antonia Novello, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Neil Sheehan and U.S. Senator Robert Kerry of Nebraska, seated in the historic Russell Hearing Room of the the U.S. Senate, discuss citizenship and the role of minorities and the media in the democratic process with students from across the nation.
102
103
104
"JUSTICE AND THE CITIZEN: A CELEBRATION OF THE LIFE OF DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR." (56:35) Maya Angelou, critically acclaimed poet, educator, historian, civil rights activist, actress, playwright and stage director and Alan M. Dershowitz, Harvard Law School professor and pre-eminent civil libertarian and defense attorney, discuss with students the life and subsequent symbolism of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Dershowitz also conducts a brief tour of the Harvard Law School.
10
11
