Rules of Title 12 CSR 50-50.010 12 CSR 50-50.020 12 CSR50-50.030 12 CSR50-50.035 12 CSR 50-50.040 General Provisions for Class C Licenses .........................................
Page .3 .3 ...4 ...4 .5 Specific Licenses ..................................................................
Fees ......................................................................
........
Prohibited Acts ..................................................................
Duties of Specific Licensees .......................................................
Chapter SQ-Class C Licenses , 12 CSR 50-50 Title 12-DEPARTMENT REVENUE OF 12 CSR 50-50.020 Specific Licenses PURPOSE: This rule requiresstandards of applicants for specific licenses.
(1) Owners.
Owners must own a horse(s) eligible to race in Missouri.
and D.
The stable name of the corporation; E.
The names of the horses involved; F.
Any and all changes in either the corporate structure or the respective interest of the stockholders.
2.
Stockholderswho bearto eachother the relationship of husband and wife, parent and child, grandparent and grandchild or sister and brother shall be regarded collectively as one (1) stockholder, as the casemay be.
(C) In any case of multiple ownership, whether by partnership, syndication, corporation, or otherwise, not more than four (4) individual personsmay be licensed as owners of a single horse.
(D) In any case of multiple ownership, the members may designate, in writing, the membersof the partnership, syndicate, corporation or otherwise who will represent the entire ownership and be responsible for the horse as the licensed owner.
Each person designated as representing the entire ownership of a horse shall be licensed.
The agreement or lease designating the member to represent the entire ownership of the horse shall accompany the application for an owner's license.
(E) The commission may deny, suspend or revoke the license of any owner whose ownership of a horse is qualified or limited in part by rights or interests in the horse being held or controlled by another person who would be ineligible to be licensedas an owner.
(F) In any case of multiple ownership, horsesmay be raced under lease,provided the lease agreement is annexed to the horse's registration certificate and is approvedby the stewards.A leasemay not be approvedby the stewards for racing purposesunless1.
The lesseeis licensed as an owner; 2.
Each signature of the lessor and lessee to the leaseagreementis notarized; 3.
The term of the lease is not less than one (1)year unless soonerterminated by claim or retirement of the horse; 4.
The agreementcontains a statement on whether the horse involved can be enteredin a claiming race and if so, the minimum price for which the horse can be entered and the name of the payeeof the claiming price; and 5.
The agreement completely divests the lessors of further control or direction of the racing performance of the horse while under lease.
Division BO-Missouri Horse Racing Commission Chapter BO-Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50.010 General Provisions for Class C Licenses PURPOSE: This rule establishescriteria for issuance of Class C (occupational) licenses.
(1) Every individual participating in horse racing in any capacity is required to have an occupational license from the commission authorizing him/her to be employed on the licensedpremisesto practice his/her business, professionor skills, exceptfor public officersand public employees engagedin the performance of their official duties and other individuals exempted the commission.
by (2) As a condition of licensing, all applicants for occupational licenses are required to be fingerprinted and photographed.
(3) The applicant must demonstrate that his/her experience, reputation, competence and financial responsibility are consistent with the best interests of horseracing and the provisions of Missouri and United States Statutes.
(4) The commissionmay refuse an occupation license to any individual(A) Who has beenconvicted of a crime; (B) Whois unqualified to perform the duties required of the applicant; (C) Whofails to discloseorstatesfalsely any information called for in the application; (D) Whohas beenfound guilty of a violation of sections 313.500-313.710,RSMo or of the rules of the commission; (E) Whose license has been suspended, revoked or denied in any racing jurisdiction for just cause; (F) Who is a past or present member or participant in organized crime as such membership or participant may be found or determinedby the commission; (G) Who is an illegal alien; (H) Who is an employeeof the commission or any spouse,child, brother, sister or parent of any employeeor memberof commission; [I) Whois financially irresponsible; (J) who is not of good moral character; or (K) For any other just cause.
Auth: section 313.640, RSMo (1986).
Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, effective June 30, 1986,expired Oct. 13, 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12,1987.
Roy D. Blunt (H/88) SecretaryState 0` , `_ (2) Multiple Ownerships.
(A) Partnerships and Syndicates.
1.
Partnerships and syndicates shall be registeredwith the commission.Each partnership and syndicate shall file papers with the commission which contain, among other things, the following: A.
The name and address of every person having any interest in the horse(s) involved; B.
The relative proportions of those interests; C.
To whom the winnings are payable; D.
In whose name the horse or horses shall run; E. With whom the power of entry and declaration rests; F.
The terms of any contingency, lease or any other arrangement and G.
The names of the horse(s)involved.
2.
Except in the caseof a limited partnership, any partner or member transacting business on behalf of a partnership or syndicate shall own an interest in the partnership or syndicate at least equal to that of any other partner or member.The general partner shall transact businesson behalf of the partnership.
3.
When authorizing any person to act as agent for a partnership or syndicate: a majority ownership interest shall soauthonze.
4.
All partnership and syndication papers shall be signed by all of the parties or by their authorized agent.
5.
Any alteration in a recorded partnership or syndication shall bereportedin writing to the commission and signed by all the partners or membersor their authorized agent.
6.
Except in the caseof a limited partnership, all the parties in a partnership or syndicate and each of them shall be jointly and severally liable for all stakes, fees and other obligations.
(B) Corporations.
1.
Corporations shall be registered with the commission.
Each corporation shall file papers with the commission which contain, among other things, the following: A.
The name and addressof eachof the registered and beneficial owners of the stock of the corporation; (3) Trainers.
B.
The number of shares of stock held (A) The applicant for a trainer's license by each stockholder; must be eighteen (18)years old.
C.
The names and addresses of all (B) The applicant who has never been corporate officers and membersof the board licensed in Missouri or any other jurisdiction of directors; shall have at least two (2) years' experience CODE STATE OF REGULATIONS 3 12 CSR 50-50-REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse RacingCommission in an occupation that indicates a knowledge (8) Farriers.
12 CSR 50-50.030 Fees of horsemanship and racing practices.
(A) The applicant must have been licensed (C) The first time applicants shall pass a previously by the commission or another PURPOSE: This ruleestablishesfeesfor written examination administered by the racing jurisdiction.
Class C (occupational) licenses.
stewardscoveringsuch areasas rules of racing, (B) The applicant must passa practical test, horsemanship and use of equipment.
The administered by the stewards, relating to the (1) The following fee scheduleis adopted for Class C licenses: applicants shall also pass a practical test of shoeing of race horses.
(A) Assumed/stable name $50.00; horsemanshipadministeredby the stewards.
(B) Vendor $50.00; (D) The applicant may be licensed if cur- (9) Exercise Riders.
(C) Veterinarian $50.00; rently or previously licensedin another racing (A) The applicant must have been licensed (D) Farrier $50.00: jurisdiction.
previously as an exerciserider by the commis(E) Owner sion or by another racing jurisdiction.
(F) Trainer, trainer/driver (B) The applicant must passa test, adminis(G) Driver/jockey (4) Jockeys. tered by the stewards, demonstrating his/her (H) Jockey agent (A) The applicant for a jockey'slicensemust ability to gallop a race horse.
(I) Assistant trainer be at least sixteen (16)years old.
(J) Exercise rider (B) The applicant must have been licensed (10) Jockey Agents.
(K) Mutuel employee previously as a jockey.
(A) The applicant must have been licensed (L) Veterinarian assistant (C) The applicant must pass a physical previously as a jockey agent by the commis(M) Farrier assistant examination by a licensed physician within sion or by another racing jurisdiction.
(N) Official a year prior to the first Missouri race in which (B) The applicant must pass a test demon(0) Association employee the applicant intends to ride. strating the applicant's knowledge of the (P) Vendor/concession employee duties of a jockey's agent.
(Q) Stable employee and (5) Apprentice Jockeys.
(11) Authorized Agents.
The applicant shall (R) Others (A) The applicant must be at least sixteen submit a notarized application as prescribed (16)years old.
by the commissiondefining the powers,limits (2) The fee for replacing lost, stolen or (B) The applicant must have been licensed and terms of the agency agreement.
damagedlicensesis four dollars ($4). previously by the commission or another racing jurisdiction as an apprentice jockey or exerciserider or have comparableexperience.
(12) Mutuel Clerks.
The applicant shall indi- (3) Licensesshall be valid for one (1) calendar (C) If licensed previously as an exercise cate on his/her application that s/he is not year.
rider or with comparable experience, the indebted to any association.
Auth: section 313.640.2, RSMo (1986). applicant mustEmergency rule filed June 20, 1986, (13) Stewards.
The applicant shall have 1.
Demonstrate the ability to break a effectiue June 30, 1986,expired Oct. 13, horse from the starting gate in company with satisfactorily passedan optical examination 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, within one (1) year, prior to the race meet, other horsesunder the observation of a starter; effective Jan. 12, 1987.Amended: Filed evidencing corrected twenty/twenty (20/20) and Oct. 13, 1987,effective Jan. 14,1988.
2.
Ride in at least two (2) races under vision and ability to distinguish colors correctly.
observation of the stewards beforelicensure.
(D) The applicant must pass a physical examination by a licensed physician within (14) Assistant Trainer.
A trainer who has in 12 CSR 50-50.035 Prohibited Acts a year prior to the first Missouri race in which his/her care a substantial number of horses or who is actively participating in more than the applicant intends to ride.
PURPOSE: This rule prohibits certain one (1) race meeting at one (1) time, may types of conduct by Class C licensees. employ an assistant trainer with the approval of the stewards.
Prior to the issuance of an (1) The commission may suspendor revoke a (6) Drivers.
(A) The applicant must be at least sixteen assistant trainer's license, the applicant shall license or impose a fine on the following comply with all the requirements prescribed grounds: (16)years old: (B) The applicant must have been licensed for a person applying for a trainer's license.
(A) Offering, promising, giving, accepting previously as a harness driver by the commis- The assistant trainer shall be the absolute or soliciting a bribe in any form to or by any insurer of all horses that s/he may enter and person having any connection with the sion or another racing jurisdiction.
(C) If the applicant has never beenlicensed is subjectto all rules prescribedby the Missouri outcomeof a raceor failure to report knowledge as a harness driver, s/he must demonstrate Horse Racing Commission.
The name of the of a bribe immediately to the stewards; to the stewards the ability to drive a horse at assistant trainer shall beshown on the official (B) Entering a horse ineligible or unqualiprogram along with that of the employing fied for the race entered; training speeds.
(D) The applicant shall be licensed by the trainer.
(C) Participating in any improper, corrupt U.S.T.A. or fraudulent act or practice in relation to racing or failure to report this act to the Auth: section 313.640, RSMo (1986). stewardsimmediately; Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, (D) Causing or participating in any pre(7) Veterinarians.
The applicant must be effective June 30, 1986,expired Oct. 13, arrangement or in any attempt to cause the currently licensed or certified to practice 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, pre-arrangement of a race result or failure to veterinary medicine in Missouri.
effective Jan. 12, 1987.
%~I 4 CODE STATE OF REGULATIONS (11/88) Roy D. Blunt Secretarystate of Chapter 50-Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50 . report knowledge of same to the stewards immediately; (E) Committing or participating in the commission of a criminal act while on the grounds of any racing association under the jurisdiction of the commission; (F) Using profane, abusive or insulting language to racing officials; (6) Failing to cooperatewith association or commissionsecurity; (H) Fighting or disorderly conduct; (I) Being cruel to animals; (J) Using or possessingon the grounds of any association under the jurisdiction of the commissionof1.
Controlled substances as defined in chapter 195,RSMo(1986)unlessthe substance was obtained directly or pursuant to a valid prescription from a licensedphysician.
It shall be the responsibility of the licenseeto provide proof to the stewardsthat the useor possession is pursuant to a valid prescription, A.
On any day racing is conducted on the grounds of a licensed association, any licenseeshall be deemedto have consentedto a urine and/or breathalyzer test or other noninvasive drug and/or alcohol detection test which shall be conducted in a manner prescribed by the commission.
B.
Any Class C licenseewho refusesto take the drug detection or breathalyser test may not be permitted to continue his/her duties on that racing day and shall be subject to disciplinary proceedingsas provided in the commission'srules.
C.
A licensee whose sample is positive may be subjectto disciplinary action, may not be permitted to participate in any racing program until a negative test is shown or may be required to undergo a supervisory drug treatment program approved by the commission or all ofthese.
Alicensee whosetest shows a reading morethan .05percent alcohol in the blood may be subject to disciplinary actions and may not be permitted to continue his/her duties on that racing day.
D.
The presence of cannabinoid metabolites of the drug tetrahydrocannabinol shall be considereda positive test; 2.
Hypodermic syringes, hypodermic needlesor other devices which could be used for injection; 3.
Drug paraphernalia or devices for illegal use of controlled substancesas defined in chapter 195,RSMo (1986); 4.
Battery, buzzer, electrical device or other applicances, other than an ordinary whip which would be used to alter the speed or performanceof a horsein a raceor workout; and 5.
Firearms;, (K) Smoking m areas designated as nonsmoking areas; Roy D. Blunt secretarystate Of (11/88) (L) Employing unlicensed persons; (M) Driving or riding a horse while on the grounds of an association without a properly fastened protective riding/driving helmet of a type satisfactory to the commission.
For purposes of this rule satisfactory shall be deemedto require any helmet used,be manufactured in compliance with the 1984 Snell Harness Racing Standard or in compliance with any other safety standard as approved by the commission; (N) Betting on any race by any official; and (0) Engaging in any conduct deemed the by commission to be detrimental to the best interest of horse racing.
Auth: section 313.640, RSMo (1986).
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986,effectiue Jan. 12.
1987.
12 CSR 50-50.040 Duties of Specific Licensees PURPOSE: This rule establishes duties and responsibilities ofspecific categories of Class C loccupationalj licensees.
(1) Owners.
(A) The stewards in their discretion may allow an owner to race a horse one (1) time while awaiting the receipt of the owner's license.
An owner who so races, but doesnot completehis/her application for a license and pay the appropriate fee within a reasonable period of time, shall be precludedfrom racing until his/her application is filed and the license fee paid.
(B) Owners shall be responsible for providing individual racing colors and shall register the racing colors with the commission.
(C) Owners shall record each transfer of horse ownership with the Jockey Club.
obtained the permission of the stewards to send another licensed trainer as a substitute.
(D) No trainer may take or keepon his/her charge a horse owned or controlled wholly or in part by a person unlicensed as an owner.
No trainer shall assumeresponsibility for a horse not under his/her active care and supervision, exceptas provided in the commission's rules.
(E) Trainers shall be responsible for horses entered and/or raced as to eligibility, weight and conditions.
(F) Each trainer shall provide a list of all persons in his/her employ to the commission within twenty-four (24) hours of employment or termination and shall ensure such persons are licensed by the commission.
(G) Each thoroughbred or quarter horse trainer shall furnish the name of the jockey engagedto ride each horse enteredif possible at the time of entry, but in no event later than scratch time.
If no jockey has been named to ride a horse entered to race by scratch time, the stewards shall select the best rider available to ride the horse.
(H) If a trainer engages two (2) or more jockeys for the samerace, s/he shall pay the losing fee for each engagedjockey not riding the race, as well as the proper feeto the jockey who does ride.
No trainers may employ a jockey for the purpose of preventing him/her from riding in any race.
(3) Jockeys.
(A) A jockey shall not be the owner of any race horse.
(B) A jockey shall not bet on any race or causea wager to be placed on his/her behalf on any race except on his/her own mount and then shall bet only through the owner or trainer of that horse.
(C) A jockey shall ride under his/her legal name.
(D) A jockey shall exert every effort to ride (2) Trainers.
his/her horse to the finish in the best and (A) The trainer is responsible for and is the fastest run of which the horse is capable and absolute insurer of the condition of the horses shall not easeup or coast to a finish without in his/her care and custody and for the adequatecause.. condition and contents of stalls, tack rooms, (E) Everv iockev shall fulfill his/her riding feed rooms, sleeping rooms and other areas engagements,but shall not be forced to rid; which have been assigned by the association a horse s/he believes to be unsound, nor over to him/her.
The trainer is liable for the a racing surface s/he believes to be unsafe. presencein the horse during the race of any (F) No jockey shall ride in any race against drug, medication or any foreign or prohibited a starting horse belonging to the jockey's substance.
contract employer unless the jockey's mount (B) Each trainer shall report any unusual and the contract employers' horse are both sickness of any horse in his/her care to the trained by the sametrainer. commission veterinarian.
Each trainer shall (G) No jockey shall compete in any race report any alteration of the sex of a horse in against any horse which is owned, trained or his/her care to the racing secretary.
ridden by the jockey's spouse.
(C) Each trainer shall attend his/her horse (H) A jockey who is engagedto ride a race in the paddock and shall be present to shall report to the scale room on the day of supervise its harnessing, unless s/he has the race at the time designatedby association CODE STATE OF REGULATIONS 5 12 CSR 50-50-REVENUE Division 50-Missouri HorseRacingCommission officials.
S/he shall then report his/her engagementsand any overweight to the clerk of scales
.Thereafter, s/he shall not leave the jockey room, except by permission of the stewards, until all of his/her riding engagements of the day have been fulfilled.
Once a rider has fulfilled his/her riding engagements for the day and has left the jockeys' quarters, s/he shall not be readmitted to the jockeys' quarters until after the entire racing program for that day has been completed,except upon permission of the stewards.
A jockey is not allowed to communicate with anyone but the trainer or his/her agent while s/he is in the room during the performance except with approval of stewards.
On these occasions, s/he should be accompanied by a security guard.
(I) Interference.
1.
Whenthe way is clear in a race,a horse may be ridden to any part of the course,but may not weave nor cross in front of other contendersso as to interfere with their course or threaten their safety.
No jockey shall jostle another horse or jockey.No jockey shall strike another horse or jockey or ride so carelessly as to causeinjury or possibleinjury to another horsein the race.If a horse or jockey interferes with or jostles another horse, the aggressor may be disqualified, unless the interfered or jostled horse or jockey was partly at fault or the infraction was wholly causedby the fault of someother horse or jockey; 2.
In a straightaway race, every horse must maintain position as nearly as possible in the lane in which s/he starts.
If a horse is ridden, drifts or swervesout of his/her lane in such a manner that s/he interfers with or impedesanother horse,it is a foul.
(J) Jockey WeighedOut.
1.
Each jockey must be weighed for his/her assigned horse not more than thirty (30)minutes beforethe time fixed for the race
.
2.
A jockey's weight shall include his/her clothing, saddle,girth, pad and saddlecloth.
A jockey's weight shall not include the number cloth, whip, head number, bridle, bit or reins, blinkers, helmet, tongue strap, tongue tie, muzzle, hood, noseband, shadow roll, martingale, breast plate, bandages,boots and racing plates or shoes.
No jockey may weigh more than two pounds (2 lbs.) over the weight his/her horse is assignedto carry unless with consent of the owner or trainer and unless the jockey has declaredthe amount of overweight to the clerk of the scales at least forty-five (45) minutes before the time of the race.
However, under no circumstances shall a horse carry more than five pounds (5 lbs.) overweight.
The overweight shall be publicly announced and postedin a conspicuousplace both prior to the 6 first race of the day and before the running of the race.
(L) WeighIn.
1.
Upon completion of a race eachjockey shall ride promptly to the winner's circle and dismount.
S/he shall then presenthim/herself to the clerk of scales to be weighed in.
If a jockey is preventedfrom riding his/her mount to the winner's circle becauseof accident or illness either to him/herself or his/her horse, s/he may walk or becarried to the scalesunless excusedby the stewards.
2.
Each jockey, upon completion of a race, must return to the winner's circle and must unsaddle his/her horse,unless excusedby the stewards.
3.
No person except the valet-attendant for eachmount is permitted to assistthe jockey in removing the horse's equipment that is included in the jockey's weight, unless the stewards permit otherwise.
To weigh in, each jockey shall carry to the scales all pieces of equipment with which s/he weighed out.
Thereafter s/he may hand the equipment to the valet-attendant.
4.
When any horse placesfirst, secondor third in a race, or is coupled in any form of multiple exotic wagering, and then the horse's jockey is weighed in short by more than two pounds (2 lbs.) of the weight of which s/he was weighed out, his/her mount may be disqualified and all purse moniesforfeited.
No jockeymay be weighedin morethan two pounds (2 lbs.) over his/her declared weight but consideration shall be given for excessweight causedby rain or mud.
If s/he is overweight, his/her mount may be disqualified and all purse moniesforfeited.
(M) Contracts.
1.
A jockey may contract with an owner or trainer to furnish jockey serviceswhenever the owner shall require and in that event a jockey shall not ride or agree to ride in any race for any other personwithout the consent of the owner or trainer to whom the jockey is under contract.
2.
No personother than an owner,trainer, jockey agent or authorized agent of an owner in good standing shall makeengagementsfor an apprentice jockey or jockey.
However, a jockey not represented an agent may make by his/her own engagements.
(N) Whenever two (2) or more licensees claim the servicesof one (1)jockey for a race, first call shall have priority and any dispute shall be resolvedby the stewards.
(0) No jockey shall have a valet-attendant except one provided and paid for by the association.
(P) JockeyAgent.
1.
No jockey shall have morethan one (1) agent.
CODE STATE OF REGULATIONS 2.
All engagements to ride other than those for the jockey's contract employer shall be madeby the agent.
3.
No revocation of a jockey agent's authority is effective until the jockey notifies the stewards in writing of the revocation of the agent's authority.
(Q) Every jockey shall attend the video replays as directed by the stewards.
(R) The fees to be paid jockeys for mounts shall be- Purse I;@: and under $700-$900 $600 $lOOO-$1400 $1500-$1900 $2000-$3400 $3500-$4900 $5000-$9900 $10,000-$14,900 $15,000-$24,900 $25,000-$49,000 $50,000-$99,000 $100,000 up and Win2nd 30 20 27 19 36 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 25 22 30 35 45 55 65 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 3rd Unplaced 17 22 17 25 30 35 45 50 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 16 4: 22 ii 35 40 ii 60 75 100 (S) The fees shall be paid except when the jockey rides a horse owned in part or solely by his/her contract holder.
1.
A jockey's fee shall be considered earned when the jockey is weighed out by the clerk of scales and shall not be considered earned if the jockey takes him/herself off of his/her mount.
2.
Jockeysfinishing a race or a deadheat shall divide equally the totals they individually would have received had one (1) jockey alone won the race.
(4) Apprentice Jockeys.
(A) Unless excepted under these rules, apprenticesaresubjectto all commissionrules governing the conduct of jockeysand racing.
(B)
An apprentice jockey shall ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance beginning with his/her first mount and for one (1) full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount.
If after riding (1) one full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount, the apprentice jockey has failed to ride a total of forty (40)winners from the date of his/her first winning mount, s/he shall continue to ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance for one(1)moreyear from the date of his/her fifth winning mount or until s/he has ridden a total of forty (40) winners, whichever comesfirst.
If an apprentice jockey is unable to ride for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive days or more after the date of his/her fifth winning mount becauseof service in the armed forces (H/88) RoyD.
Blunt secretarystate Of Chapter 5O-Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50 of the U.S.A. or becauseof physical disable- substance to any person within the grounds ment, the commission may extend the time of a licensed association.
(D) Whenever a veterinarian has used a during which the apprentice weight allowance may be claimed for a period not to exceedthe hypodermic needle or syringe, s/he shall period the apprentice jockey was unable to destroy the needleand syringe.
(E) Whenever a veterinarian prescribes or ride.
(C) No apprentice jockey may ride for a administers any medication or drug to a horse licensed owner or agent unless with the on the grounds of a licensed association, consent of the apprentice'scontract employer.
s/he shall file a report of the serviceswith the Owners or trainers and apprentices who are stewards.
These reports shall be filed within parties to contracts for apprentice jockey twenty-four (24)hours of the services.
(F) Every licensed veterinarian practicing servicesshall file a copy of the contract with the commission and, upon any transfer, on association premises shall maintain assignment or amendment of the contract, records showing all medications purchased, immediately shall furnish a copy to the and for each horse treated: the name of the commission.
The contracts are subject to the horseand its owner,the medication,its method of administration and its date of administrareview and approval of the commission.
(D) No apprentice jockey shall acquire tion.
Veterinarians shall retain duplicate copies of bills or statements to trainers or his/her own contract.
owners which shall be retained for at least three (3) years and made available to the (5) Drivers. commission upon request.
(A) Every driver shall participate when (G) Each veterinarian shall report immeprogrammedor assignedby the judges,unless diately to the stewards and the commission excusedby the judges.
veterinarian any illness in a horse entrusted (B) Each driver shall drive each race so as into his/her care presenting unusual or to win and shall not easeany horse without unknown symptoms.
adequatecause.
(C) No driver shall wager on any horse in (7) Jockey Agents.
a race except the horse s/he owns, trains or (A) No jockey agent may serve as agent for drives.
morethan two (2)jockeys.No agent shall make (D) Drivers shall appear dressedin colors or assist in making any riding engagement in all races and any pre-race warmup, post for a jockey with whom the agent has no parade or time trial.
contract.
(E) A driver under contract of employment (B) Every jockey agent shall have in may not drive for any person other than his/her possession at all times engagement his/her contract holder in any race in which books,subjectto examination by the stewards a horse owned or trained by his/her employer, at any time.
All engagements madefor jockeys in the samestable or under the samemanage- shall be recordedin the engagementbook. ment as his/her employer is entered.
(C) No jockey agent shall give more than (F) In the absence of a contract or other two (2) calls per race for any jockey and shall arrangement, driver's fee shall be twenty designate one (1) engagementas first call.
dollars ($20)or five percent (5%)of the purse (D) No agent shall withdraw from the earned, whichever is greater.
A driver's fee representation of any jockey until notice has shall be consideredearnedwhen the horse the been provided to the stewards.
driver has been engaged to drive leaves the (8) Authorized Agents. paddockfor the post.
(A) Authorization of agents shall expire at the end of the license year unless earlier (6) Veterinarians. revoked by the owner or commission, or (A) Licensed veterinarians practicing at renewed.An owner may appoint only one (1) any meeting are prohibited from any owner- personat a time to act as his/her agent.
ship interest in any horse racing during the (B) Whenan authorized agent entersa claim meeting.
for the account of the person for whom s/he (El) Licensed veterinarians are prohibited is licensed as agent, the name of that person from placing any wager of money or other and the agent shall appearon the claim slip. things of value directly or indirectly on the outcomeof any race conductedat the meeting Auth: section 313.640, RSMo (1986). at which s/he is furnishing professional Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986,effective service.
Jan. 12, 1987.
Amended: Filed Oct. 13, (C) No veterinarian! within the association 1987,effective Jan. 14, 1988.Amended: grounds, shall furnish, sell or loan any Filed Dec. 28, 1987, effective June 11, hypodermic syringe, needleor other injection 1988.
device, or any drug, narcotic or prohibited Roy D.Blunt secretarystate Of (H/88) CODEOF STATEREGULATIONS 7
