If you do not recycling at your facility, direct your customers to bring their waste materials to a public collection depot.
Remind them to: place oil in a leakproof, reusable container with a tight-fitting cap, never mix oil with water, gasoline, antifreeze, solvents or any other substance, and to drain and collect oil from used oil filters (a thoroughly drained filter can be placed in the trash or recycled).
For a complete list of the 170 public used oil and antifreeze collection sites around the state, visit www.menv.com or call 1-800-4RECYCLE (1-800-4732925).
This statewide network of collection facilities is administered by the Maryland Environmental Service.
RECYCLE andSED OIL U antifreeze provide oil AND ANTIFREEZE Mar yland Clean Marinas Underway is a quarterly newsletter published by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
A hydraulic lift carries boats about 100 feet from the water to a concrete pad which is curbed on three sides.
The fourth side is bound with filter fabric.
Pressure wash water flows out through the filter fabric and then into a gravel lot.
The fabric catches most of the large particles dislodged by pressure washing .
For additional information, contact: Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Toll Free: 877-620-8DNR, x8770 or: 410-260-8770 Fax: 410-260-8779 Web Site: www.dnr.state.md.us/boating The facilities and the services of the Department of Natural Resources are available to all without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, physical or mental ability.
Graphics from ClickArt Deluxe Image Pack 97.
Printed on recycled paper.
A publication of the Maryland Coastal Zone Management Program pursuant to NOAA Award NA87OZ0236.
Parris N. Glendening , Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Lt. Governor Sarah Taylor-Rogers, Secretary Elizabeth Fuller Valentine, Editor Donna Morrow, Layout UNDERW N OVEMBER Maryland Clean Marinas AY 1999 What is the Clean Marina Initiative? Real Marina Solutions: FISH C OMPOSTING
A series of three videos depicting best management practices for spring time commissioning, summer operations, and winter lay-up are now available.
The videos are intended to be used by marina managers to introduce their staff to pollution prevention practices.
An optional instructors guide is also available to help managers lead a formal training session.
For free copies, call the Clean Marina office at 410-260-8770.
Clean Marina Videos Available 4 Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative promotes and celGlenda Felmey, manager of Londontowne Marina in Edgewater, ebrates the voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution is using some assistance from mother nature to help solve a stinky from marinas and recreational boats.
It was developed in response problem: the disposal of fish scraps.
She composts the scraps to to federal legislation passed in 1990 that requires states to address produce high quality fertilizer for her own landscaping needs.
Cusnonpoint source pollution at marinas.
Rather than adopting a tomers and neighbors are also welcome to take the finished comheavy-handed regulatory approach to dictate what marinas must post free of charge.
Glendas system is very simple: do, the State of Maryland chose to reward en Customers leave their fish cleaning vironmentally-responsible behavior.
By taking scraps in a standard metal trash this approach, the State is able to achieve clean barrel (with a lid!) next to the fish water goals while marina operators enjoy the cleaning station.
Photo p. 2 freedom to select the pollution prevention mea The barrel is periodically emptied sures that make the most sense for their faciliinto a ditch that Glenda or a member ties.
Twenty-five percent of Marylands mariof her staff has dug and is layered with nas must be certified as Clean Marinas by 2004 dirt and/or peat.
To make the area in order to satisfy the requirements of the fedlook more attractive, Glenda has built eral legislation.
a 4 foot by 4 foot wooden frame The elements of the Clean Marina Iniaround the ditch. tiative were developed by the Department of Glenda turns the compost often to Natural Resources in association with an advispeed the decay of the fish scraps sory committee composed of marina operators and to keep odor down.
Glenda Felmey turns the compost and representatives of the Marine Trades Assopile at Londontowne Marina.
After about 60 days, the compost is ciation of Maryland, Boat/U.S.
Clean Water Trust, ready to use.
the Maryland Department of the Environment, Glenda typically has several compost pits going at a time Maryland Environmental Service, the U.S. Coast Guard, and Maryduring the busy summer season.
For marinas that do not have land Sea Grant.
the space for multiple compost pits, she suggests composting in Steps to Being a Clean Marina large plastic trash cans with tight fitting lids.
Begin by drilling holes The first step to becoming recognized as an environmenall over the barrel.
Then, fill the barrel with alternating layers of tally-responsible marina is to sign a pledge to keep Marylands fish and dirt.
Roll the barrel to mix the maturing compost.
waterways free of harmful chemicals, excess nutrients, and debris.
In recognition of your expressed commitment to environmental stewardship, the Clean Marina staff will prepare a press release and incorporate the name of your marina, boatyard or yacht club into publications and displays.
The next step is to conduct a self-assessment of your property using the Clean Marina Award Checklist and the Mar yland Clean Marina Guidebook.
The Checklist summarizes the contents of the Guidebook which is a comprehensive review of pollution prevention measures.
The Checklist asks questions such as, Do you contain dust from sanding? and Do you have oil spill See Steps, page 2 See Solutions, page 2 INSIDE THIS ISSUE WHAT IS THE CLEAN MARINA INITIATIVE? REAL MARINA SOLUTIONS: FISH COMPOSTING GRANT AWARDS THREE NEW CERTIFIED CLEAN MARINAS RECYCLE USED OIL AND ANTIFREEZE TRAINING VIDEOS AVAILABLE ... 1 Steps from page 1 response equipment in a convenient, readily accessible location? Answer each question with yes, no, or not applicable.
As you go through the Checklist, the goal is to meet the minimum score for each of the eight sections.
The required scores are listed on the last page of the form.
Call upon Clean Marina staff or the Marine Trades Association of Maryland (410-2690741) for assistance if any questions arise as you complete the self-assessment.
All program materials are available by calling 410-260-8770 or can be downloaded from www.dnr.state.md.us/boating Once you feel you meet the minimum score for each section, call the Clean Marina office to schedule a confirmation visit.
During the confirmation visit, a member of the Clean Marina staff and a member of the advisory committee will verify the items on the Award Checklist.
With a successful confirmation visit your facility would become a certified Clean Marina.
Frequently Asked Questions about the Clean Marina Initiative Q: Do I need to invest in expensive equipment like a recycling power wash system to become a certified Clean Marina? A: No, it is not necessary to spend a lot of money on fancy equipment to become a certified Clean Marina.
There are really only two requirements: that you be in compliance with any applicable laws and regulations and that you meet the minimum score for each section of the Award Checklist.
Other than these two requirements, the program is very flexible.
For example, we ask that you remove visible solids from pressure wash water (this is a condition of the General Permit for Discharges from Marinas).
How you remove the solids is up to you.
You could direct the wastewater through hay bales or filter fabric, allow the solids to settle out in some sort of a holding tank, filter and reuse the water in a recycling power wash system, et cetera.
The decision is up to you.
We are satisfied as long as you are taking steps to prevent pollution.
GRANT FROM THE CHESAPEAKE BAY TRUST C ONGRATULATIONS TO CROCKETT BROTHERS BOATYARD ,M AGOTHY MARINA, AND LOCUST POINT MARINA ! The Chesapeake Bay Trust awarded the Clean Marina Initiative a grant to produce and distribute educational materials for boaters.
Call Donna Morrow at 410-260-8773 to order a complimentary supply of clean boating tip cards and oil absorbent pads for your customers.
Thanks to a grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Maryland Clean Marina Initiative has selected nine marinas to receive cost-share assistance.
The funds will be used to cover 75 percent of the costs associated with purchasing and installing equipment such as recycling pressure wash systems, fish cleaning stations connected to sanitary sewers, and vacuum sanders.
The marinas are all in priority watersheds identified by an interagency committee as being in need of restoration: Isle of Wight Bay, South River, and Upper Elk River.
The lucky marinas are Pines Point Marina, Ocean City Travel Lift, South River Marina, Turkey Point Marina, Liberty Marina, Triton Marina, Elk Point Marina, The Cove, and Locust Point.
Pending Congress approval of the year 2000 federal budget, we hope to be able to offer cost-share assistance to facilities in the Baltimore Harbor, Severn River, West Chesapeake Bay, and Lower Choptank watersheds.
Information about the grant program will be distributed as soon as more details are known.
Solutions, from page 1 Customers leave their fish cleaning scraps in a standard metal trash barrel (with a lid!) next to the fish cleaning station at Londontowne marina.
Grant Funds Awarded to Nine Marinas Crockett Brothers Boatyard in Oxford, Magothy Marina in Severna Park, and Locust Point Marina in Elkton are the newest certified Clean Marinas.
They have all met the Clean Marina criteria by incorporating pollution prevention measures into their daily operations.
For example, Philip Conner, owner of Crockett Brothers, is working with the Chesapeake Bay Foundation to raise oysters on a float suspended from a pier.
After tending to the oysters for about a year, the young oysters are transplanted to a non-harvested bed where they help to filter the Chesapeake Bay
When the pumpout system at Magothy Marina broke this past summer, manager and president Victoria Shiroky gave her customers coupons for a free pumpout at a later date and directed them to the next closest pumpout.
The coupons helped to alleviate some of the frustration felt by boaters with full holding tanks.
Also, the coupons encouraged boaters to continue to properly dispose of their sewage
.
Bill and Reji Descheemaeker, owners of Locust Point Marina, have constructed a wash down pad to filter wash water runoff.
A hydraulic lift carries boats about 100 feet from the water to a concrete pad which is curbed on three sides.
The fourth side is bound with filter fabric.
Pressure wash water flows out through the filter fabric and then into a gravel lot.
The fabric catches most of the large particles dislodged by pressure washing .
In recognition of their commitment to environmental stewardship, Clean Marina staff present operators of approved Clean Marinas with certificates signed by Governor Glendening .
The certificates read, in part, This marina meets the rigorous pollution prevention standards established by the Maryland Clean Marina Committee and the Department of Natural Resources.
The operators have voluntarily adopted measures to control pollution associated with marina operations and stand as a notable example of the conservation ethic: individual responsibility for healthy land and water.
ANCHOR BAY EAST MARINA, DUNDALK BALTIMORE YACHT CLUB, BALTIMORE CROCKETT BROS.
BOATYARD, INC., OXFORD FT. WASHINGTON MARINA, FT. WASHINGTON Fr om top: V ictoria Shiroky of Magothy Marina, and Tim Newell of Fort Washington Marina, accept their Clean Marina award certificates.
(Photos not yet available from Crockett Brothers Boatyard and Locust Point Marina.)
Certified Clean Marinas HAVEN HARBOUR MARINA, ROCK HALL HERRINGTON HARBOUR SOUTH, FRIENDSHIP LOCUST POINT MARINA, ELKTON MAGOTHY MARINA, SEVERNA PARK PORT ANNAPOLIS MARINA, ANNAPOLIS SPRING COVE MARINA, SOLOMONS Q: A: What if we fail to certify 25 percent of Maryland marinas as Clean Marinas by 2004? It is not possible to predict definitively what EPA and NOAA will require if the Clean Marina Initiative fails to reach the goal of 25 percent of Maryland marinas as Clean Marinas by 2004.
It is likely, however, that the federal agencies will put pressure on the State to implement more formal pollution control measures.
The areas most likely to be considered for new regulations if the 25 percent goal is not achieved are petroleum, liquid waste (e.g., antifreeze and solvents), fish scrap disposal, and boat cleaning practices.
Odor is not the problem that many people expect it to be.
In fact, there was no odor at all on the warm, sunny day that I visited Londontowne.
Furthermore, Glenda has never had any trouble with animals, such as dogs or racoons, digging in the compost pits.
For further information about how to get started, call Glenda Felmey at 410-956-5077.
We hope to make Real Marina Solutions a regular feature of Underway.
Please submit story ideas to Beth Fuller Valentine.
Anchor Yacht Basin, Edgewater Anchorage Marina, Baltimore Annapolis City Dock, Annapolis Beacon Light Marina, Baltimore Breezy Point Marina, Inc, Chesapeake Beach Casa Rio Marina, Mayo Chesapeake Yacht Club, Shady Side Coastal Properties Management Inc., Annapolis Deep Creek Lake Recreation Area, Swanton Dennis Point Marina, Inc., Drayden Drury s Marina, Ridge Elk Point Marina, Elkton Ferry Point Marina 
