MANUAL: Personnel Chapter Series CC--Commissioned Corps Personnel Manual DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE Public Health Service Chapter CC29--Officers' Relations, Services, and Benefits Subchapter CC29.9--Miscellaneous Personnel INSTRUCTION 1--Public Health Service Flags and Automobile Plates CONTENTS Section A B C D E F G H I J K Exhibit Exhibit Exhibit A B C Subject Purpose and Scope............................
Authorized Design of PHS Flags...............
Types for Various Uses.......................
United States Flag...........................
Indoor Flags.................................
Outdoor Flags................................
Automobile Flags.............................
Boat Flags...................................
Automobile Plates............................
Disposition of Flags.........................
Presentation of Flags Upon Retirement........
Public Health Service Flag...................
Surgeon General's Flag.......................
Deputy Surgeon General's and Assistant Surgeon General's Flag.......................
Section A. Purpose and Scope Page 1 2 2 3 3 4 7 7 8 9 9 10 11 12 1.
This INSTRUCTION establishes specifications and prescribes uses and flag protocol for the PHS Flag, Surgeon General's Flag, Deputy Surgeon General's Flag, and Assistant Surgeon General's Flag.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 PAGE 2 PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG 2.
3.
All PHS flags shall conform to specifications contained in this INSTRUCTION.
PHS flags serve to enhance the prestige of PHS, provide a symbol of identity, and symbolize the leadership roles of the Surgeon General, Deputy Surgeon General, and Assistant Surgeon General.
Section B. 1.
Authorized Design of PHS Flags PHS Flag (Exhibit A).
The PHS Flag shall have a yellow background (a gold hue), with a blue PHS Seal centered on the flag.
Diameter of the Seal shall be one-half of the hoist (height) of the flag.
For purposes of flag usage, the PHS Seal is a winged caduceus crossed with a fouled anchor, both surrounded by "U.S. PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE 1798," forming a circle which almost touches the wings of the caduceus.
The numerals "1798" shall appear at the lower point of the circle.
The caduceus is at a 315 degree angle (clockwise) and the anchor at a 45 degree angle to the vertical.
Surgeon General's Flag (Exhibit B).
The Surgeon General's Flag shall have a blue background with a white PHS Corps Device centered on the flag.
Diameter of the Corps Device shall be one-half the hoist of the flag.
The PHS Corps Device is a winged caduceus crossed with a fouled anchor.
For the purpose of the flag usage, the caduceus is at a 315 degree angle (clockwise) and the anchor at a 45 degree angle to the vertical.
Deputy Surgeon General's Flag (Exhibit C).
The flag for the Deputy Surgeon General shall have a white background with a blue PHS Corps Device centered on the flag.
Diameter of the Corps Device shall be one-half the hoist of the flag.
The design of the Corps Device shall be the same as for the Surgeon General's Flag.
Assistant Surgeon General's Flag (Exhibit C).
The basic design and colors of an Assistant Surgeon General's Flag shall be the same as for the Deputy Surgeon General's Flag. 2.
3.
4.
Section C. Types for Various Uses The basic flags authorized in Section B shall be made available in various types, dependent upon use, as identified and described in Sections E through I. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 PAGE 3 Section D. 1.
United States Flag Flag Code.
Display of the United States Flag shall be in accordance with the Flag Code of the United States (Public Law 623, 77th Congress).
It is necessary to include in this issuance, for purposes of clarity, certain provisions of the Flag Code of the United States in instances where PHS Flags are used in conjunction with the United States Flag.
The sizes prescribed for the various types of PHS flags in sections are identical with those of the United States Flag similar purposes, except in the case of Boat Flags and as paragraph F3c.
The prescribed sizes for United States Flags Boat Flags are contained in Section H. Section E. Indoor Flags the following when used for prescribed in when used as 2.
1.
Definition and Use.
Indoor flags are those which are generally used inside buildings (in offices, conference rooms, or auditoriums) but which may also be used out of doors for ceremonial purposes, such as parades.
The two types of PHS Indoor Flags are Colors and Distinguishing Flags. a.
Color.
A specific flag which is indicative of the spirit and tradition of either the United States or the office, position, or organization represented is known as a "Color."
The United States Flag, PHS Flag, Surgeon General's Flag, and Deputy Surgeon General's Flag are, when used as Indoor Flags, Colors.
Distinguishing Flag.
A flag which identifies an Assistant Surgeon General is called a "Distinguishing Flag."
A Distinguishing Flag differs from a Color in that a Distinguishing Flag identifies only the rank of a person while a Color not only identifies but also represents the spirit and tradition of the organization.
b. 2.
Authorization to Display Indoor Flags. a.
Flag Rank Officers.
All flag rank officers are authorized to display appropriate Indoor Flags (United States Flag, PHS Flag, and/or the Color or Distinguishing Flag reflecting office or rank) in the officer's office at any time.
A Distinguishing Flag may also be displayed in conjunction with the United States Flag and the PHS Flag on occasions of ceremony, in auditoriums or conference rooms, or on similar occasions, provided that, on any of these occasions, (1) the officer is present, and (2) he/she is the senior flag rank officer present.
Officers in Charge of PHS Stations or Activities.
An officer occupying a position of Division Director or above, and officers in charge of field stations or activities, may display appropriate Indoor Flags (the United States Flag and the PHS Flag) in their offices, in conference rooms, auditoriums, buildings, and lobbies.
T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 b. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE PAGE 4 PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG c. Placement.
The United States Flag is always to the observer's left and the PHS Flag and flag of flag rank officer follow, in that order, to the observer's right of the United States Flag. 3.
Specifications.
a.
Material.
All Indoor Flags shall be made of rayon banner cloth, with embroidered designs.
Size.
All Indoor Flags shall be 4 1/3 feet hoist by 5 1/2 feet fly (length).
Fringe, Cord, and Tassels.
All Indoor Flags shall include a 2inch fringe on three edges (excluding the edge which is attached to the flagstaff) of the same (or similar) material as the flag.
The flagstaffs for all Colors shall have attached below the head of the staff a rayon cord, 8 feet, 6 inches in length, with a tassel of rayon strands at each end.
The fringe, and cord and tassels when applicable, shall be: (1) (2) (3) Blue for the PHS Flag.
White for the Surgeon General's Flag.
Blue and white (interwoven blue and white cord) for the Deputy Surgeon General's Flag.
Blue for the Assistant Surgeon General's Flag. b. c. (4) 4.
Flagstaffs for Indoor Flags. a. United States Flag.
Flagstaffs for the United States Flag shall be hardwood, oak finish, with solid brass screw joint, headed by a solid brass spread-winged eagle with approximately 7 inches wing spread; the overall length, inclusive of the eagle, shall be approximately 9 feet.
PHS Flags.
Flagstaffs for display of any of the PHS Flags shall be hardwood, oak finish, with solid brass screw joint, headed by a solid brass spearhead (U.S. Army type), 4 inches wide and 8 1/2 inches long.
The overall length of the flagstaff, inclusive of the spear staffhead, shall be approximately 8 feet, 9 inches.
b. Section F. 1.
Outdoor Flags Definition and General Use.
Flags which are displayed out of doors, as from a flagpole, will be known as Outdoor Flags.
The three types of Outdoor Flags are Dress, Fair Weather, and Storm.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 PAGE 5 a.
Dress Flag. (1) Use.
A Dress Flag recognized holidays Exception may be made size to hold the Dress (2) Size. may be flown on all national or locally and other dress (ceremonial) occasions.
when the flagpole is not of a sufficient Flag.
All Dress Flags shall be 10 feet hoist by 19 feet fly. b. Fair Weather Flag. (1) Use.
A Fair Weather Flag may be flown outdoors on all days except those specified in paragraph a above, or c below.
(2) Size.
All feet fly.
Fair Weather Flags shall be 5 feet hoist by 9.5 c. Storm Flag. (1) Use .
A Storm Flag may be flown outdoors Weather Flag during inclement weather.
(2) Size. fly. in lieu of Fair All Storm Flags shall be 3.52 feet hoist by 6.69 feet 2.
Material. bunting.
The material used for Outdoor Flags shall be nylon-wool 3.
Authorization to Display PHS Outdoor Flags. a.
Authorization is hereby given to display one of the following PHS Flags at PHS activities.
(1) If the post is commanded by a PHS flag rank officer, the flag pertaining to that rank shall be displayed.
(2) Whe the be the n the Commanding Officer of the flag rank is absent from post, the flag of the next flag rank officer present shall displayed.
If there is no officer of flag rank present, PHS Flag shall be displayed.
of lower than flag (3) If the post is commanded by an officer rank, the PHS Flag shall be displayed.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 PAGE 6 PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG (4) When a post flying the PHS Flag is officially visited by a flag rank PHS official, the post shall display the flag of that official during the visit (in lieu of the PHS Flag).
If a post commanded by a flag rank officer is officially visited by the Surgeon General or Deputy Surgeon General, the post will display the Surgeon General's Flag or Deputy Surgeon General's Flag, as appropriate, during the visit (in lieu of the Assistant Surgeon General's Flag). b.
If any PHS Flag is flown from one staff and the United States Flag from a second one, both flags shall be the same size with the United States Flag to the observer's left.
If flown from the same pole, a PHS Flag shall be flown below the United States Flag and shall be the same or one size smaller than the United States Flag.
When a PHS station or activity occupies a large geographical area, a PHS Flag may be displayed at more than one location in the post at the discretion of the Officer in Charge of the station or activity.
While customary to display flags outdoors only from sunrise to sunset, it is permissible to display flags at night when special patriotic effect is desired.
c. d. 4.
Flags at Half Mast. a.
Whenever the United States Flag is flown at half mast, so is the PHS Flag.
However, the flags of the Surgeon General, Deputy Surgeon General, or an Assistant Surgeon General will be flown at half mast only in the event of death, while on active duty, of that officer.
United States and PHS Flags are flown at half mast on due notice of death of a United States official or Member of Congress.
On notification of the death of a PHS official, a PHS agency head may order the United States and PHS Flags at PHS installations under that officer's jurisdiction flown at half mast.
The death of a PHS official at a field station is adequate cause for an Officer in Charge, or other appropriate official, to order that United States and PHS Flags at that field station be flown at half mast. b. c. d. 5.
Flagstaffs.
Flagstaffs for outdoor use and display of the United States Flag and PHS Flags shall be headed with a ball of appropriate size.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG Section G. PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 Automobile Flags PAGE 7 1.
Definition and Use .
An Automobile Flag is a small distinguishing flag flown from a vehicle to indicate that the holder of the office or rank represented by that flag is an occupant.
Display.
PHS flag rank officers are authorized to display their flags on automobiles on occasions of ceremony, when participating in parades, or when performing official visits to stations and activities under their jurisdictions.
(Also see paragraph 4, below.)
Specifications.
a.
Material.
The Surgeon General's Flag, the Deputy Surgeon General's Flag and the Assistant Surgeon General's Flag shall be made of rayon banner material, with embroidered design.
Size.
All Automobile Flags shall be 1 foot, 6 inches hoist by 2 feet, 2 inches fly.
Fringe.
Automobile Flags of the Surgeon General and Deputy Surgeon General shall include a 1 1/2-inch fringe on three edges (excluding the edge which is attached to the flagstaff) of the same material as the flag.
The fringe for the Surgeon General's Flag shall be white in color, and the Deputy Surgeon General's shall be blue.
The Assistant Surgeon General's Flag shall have no fringe.
2.
3.
b. c. 4.
Flagstaff. a.
The flagstaff shall be of metal and of sufficient length so that when mounted (see b. below) the lower edge of the flag will fly about one inch higher than the crest of the hood of the automobile.
The design of the staffhead shall be that of a ball.
Flagstaffs normally are mounted on the inside of the right front bumper support.
When this is not practicable, the nearest suitable location which will not interfere with the right headlight beam is used.
Section H. Boat Flags b. 1.
Definition and Use.
A Boat Flag is (1) a PHS Flag used to identify a PHS boat or vessel, or (2) the flag of a flag rank officer flown from a boat or launch to indicate that the holder of the office or rank represented by that flag is aboard.
Display of United States Flag and PHS Boat Flags. a. United States Flag.
It is the custom to display the United States Flag from the gaff while running and the stern flagstaff while at anchor or 2.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 PAGE 8 PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 CC29.9 PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG at dock.
If the boat is not equipped with a gaff, the United States Flag should be displayed from the highest point while running.
b. PHS Flag. yardarm.
The PHS Flag should be displayed from the starboard c. Flag of the Surgeon General, Deputy Surgeon General, or an Assistant Surgeon General.
(1) When a flag rank officer is aboard, his/her flag shall be displayed from the starboard yardarm and the PHS Flag shifted to the port yardarm.
(2) If two flag rank officers senior should be displayed.
are aboard, only the flag of the d. Follow U.S. Navy or Coast Guard Customs.
In situations not covered in this INSTRUCTION, the customs or flag regulations of the U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Navy shall be followed.
3.
Specifications.
a.
Material .
All PHS Boat Flags shall be of nylon-wool bunting, with appliqued design.
Size.The United States Flag and all PHS Boat Flags, when flown from a boat, shall be in the following sizes: (1) Boat (Over 50 feet in length): (a) (b) United States Flag, 3.52 feet hoist by 6.69 feet fly; All PHS Flags, 32 inches by 48 inches.
b. (2) Small boat (50 feet and under in length): (a) (b) United States Flag, 2.37 feet hoist by 4.5 feet fly; All PHS Flags, 24 inches by 36 inches.
Section I. 1.
Automobile Plates Use.
Distinguishing automobile plates may be attached to the right front bumper of motor vehicles used by flag rank officers on occasions of ceremony or when performing official inspections.
Material and Size.
Automobile plates for motor vehicles shall be of sheet metal, 6 inches high and 9 inches wide.
2.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78 CC29.9 3.
PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE FLAG PHS PERSONNEL INSTRUCTION 1 PAGE 9 Design.
The design and color of automobile plates for flag rank officers shall be the same as for their respective flags, except that: a.
The Surgeon General's plate shall include a 1/2-inch border in white along the four edges.
The Deputy Surgeon General's plate shall include a 1/2-inch border in blue along the four edges.
.
If a distinguishing automobile plate is attached permanently vehicle, a plain canvas cover of appropriate size shall be cover the plate when the vehicle is not in use by the flag rank is in use by other than the flag rank officer for whom it is b. 4.
Canvas Cover to a motor provided to officer, or provided.
Section J. Disposition of Flags When a flag is in such condition as to be no longer fit for display, it should be destroyed by burning unless considered historically significant.
If historically significant, it should be sent to the Executive Officer of the appropriate organization with a memorandum explaining the circumstances.
Section K. 1.
Presentation of PHS Flags Upon Retirement PHS Flag, Indoor Type.
A PHS Flag (Color) may be presented to an officer upon the occasion of retirement.
Surgeon General, Deputy Surgeon General, and Assistant Surgeon GeneralFlags, Indoor Type.
The flag of a flag rank officer may be presented to the officer upon the occasion of retirement.
2.
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE T.S. PHS-CC 261 05/18/78
