Skip Ender Navigation accessIndiana Agency Listing Policies Contact Webmaster Help ________ Go skip navigation Click here to go to IDNR's INTRANET.
You must have user-id and password.
For DNR's employees only about DNR camping fishing hunting other activities education environment inns land owner 
Return to Public Information Home
[train.jpg]
A fast train rolls along the Wabash into Vincennes.
Yet two-thirds of the watershed is in constant cultivation, much of it farmed to the water's edge.
"The river will be much healthier if we continue to reduce the nutrient flow into the river, and increase streamside vegetation," says Gammon.
During two weeks of July 1999, DNR fisheries biologists conducted an unprecedented snapshot survey of fish communities, habitat and public access on the entire river.
The electrofishing survey collected 8,450 fish weighing 9,035 pounds.
Of the 82 species collected, 10 species represented more than half the fish caught -- gizzard shad, carp, steelcolor shiner, freshwater drum, flathead catfish, channel catfish, shortnose gar, quillback, golden redhorse and longear sunfish.
The greatest species diversity was found in a 100-mile stretch 300-400 miles upstream from the river's mouth.
Hoosiers have feasted on the river's abundant and diverse freshwater mussels, fish and game.
Plentiful mussels living in Wabash River riffles led to the development of Indiana riverside industries.
Around the turn of the 20th century, pearls were harvested for jewelry, while Wabash River mussel shells were cut and finished into mother-of-pearl buttons and knife handles.
Vincennes soon became a mother-of-pearl button factory boomtown, as the Alices musseled a living from the river shells.
The Vincennes button boom died around the time of the Great Depression, as mussel populations dwindled, and zippers and plastic buttons took hold.
Hoosiers had cut canals and forests, which shifted river flow patterns and increased the river's silt load.
More sewage and industrial waste also reduced mussel numbers and diversity.
New markets opened for Wabash River mussels in the 1960s.
The Japanese cultured pearl industry discovered that shell bits of several types of Wabash River mussels made ideal "seeds" for growing cultured pearls in marine pearl oysters -- and the harvest began anew.
Mussel dredges and SCUBA divers combed the river's mussel beds.
Trainloads of mussel shells clunked and squealed through Vincennes switching yards.
Silt and other pollutants continued to coat the river bottom.
Many mussel species became rare.
Several species were extirpated, and four river mussel species would never be seen anywhere alive again.
In 1991, by emergency order, the DNR halted the harvesting of mussels in Indiana.
Subsequent DNR mussel studies indicate siltation, pollution and habitat loss are the greatest threat to the Wabash's remaining mussel populations.
Still, more than half of Indiana's commercially valuable fish, like catfish, sucker, drum and buffalo, come from the Wabash River below Lafayette, and fish mongers can yet be seen setting nets along lower river stretches.
The use of the river for industry and sport is part of its story, but this broad survey of Indiana wouldn't be as interesting without attention paid to the set pieces of our Indiana culture, our Hoosier songs.
[hay.jpg]
The frangrance of new mown hay is celebrated in the state song, "On the Banks of the Wabash, Far Away" by Paul Dresser.
[forward.gif]
Next Page
