Wednesday Section 6: 8:30 ­ 10:00 a.m.
Power Purchasing Techniques A Contracting Officer's Guide to Competitive Energy Acquisition in Newly Restructured Markets (A.K.A.
­ Making Sausage) Presented by:
Jacob R. Moser Director, Installation Energy CBU Defense Energy Support Center Phone: (703) 767-8572 E-mail: Jacob.R.Moser@dla.mil
An Energy-Efficiency Workshop and Exposition Orlando, Florida
Please be courteous to Jake Turn off all: · cell phones · laptops · PDAs · electronic games · MP3 players (and similar devices) · anything you can not use during commercial aircraft take offs or landings · set pagers to vibrate Additionally, let's leave Tijuana out of this AND that bad fat joke you just remembered can most definitely wait until lunch!
Outline · Commodity Programs Overview ­ Coal ­ Natural Gas ­ Electricity
·
So you say you want to buy competitive electricity ­ The "Basics" ­ To boldly go . . .
·
Now your ready to engage that emerging market ­ NOT ­ 400 pound gorilla or 80 pound weakling? · Ain't aggregation grand? · But I'm the GOVERNMENT! ­ Paradigm shift or pratfall ­ Pick yer poison
· ·
Unintended consequences Lessons Learned
Coal · · · Consolidated DoD program established in 1963 Currently includes 13 DoD and 1 Fed Civ facility FY 2002 ­ Total Award Value: $39,437 ­ Total Awarded Quantity: 714,770 tons ­ 100% Small Business Awards
·
Program Highlights of 2002: ­ Awarded 5-year contract for 3 Alaskan installations with a firm-fixed delivered cost and established a price reduction schedule for the waiver of minor deviations from specification ­ Awarded first utility grade coal purchase for Indian Head, Maryland for test burn in anticipation of converting from the current grade to the less costly and more readily available utility grade.
Natural Gas · · · Program established in 1990 Total Cost Avoidance 1990-2002: $264.6M FY 2002 Awards ­ Total Award Value: $344.3M ­ Total Awarded Quantity: 122M dths ­ Cost Avoidance: $38.7 M
·
FY 2003 Awards to date ­ Total Award Value: $83.9M ­ Total Awarded Quantity: 31.7 dths ­ Cost Avoidance: n/a or TBD ­ Significantly increased contractor base as a result of a focused marketing/outreach effort with potential suppliers.
­ In response to customer concerns about price volatility risk, mitigated said risks using price conversions and/or fuel switching
·
Program Highlights of 2002
Electricity · Program established in 1996 · Total Cost Avoidance To Date: $36 Million · FY 2002 ­ Total Award Value: $177 Million ­ Total Awarded Quantity: 1,756,660,754 kWh ­ Total Cost Avoidance: $27 Million
· Program Highlights of FY2003 to date: ­ Contracting support for Dyess AFB's 100% renewable purchase ­ TX procurement w/ DOD 
Electricity ­ ­ ­ ­ ­
(continued)
· More Program Highlights of FY2003 to date First New York awards (4th try, utility previously best value) New New Jersey awards (utility = best value for last two years) Two NJ contracts awarded using Locational Marginal Pricing Executed several PJM Curtailment Service Provider agreements 1st small businesses awards (Small Disadvantaged Businesses)* · Utility Choice Electric - $3.5 M over two years (TX) · Liberty Power - $400K over three years (NY)
So you say you want to buy competitive electricity The Basics (101) · CICA · What is being purchased? ­ Supply or Service (Utility Services/FAR 41 = subset) ­ Refrain: Why does it matter? Can't "good minds' differ?
· What FAR Part (12, 15, 41, other) is applicable? (Refrain) · FAR 19 ­ What NAICS code should be used? (Refrain) ­ What Size Standard applies? (What?? + Refrain) · Manufactured or Not? · But the NAICS . . .
­ Application of Set-asides and Preferences (Refrain)
So you say you want to buy competitive electricity (continued) To boldly go . . .
· Section 8093 of Public Law 100-202 · Trade Agreements Act and NAFTA ­ DFAR 225.401 - Products subject to trade agreement acts.
Foreign end products subject to the Trade Agreements Act and NAFTA are those in the following Federal supply groups (FSG).
If a product is not in one of the listed groups, the Trade Agreements Act and NAFTA do not apply.
­ FSG list is pre-restructuring (electricity was not available as a supply) ­ NAFTA is, however, applicable
· · · ·
FAR Part 5 - Publicizing Contract Actions Title Transfer: Delivery Point versus Service Point Pricing Mechanisms ­ what makes sense FAR 12 Invoice Clause (no tailoring permitted!)
Now your ready to engage that emerging market ­ NOT! · 400 pound gorilla or 80 pound weakling? ­ Ain't aggregation grand? · Big dogs, little dogs, and dead dogs · Bundling versus Aggregation versus aggregation · Cherry Picking?
­ But I'm the GOVERNMENT! · Standard Commercial Practices · Automated Business Processes · Transaction Costs (no - not CTCs)
·
Paradigm shift or pratfall ­ your choice ­ It is a commodity not a utility service ­ get over it ­ It's a FAR Part 12 kind of world (when in Rome . . .)
­ Outside the box is great, but at least stay in orbit!
·
Risk Management (pick your poison)
Unintended Consequences Energy Program Interactions BRAC Right Sizing/ Resources Heating Oil Homeland Defense: Infrastructure Protection Supply Assurance - On-Site Generation
Partial List of Stakeholders: Taxpayers The Warfighter OSD Each Service OPM Intelligence Agencies Homeland Defense DOE EPA GSA Other Fed Civs FERC NERC State Regulators NARUC NAESB EEI AGA Consumer Advocates Army Corps of Engineers (Huntsville) ACSIM AFCESA Navy EFDs ARMY IMA Organization DESC FEMP SPR Contractors Policy Writers Consultants "Enrons" Canada (NAFTA) Mexico (NAFTA)
Competitive Electricity
Utility Service Contracts
Direct Supply Natural Gas
Housing Privatization
Hydrogen ?
Coal Energy Saving Performance Contracts
Utility Infrastructure Privatization
Renewables
Who knows? Facility Fuel Cells
Alternative Fuels
What Else?
Mobility Fuels/ Energy
· Some of these are also used for facilities · Alternative technologies like fuel Cells and hydrogen blur the distinction ­ a vehicle fuel cell could also provide electricity for facility use
Lessons Learned · FAR Part 12 is your friend - learn it, live it, love it ­ Many "constraints" are self-imposed ­ Buy what's being sold ­ Buy the way it is being bought · Understand how sellers sell · They will not change to sell the way Uncle Sam usually buys
· Know the market space even better ­ Nothing beats experience in competitive markets ­ Establish 
Lessons Learned
(continued)
· Place value on being a good business partner ­ Act in good faith ­ Protect the Government's interest but · Place long-term interest ahead of the short term ­ Balance actions v.s. future ability to conduct business ­ Pay your bills on time! · For DESC, the benefits have exceeded costs
· It ain't easy ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ ­ Avoidable mistakes usually more than eliminate "savings" It take's "good people" Nothing works as advertised on day one of retail access Restructuring rules not synchronized with RFP process Each state has "unique and innovative" restructuring rules DO NOT even mention billing (I guess I just did)
Lessons Learned Centrally managed program advantages ­ Government benefits:
(continued)
· Reduced costs ­ less duplication of effort · Develop and maintain team of dedicated specialists ­ Local COs can focus on core responsibilities ­ Avoid risk of long learning curve for new entrants
­ Market prefers "one face" · Reduced transaction costs throughout contract life · Consistency in RFPs and post-award administration · Facilitates establishment of trust/long-term relationships
­ Increased competition, better prices · Aggregated requirements large enough to generate interest · Suppliers accept the resultant commercial practice RFPs
­ Team effort with our partners critical · Partners in "extended acquisition team" · Partners participate in entire process
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call 09 Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call 09 Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly 08 Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Electricity is out - Utility Privatization is really where it's at!
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Electricity is out - Utility Privatization is really where it's at! It's what we live for . . .
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but feels it's not manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Electricity is out - Utility Privatization is really where it's at! It's what we live for . . .
Our experienced professionals actually know what they're doing (ask a supplier)
The Number ONE reason to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity
Up until today you thought NERC, FERC and SERC were Smurfs!
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but not that it's manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Utility Privatization is really where its at! It's what we live for . . .
Our experienced professionals actually know what they're doing (ask a supplier) Up until today you thought that NERC, FERC and SERC were Smurfs
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but not that it's manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Utility Privatization is really where its at! It's what we live for . . .
Our experienced professionals actually know what they're doing (ask a supplier) Up until today you thought that NERC, FERC and SERC were Smurfs
Top 10 reasons to use DESC (or similar) contracting support to procure competitive electricity 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 You're still waiting for Enron to return your call Your boss thinks "Sacramento" handled the California Energy Crisis superbly Your policy shop does not think electricity is a commodity, legal counsel agrees Your small business office is OK on commodity part but not that it's manufactured You already have something just as exciting to talk about at cocktail parties We've already made (and can avoid) 4 out of 5 mistakes you would going solo Utility Privatization is really where its at! It's what we live for . . .
Our experienced professionals actually know what they're doing (ask a supplier) Up until today you thought that NERC, FERC and SERC were Smurfs
