August/September 2002 · Vol. 3 No. 4
National Marine Sanctuar y Program Ocean Discoveries I NSIDE... 2
2002 2
Davidson Seamount Exploration Sanctuary Quest Chaunacid anglerf ish peers from beneath a rock.
(Bathychaunax coloratus) Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
The Spiegel Grove Becomes a Reef Wellwood restoration in the Florida Keys A Latino look at ocean conser vation News Splash Sanctuar y Quest sampler Voices from a sanctuar y summer of exploration Thunder Bay welcomes new sanctuar y manager National Marine Sanctuar y Foundation Oceans Week Monterey Bay Live in the Mystic Aquarium Calendar
3
3 4 5
From the shipwreck site of the USS Monitor... to a 7,800-ft. undersea mountain...to a visit from a rare marbled grouper-- a Sanctuar y Summer of exploration mapped new ocean landscapes and joined the best and the brightest in partnerships of discover y.
The ROV camera capture the image of a deep-water anemone.
Photo: National Marine Sanctuary Program
Sanctuary Quest
Monitor Mission 2002 6 A side view illustration of the current position of the Monitor on the seafloor.
Illustration: Jeff Johnston Lobsters hide in deepwater habits.
Photo: National Marine Sanctuary Program
6 Dan Howard, spirit of discovery guided the National chief scientist Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's helps control (NOAA) National Marine Sanctuary Prothe ROV along with a gram this summer as scientists on both coasts pilot and and in the Gulf of the Mexico conducted navigator ocean expeditions, monitored familiar marine from the areas with new technologies and attempted a NOAA ship long anticipated recovery of the revolving McArthur.
Photo: National Marine Sanctuary Program turret and cannons from the famed Civil War ironclad, the USS Monitor.
In the Great Lakes, explorer Bob Ballard, scientists from his Institute for Exploration, and sanctuary staff returned to shipwrecks surveyed in an earlier mission and to newly discovered wrecks to continue video documentation.
Sanctuary Quest: West Coast Expedition 2002, Monitor Greg McFall/NOA Mission 2002, the Davidson Seamount Mission, the Photo: Stetson Monitoring Cruise, and a Great Lakes shipwrecks exploration -- each emphasized the program's many strong partnerships forged over the years and its renewed energy in uncovering marine and maritime mysteries.
Researchers aboard these voyages of discovery included scientists from the University of California at Santa Barbara, Channel Islands National Park, U.S. Geological Survey, California Department of Fish and Game, U.S Naval Facilities Engineering Services Center,
7
The
8
(cont'd on pg. 4)
Wellwood Restoration Offers Damaged Corals a Second Chance in Florida Marine Sanctuar y The world's largest intentionally scuttled artificial reef had a mind of its own, capsizing hours before its planned sinking.
Photo: Bernd Altmeier
Spiegel Grove Continues its High Profile in Florida Picture a proud 510-ft. long, 6,880-ton warship, a hulking superstructure of metal, plowing through the water, dwarf ing everything in its wake.
Now picture the ocean-going behemoth sunk beneath the waves, flipped upside down at a 45-degree angle, with its bow piercing the surface on its way to becoming an artif icial reef.
Commissioned in 1956, The USS Spiegel Grove served the Navy in transporting combat troops and amphibious vehicles.
The Spiegel Grove was decommissioned in 1989, 15 years after serving a f inal tour of duty with the Atlantic Fleet.
The crew once affectionately refer red to the ship as the "Spiegel Beagle," even painting a picture of Snoopy on the floor.
After eight years of negotiation, the Spiegel Grove was slated to become the largest ship to ever be intentionally scuttled as an artif icial reef.
The steam turbine-powered ship was sent to Chesapeake, Va., to be cleansed of all residual petroleum products and other possible environmental contaminants.
Once it was determined pristine enough to become a marine habitat, the retired vessel was anchored six miles off the coast of Key Largo, in the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.
It was the original intention of the Key Largo Chamber of Commerce and the Keys Tourism Council to create an artif icial reef by sinking the ship in 130-ft of water, with its top resting at 40-ft beneath the surface, to appeal to a wide range of SCUBA divers and snorkelers.
On May 17th, the Spiegel Grove began to sink prematurely, sending 40 crewmembers rushing to safety.
Pulled onto its starboard side, the vessel today rests on the sandy bottom.
A public opening of the new reef was further delayed by a mysterious fuel sheen.
Now fuel-free, the ship was dedicated as an artif icial reef on June 26, 2002.
The sanctuary reports that the ship is well on its way to becoming a live ecosystem, having already attracted algal growth and schooling f ish.
Most Spiegel Grove crewmembers never thought they'd get to see her again and many are delighted at the prospect of joining her once again--albeit underwater.
--Miriam Stein
Tall branches of elkhorn and staghorn corals toppled.
Pur ple sea fans lay crushed on the ocean floor.
When the M/V Wellwood was f inally removed 12 days after it grounded in the Molasses Keys, 5,805 square meter of living coral was destroyed and over 75,000 square meters of reef habitat was injured.
Now 18 years after the grounding, NOAA's National Marine Sanctuary Program (NMSP) has begun an ambitious restoration project on Molasses Reef, now part of the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.
Within one of the third largest barrier reef system in the world, Molasses Reef contains some of the most aesthetically valuable and heavily visited reefs in the continental United States.
On August 4, 1984, the M/V Wellwood, a 122-meter Cypriot-registered freighter car rying pelletized chicken feed, ran aground in six meters of water about six nautical miles southeast of Key Largo.
Early attempts to power off the reef, tugboat prop wash abrasion, extended periods of shading under the vessel and cable abrasion during several failed removal attempts added to the damage.
NOAA biologists thoroughly searched the area for survival of damaged coral colonies.
Few corals actually survived the initial impact and the grounding period.
The corals that did survive were salvaged and reoriented, including several large head corals (greater than 6 feet diameter) that were turned over and left in place.
The rest of the reef, however, was flattened like a parking lot, a name later assigned to the area by scientists.
The reef was even further injured as a result of storms (cont'd on pg. 4)
A diver from Underwater Engineering Services Inc. secures the tremie concrete tube for the first reef module in the reef restoration project.
Photo: Coastal Planning and Engineering, Inc
2
Helping Latinos make a difference in ocean conser vation--A Latino's perspective Tanto monta, monta tanto is a Spanish saying meaning, "It makes no difference."
Many Latinos, as well as many other Americans of other ethnic backgrounds, have the belief that what they do will not have a great impact on the many plants and animals that inhabit our oceans or don't understand how important their participation is in helping protect the marine environment.
In many cases, this attitude is the result of the lack of information that Latinos have about the oceans or what they could do to help out.
Some have the belief that such help would be better done by scientists and researchers.
Many national marine sanctuaries are now providing Latino communities with information about the many ways for them to get involved in marine conservation.
By participating in beach clean ups, visiting aquariums with the family, or simply taking sanctuary cruises, one could make a big difference in the well-being of the sanctuaries and make things easier for those who devote their lives in protecting these special areas.
El trabajo compartido es m`as llevadero or "many hands make light work."
Sanctuary staff are thinking of ways to help Latinos discover just how important national marine sanctuaries XXXXXXXXXXXXX are to their communities.
In marine sanctuaries with a XXXXXXXXX high Latino population nearby, such as Monterey Bay, XXXXXXXXXX brochures, coloring books, radio and bus advertisements in Spanish are helping.
In the Florida Keys, the sanctuary created Spanish videos about boating safety and diving.
Still, more can be done to encourage residents to get involved and to teach the importance of preserving the oceans and the life it maintains.
Tours of visitors centers and other educational programs led by Spanish speaking staff would help.
Discounts for scuba gear or boat rentals would encourage Latino families to participate in the recreational activities offered by the sanctuary.
It's important to know that to get a response from the Latino community, information needs to be presented to them in ways that they will understand and feel welcomed.
Only through education is change possible.
Baba Dioum, a poet from Senegal, once wrote, "In the end we will only conserve what we love.
We will onlyXXXXXX love what we understand.
We will understand only what we are taught."
Sanctuary Program's "Down Under, Out Yonder" Annual Education Workshop Honored--The Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary will receive second place honors in the Youth/Education category of the "Gulf Guardian" Awards for the Sanctuary's "Down Under, Out Yonder" annual education workshop.
The Environmental Protection Agency sponsors the awards in their Gulf of Mexico Program.
The program's goal is to recognize and honor "community groups, businesses, individuals and agencies who are taking positive steps to keep the Gulf healthy, beautiful and productive."
Awards will be presented during the Clean Gulf Conference on November 5-7 in Galveston, Texas.
Journal Features Sustainable Seas Expeditions (SSE) Research--An article just published in the scientif ic journal Coral Reefs (21:73-82) features research conducted on the 2000 SSE in the Hawaiian Islands Humpback Whale National Marine Sanctuary.
The article, "Drowned reefs and antecedent karst topography, Au'au Channel, SE Hawaiian Islands," describes bottom formations, benthic communities and the history of sea level and its influence on the seabed between Maui and Lanai since the last Ice Age, when sea surface was 120 meters below current levels.
The authors concluded that the islands of Maui, Lanai and Molokai were interconnected by emergent limestone bridges until about 14,000 years ago, resulting in numerous basins and other complex features formed by exposed rock formations.These features are still evident on the now-flooded seabed, providing ideal habitat for a variety of diverse hard-bottom communities.
Dr. Richard Grigg, of the University of Hawaii, was lead author.
Co-authors included National Marine Sanctuary Program Scientist Dr. Steve Gittings, Dr. E.E. Grossman (USGS), Dr. Sylvia Earle (National Geographic Society), Dave Lott and John McDonough (NOAA Special Projects Off ice).
More Sanctuary News, All the Time--Valarie Thorpe and Georgia Shao, Internet developers in the National Marine Sanctuary Program's Communication Branch, are helping NOS Special Projects Off ice to build an online NOS level publications library.
At the same time, project will also be used to develop a program online library.
When completed the new library will be merged with the NOAA Library and made available to outside commercial, international databases.
Cur rently, the new library houses management plan reviews, national and site State of the Sanctuary Reports, and various other brochures and regulation documents.
--Nancy O'Donnell
--Javier Delgadillo University of California at Santa Barbara
3
A science sampler from Sanctuar y Quest...
Wellwood Restoration (cont'd from pg. 2)
over the following years: scouring and vertical erosion to the reef and several pits were created in the parking lot, exposing the underlying framework cracks to the potential of future erosion.
Scientists determined that without physical restoration, recovery of the reef would be extremely slow, and the site would deteriorate further during future storms.
During NMSP's cur rent restoration, 14 separate sites damaged during the 1984 grounding will receive a total of 22 dome-shaped "reef modules," reinforced concrete slabs covered by a hollow concrete and limestone dome.
In general, the modules will be placed and anchored to natural reef by a process of pumping tremie concrete beneath and around the base of each module, which will secure it to the natural reef structure.
Workers will then compare each reef repair site to the adjacent undamaged coral reef in order to create an ambient structure similar to the conditions of both the adjacent reef and the reef prior to the g rounding.
To learn more, visit http:/www.sanctuaries.nos.noaa.gov/ special/wellwood/.
--Columbine Culberg
Summer of Exploration
(cont'd from pg. 1)
Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, Cascadia Research, Makah Cultural Research Center, National Marine Fisheries Service, U.S. Navy's Naval Sea Systems Command and Mobile Diving and Salvage Unit, along with many academic and private institutions.
In many of the missions, a U.S, Navy remotely operated vehicle (ROV) aided scientists by sending back pictures of waters 2,500 feet deep and scanned never before scaled underwater mountains and canyons.
Tethered to a vessel, the ROV's lasers, lights, video camera and "arms" offered new vistas to the researchers.
In other missions, sidescan sonar devices bounced sound waves off the sea floor and created rough maps of sanctuary ter rain.
"The Sanctuary Quest expeditions were conceived to help the National Marine Sanctuary Program understand how the sanctuaries function as a system," explained Daniel J. Basta, director of the National Marine Sanctuary Program.
"The area of this expedition represents a small part of a much larger, very dynamic ecosystem.
This research is an example of how the program integrates science with management of resources within a larger ecosystem.
The observations and data are critically needed to make sound management decisions."
In the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary, Sanctuary Quest researchers study of its vibrant marine life diversity and abundance will help Sanctuary staff to better (cont'd on pg. 7)
Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary · Research operations were conducted 24-hours a day with plankton sampling at night and wildlife observations and remotely operated vehicle (ROV) dives during the day.
· Three ROV dives explored the benthic habitat at 70m (~228ft) near the Farallon Islands allowing a glimpse of bottom habitats and associated marine life.
· Wildlife observers saw aggregations of surface feeding Sooty Shearwaters and lots of Cassin's Auklets and common mur res.
The latter two species are foraging in the food rich waters to feed their young on the nearby Farallon Islands.
Cordell Bank National Marine Sanctuary · The Cordell Bank mission conducted six ROV dives each lasting 3-4 hours, looking at habitats never before documented.
(Sandy habitat, transition zone to the Bank, cobbles, boulder, pinnacles, and rocky reef.)
· Three different six-gill sharks, many species of rockf ish, lingcod, sponges, hydrocoral, algae, anemones and echinoderms were observed.
· Researchers monitored all 16 different Ecosystem Dynamics Study stations in the sanctuary, each getting plankton samples and prof iles of temperature and salinity from surface to bottom.
· During daylight hours zooplankton were sampled acoustically along transects concurrent with seabird and marine mammal observations, allowing scientists to estimate krill biomass.
Measuring krill biomass in this manner increases the understanding of forces that are affecting distribution of organisms within the sanctuary.
Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary · Seven ROV benthic dives and one water column divewere completed.
The deepest dive at 380m (~1200ft) provided a glimpse of the seafloor in the Nitinat submarine canyon.
· Eleven marine mammal and seabird survey transects were completed as well as 10 unique transects and one duplicate transect to cor relate with trophic relationships using hydroacoustic equipment.
·16 stations were sampled for harmful algal bloom toxins, phytoplankton species composition, and nutrient and chlorophyll levels.
· A record high number of humpback whales were seen in the sanctuary--139.
This number exceeds previous surveys in 1995, 1997 and 1998.
One orca and 30 humpback whales were photographed for individual identif ication.
--Sarah Marquis
4
Blackfooted albatross in the Olympic Coast Sanctuary Photo: John Brooks
Basket star (Gorgonocephalus)
Voices from the Sanctuar y Summer of Ocean Explorations
Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
on yellow sponge at 1362 meters, Davidson Seamount.
Deep-sea blob sculpin (Psychrolutes Phrictus)
Alert birdwatchers monitor the sea within 300 meters of the ship.
Photo: Robert Steelquist Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
at 1317 meters.
A skate cruises along the ocean floor.
Venus's-flytrap anemone (Actinoscyphia sp) on the Davidson Seamount at 1874 meters.
Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
Gorgonian coral (Paragorgia arborea) at 1257 meters.
Photo: NOAA National Marine Sanctuary Program
Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
The drop into the canyon goes slowly.
Through both cameras, we see swarms of plankton and detritus, the snow of the oceans.
Siphonophores, salps, ctenophores, jellies, shrimp, larval forms of fish and invertebrates swirl past as the ROV descends.
Numbers on the screen get larger 100, then 200 meters.
Creatures that have never been exposed to light race past the camera and lights.
Strange chains of polyps, f iligrees and webs, feathery organisms.
The sheer density of tiny, translucent living organisms is astonishing.
Pulsating, writhing, darting, drifting, wiggling, floating--as though the entire early evolution of locomotion is being demonstrated before our eyes.
--Bob Steelquist (from Mission log) Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary
The Sanctuary Quest West Coast Expedition 2002 certainly presented its share of challenges: high seas, strong winds, and mechanical problems with the equipment.
However, the people involved-- scientists, technicians, and deck crew--rose to these challenges.
Early results include high resolution images of deep water habitats and species that have never been visited before, as well as information on seabirds and marine mammals that call the sanctuaries home.
As with all expeditions, the work has just begun.
Scientists will assess the video tapes and still images, analyze the sediment and water samples, and assess the data collected through other instruments for weeks and months to come.
--John McDonough, NOAA/Special Projects Off ice
With the array of sampling equipment and combined expertise of scientists on board, we had a unique opportunity to explore the Cordell Bank National Marine Sanctuary from top to bottom.
Sampling during the middle of our spring upwelling season really gave us a feel for the incredible productivity and dynamic nature of these special marine areas during upwelling.
--Dan Howard Cordell Bank National Marine Sanctuary
Prior to the McArthur cruises, really our knowledge of what was out here pretty much stopped a mile or two or three offshore, and beyond that, we knew there were whales, but there wasn't very much information.
As a biologist, I'm interested in that because it's a big piece of the picture that we didn't have.
--Barry Troutman, Washington Dept. of Fish 
5
Photo of Ocean Day on the Hill Photo: Ellen Brody
Jefferson Gray, Thunder Bay Sanctuary's new manager boards the R/V vessel Shenehon for an emergency diver evacuation drill in the Great Lakes shipwreck sanctuary.
Introducing Thunder Bay Sanctuar y's New Manager On July 15, 2002, the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary and Underwater Preserve welcomed Jefferson J. Gray as its f irst off icial manager since the sanctuary's designation in October 2000.
Following an exhaustive applicant search, the sanctuary was delighted to have found an exemplary candidate to take the helm of the sanctuary's management.
"A unique combination of academic credentials and Great Lakes f ieldwork placed Gray in the ideal position to take over the management of Thunder Bay's maritime heritage," said Daniel J. Basta, director of the National Marine Sanctuary Program.
The new manager acknowledged that while it is "a major step to move from state to federal management, it is a natural progression in my career and a responsibility that I am honored to have."
Gray received a B.A. in Anthropology and Archaeology from Wisconsin's Beloit College and an M.A. in Maritime History and Underwater Archaeology from North Carolina's East Carolina University.
He ar rives at the Alpena, Michigan off ice, having worked most recently as the State Underwater Archaeologist at the Wisconsin Historical Society.
Gray brings to the sanctuary his expertise in statewide cultural resource management and in developing partnerships between government, cor porate, nonprof it and local community entities.
His background includes underwater diving and research for NOAA and archaeological work not only in the Great Lakes system, but also all over the world.
Gray was also instrumental in the development and implementation of the Wisconsin Maritime Trails system.
This experience has primed Gray to monitor the sanctuary's estimated 116 shipwrecks and signif icant underwater resources, while concur rently developing local education initiatives and cultural awareness activities such as the Tall Ships Festival.
Gray's enthusiasm in joining the sanctuary system was apparent when he described his big plans for a visitor center at Thunder Bay.
"I hope to make the Sanctuary/Preserve into a major destination in Michigan," said Gray.
"Although people within the state know the sanctuary is there, I anticipate bringing the Great Lakes to the rest of the country."
The f irst sanctuary in the Great Lakes, Thunder Bay is jointly managed with the State of Michigan.
To learn more about the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary and Underwater Preserve at http:/ /www.glerl .noaa.gov/glsr/thunderbay/.
--Miriam Stein
National Marine Sanctuar y Foundation Ocean Week Focuses Capitol Hill on Marine Issues The National Marine Sanctuary Foundation gathered ocean experts, policymakers, and supporters from far and wide for Capitol Hill Oceans Week (CHOW) on June 4-6.
CHOW workshops concentrated on ways to increase the nation's ocean literacy and understanding of the challenges involved in protecting coral reefs and to raise the prof ile of the National Marine Sanctuary Program.
Co-sponsors included the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation and Transportation Committee's Subcommittee on Oceans, Atmosphere and Fisheries; the House Oceans Caucus; the National Geographic Society; the American Oceans Campaign and other federal agencies and nonprof its.
Leon Panetta, Chair of the Pew Oceans Commission, began Ocean Week activities with a thought-provoking assessment of cur rent ocean practices.
"It's not enough to just designate sanctuaries," said Panetta.
"It's extremely important to try to make sure that these sanctuaries develop the support system they need in order to do the job.
You've got to make them real.
You've got to protect them and provide the education so that people understand the value of these sanctuaries."
Visit the National Marine Sanctuary Foundation at http://www.nmsfocean.org/ Copies of CHOW presentations are available at www.house.gov/greenwood/oceans.
--Nancy O'Donnell
"Will we govern our oceans by leadership or crisis?" Leon Panetta asked participants at the CHOW workshop.
Photo: National Marine Sanctuary Foundation
6
Sanctuar y Summer of Exploration manage and set policy for the 1,658-square mile sanctuary that sur rounds the f ive Channel Islands.
Next Sanctuary Quest scientists traveled to the Gulf of the Farallones National Marine Sanctuary, a 1,255-square mile area that contains thousands of seals and sea lions and in certain months Great White Sharks.
Here, the Navy ROV illuminated odd crab and f ish species such as the deep water canary rockf ish.
Especially heartening to the sanctuary was the discovery of a healthy amount of krill, tiny pink crustaceans that live thousands of feet below the surface before rising to become an important food staple for many ocean creatures.
On June 11th scientists and resource managers completed the f inal leg of the mission in the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary, the nation's third largest marine sanctuary.
This exploration provided record-breaking marine mammal and seabird observations while below the surface ROVs captured underwater video footage as deep as 1200 feet.
Also during the mission, researchers reported a record high count of 136 humpback whales, the highest number seen in the sanctuary during recent surveys.
Also this summer, the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary played a major role in exploring the Davidson Seamount, a 7,800-foot-tall underwater mountain 60 miles offshore of central California.
Each day, sanctuary staff and scientists from the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute launched the Tiburon, an unmanned submersible, to study the undersea mountain that promised a wealth of data on f ish. Monterey Bay Sanctuary Superintendent William J. Douros was joined by deep-sea biologists, geologists, seabird and marine mammal biologists, who worked together to collect and identify data.
On one day, researchers digitized the image of a six-inch-long f ish and orchestrated an online collaboration to ichthyologists in the f ield who reported back that the f ish was from a seldom seen sea toad family.
Meanwhile in the Gulf of Mexico, the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary got to visit deep regions of the sanctuary never before viewed by humans.
During a four-day research cruise aboard the chartered vessel, M/V Spree, sanctuary researchers joined by National Undersea Research Center scientists launched ROV Phantom S-2 some 14 times in an effort to classify f ish populations and to create a map of their habitats.
While the sanctuary's East and West Banks' coral reefs are well documented, at least 95% of the sanctuary is beyond SCUBA depth and remains a mystery to the sanctuary staff charged with protecting it.
The mission's highpoint, researchers reported, was the appearance of six marbled groupers, a rare glimpse of a f ish favored by both commercial and sport f ishermen and susceptible to overf ishing.
Sanctuary Manager G.P. Schmahl was hopeful that their
Monterey Bay Goes Live inside Mystic Aquarium On the evening of Friday, June 21, the national marine sanctuaries were off icially "opened for viewing" at the Mystic Aquarium 
The Immersion InstituteTM is the off icial name of the underwater telepresence project that sanctuary staff have been developing in cooperation with Mystic Aquarium 
The Immersion InstituteTM combines live digital video, robotics, and interactive games to educate the public about the wonders of the national marine sanctuaries.
Visitors to the Immersion Institute are greeted by a short f ilm about the sanctuary system that emphasizes the importance of preservation.
Inside the interactive theater, visitors sit at consoles where they can work individually or in pairs.
The half-hour experience begins with a short tour of the Monterey Bay kelp beds, above and below water, that is provided by a live link video delivered via Internet II from a ROV, a remotely operated vehicle, tethered about 30 yards offshore from the Monterey Aquarium.
Visitors can pilot Orpheus the ROV from the Mystic Aquarium 
After the video tour, visitors using interactive touch screen consoles can drive the ROV and answer questions about marine creatures encountered.
The consoles provide a virtual tour of the kelp bed, a library of information on the marine life that inhabit the sanctuary, and an interactive game that allows players to earn points by answering questions about the creatures (including sea lions, sea anemones, and Bat Stars) encountered during the virtual tour.
Immersion InstituteTM has received very positive reactions, according to Lisa R. Jaccoma, Vice President of Public Affairs for Mystic Aquarium 
While the launch show features a Monterey Bay kelp forest, programs from Channel Islands, Thunder Bay and the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuaries are expected to follow in the next 18 months.
The launch version is geared for the general public, but plans are also in place to develop a cur riculum-based version for educators.
A description of the project, including video clips should soon be available on the website http://www.mysticaquarium.org.
--Alice Stratton (cont'd on pg. 8)
Photo of More Happy Interns
(cont'd on pg. 8)
7
1305 East-West Highway Silver Spring, MD 20910 Tel. 301-713-3125 Fax 301-713-0404 E-mail: nmscomment@noaa.gov http://sanctuaries.nos.noaa.gov
discovered multi-frequency sidescan and sub bottom appearance in the sanctuary could provide prof iling sonar system, ECHO, an ARGUS imaging valuable information to scientists who want sled and a ROV Little Hero---will enable scientists to know how groupers interact within the reef to look for unknown shipwrecks that have been lost ecosystem. in dangerous regions of Lake Huron as well as study mission To ser ve as the In July, a team of NOAA marine archtrustee for the nation's submerged ter rain eologists and system of marine protected the U.S. Navy that may once have areas to conser ve, protect, been the site of divers banded and enhance their Native American together in a biodiversity, ecological communities when integrity, and cultural legacy.
historic effort the ancient lake's to recover the shoreline existed at USS Monitor's a deeper depth.
revolving tur ret In the coming and two 11months, data inch Dahlgren August/September collected from the cannons.
Calendar sanctuary summer NOAA divers of discovery will Natural Events · Mass coral spawning will follow this be analyzed and at the Flower Garden Banks National mission with a Marine Sanctuar y.
Each year eight publicized to survey of nights around the full moon in August benef it not only remaining between the hours of 8-9 p.m., the entire system artifacts.
several species of coral release their of national marine The recovery gametes, causing an underwater sanctuaries but also the f ield of ocean conservation followed earlier missions that saw the ship's snowstorm.
Humpback whales court around the globe.
propeller, steam-powered engine and other and calve in Fagatele Bay Sanctuar y, "With each new sanctuary mission, we open a dozen of other artifacts recovered more than August through October.
In window on unknown marine worlds," said Basta, the a century after the vessel wrecked off Cape September, Cordell Bank Sanctuar y program's director.
"During the coming year as we fills with pods of thousands of Pacific- Hatteras, N.C. plan for next year's missions, and for missions in the White Sided Dolphins cruising Later this summer, Bob Ballard's Institute sanctuar y waters through the fall and years beyond, we will always be aware of how for Exploration (IFE) will return to the winter.
Common murre chicks have essential the ocean is to our everyday lives.
Our Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary and fledged and are following their dads weather, our economy, our enjoyment of the oceans' Underwater Preserve.
The second of a threearound the sanctuar y learning how to beauty, each depends on our learning more about the year IFE project, scientists hope to discover, catch food.
Gulf of the Farallones and marine world than we know today.
We're committed document and provide public access to the Cordell Bank Sanctuaries, California.
to a program of ocean discovery.
It's that important."
public to the sanctuary's geological, bioAugust 16-18 --Thunder Bay Tall logical and cultural resources.
Ships Festival in Alpena, Michigan.
--Nancy O'Donnell Technological advances--a newlyFor more info, contact 743-741-2270.
In September · On each Saturday, (Photo above: Gorgonian corals (Paragorgia arborea) illuminates in light on the Davidson Seamount Photo: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI) Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuar y will be celebrating its 10th Anniversar y. Events will take place Sanctuar y Watch is a publication of the Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Half Moon Bay, Monterey, San National Marine Sanctuar y Program, Communications and Development Branch.
Simeon, and Santa Cruz.
For more Managing Editor/Writer Nancy O'Donnell Branch Chief Matthew Stout information, contact 831-647-4201.
Copy Editors David Bizot 
Printed on recycled paper.
vision People value marine sanctuaries as treasured places protected for future generations.
