NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY 1999 ANNUAL REPORT ON THE COVER . . .
Governor Christine Todd Whitman gleaned strawberries with volunteers from Team Fleet and Notre Dame High School at Specca=s Garden State Greenhouse.
Farmers Against Hunger delivered the berries to local churches in Mt. Holly for distribution to families in need of emergency food assistance.
New Jersey Agricultural Society P.O. Box 331 Trenton, NJ 08625-0331 March 31, 2000
A Blueprint for the Future . . .
As the millennium came to a close, we found the New Jersey Agricultural Society expanding beyond its traditional roles and creating bold, new and exciting approaches to educating the nonfarm public about the vital role that New Jersey agriculture plays in the States economy and quality of life.
While educating young people in the schools remains a core objective, we have taken our message to the general public with the creation and expansion several programs.
Farmers Against Hunger, the Food Doesnt Grow in the Supermarket video and Ag Leadership Development programs, have been implemented in the last decade.
We are reaching out to all New Jersey citizens including state and community leaders, corporate citizens, consumers and children of all ages through our programs, always keeping our core mission of promoting and educating people about agriculture firmly in our sights.
We have expanded the organizations operations to focus on and increase public outreach, involving more farmers and agribusinesses in our efforts.
And as we grow, we continue to gain recognition of our efforts.
These results have been very gratifying.
I want to thank each of our staff members: Joni Elliott, Maryann Hutson, Robin McGovern, Mary Nikola and Alyson Smith, and our food collectors and distributors David Jenkins, Darryl Jenkins and Tommie Farrior, for their dedication and hard work.
Without them we could not produce our many programs.
I also want to thank Secretary Art Brown and the NJ Department of Agriculture for its constant and unwavering support without which the Agricultural Society could not exist.
And finally, I want to thank each and every one of you for your membership.
Without you we would have neither the funds, nor the incentive to do what we do.
As we enter a new millennium in New Jersey agriculture, we do so with expanded resources and capabilities for promoting agriculture and educating people about the industry, its challenges and contributions.
We look forward to your continued support as we pursue our mission into the millennium! Earl F. Ervey President
New Jersey Agricultural Society P.O. Box 331 Trenton, NJ 08625-0331 March 31, 2000 Well, I am proud to say that weve done it again.
The New Jersey Agricultural Society has had another very successful year promoting the agricultural industry and educating our states citizens about why agriculture is important to them.
To begin our good news, I am very pleased to tell you that our Ag in the Classroom video Food Doesnt Grow in the Supermarket has surpassed all of our expectations, not only getting wonderful reception in our schools, but also winning a handful of prestigious awards and gaining us national recognition.
Perhaps the most impressive, this fall the video was nominated for two Emmy Awards in the Best Programming/Children and Best Musical Composition categories.
This winter the video was awarded the coveted Parents Choice Award, and as we go to press with this annual report, we just received word that we are a finalist in the national Telly Awards.
Each time we announced an award, there was a surge of interest in the schools for both the video and the accompanying curriculum guide.
The Farmers Against Hunger program has received significant public recognition.
More than 500 volunteers participated in 30 gleanings around the state.
In June, as seen in our cover photo, Governor Whitman attended a gleaning at Garden State Greenhouse along with volunteers from Fleet Bank and Notre Dame High School.
Each of these events earned us a significant amount of media coverage.
I also addressed the national convention in Chicago and program director, Robin McGovern has led and participated in many conferences nationwide.
Perhaps most importantly, the Societys 1999 Legislators Tour led to the enactment of the Emergency Disaster Relief Act of 1999 which is providing New Jersey farmers with $20 million in cash grants.
The two-day tour, hosted by Somerset County, successfully educated both legislators and high-level policy officials about the diversity of our agriculture and the tremendous impact of the drought.
And finally, we have started our third Ag Leadership Development Class under the direction of Dr. Mary Nikola.
The class has held a majority of its first year seminars and has already accomplished a great deal working with state legislators and local newspapers regarding what New Jersey agriculture is about.
You can read more about each of these and all of our other programs in the pages which follow.
As we continue to achieve our mission of promoting and educating New Jerseyans about the importance of agriculture to our state, please renew your commitment to the Society.
Its going to take all of us working together to keep the garden in the Garden State and NJ agriculture an integral part of the states landscape.
Joan M. Elliott Coordinator, Agricultural Development
MISSION STATEMENT The mission of the New Jersey Agricultural Society is to preserve and enhance agriculture, farming and related activities and businesses in New Jersey through educational, informational and promotional programs.
In order to carry out the mission of the New Jersey Agricultural Society, it is essential that the Society meet the following critical objectives by implementing specific programs directed to various audiences including the business community, consumers, environmentalists, farmers, farm support groups, the general public, members of the New Jersey Agricultural Society, policy makers, public officials/regulators, and students/educators: 1.
Create an understanding of the contributions of agriculture, farming and related activities and businesses to the quality of life and economic vitality of New Jersey; Educate and inform various audiences about the role and contributions of agriculture, farming and related activities and businesses; Identify issues impacting agriculture, farming and related activities and businesses and articulate those issues to various audiences; Build coalitions to preserve, enhance, and promote an economically viable agriculture; Work cooperatively with other individuals, agriculture organizations and institutions to address issues and implement appropriate actions which benefit the total agricultural community; and Recognize individuals or organizations who contribute to the mission of this Society.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
3
NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY 1999 OFFICERS President Vice President Secretary/Treasurer Assistant Treasurer Earl F. Ervey Pamela Mount Arthur R. Brown, Jr.
Richard E. Nieuwenhuis
BOARD OF TRUSTEES Raymond L. Blew, Jr. William N. Brooks, Jr.
Dr. Bruce Carlton Earl F. Ervey James Giamarese Nancy Hutcheson Pamela Mount Taylor Palmer, Jr. William Randolph Roger J. Ruske Honorable William E. Schluter Alex Trent David W. Boone Honorable Arthur R. Brown, Jr.
Fred Clucas Al Ferri Therese Haaf David J. Kanach Richard E. Nieuwenhuis William H. Pettit, Sr. John I. Rigolizzo, Jr.
Arlene Sarappo Jeffrey Shilling
COMMITTEES Ag in the Classroom Executive Committee Farmers Against Hunger Finance Leadership Development Legislators Tour Membership Nominating Program Development Arlene Sarappo Earl F. Ervey Pamela Mount Richard E. Nieuwenhuis David J. Kanach Taylor Palmer Pamela Mount William H. Pettit, Sr. Jim Gramlich
STAFF Coordinator Ag in the Classroom Farmers Against Hunger Leadership Development Secretary Driver/Coordinator Assistant Joni Elliott Maryann Hutson Robin McGovern Mary Nikola Alyson Smith David Jenkins Darryl Jenkins
4
A WARM WELCOME . . .
The New Jersey Agricultural Society welcomes the following new members to the Board of Trustees.
Fred Clucas is the owner/operator of Clucas Farms in Oldwick, Hunterdon County.
Fred is a former vice president of the State Board of Agriculture and an active member of many agricultural organizations both at the county and state level.
David J. Kanach and his family operate River Lea Dairy Farm in Somerset County.
Dave is currently serving as the Chairman of the New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development Program, is a member of the State Board of Agriculture, the Somerset County Board of Agriculture and a graduate of the first New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development class.
W illiam Randolph owns and operates Millstone Valley Nursery.
Bill comes to the Board of Trustees, having been a member of the inaugural class of the New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development Program.
He is an active member of the Somerset County Board of Agriculture and a trustee of the New Jersey Museum of Agriculture.
5
THANKS FOR THE MEMORIES . . .
In 1999 Dave Bibus and Jim Gramlich completed two terms of service as trustees of the New Jersey Agricultural Society.
Their commitment and dedication to helping the Society conduct programs and educate New Jersey citizens about our agricultural industry is greatly appreciated.
Dave Bibus
Jim Gramlich
6
AGRICULTURE IN THE CLASSROOM COMPONENTS OF AG IN THE CLASSROOM PTeacher of the Year PFood Doesnt Grow in the Supermarket video PFarm Tours 
The video, Food Doesn't Grow in the Supermarket and the accompanying teachers guide were distributed to every New Jersey public school with a fourth grade.
Throughout the course of the distribution and marketing process the video has garnered some prestigious attention.
In September the video was Joan Weckenman was named Teacher of the Year at the Society's Annual Dinner for her efforts to include nominated for two Emmy Awards -- one for agriculture as an integral part of her day to day Best Children's Program and another for Best teaching.
Pictured are Secretary Art Brown (l) and Musical Composition.
In October the video Society President Earl Ervery. and curriculum guide received a Unity in Agriculture Award for Curriculum Development.
This award program was sponsored by the Kellogg Foundation and Texas Tech University.
In December, the video was awarded a Parent's Choice Award for quality children's programming.
This year while at the New Jersey Science Convention, Program Director, Maryann Hutson and Burlington County nurseryman Larry Kuser presented a 90-minute Workshop for Teachers.
Based on the Food Doesn't Grow in the Supermarket video and teachers guide, the workshop provided additional hands-on activities and science concepts and discussed the importance of agriculture to the everyday lives of all New Jerseyans.
7
AGRICULTURE IN THE CLASSROOM The Farm Tour and Workshop for Teachers program offers educators an opportunity to get first-hand farm experiences by visiting farms and agribusinesses in a designated county.
The tours this year were held in Camden County in June and Sussex County in October.
Each tour had a specific theme and topic addressed at the individual stops.
C AMDEN COUNTY MARKETING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS e t, Springdale Farm Market Cherry Hill -- the only farm in Cherry Hill, this farm survives in a very suburban area.
The farm has adapted by serving its suburban neighbors with a large retail farm market and garden center.
Issues addressed at this stop centered on land use and Right to Farm.
Five R Farms, Berlin -- this diversified vegetable farm markets 40% of its products through its retail market and wholesales the remaining 60%.
Opportunities for New Jersey farms to participate in the global markets and the impact of trade agreements were discussed at length during the visit.
Donio Farms, Hammonton -- this diversified fruit and vegetable farm sells most of its produce in the wholesale market.
Following a late spring hail storm, the group focused discussion on the impact of weather on crops and their marketability.
Workshop -- During the workshop, teachers viewed the Food Doesn't Grow in the Supermarket video, conducted hands-on science experiments, and discussed land use and Integrated Pest Management applications.
Tom Jarvis of Springdale Farm Market discusses cultural practices used to grow peppers.
8
AGRICULTURE IN THE CLASSROOM SUSSEX COUNTY WILDLIFE and WEATHER W indy Brow Orchards, Sparta -- This farm was purchased by a land developer, with no background in farming, as an investment.
When the economy depressed in the 80's the owner kept the farm operational, found that he loved farming and continues to operate the orchard today.
During their visit, teachers focused on the impact of late frost on peaches and techniques to reduce wildlife damage.
Spring Valley Equestrian Center, Newton -- This family operation is a full service equine facility, where clients can board their horses, receive lessons and acquire training and care skills.
In addition to learning about the pleasure horse industry, teachers learned about agriculture as a family business.
arm B rodhecker Farm, Newton -- This family farm stays profitable through extensive diversification and currently grows grains and hay and raises sheep and beef cattle.
The significant impact of the drought and the family's bottom line were major points of discussion.
The Farmside Group, Sussex -- This multi-faceted farm and garden center includes a nursery, a small dairy and a pet store.
More than anywhere else the need for farmers to diversify in order to remain financially viable was seen first hand by teachers on the tour.
Topics addressed during the tour included small animal care, bird watching, the story of milk and soil and plant science.
Workshop -- During the workshop, teachers presented their ideas on how to use the concepts discussed at each stop in their classrooms and for their grade level.
The lively exchange generated a lot of enthusiasm and discussion for using agriculture in their classrooms.
Teachers at The Farmside Group prepare for a lesson in soil science.
9
AGRICULTURE IN THE CLASSROOM
EDUCATIONAL GRANT PROGRAM 1999 - 2000 RECIPIENTS PCindy VonThun, Project PALS C connecting elementary 
Also pictured are Society trustee Jim Giamarese (l) and Department of Agriculture representative Jack Gallagher.
The poster contest helps students in grades 3-5 learn about NJ agriculture.
P JoAnn Sopchak , Just Add Water C water quality project, Cumberland Regional High School, 9th - 12th grade PLois Spangler, Growing and ACelling@ Plants on the Muck C plant 
Winners of the 1999 National Agriculture Week President Earl Ervey (l) and Secretary Art Brown.
Society sponsors the contest as a way to educate 6-11 about the importance of agriculture in New essays addressed the topic of why it is important Jersey's farmland.
essay contest with Each year the students in grades Jersey.
This year's to preserve New
10
NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
CLASS OF 2001 Michael Baki, Warren County Leanna Boyle, Gloucester County Asa Cadwallader, Salem County Andrew Carpenter, Salem County Allen Carter, Cape May County Alfred Esposito, Hunterdon County John Ferrie, Atlantic County Gef Flimlin, Monmouth, Ocean and Atlantic Counties Brian Hautau, Sussex County Edward Kertz, Atlantic County Cheryl Ann Lowe, Salem County Gerald Lyness, Hunterdon County Joseph McCullough, Mercer County Kenneth Muckenfuss, Burlington County Jay Perry, Salem County Gary Pohorely, Hunterdon County Michael Reynolds, Somerset County Sharon Smith, Warren County Richard Stern, Monmouth County
In 1999 the New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development Program graduated its second class.
The program now has over 46 alumni to take up the cause of educating people in New Jersey about the importance of agriculture to our state.
The third class of the New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development Program got under way this fall.
Developed specifically for individuals in farming and agribusiness, NJALDP provides a forum for participants to develop and strengthen their leadership and communication skills.
Through a series of seminars offered over a two year period, participants expand their knowledge and skills to become more informed, articulate spokespersons who can effectively lobby for agriculture's interest and interact with our leaders from the public and private sectors, media and government.
The Class of 2001.
11
NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM The 1999 seminars focused on leadership, team building, communication skills, group dynamics, problem solving, organization and operation of both the state and federal governments, policy development, effective lobbying, and the infrastructure of agriculture.
In addition to expanding knowledge and building leadership skills, the programs seminars are designed to provide participants with the opportunity to establish an extensive resource network both within and outside of the agricultural community.
During seminars held at the State House in Trenton, the New Jersey Agricultural Convention in Atlantic City and on Capitol Hill in Washington, DC, participants had numerous opportunities to meet their legislative representatives, fellow farmers and other key individuals from the public and private sectors.
Participants comments regarding the sessions held so far are very positive.
It provided us with a better understanding of the legislative process@.
Brian Hautau, Sussex County AI found it quite amazing how delving into our personalities helped bring our group together, build our leadership skills and then help expand our network of contacts@.
Rick Stern, Monmouth County
"We tackled these problems as a team and we worked our way through them together.
It proves that as a community we can work towards solving the problems within agriculture together."
Leanna Boyle, Gloucester County
"The most useful information has been the ability to recognize different personalities and their view of a situation from a different perspective.
This has been most helpful in dealing with my clients in my agricultural consulting business".
Ken Muckenfuss, B urlington County
12
NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM "I now have a better understanding of the lobbying process and I will be better prepared to affect the political action with which I become involved".
Al Esposito, Hunterdon County "I am grateful to have been given the opportunity to participate in this program.
Class III is a diverse group from the agricultural community and I believe that we will learn as much from each other as we will from our seminars".
Andrew Carpenter, Salem County
"One of the keys to being a successful leader both inside and outside of agriculture, is the ability to initiate and champion change.
It is important that we develop relationships with as many people as we can and leverage those relationships to improve our businesses, industries, communities and ourselves".
Mike Reynolds, Somerset County
"I have never seen a group mesh together so fast in any other setting I have ever been in.
I truly think that Denny Blew's first night session was responsible for that".
Gef Flimlin, Monmouth, Ocean 
"It is truly amazing to see this business (Lund's Fisheries) which deals with many of the same challenges and problems that land based agriculture faces, from expanding global markets to federal regulations and relationship to the environment".
Mike Baki, Warren County
13
NEW JERSEY FARMERS AGAINST HUNGER HARVESTING FOR THE HUNGRY Farmers Against Hungers efficiency and fine reputation increased in 1999.
The number of farms and wholesalers donating to Farmers Against Hunger continued to grow despite a difficult harvest season.
This years total distribution, including produce to or from other hunger relief networks was 1,043,929 pounds of fresh, nutritious fruits and vegetables.
The produce is distributed at four central distribution sites, located in Trenton, Hammonton, Mt. Holly, and Moorestown (for distribution in Camden), as well as to the states food banks.
The produce is distributed to churches, shelters, senior and day care centers to use in their meal and pantry programs.
Due to the continued success of the Farmers Against Hunger Program, Joni Elliott and Robin McGovern participated in the USDAs National Summit on Food Volunteers from Our Lady Queen of Peace in Hainesport, Security in Chicago this October.
Joni and Extended Hand Ministries in Burlington help unload spoke at the opening plenary, and Robin the Farmers Against Hunger truck at the central participated in a food recovery workshop.
distribution site in the parking lot of the Children's In addition, Robin was on the Farmers Home in Mt. Holly.
Fight Hunger, Too! panel at The Future of our Food and Farms conference held in Philadelphia in December.
Students from Notre Dame High School in Lawrence glean strawberries at Specca's Garden State Greenhouse in Bordentown.
14
NEW JERSEY FARMERS AG AINST HUNGER GLEANINGS This year a record 500 volunteers participated in 30 gleanings.
Over 160,000 pounds of produce was picked by gleaners from a diverse group of organizations.
Gleanings are more than just an event for volunteers to pick fresh fruits and vegetables for distribution to those less fortunate.
Gleanings provide an opportunity for the agricultural community to discuss the challenges currently facing farmers.
Whether the discussion turns to food security, open space, or the destruction of crops by wildlife, volunteers learn first hand the challenges confronting the hosting farmer.
One lesson quickly learned is the disparity between the wholesale market price vs. the retail price of fresh fruits and vegetables.
Due to 1999's low market price for many crops, Farmers Against Hunger had Members of DOC's New Lisbon Boot Camp help FAH staff load a bin of more opportunities to glean watermelons at Harold Abrams' farm in Shamong.
The Boot Camp directly in field this year.
gleaned over 38,000 pounds of watermelons which were distributed Thanks to the cooperation of throughout NJ. the Department of Corrections, inmate crews from the Boot Camp in New Lisbon, and the Paying Communities Back detail from Marlboro gleaned over 120,000 pounds of produce in 1999.
This is a win-win situation toward alleviating hunger in our own communities.
Gleanings have also generated a tremendous amount of positive publicity for the agricultural community in New Jersey.
Again this year, Farmers Against Hunger was highlighted on network television, as well as in numerous daily and weekly newspapers, including the Trenton Times and the Star Ledger.
ORGANIZATIONS PARTICIPATING in 1999 GLEANINGS Burlington County Home Schoolers Mercer County Slap J Program HUD from Union and Jersey City Congregation of the Brothers of Israel St. Stephens of Marthoma Church Har Sinai Temple Main Line Reform Temple Villa Victoria Academy Notre Dame High School Prudential Mutual Funds 
15
NEW JERSEY FARMERS AG AINST HUNGER FUNDING Primary funding for the Farmers Against Hunger Program is provided by a Nutrition Block Grant from the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, and a Fund for Rural America Grant from the United States Department of Agriculture.
The Bonner Foundation, FOOD FOR ALL, the Harbourton Foundation, Jersey Fresh, and the Princeton Area Community Foundation also awarded grants to Farmers Against Hunger.
During the November Cabinet on the Road, Jack Terhune (far left), Commissioner, Department of Corrections (DOC), Agriculture Secretary Arthur R. Brown, Governor Christine Whitman, Kathleen DiChiara, Executive Director of the Food Bank, and Jane Kenny, Commissioner, Department of Community Affairs admire the fresh produce that Farmers Against Hunger delivered to Community Food Bank in Hillside.
The DOC's Boot Camp inmates gleaned two bins of potatoes from Hallock's U-Pick, and a bin each of cabbage, brussel sprouts and broccoli from Robson's Farm and Greenhouse.
PRODUCE DISTRIBUTORS and WHOLESALERS Frank Donio, Inc.
Ocean Spray Raio Produce Wakefern Food Corporation Wegmans Food Markets
16
NEW JERSEY FARMERS AGAINST HUNGER FARMS DONATING to FARMERS AGAINST HUNGER Abrams Farm Alstede Farms* Angelo Grasso Farms Badaracco Farm Burlington Co.
Greenhouse Casella Farms Cedarvale Farms Conte Farms Cornercopia Farm Market David Specca Farm Dumia Blueberries Eastern Pro-Pak Ed Allen Farms Ed Wuillerman 
Extension* Snipes Orchards* Soon Hing Farm* Strawberry Hill Stony Brook Watershed* Sun Valley Orchards Terhune Orchards* Wuillermin Farms W.W. Heritage Vineland Produce Auction Zee Orchards * Hosted Gleanings
This November students from Villa Victoria Academy in West Trenton joined volunteers from The Pennington School and the Pennington United Methodist Church gleaning turnips at Stony Brook Watershed Organic Farm in Pennington.
17
LEGISLATORS TOUR The Annual Farm Tour for Legislators was held in Somerset County on August 3 and 4.
More than 20 senators and assembly persons, the staff representatives of 35 legislators as well as policy makers from the Governors Office and Legislative staff were given a chance to talk with farmers who raise nursery stock, livestock, grain, flowers, Christmas trees and hops.
The tour stops clearly demonstrated the diversity of New Jersey agriculture and highlighted the effects of the summers drought on many farms.
The sight of dried up fields directly resulted in the $80 million Emergency Disaster Relief Act of 1999", which provided farmers with $20 million in cash grants.
Legislators pose with Secretary Brown during the annual legislators tour at Dunwalke Farm.
AUGUST 3 John Vermeulen 
River Lea Farm, Somerville a Holstein Dairy of Distinction hit hard by the effects of the drought.
Dunwalke Farms, Far Hills this livestock operation on the grounds of former US Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillons estate produces high quality Polled Hereford and Gelbvieh beef cattle.
AUGUST 4 Atlock Flower Farm, Somerset garden center and home of the beautiful display gardens that have been the backdrop for Martha Stewarts Living magazine and television show.
Suydam Farms, Somerset for 11 generations this farm has evolved by innovative techniques and diversifying its crops.
Millstone Valley Nursery, Belle Mead this first generation farm and greenhouse facility raises flowers, potted plants and annuals for the wholesale market.
18
AWARDS
An active and longtime advocate for agriculture, former Ag Society President Bill Pettit receives the 1999 G old Medallion from Secretary Art Brown (l) and President Earl Ervey for his many contributions to the industry.
The Coombs family receives the Century Farm Award from Secretary Art Brown (l) and President Earl Ervey.
Their farm in Salem County is a large vegetable farm which produces potatoes for processing.
19
AWARDS
The Phillip Alampi Marketing Award was presented to Bill Haines for his years of dedication and contributions to marketing and promoting the blueberry and cranberry industries.
(L to R) Society President Earl Ervey, Holly Haines, Bill Haines, Fred Detrick, Tru-Blu Cooperative and Abbott Lee, Ocean Spray.
The Tony Russo Farmers Marketing Award was presented to Melick's Town Farm for the outstanding job of marketing farm products.
(L to R) Society President Earl Ervey, Denise, Peter, John and George Melick of Melick's Town Farm and Irvin Hockenbury, Hunterdon County Board of Agriculture.
20
MEMBER SERVICES
Member Services Include: Annual Dinner
The Harbinger Annual Report Delegates Luncheon Membership Directory
At the Annual Dinner Commissioner Bob Shinn presents Bill Pettit with the Eagle Award from the Department of Environmental Protection.
The recipients of the President's Award given for their generous financial support of Ag Society programs.
The awards were presented at the Delegate's Luncheon at the Annual State Agriculture Convention.
21
FINANCIAL STANDING 1999 INCOME Opening Balance Accounts Receivable Ag in the Classroom Ag Leadership Development Annual Dinner Farmers Against Hunger Interest Earned Legislators' Tour Membership Dues Other Fundraising Total Income 1999 Budget $105,000.00 0.00 30,000.00 78,000.00 5,000.00 120,000.00 1,000.00 12,000.00 60,000.00 1,000.00 $412,000.00 1999 Actual $120,213.23 25,913.00 11,115.00 56,555.82 6,160.00 113,355.07 315.40 9,055.00 57,390.00 614.00 $400,686.52
ASSETS Escrow Account Ginny Mae PSE 
Total Assets
$79,600.00
$81,70 5.59
EXPENDITURES Ag in the Classroom Ag Leadership Contests and Awards Farmers Against Hunger Legislators Tour Membership Drive 
22
FINANCIAL STANDING Chart
23
24
NEW JERSEY AGRICULTURAL SOCIETY PO Box 331 Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0331 (609) 394-7766 www.state.nj.us/agriculture/agsociety
The following supporters have made major contributions to the New Jersey Agricultural Society in the past year.
We thank them for their continued generosity.
Government Agencies New Jersey Department of Agriculture New Jersey Department of Community Affairs United States Department of Agriculture
Corporations Fleet Bank American Cyanamid American Farm Publications Ocean Spray Cranberries Seabrook Brothers 
Foundations Agway Foundation Corella 
Organizations Atlantic County Board of Agriculture Bergen County Board of Agriculture Burlington County Board of Agriculture Camden County Board of Agriculture Cape May County Board of Agriculture Cumberland County Board of Agriculture Gloucester County Board of Agriculture Hunterdon County Board of Agriculture Mercer County Board of Agriculture Middlesex County Board of Agriculture Monmouth County Board of Agriculture Morris County Board of Agriculture Ocean County Board of Agriculture Salem County Board of Agriculture Somerset County Board of Agriculture Union County Board of Agriculture New Jersey Tomato Council Cooperative Association New Jersey Farm Bureau Jersey Fruit Co-operative Association New Jersey Nursery 
Friends -- $250 and more Lewis Arno Bitters Brothers Art Brown Glen Summit Nurseries Waldac Farm Dearborn Farm Frank Donio, Inc.
Delicious Orchards Estate of Clinton Gaventa Helis Enterprises Plant Food Company Medford Nursery Clifford Michel Centerton Nursery Emily Rosen DeCosta Fruit Company Scott Farm Nursery Wightman Farm Zee Orchards River Lea Farm Trent-Jones, Inc.
Marino Brothers Family of Dr. John Flemer Millstone Valley Nursery Boxwood Farm
