[shim_bl.gif] [shim_bl.gif]
I am still very curious about the possible advancements of the program.
Thank you Ryan Scott Long 12/8/2003 The Hubble Space Telescope (HST) is the first observatory designed for extensive maintenance and refurbishment in orbit.
While other U.S. spacecraft have been retrieved or repaired by astronauts, none was so thoroughly designed for orbital servicing as HST. 12/5/2003 i love the access to your site and all of the pictures of solar systems, galaxies, nebulas etc. keep up the good work and may we someday find what we are looking for and be able to understand sincerely Steven R. Craig 11/26/2003 I just want to say that the Hubble Space Telescop is, was and will be a big step in our desperate search for the truth.
Ihope we can findit!!!! 11/16/2003 I AM 57 YEARS OLD AND HAVE ALWAYS HAD A FACINATION FOR THE STARS.
I THANK YOU FOR HAVING SITES LIKE THIS THAT I CAN SEE WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE.
I WOULD GIVE ANYTHING TO BE ABLE TO SEE IT ALL FIRST HAND, I MEAN TO BE ABLE TO TRAVEL INTO SPACE AND JUST SEE MY HOME PLANET FIRST HAND JUST ONCE IN MY LIFE.
ALLEN RITTENHOUSE 11/4/2003 hey 10/18, eyes don't "see" anything without a brain, and alot of people are very bad at taking in and making sense of information, eyes can easily be tricked.
Maybe nutrinos are like acceptance.
They fly through everything yet are rarely captured.
My point being, which I admit I think I don't get out and talk to people enough.
If I did I wouldn't say that the most beatiful things I have encountered in my life are concepts of things,not the actual image, yet I feel the eye does allows me to put some kind of perspective on everything even if I'm not seeing it in a picture 11/4/2003 I was just wondering why the photograph of "Embryonic Stars Emerging from Stellar Eggs" has been massacred? It looks like the original picture untouched would have shown enough contrast, but that didn't seem like the purpose of the chopping of the picture, so what gives? 10/30/2003 Many thanks for allowing me access to this magnificent project,it is absolutely mind boggling.
10/29/2003 didn't mean it it rocks 10/29/2003 this place stinks 10/27/2003 I like to get Information on Hubble Telescope and images it has taken in space.
I mailing address is Carson City Rd. Greenville, MI.48838 Thank you for your time.
Sincerely, Adam J. Mercier 10/21/2003 O my god you guys have great colorful pictures.this is so cool 10/20/2003 Why dont you have a live broadcast of what the hubble telescope is seeing? :( 10/18/2003 GOD GAVE US EYES TO SEE THINGS, HUBBLE GAVE US THE EYES TO SEE THE MOST BEAUTIFUL OF THOSE 10/18/2003 GOD GAVE US EYES TO SEE THINGS, HUBBLE GAVE US THE EYES TO SEE THE MOST BEAUTIFUL OF THOSE THINGS 10/7/2003 I started reading the book Cosmos, again! I was wondering if there are any last images of voyager or other such vehicles.
Is voyager on it's way to pluto? Will it ever be able to send im ages again, or has the power depleated? Most Sincerely, Darres... 10/6/2003 Who paid for the hubble telescope? who maintains it? at what cost? (for a school project) 10/4/2003 Great web page 10/3/2003 I have a question.
Can the hubble telescope look far enough out in space to see the beginning of time? 9/26/2003 There is no such thing as big bang -- no one has ever seen some windows, doors, plaster, wires, siding, lumber, metal, etc... all put together and then blown up and then coming back together as a house! It's prepostorous!! Honestly, even a second grader understands that.
9/24/2003 hi,we are trying to do a project and this sight needs to be more specific with info and needs to have stuff like size and names of stars regards hayley and clare p.s the rest of the sight is ok..
9/23/2003 why don't you do live streaming video feeds from the hubble telesco.pe? this would be much more exciting 9/23/2003 Thanks you people for be to open and show us all this amazing things.
Thanks from Australia Leo 9/18/2003 this site has helped me a lot in learning about the Hubble space program.
Thanks! 9/18/2003 In my science project, it asked my to say what year the Hubble Space telescope was built in.
And i couldn't answer my question because you didn't have the answer on your web site. thanks for nothing.
9/17/2003 What can I say - WOW! What an awesome universe we live in! Sure gives our daily lives some perspective! 9/15/2003 To Whom it may concern: Dear Sir/Madam, I stumbled into your Hubble Telescope Project by accident a few days ago, and I have take the opportunity to look at a lot of the pictures of our solar system, and the other photos of space gasses collected, and many other such photos.
I just wanted to tell you how beautiful of a website you have.
Keep up the good work,,,,Sincerely Yours ,,,William Burke.
9/13/2003 I just stumbled over this website and I'm amazed with the information presented.
Honestly, I could just sit here all day and click the hubble tracking screen! Even though you folks are getting a bad rap lately, I believe your work is essential to the USA..
not to mention all humanity.
Keep up the good work and don't listen to the critics.
The entire space program deserves a pat on the back from where I sit.
Opinions are like... well you know.
9/11/2003 So did or did you not come up with the hubble telescope 9/11/2003 When was the Hubble telescope launched into space? I have learned that the time was on April 20,1990, but it is on April 25,1990.
What is the difference? 9/11/2003 When was the Hubble telescope launched into space? I have learned that the time was on April 20,1990, but it is on April 25,1990.
What is the difference? 9/10/2003 can other people request that a picture of a specific location be taken by the telescope? 9/8/2003 i really think that some of your pitchers are pretty cool.
Im in school and i have never seen any thinkg so cool thank you for these grate pitchers.
9/8/2003 Nice site! You should check out car covers, classic car covers, car bras, classic car bras dash mats, tonneau covers , seat covers, tire covers, floor mats and many other auto accessories and products at excellent prices.
I think it would be good to add this link to your site.
9/5/2003 I WUOLD LIKE TO SEE SOME MORE PICTURE ABOUT OUTER SPACE AND BEYOND.O 9/2/2003 I hope everyone responsible for these pictures and the information on this site knows how much their work is appreciated.
This site is so interesting and beautiful, and it is an excellent piece of work.
Thank-you very much.
-- Dan Kempf Springfield, Ohio (Father 
And I understand you have the intent of launching a new orbital telescope in about 12 - 13 years.
I also understand the new telescope will work on -- hmmmm -- not the best memory in the world -- ultraviolet or infrared or something like that.
If the new telescope is going to operate on one light wave-length, then doesn't it make sense to keep Hubble in orbit? You say you have all these money saving methods in place including recycling modules.
It makes sense to me that it is more cost effective to go into space to upgrade two telescopes than to just upgrade one.
Further, if one telescope can do something the other cannot, then keeping both functioning might just be a good idea in the long run.
If nothing else, Hubble has inspired many of us to take a more active interest in outer space and contrary to what the media says, many Americans are still greatly interested in launches -- the media just isn't telling us when they are happening and they aren't following up on it by reporting it unless there's a disaster.
My guess is they are bored and would rather go on and on and on about sensationalistic "news" such as O.J.'s murder trial -- which everyone got tired of and I, for one, did not even watch.
I would rather see what Hubble's been up to and frequently get on your site to check out the latest digital images.
I don't understand all of them, but I thoroughly enjoy seeing them.
I would like to see Hubble stay afloat, or at the very least, not brought down until the other telescope is in place.
But will we see images from the other telescope? This is a side note: I realize one of your concerns is the budget.
Is there any restriction to marketing the beautiful photos that Hubble sends back? I'm sure you have various items at the Space Center, but not everyone travels there.
And I know you have a catalogue that sells various items.
I've been trying for years to get checks with pictures from the Hubble Telescope on them.
No one has them as far as I know.
I'd buy them and if part of the cost went to keeping Hubble in the air, I'd tell my friends and all the members of Richland astronomy club.
Yes, I know it will cost in the hundreds of thousands of dollars to keep Hubble afloat, but I also believe there are ways the American public can help without our taxes being raised.
I've gone on and on -- Sorry -- I just feel passionately about keeping Hubble in space.
I'm serious about the checks if you ever have them made up...
Thanks.
Debi-Ann Ward 8/31/2003 Thanks The site is great.
Ed 8/31/2003 ALL OF THE OPTIONS IN YOUR IMAGE GALLERY GO TO YOUR MARS PROJECT.
NOT THAT IT ISN'T COOL BUT I WOULD LIKE TO SEE SOME OF THE OTHER THINGS LISTED THERE.
8/30/2003 Hubble Project, What good has come out of studying things in space with a high cost scope? Do I have anything in my possesion that makes my life any better? In my house? My car? My medicine cabinet? Pioneers have set out, many on there own, and have brought back useful information for future travelers.
Is that what you do? Sould I as taxpayer pay for this? What do I get out of it.
Better yet what does society get for it? High tech tools are fascinating but expensive.
I do not think that Nasa promtes the benifits the average joe might recieve because someone at Nasa looked at a black hole using a high tech expensive tool.
8/30/2003 I just wanted to let you know that your web site has been very help full I have to do a project for school about the hubble and I got all my info from you guys and it is all very interesting thank you 8/28/2003 How difficult would it be to modify the Hubble telescope so that it could be permanently attached to the International Space Station once the Hubble is decommissioned in 2010? 8/27/2003 I think the Specialists should hear this one! The people should I think hear the sounds and see the sights that the digital imagery is setting before the masses.
The way I see it and it is a small view, is that the one other galactic anomily seeming to be a black hole is emmitting a gasious cloud at around 40% the speed of light.
8/27/2003 Hi how old is the hubble what year was it put in outter space.
And can i ask for the latest pic of mars plz thanx 8/27/2003 Hi i was looking at some new pictures of mars at 10:00 pm.
Then the pictures that i was looking at i could not find them again.
Please help me thank you.
8/24/2003 I would like to buy Hubble as is, where is, when the government deems it necessary to retire the observatory.
As a private enterprise, we would run it much less expensively, obviously.
Yours in service, Bubba Nicholson 8/23/2003 Thank you guys for showing me that there are things thant go beyond my imagination...keep up the good work!!! greets from Nunspeet, the Netherlands 8/21/2003 To: Dr. Anne Kinny If funds to keep Hubble maintained and up-dated are the issue, why doesn't NASA or some other organization establish a way for the millions of amateur astronomers world wide to contribute to its upkeep.
In return it could also be dedicated to those astronomers and possibly be used by them on the basis of a lottery or approved scientic research proposal.
8/17/2003 The Hubble Telescope could be launched into deep space or launched to a decaying orbit into the sun.
8/17/2003 Hi, I have never done this before but hubbles's pictures leave me in complete awe of our universe and just seems to proove that somewhere out there, there just has to be more life and not just life but intelligent life and I often find myself wandering if they are not also looking out at thier night time sky and thinking "gee maybe somewhere out there there are more intelligent beings not so unlike us."
Perhaps one day we can all meet!! 8/17/2003 I think the group in charge of the Hubble's fate should really consider bringing it back and placing it in the Smithsonian if it is not going to be serviced and left operational.
Maybe retrieving the telescope could be worked in with some other shuttle mission so it wouldn't be a costly one.
The Hubble has been on of the greatest advancements in astronomy that the world has ever seen and it would be sad to see it burnt up and dumped in the ocean like a piece of garbage.
It should be considered one of the few real wonders of science.
Thanks for listening Bill 8/16/2003 Personally I think that if there are not going to be any more missions to service the HST, then it should be brought back to earth and put in a museum. to do otherwise in my opinion would not be very smart considering the advances that the HST as provided us.
another point is all you would really need to do is take off the solar panels and put it back in the loading bay of the shuttle considering that NASA must still have the mounting hardware stored from the origional mission to put it into orbit.
and the saftey risk involved to bring it back in the shuttle instead of degrading the orbit is safer.
and one last thing after the HST is back on earth it also can be studied to see what long term effects of space is on our orbiting items to improve things for them.
8/16/2003 Apparently, plans to bring the Hubble back to Earth after its life is over have been rejected.
WHY? This device isn't just a big telescope, its a symbol of great achievement! Look at all the wonder and awe that we felt from the multitude of images brought back from its deep explorations.
This thing needs to be in the Smithsonian, not the bottom of the ocean.
8/16/2003 I just read that the Hubble may not be serviced, because future shuttle missions will need to be dedicated to building the ISS.
I have just one question: Hubble has resulted in over 260 scientific publications per year and enough data to generate many more--how many scientific publications have resulted from the ISS? To me it seems wrong to kill off something with a demonstrated record of scientific achievements to throw more money into something that does not seem to have much promise of returning scientific results.
Todd R. Johnson Associate Professor of Health Informatics University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston 8/15/2003 having read about the possibility of extending hubble's life to after the launch of the james webb telescope (provided a scientific case can be made out), can the two telescopes be used together as an optical interferometer? 8/14/2003 What's with all this talk about dumping the Hubble in the ocean when we're done with it! Why not send it on a journey to the nearest star? What a message that would be to any other race! Gee - maybe we can get some pictures sent back here along the way to wherever.
Please pass it on to whoever might have interest.
Thank you.
:) 8/8/2003 Any pictures of Mars, especially during the close-up.
8/8/2003 Really like your site and what you are doing,,we have an space page at www.muleskinner58.com please sign our guest book and keep up the good pictures ..Thanks Lea and Toby and Foggy the Wonder Mule 8/4/2003 Just reading the debate about decommissioning the telescope.
Has anyone considered selling/leasing to private organizations? Perhaps our American entrepreneurial spirit can find a reason to come up with 700 million to keep Hubble in orbit.
Seem a shame to depend on the goverment for everything.
8/4/2003 In regards to the planned destruction of the Hubble Telescope, has anyone given thought that the metals and other parts might be useful in the space station? I'd think that the cost of moving it to the station would be far less than the cost of moving something from earth to the station and additionally there would be little of the waste that would occur if the telescope was sent to crash into the ocean.
8/4/2003 Sir(s), With all the scientific information that the Hubble has brought to the world, why is NASA thinking of simply ending it like placing a horse out to stud? Millions of taxpayers money has been spent on placing it in orbit, maintaining it, for all of mankind.
There has to be a better solution since I really can't believe that it is at the end of its usefulness.
My suggestion would be to modify the unit and place it into another orbit either between the Earth and the moon or for that matter, place it in orbit around the moon where even better pictures can be achieved, perhaps on the dark side.
At least in this way it can still bring important information to the world and scientific community.
Isn't two telescopes better than one in the long run even if they are entirely different in nature? 8/3/2003 Re: Deactivating Hubble...
As I read the news, it looks like the Bean Counters want to plan to deactivate Hubble in 2010 because there is going to be a "replacement" for Hubble in 2011 -- Yeah right! Since when has any space mission gone into space at the date planned? So the Bean Counters pull the plug in 2010 and then Oopps! The "replacement" next generation telescope is -- gosh it's not ready! Who would have guessed.
Now if we can spend a BILLION dollars a month in Iraq -- we sure as Hell can find a few bucks to service and maintain Hubble.
The time to deactivate Hubble is when it no longer produces relevant science -- not before.
Ken Warner Mammoth Lakes, CA 8/1/2003 Just found your site,looks interesting.Will give more thoughts later.
THANKS 8/1/2003 Have there been any serious theological discussions about Hubble project discoveries tending to con firm the "big bang" theory? 8/1/2003 Can't HST be put into Lunar orbit.
There has been discussions in the past about putting a telescope in orbit around the moon, so why not try the idea with hubble.
After all you are going to have to fit rockets to it anyway, why not try out t he idea first and if it does not work what have you lost, but if it does work!!! 7/30/2003 There seems to be something causing the sun to appear brighter than normal- along with seismic activities way higher than normal- Can you explain what the object is that seems to be rounding the sun from the ORION vacinity? This is a serious question in hopes for a serious answer.
Thank you.
7/30/2003 Is it possible to see images of Mars on these days that is close to us.
Thanks.Jesus 7/29/2003 Don't end the HST, it's to valuable to Space Science and Astronomy.
7/28/2003 Please don't take down Hubble.
Please.
Hubble has become our friend and our eye into wonder.
Let Hubble continue until it fails on its own.
And if you MUST take it down, please don't name the new telescope Webb.
What an awful name.
The Webb Telescope.
It sounds like it's spying on the internet.
Hubble sounds full of hope and fun.
Let us keep our old friend.
Thank you, CJ Wright Dublin, GA 7/27/2003 thanks for an exellent site.
7/27/2003 I cannot even fathom the notion of allowing the Hubble Space Telescope to meet an earlier-than-necessary demise; but then I am not a professional astronomer and I do not understand all the various considerations at hand with regard to making such a decision, so I must defer to those whose reasonings are more complete.
A meeting of the minds is soon to take place on this most important question.
As a very concerned citizen, amateur astronomer, teacher, and taxpayer, may I add a simple, but enormously important charge to those of you personally responsible for making this decision: Remember your scientific integrity.
You know what I am talking about: Do not cling to your forethoughts on this matter too tightly.
Listen to each other carefully; examine all the alternatives; look long upon the impact your collective decision will make.
I suspect the decision may be partly based on political considerations - funding, to be specific.
I would hope that you do not allow such considerations to carry much weight at this upcoming conference.
I believe if you give the public enough time to develop a serious understanding of what taking Hubble off-line will mean, I think you will find a volunteer source of supplemental funds to keep it alive and well.
There is still time to do this.
The public needs and deserves to understand the distinction between valid, scientific reasons for ending the Hubble program and the character and extent of all political or monetary reasons.
But first do the science.
Then we can debate the value of continuing Hubble's unprecedented contributions to knowledge in terms of dollars.
7/27/2003 Oh, and I forgot (almost): Must we still make the oceans our garbage dumps? There must be a different method - perhaps destruction way out there in space... 7/27/2003 Take one day's expenditure from the Iraq "Peacekeeping" Mission, and keep Hubble up there! (I know, I know...)
But you could start a donation pledge site, and if only 300,000 of us gave $2.00 each, you'd have the $$$ for keeping that marvel going.
Yes? It is doing so much, and what if the Webb doesn't even make it into orbit? A bird in the hand... 7/27/2003 After reading this morning's (7-27-03) NY Times article on the planned demise of HST with the ambition of replacing it; I'd like to suggest waiting until Webb is orbiting and functional first.
I hate to be so pessimistic, but that does lessen the odds of having NO telescope were there to be a catastrophe.
Romantically, it seems like the money to buy an afternoon's worth of bombs to pummel some destitute nation could be re-allocated to maintain both telescopes, so perhaps this discussion should be put off for another couple of years.
7/27/2003 Great site.
Hubble has many friends.
If there was a non-profit fund to extend the life of Hubble, I think people would contribute to it.
7/27/2003 ARGGH! Dismantling th eHubble is just plain stupid! Why is anyone even considering doing so? Because of a deadline? Are there no more thinking personnel in the project to question the necessity of this course of action? Hubble has adapted and changed (as mentioned in the New York Times 7/27/03).
Why stop the project before the other one is in place? Why not 2 telescopes? What's wrong with that? Please tell me ther eis someone with common sense still at NASA and is asking the right questions! 7/27/2003 Please do not allow the Hubble's mission to end in 2010.
It has been the greatest source of scientific inspiration built on profoundly new information since the empire-of-science-building voyages of the Royal Navy in the 18th and 19th centuries.
We will be watching both the skies and your decisions.
7/21/2003 this is cool.
7/21/2003 Dear Sir, Hello.
Have a nice day.
As you are one of the NASA TEAM, Pls I have a recommendation to have OCEAN MANAGEMENT TEAM, Its just like a fleet; with a landing surface for helicoter,airplane and port for ships; waste collector(floating or submerged garbagges),study of Tuna,Dolphine,whales,shark and other marine life in the oceans and also served as communication ,security...a Hubble at the middle of the oceans.
Thank you very much.
Sincerely Your's, Pedro L. Angco,Jr Oroquieta City, Philippines 7/20/2003 I just have to say, way back when...
When we were about to fix the Hubble Telescope, I thought it was a gigantic waste of money, but I am glad to admit I was deeply wrong.
This view of space is by far, the most fascinating.
I am greatful to the man who thought this up, the astronauts who put it up there, the team of people and researchers who keep us looking at the stars, and above all, the people who keep this website up and running!!! It does take a great deal to update images and add info, so THANK YOU!! I wish there were words to tell you all how much I am thankful for what you are doing.
Again, thank you so much for providing this site and it's information.
7/17/2003 hi how is it in space.
we live in rosebud victoria.do you miss anything from earth i would miss tv and real food how do you have showers? do you smell like a potty?she weird that one is it cool to float everywhere.
how long have you been ther and how long are you staying for? well better get back to school bye 7/14/2003 After the last Hubble mission in 2010 what is going to happen to it? I would hope rather than letting it fall back to Earth that you could rig it up as part of the ISS it would be a shame to burn away that expensive piece of hardware.
7/1/2003 im doing a science project and i need some info on the planets.could you please send me some info.thanks.oh and could you put more info on your webs. [shim.gif] [icon_bullet_2tr9pxb.gif]
[inside_zblue.gif] Contact: webmaster@hubble.gsfc.nasa.gov, Global Science 
Page Last Updated: December 9, 2003 [inside_r19_c01.gif]
