REDUCING DEMAND THROUGH PREVENTION It is widely acknowledged that a key way to reduce the demand for illegal drugs in the long run is through prevention.
Prevention is critically important in keeping new users from entering the pipeline to become chronic, hardcore users and in breaking the cycle through which children of addicts become users themselves.
This section describes OJP-funded demonstration efforts aimed at preventing illicit drug use, primarily focused at the community level and, in particular, targeting the juvenile population at risk.
In addition, the research and evaluation initiatives described recognize the particularly complex problems posed when measuring and evaluating the impact of prevention programs.
1.
Targeting Neighborhoods Through Comprehensive, Community- Based Strategies
OJP provides leadership to facilitate the development of community-based approaches to the interrelated problems of drugs, crime and violence in our neighborhoods.
The model programs described here bring together the full range of community resources, including law enforcement, housing, educational, and health organizations to build a community- based drug control infrastructure.
These models also empower local communities through emphasis on coordinated planning and partnerships among state, local, and federal agencies that leverage public and private resources and involve broad representation and participation from community stakeholders.
A focal point in these programs is the emphasis on young people at risk.
1.1 Operation Weed and Seed--BJA, OJP/EOWS
Operation Weed and Seed is a community-based, comprehensive, multi-disciplinary approach to combating drugs, violence and gang activity in high-crime neighborhoods.
The overall goal is to weed out crime from targeted neighborhoods and then to seed the targeted sites with a wide range of prevention, intervention, and treatment programs, neighborhood revitalization, and economic development to prevent crime from recurring.
The Weed and Seed strategy emphasizes the importance of community involvement in combatting drugs and violent crime.
Community residents are empowered to assist in solving crime-related problems in their neighborhoods.
In addition, the private sector is mobilized to become involved in reducing crime and in revitalizing the targeted area.
In all 36 funded demonstration sites--which serve as models to be replicated in other high-crime areas--federal, state, and local government, the community, and the private sector work together in partnership to create a safe, crime and drug- free environment.
The Weed and Seed program encompasses four major elements:
* Enforcement, adjudication, prosecution and supervision activities are designed to target, apprehend and incapacitate violent street criminals who terrorize neighborhoods and account for a disproportionate percentage of criminal activity.
* Community policing operates in support of intensive law enforcement suppression and containment activities and provides a "bridge" to prevention, intervention and treatment, as well as to the neighborhood reclamation and revitalization components.
* Prevention, intervention and treatment focuses on activities such as youth services, school programs, community and social programs, and support groups to develop positive community attitudes towards combatting narcotics use and trafficking, and providing opportunities for neighborhood residents.
* Neighborhood restoration supports economic development activities designed to strengthen legitimate community institutions.
Programs are developed in partnership with law enforcement to organize and train citizens and resident groups to resist and repel the drug culture.
These programs improve living conditions, enhance home security procedures, allow for low-cost physical improvements within neighborhoods, develop long-term efforts to renovate and maintain housing, as well as provide educational, economic, social, recreational and other vital opportunities.
In addition to the 36 fully-funded sites, there are approximately 100 sites which either have developed or are developing strategies for "Official Recognition."
Official Recognition is a designation accorded to sites implementing a Weed and Seed strategy without DOJ funding.
Sites which competed for funding in FY 1994 have priority eligibility for a one-time $35,000 award to fund a coordinator or for other program needs.
The Officially Recognized sites form the eligible pool for competing for full funding.
1.2 Evaluating Operation Weed and Seed--NIJ
1.2.1 National Evaluation of the Weed and Seed Program
The draft report of the process evaluation of the first 19 Weed and Seed demonstration sites offers the following suggestions:
* It is critical to bring the right people "to the table" from the start; future endeavors should include key representatives from district attorney's offices and target neighborhoods as well as federal law enforcement and municipal agencies.
* Program guidelines should continue to be structured with enough flexibility to enable communities to do what they think is needed within their neighborhoods.
* Weeding efforts should involve interagency task forces consisting of all relevant federal, state and local law enforcement agencies.
* Further documentation should be gathered on innovative enforcement efforts that were reported by the sites to have been particularly effective.
Additional research is needed on the overall quality of arrests, final disposition of cases, community response to weeding and protection of individual rights.
* Future efforts should recognize and support the critical role of local prosecutors.
They should be included from the start on interagency task forces and granted additional resources to address the increased caseloads and community involvement required by Weed and Seed.
* Community prosecution efforts should be supported and studied along with further research on prosecution strategies, rates of convictions in these prosecutions, types and lengths of sentences ultimately served by Weed and Seed offenders, and offender recidivism.
* Community policing principles and practices should be advocated and supported by the police department and city government with appropriate training, recognition, compensation and room for advancement.
* Training and technical assistance should be provided for planning and developing the dual "seeding" approach of prevention and community revitalization.
* Uniform data collection should be required and monitored.
* Further evaluations should be conducted into the impact and effectiveness of the Weed and Seed initiative, particularly in methods of supporting prevention, intervention, treatment services, and neighborhood restoration.
1.2.2 Impact Evaluation of Weed and Seed
NIJ has awarded a grant to conduct an impact evaluation of Operation Weed and Seed.
This 24-month study will evaluate eight sites (utilizing eight comparison sites) and the National Performance Review Laboratory (NPRL) as it is applied to Weed and Seed.
The eight selected sites are in Bradenton, Florida; Shreveport, Louisiana; Hartford, Connecticut; Las Vegas, Nevada; Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Seattle, Washington; Salt Lake City, Utah; and Akron, Ohio.
Process and impact data will be assessed through a multi- method approach including comparison sites, topical case studies, phone interviews, in-person interviews, observations, and records extractions.
The evaluation will focus on the following issues:
* extent to which the strategy has been implemented as intended (e.g., the extent of citizen involvement in anti- crime/anti-drug community events) * services provided in relation to the elements of the strategy (e.g., weeding, prosecution, community policing, seeding) * costs of the strategy, including federal, state, local, and private funds and in-kind resources * whether the strategy changes/reduces drug-related and violent crime in the target neighborhood * whether the strategy reduces fear of crime among residents and businesses * whether crime is displaced to adjacent neighborhoods * whether neighborhood restoration and economic development, including increased employment opportunities, has been implemented * changes in the quality of life of target neighborhoods, including perceptions of safety, education and social improvements * impact of Weed and Seed on public safety by examining the extent to which offenders have been removed (weeded) from the target areas * comparisons across Weed and Seed programs in order to examine the strengths, limitations, and issues regarding NPRL-funded sites versus non-NPRL funded sites.
Anticipated results of this study will inform policymakers and practitioners of the impact of Weed and Seed NPRL at these sites.
Findings should be useful for planned replications or expansions of Weed and Seed.
1.3 Comprehensive Communities--BJA
The Comprehensive Communities Program (CCP) encourages the development and implementation of comprehensive strategies to reduce and prevent drug-related crime and violence.
Law enforcement and other governmental agencies work in partnership with communities to address crime problems, as well as the factors that increase the risk that individuals will become involved in problem behaviors.
In FY 1994, 16 jurisdictions faced with high rates of crime and violence were selected to participate in CCP, including the four Pulling America's Communities Together (Project PACT) sites.
Each jurisdiction was provided with planning funds to develop a strategy that demonstrates a jurisdictionwide commitment to community policing, coordination among public and private agencies (including social services, public health, and others), and an active role by the community in problem solving.
NIJ is evaluating the coordination and implementation process in six of the sites (Baltimore, MD; Boston, MA; Columbia, SC; Fort Worth, TX; Salt Lake City, UT; and Seattle, WA) through case studies, observations, and interviews.
The evaluation will focus on:
* how comprehensive community approaches to crime and drug abuse prevention evolve; * how each of the sites implements its comprehensive strategy; and * how differences in pre-existing external and internal environments and structures affect the evolution of a comprehensive community-wide drug abuse and crime control effort.
Each of the 16 CCP sites has implemented crime control strategies.
For example, in Salt Lake City, Community Action Teams, representing citizens, police, probation, code enforcement, the health department, and the mayor's office, are engaged in implementing neighborhood-based public safety activities to make communities safe again.
Part of that effort is the juvenile court with diversion to treatment which now operates to serve over 400 youth who will receive intensive supervision, group counseling, and substance abuse prevention services.
In Boston, the CCP initiative has created neighborhood partnership councils in 10 districts and has trained the core team members of those counsels in planning and operating neighborhood-based initiatives.
In addition, a One-Stop Drug Diversion program is starting which focuses on juvenile and family drug abuse problems through a holistic justice/social service approach.
Hartford has started to reshape the delivery of many neighborhood services throughout the city under its CCP initiative.
Police, utilities, and selected social services have been decentralized to directly support communities in solving crime and quality of life problems.
Phoenix and Fort Worth are implementing comprehensive community strategies by expanding neighborhood-based Weed and Seed efforts in existing target neighborhoods into new communities.
Four sites participating in the Comprehensive Communities Program are engaged in a companion effort--Pulling America's Communities Together (PACT).
This initiative encourages the development of multi-jurisdictional crime prevention and control strategies in a partnership among local communities; federal, state, and local governments; businesses; and private foundations.
Metropolitan Denver, Metropolitan Atlanta, the State of Nebraska, and Washington, D.C., are applying CCP funding to implement portions of their strategies.
Although the strategies focus on violence prevention, all of the sites are implementing community- based initiatives which address drug education and intervention, recognizing that violence and serious crime are symptomatic of drug use and abuse.
Denver, Atlanta, and Washington, D.C., use the Communities That Care process to identify risk and protective factors and have selected appropriate promising approaches to meet neighborhood issues, including an emphasis on drug abuse.
Denver is expanding its drug court capacity to provide adjudication services at night to handle the increasing number of drug felony filings.
In addition, a special project to target "at risk" youths will begin to build their self esteem and independence and reduce the likelihood of involvement in drugs, gangs, and guns.
In Atlanta, jurisdictions will expand the Adolescent Substance Abuse Program throughout elementary, middle, and high schools to ensure early and comprehensive drug abuse education opportunities.
Further, a judicial program coordinator and probation officer within the Cobb County Juvenile Court are dedicated to identify, screen, and assess juvenile offenders for substance abuse, develop intervention and treatment strategies, administer drug screening, and monitor cases of juvenile participants.
2.
Anti-Drug Coalitions and Partnerships
2.1 Communities In Action To Prevent Drug Abuse II "Reclaiming Our Neighborhoods"--BJA
Through a cooperative funding agreement negotiated with the Employment and Training Administration, U.S. Department of Labor, BJA continues its work at the grassroots level with the National Training and Information (NTIC) in conducting a unique crime, violence, and drug reduction demonstration program.
In recent years, BJA has tested the concept of partnership and coalition building at the neighborhood level to mobilize citizens and representatives of local units of government to work closely on prevention education and providing direct services to youth and their families; to test innovative community-based prevention strategies; and to reestablish and revitalize drug-ridden communities.
Through Reclaiming Our Neighborhoods, NTIC is focusing its efforts on: (1) the building and/or enhancing of local planning teams and partnerships that include public officials, law enforcement, private industry councils, and other public/private service providers (e.g., businesses, religious institutions, schools, community organizations); and (2) the development and implementation of short, intermediate, and long-term strategies regarding community policing, prevention education, and job training opportunities placement.
Of the more than 40 groups that entered into a competitive selection process, 11 nonprofit neighborhood-based organizations were selected to take part in the 2-year demonstration program begun on October 1, 1995.
Project participants include:
* Action Through Churches Together, Virginia, MN * Education Safety Organizing Project, Cleveland, OH * Northwest Bronx Community 
2.2 National Night Out--BJA
Administered by the National Association of Town Watch of Wynnewood, Pennsylvania, National Night Out (NNO) is the culmination of a year-long effort of coalition and partnership building among law enforcement, public and private service providers, businesses, community-based organizations, residents, youth groups, and others to coordinate the development of comprehensive neighborhood- wide strategies to combat crime, violence, and drug abuse.
A recent addition to the program is Project 365 which encourages law enforcement and citizen volunteer leaders to target and assess particular problem areas in their city or town such as drugs, graffiti, or a lack of Neighborhood Watch groups.
This action is followed by the group working together over the next year to implement change that will help resolve identified issues and needs.
First launched in 1984 by the National Association of Town Watch (NATW), a total of 400 communities from 23 states participated in community building and crime watch activities.
Since that time, the initiative has continued to grow and flourish in both metropolitan and rural areas.
The 12th annual National Night Out, which culminated on August 1, 1995, involved a record 28.1 million people in 8,820 communities from all 50 states, U.S. territories, Canadian cities, and military bases worldwide.
Communities of all sizes celebrated NNO in diverse ways.
Reports show a broad array of events, including:
* 750 block parties citywide in Minneapolis, MN, involving more than 35,000 residents and coordinated by the community crime prevention division of the Minneapolis Police Department.
* A kick-off at City Hall Park in New York City attended by the mayor, police commissioner, and other city officials.
* An NNO Cavalcade in Boston, MA, led by the mayor and police commissioner that traveled across the city, stopping at each police district to present awards to volunteer crime fighters.
* Through Project 365, Somerville, New Jersey, police and citizens worked in the South Bridge and Second Street area to curtail the selling, distribution, and use of drugs.
* Project 365 leaders in Puyallup, Washington, targeted a low income housing complex because of frequent problems involving domestic violence, drugs, and juvenile delinquency.
The police department conducted special training for apartment managers on substance abuse prevention, dealing with problem tenants, and personal safety, resulting in an Apartment Watch program that has significantly reduced calls for service.
2.3 Race Against Drugs--OJJDP
The Race Against Drugs (RAD) program is a collaborative effort with BJA, the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The purpose of the program is to implement a unique drug awareness, educational, and prevention program in 50 sites that will reach at-risk young people, many of whom likely live in public housing and crime-infested areas.
The program uses motor sports racing events and well-recognized racing heroes as role models to rally the community, family, children, or schools to get involved in exciting, colorful, fun, anti- drug programs.
2.4 Faith Community Involvement--OJJDP
The Congress of National Black Churches' (CNBC) National Anti-Drug/Violence Technical Assistance and Training program is providing a national training and technical assistance program to increase public awareness and mobilize residents to address the problems of drug abuse and related crimes in targeted communities throughout the United States.
The program works to summon, focus, and coordinate church, public, and community leadership to launch local anti-drug campaigns.
2.5 Drug-Abuse Prevention Technical Assistance Voucher Program--OJJDP
The Drug-Abuse Prevention Technical Assistance Voucher Program provides technical assistance funding to neighborhood organizations throughout the country.
The purpose of the program is to provide assistance to help organizations establish or strengthen youth programs and encourage activities designed to reclaim communities from drug abuse and violence and to reduce delinquency.
The emphasis of the program is on building the capacity of local groups to fight drug abuse and crime and develop healthy, safe, and economically-sound environments in urban neighborhoods.
3.
Focusing Prevention Activities on Our Youth
3.1 Safe Haven Program--BJA
The Safe Haven Program is sponsored jointly by the Departments of Justice and Education and joins school, health, and education components in 10 demonstration sites.
The goal of a Safe Haven is to enable neighborhood youth and adults to become healthy, productive, law-abiding citizens, free from drug and alcohol abuse, through the establishment of a neighborhood-based multi-service center, located in a safe environment.
* A Safe Haven is a multi-service center where a variety of youth and adult services are co-located in a highly visible and accessible facility that is secure against crime and illegal drug activity.
It brings together law enforcement, community services, basic and continuing education, health, recreation, employment, and other key sector to provide opportunities, skills, and recognition for young people, their family members, and other residents of the community in a safe environment.
A special emphasis is placed on education about preventing drug abuse.
* The preferable location in which to locate a Safe Haven is in a neighborhood school, since it is usually a well-known facility with ample room for a broad variety of activities.
A school has certain attributes that tend to make it defensible against crime, and often it is protected by drug- free zone laws.
The facility should be open from early morning through the evening, and the services should be provided by highly experienced personnel.
* If it is not possible to locate the Safe Haven in a school setting, other sites may be considered, such as a community center, a public housing development, a church or temple, or other secure, accessible and ap- propriately equipped building.
3.2 Drug Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.)--BJA
D.A.R.E. is a drug and violence prevention collaborative effort between education and law enforcement whose primary design is to equip students at the elementary, middle, and high school levels with appropriate life skills that will aid them in decision-making.
To date, more than 22,000 community-oriented law enforcement officers from 7,000 communities throughout the country have provided the core (elementary) curriculum to over 25 million youth.
In 1995 alone, it is expected that 5.5 million children (representative of 250,000 classrooms) will participate in the program and an additional 20 million more students will be impacted by other components of the D.A.R.E.
Program, which include: D.A.R.E.
Junior High (10 lessons); D.A.R.E.
Senior High (6 lessons with 3 follow-up lessons by the teacher); D.A.R.E.
Parent Program; and, the D.A.R.E.
+ P.L.U.S.
(Play and Learn Under Supervision) after-school activity program.
The core curriculum (K-4th grades) focuses on child safety and prevention issues.
Students are alerted to the potential dangers in the misuse of drugs, medicine, and other substances.
There is recognition of the need to help students at this level develop an awareness that alcohol and tobacco are also drugs.
Under the 5-6th grade curriculum, D.A.R.E. helps students to understand the effects of mind- altering drugs and the consequences; teaches resistance techniques--ways to say "NO"; builds self-esteem; makes students aware of the kinds of peer pressure they may face and helps them learn appropriate responses to say no to offers to use drugs; helps students recognize stress and suggests ways to deal with it other than by taking drugs; helps students identify nonviolent ways to deal with anger and disagreement; and, helps students develop the understanding and skills needed to analyze and resist media presentations about alcohol, drug use, and violence.
The emphasis of the D.A.R.E.
Junior High Program is on providing information and skills which enable students to resist peer pressure and other influences in making personal choices.
The lessons concentrate on helping students to manage their feelings of anger and aggression and show how conflicts may be resolved without resorting to violence or using alcohol or drugs.
The D.A.R.E.
Senior High Program was developed to coincide with the everyday situations students encounter in their environment.
The curriculum addresses drug abuse and its effect on communities and young people.
Specifically, the program reinforces information and skills which enable students to act in their own best interest when facing high-risk, low-gain choices.
This includes resisting peer pressure and other influences which can affect those choices.
Equal emphasis is placed on helping students handle feelings of anger without causing harm to themselves or others.
The D.A.R.E.
Parent Program addresses the growing need for comprehensive family support and involvement in school programs.
It is intended for any adult interested in ensuring the health, safety, and development of life skills for children.
The program provides information on: communication and self-esteem building; risk factors associated with young children; basic information on drug usage and stages of adolescent chemical dependency; peer pressure and protective factors; violence and conflict resolution; and opportunities for networking in the community.
BJA also supports D.A.R.E. technical assistance, training, and accreditation through five D.A.R.E.
Regional Training Centers (RTCs).
Working in conjunction with D.A.R.E.
America, the non-profit organization that is responsible for the program's oversight and for maintaining up-to-date curricula, RTCs provide: D.A.R.E.
Officer Training for new officers; D.A.R.E.
In-service Training for experienced officers; Mentor Officer Training; D.A.R.E.
Parent Program Training for instructors who work with and train parents using the D.A.R.E. curriculum; D.A.R.E. junior and senior high school student training; program development; assessments for D.A.R.E.
Training Centers; accreditation of law enforcement agencies as D.A.R.E.
Training Centers; and, monitoring and technical assistance for agencies across the country that are replicating the D.A.R.E.
Program.
In July of 1993, a Gallup Poll Survey of over 2,000 D.A.R.E. graduates showed that over 90 percent felt that D.A.R.E. assisted them in avoiding drugs and alcohol.
The program also was credited with increasing both their self-esteem and ability to deal with peer pressure.
Students reported that they had used one or two of the avoidance techniques taught to them by their D.A.R.E.
Officer.
An NIJ evaluation report is currently available entitled "Past and Future Directions of the D.A.R.E.
Program: An Evaluation Review".
This study was conducted by the Research Triangle Institute.
In summary, the evaluation found that:
* D.A.R.E. has strong support and user satisfaction that cuts across racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic lines; * D.A.R.E. programs are best at increasing students' knowledge about substance abuse and enhancing their social skills; and * A revised D.A.R.E. curriculum that includes more participatory learning is planned for implementation.
3.3 Cities in Schools Partnership Programs--OJJDP
The Federal Interagency Partnership program reduces school dropout rates and school-related violence by mobilizing and coordinating public and private sector resources within a given community and focusing communities' efforts and resources on the schoolhouse.
This program supports continuation of the national school dropout prevention model developed and implemented by Cities In Schools, Inc.
(CIS).
CIS provides training and technical assistance to states and local communities enabling them to adapt and implement the CIS model.
The model brings social, employment, mental health, drug prevention, entrepreneurship, and other resources to high-risk youth and their families at the school level.
The goal of the program is to create and support local programs with the capacity to serve 150,000 students and their families, and positively impact an additional 600,000 young people annually by September 30, 1996.
Also, CIS is fostering working relationships between the local CIS programs, the National Network, and federal partners of CIS to strategically apply available state, federal, and local private and public resources to improve the quality and expand the capacity of local CIS programs.
The CIS Partnership With the Department of the Army program supports the expansion and enhancement of the Junior Reserve Officer Training Corp (JROTC) Program by establishing up to ten Partnership Academies, enhancing existing JROTC and Career Academies through CIS training and technical assistance, and implementing special collaborative initiatives for the benefit of CIS and JROTC programs.
Enrolling JROTC cadets in CIS programs gives the cadets access to such CIS programs as counseling, conflict resolution, health and medical issues, alcohol and other drug abuse prevention, reducing family and classroom violence, teen pregnancy prevention, and minority male initiatives.
CIS is also providing JROTC instructors with training in how to locate additional health and human services for their students in communities not yet served by CIS.
3.4 Children At Risk--OJJDP/BJA/NIJ
The Children At Risk (CAR) program is testing a specific intervention strategy for reducing and controlling illegal drugs and related crime in target neighborhoods of six sites and fostering healthy development among youth from drug and crime-ridden neighborhoods.
This program supports diverting inner-city youth ages 11-13 from involvement in drugs, gangs, and crime.
The program comprises two components: a service intervention component, including one-on-one case management, after school and summer programs, individual and family counseling, community policing, tutoring, mentoring, and more; and a criminal justice component, including neighborhood-based activities designed to reduce the prevalence of drug dealing and drug use.
Schools, service providers, police, and other criminal justice agencies collaborate at both a policy and service delivery level to provide a coordinated array of services and support for at-risk youths and their families.
Certain elements of the program--case management, community policing, safe passages, drug-free zones, individual and family counseling--are common to all five sites.
The sites are Austin, Bridgeport, Memphis, Newark, Savannah, and Seattle.
Preliminary analysis of initial findings reflect promising effects.
CAR youth had fewer contacts with police in the first 12 months after joining the program than youth in the randomly assigned control group (41 versus 69).
CAR youth also had fewer contact with juvenile court in the first 12 months than the control group (34 versus 71).
In addition, CAR youth were also more likely than control group youth to be promoted to the next grade (82 percent versus 70 percent for the 1993-94 school year).
These preliminary findings are based on a relatively small sample (228) and short timeframe (1 year), however.
The full evaluation will be based on a 2- year follow-up of 874 youth.
Funding for this program, including its evaluation, is provided by a partnership of public and private agencies: the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, the National Institute of Justice and the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse at Columbia University in New York.
3.5 Organizations That Promote Safe and Healthy Family Environments--OJJDP
The Parents Anonymous program enhances the capability of Parents Anonymous' state and local organizations to prevent child maltreatment and juvenile delinquency by strengthening families through Parents Anonymous' (PA) unique, self-help programming.
In the context of this self-help program, PA addresses those alcohol and other drug abuse issues through their work with parents who recognize and determine to deal with their substance abuse problems or abuse problems of other family members.
PA also serves as a continuing support group for recovering substance abusers and/or their family members.
Finally, there are certain PA groups that are directly linked to alcohol and other drug treatment programs and serve as a supporting partner to the recovery process for families.
4.
Drug Prevention Research and Program Evaluation
4.1 National Citizens' Crime Prevention Campaign Research Findings--BJA
The 1992-93 evaluation of the media component of the National Citizens' Crime Prevention Campaign--involving nearly 1,800 interviews in 100 communities across the country--found that a substantial majority of the public, the media, and the law enforcement community has accepted the McGruff character and related themes (e.g., Take A Bite Out Of Crime) as positive symbols easily adapted to influence youth and their families about prevention awareness.
In fact, an analysis of McGruff messages over the years indicate that the campaign's effectiveness has increased.
Investigators credit this to the carefully controlled use of the symbol(s) and that each new campaign phase, which is distinct, has incorporated familiar themes which have served to maintain audience interest and provide a platform for action.
Following is just a sampling of what the study found.
* 95 percent of the media managers were aware of the McGruff PSAs.
* Media gatekeepers rated the PSAs high on quality and regarded them as effective and influential within their communities.
* 98 percent of prevention practitioners were familiar with the National Citizens' Crime Prevention Campaign overall.
* 76 percent had used its materials, and most users said they were of high value.
* 85 percent of those aware called the PSAs effective for children, and 60 percent said they were effective for adults in building prevention awareness.
* Those crime prevention programs most receptive to Campaign materials tended to: -- be in larger communities -- face more crime problems -- have larger, more diverse prevention programs -- be more supportive of citizen prevention overall * People generally paid attention to the PSAs with 86 percent of citizens reporting high attention to the anti- violence ads.
* Citizens more familiar with Campaign PSAs displayed the following characteristics: -- younger, with children at home -- more attentive to overall media -- more interested in crime prevention -- more needful of information about it -- more aware of neighborhood crime problems -- more prevention responsible and confident -- more likely to take preventive actions * Somewhat greater impact was found among: -- women -- less educated, lower income citizens -- Black citizens -- parents with children in the home
4.2 Researching Prevention Programs Aimed at Our Youth-- OJJDP
4.2.1 Causes and Correlates Study
The OJJDP Causes and Correlates Study is developing research that is germane to the prevention of alcohol and other drug use as well as delinquency prevention.
Funded for 8 years, it has one more year to run.
Data collection for this study is currently being funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse, Department of Health and Human Services, while OJJDP is funding the data analysis.
The three demonstration sites are Pittsburgh, PA, Rochester, NY, and Denver, CO. Early results based on self-reported data shows a strong correlation between drug use and violence and drug sales and violence.
4.2.2 Guide for Implementing the Comprehensive Strategy for Serious, Violent, and Chronic Juvenile Offenders
The Guide for Implementing the Comprehensive Strategy for Serious, Violent, and Chronic Juvenile Offenders contains a summary of delinquency prevention programs.
The purpose of this guide is to assist communities in setting up collaborative, system-wide efforts for youth in their community.
It includes a delinquency prevention section.
Due to the overlap of the risk factors concerning delinquency prevention and alcohol and other drug prevention, the summary and program descriptions will contribute to the reduction of demand for alcohol and other drugs through prevention.
__________________________________________________________________
[arrowg.gif] Table of Contents
