Aztec Ruins National Monument Video Library Teachers from San Juan County may borrow the following videos.
You will need to pick up and return these items at the monuments.
Please call 505-334-6174 x30.
Ancient America-The Southwest -(1 hour) A video guide to Indian America in the Southwest - both past and present.
Explore cliff dwellings of Mesa Verde, journey back in time to Chaco Canyon with its vast network of roads and its intriguing astronomical observatories
.
Besh Ba Gowah -(15 minutes) Introduction to a Salado site in the Tonto Basin of Arizona and how the people relate to contemporary and historic peoples of that area.
The Continuing Forest-Managing the Resources of our National Parks - (29 minutes) US Forest Service produced video showing evolution of natural, recreational, and commercial forest management.
Conviction of the Heart-An Anthem of the Human Spirit -Kenny Loggins - (10 minutes) Anthem of the human spirit and a plea to preserve our planet's resources for the sake of our children.
This inspirational music video portrays the need to preserve the natural and cultural heritage of our National Parks.
Daughters of the Anasazi-Lucy Lewis, Emma Lewis Mitchell and Delores Lewis Garcia - (28 minutes) Pueblo potters demonstrate traditional techniques.
Grinding the raw clay and old pot sherds.
Mixing the clay.
Forming the bowl.
Building the coils.
Scraping and polishing.
Applying the white slip.
Painting and outdoor firing.
You'll see every step, from start to finish.
Diversity - Voices of Youth - (28 minutes) A teaching tool to instill in students a pride and respect for the cultural diversity of their community lead to the production of this package.
Students featured in this video share a common desire to succeed and a wonderful, youthful belief that they will do so.
The Endangered Species Act -(12 minutes) The Endangered Species Act is one of the most important pieces of conservation legislation in the world.
This video, prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, answers questions about the Act and gives information about the role of the Act in saving our plant and wildlife species for future generations.
Flintknapping-Dr. Bruce Bradley -(45 minutes) This film shows the fundamentals of the art of Flintknapping.
Dr. Bradley explains and shows the process of stone tool manufacture.
Watch as each piece is skillfully produced duplicating ancient skills as you reach a better understanding of our past.
Gila Cliff Dwellings - (15 minutes) A short video highlighting a Mogollon site in Arizona.
It offers a glimpse of the homesand lives of people who lived there from the late 1270s through the early 1300s.
Green Gold-From the Maya to the Moon - (30 minutes) A story of exploration, discovery, life and death.
It traces the phenomenal influence of three New World treasures-corn, potatoes, and chile peppers-on the lives of our ancestors, ourselves, and the generations to come.
Hisatsinom-The Ancient Ones - (25 minutes) This splendid National Park Service film captures the serene, awesome, legendary spirit of the Indian dwellings at Chaco Canyon, Betatakin, Mesa Verde, Canyon de Chelly, Aztec and other sites in the San Juan system.
This video is shown as an introduction to Ancestral Pueblo culture in the main lobby at Aztec Ruins.
The Hopi - (15 minutes) An American Indian Video Series, this video shows intimate scenes of family life, work, and colorful seasonal rituals.
It illustrates how the Hopis pass on the communal values and survival skills that have kept their culture alive for centuries.
Introduction to Southwestern Indian Jewelry - (15 minutes) A comprehensive explanation of the similarities and differences in Navajo, Zuni, and Hopi jewelry.
Watch silversmiths fashion their distinctive pieces.
Legacy of the Mound Builders - (17 minutes) An American Indian Video Series-Some scholars now believe the overall work of the mound builders exceeds that of the pyramids and the ancient works of Egypt.
But just who were these people? Discover some surprising answers.
Maria-Indian Pottery of San Ildefonso - (27 minutes) Maria Martinez, noted Indian pottery maker shows the traditional Indian ways, beginning with the spreading of sacred corn before clay is gathered.
Also shown are the mixing of clay, construction of pottery, hand decorating and building of the firing mound.
Marks of the Ancestors-Ancient Indian Rock Art of Arizona - (40 minutes) In special places throughout the Southwest, unusual images appear on boulders, cave walls and cliff faces.
These "rock art" sites were once considered meaningless scribbles made by ancient ultures hundreds, even thousands of years ago.
Today, scholars recognize rock art as another window into the lives of these ancient people.
Mesa Verde National Park - (23 minutes and 1 hour) Dr. Robert H. Lister - Eminent Southwestern archeologist and anthropologist, author and lecturer, gives an overview of ancient and early history in Mesa Verde and the surrounding area.
Mesa Verde-Legacy of Stone and Spirit0 - (26 minute version of 1 hour video) Discover the fascinating story of the Pueblo Indians and their quest for life.
Peer through the windows of time at one of America's most fascinating and vital links to the pursuit of human survival and triumph.
More than Bows and Arrows - (1 hour) An Ancient America Video Series documents the contributions of the American Indians to the development of the United States and Canada.
From net fishing off cliffs over a Northwest river to prehistoric mounds that rival the pyramids of Egypt.
Mystery of the Cliffs and Solving the Mystery - (15 minutes and 5 minutes) In "Mystery of the Cliffs," the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles introduce school children to the concept of "stewardship" as it relates to our country's cultural resources.
The message is that we all share a responsibility for the stewardship of our cultural heritage.
The companion video, "Solving the Mystery" expands upon this message.
The Navajo - (15 minutes) A child learns to tend sheep.
A mother teaches her daughter-in-law to card, spin, dye and weavewool for rugs.
A family sacrifices a sheep in a life-restoring, religious ritual.
This story of Navajo families is cast against the events of their history and the vital role of women in religious, social and cultural life.
Pablita Velarde-An Artist and Her People - (20 minutes) Meet Pablita Velarde, a member of the Santa Clara Pueblo, record the traditions and legends of her ancient people, so that future generations may know and understand their heritage.
Paths of Life -American Indians of the Southwest - (22 minutes) The stories of ten diverse cultural groups, their spiritual values, sense of place, survival as unique people despite efforts to destroy them, and enduring dynamic cultures that enrich contemporary American life.
Pawnee Creation Story-The Wolf - (15 minutes) The story told on this videotape by Susan Strauss, with the permission of the tribal council of the Pawnee people in Oklahoma, is part of the cosmogony (the creation or origin of the universe)legend of the Pawnee.
It is one culture's perception of an important wolf figure in a story central to that culture.
Silent Witness-Protecting American Indian Archeological Heritage -(31 minutes) Narrated by Robert Redford, this video explores the alarming destruction and desecration of American Indian archeological sites on public lands.
Pueblo Indians, archeologists, and national park rangers examine this crisis and the loss it represents.
It provides the first step in caring for the irreplaceable cultural resources we will pass on to our descendants.
A companion learning guide is also available for grades 6 thru 12.
Those Who Came Before - (1 hour) This video transport(s) you to some of the most spectacular archeological sites in the American Southwest, where the compelling cultural legacy of pre-Columbian Puebloan peoples has been unearthed \par and preserved ...including Aztec Ruins, Bandelier, Casa Grande Ruins, Canyon de Chelly, Chaco Culture, Gila Cliff Dwelling, Mesa Verde, Navajo, Pecos, Petrified Forest, and Tuzigoot.
Time Journey/Indian Diversity -(40 minutes) Contains both Indian Diversity and Time Journey, in addition, two storytelling programs are included and accompanies an Educational Handbook directed to high school grades.
Touring America's National Parks - (60 minutes) Celebrate America's National Parks with a video journey through the scenic beauty of thenation's greatest natural treasures.
The Wolf, A Howling in America's National Parks -(30 minutes) Robert Redford narrates this story; the wolf, his history, habits, and the role he plays in America's National Parks.
The viewer is taken from the big bad wolf of childhood tales to an intelligent, shy and highly social animal.
A glimpse into the real life struggle of the wolf and what is being done to maintain the natural balance in North America.
The Wolf, A Howling in America's National Parks -(6 minutes) Short version of above video.
Yellowstone Fires, 1988 - (20 minutes) Documentary type video showing the enormous impact the fires of Yellowstone may yet have on the parks natural resources and complex ecosystem.
Produced by NPS.
Slide Programs:
Chaco Canyon - 64 slide program featuring six sites in Chaco Culture National Historical Park with brief explanations for each slide.
Mesa Verde - 86 slide program featuring a short explanation of the Basketmaker III, Pueblo I, Pueblo II, and Classic Pueblo periods.
Slides are of pithouse detail, Basketmaker and Pueblo period villages, artifacts, and cliff dwellings of Chapin and Weatherill Mesas.
Last Updated:Wednesday, 17-Nov-99 16:13:24 http://www.nps.gov/azru/videos.htm
