The nasa.gov site requires that JavaScripts be enabled in your browser.
For instructions, click here
Follow this link to go to the text only version of nasa.gov
NASA -National Aeronautics and Space Administration Follow this link to skip to the main content + Low Bandwidth + Contact NASA FIND IT @ NASA _________ Go
ABOUT NASA NEWS AND EVENTS MULTIMEDIA MISSIONS POPULAR TOPICS MyNASA
+ Home FOR INFORMAL EDUCATORS
Features and News Contacts for Educators Internet Resources Learning Resources Multimedia Resources
Choose another category: + For Educators K-4 + For Educators 5-8 + For Educators 9-12 + For Educators Post Secondary
FEATURE Cassini-Huygens to Saturn and Titan 09.04.03 computer graphic of planet Saturn
Saturn and her beautiful rings
To tell the story of the international Cassini/Huygens mission to Saturn and Titan, a team led by NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory has produced a planetarium show called Ring World.
Written by Dr. Bill Gutsch, former head of the Hayden Planetarium and produced by Brian Sullivan of Salt Lake City, Utah, Ring World will be available to every planetarium in the U.S. in May, 2003.
The Show Kit or DVD will be shipped via UPS.
For more information, contact Brian Sullivan at codyssey2001@netscape.net or 801.350.8340.
If you conduct the show please take a moment and complete the on-line event summary.
This allows us the opportunity to see how Cassini programs and materials are being used in the community.
All information submitted will remain purely confidential.
The Cassini-Huygens mission is of great interest to museums, planetariums and science centers around the country.
The year 2002 marks the 40th anniversary of planetary exploration, and has sparked museums and planetariums to display exhibits and other materials featuring the wonders of space exploration and space science.
The widespread celebration now offers more and more opportunities for space aficionados to get a close-up view of their favorite space mission, or learn about the many events and programs JPL is involved with around the country.
For example, many of these institutions have sought to educate the public of all ages in an informal setting about the importance of the Cassini-Huygens mission including the planet Saturn, its fascinating rings, and mysterious moon Titan.
picture of Cassini-Huygens spacecraft in clean room
Cassini-Huygens spacecraft model
The Cassini-Huygens mission is an ambitious one-with its sophisticated instruments and sheer size, it is difficult to visualize, and even more difficult to study.
Luckily, a full-scale replica of the Cassini spacecraft is on display at the California Science Center in Los Angeles, Calif.
The model spacecraft, standing as tall as a 30-passenger bus standing on end, is a majestic centerpiece in the Center's Air and Space Gallery.
The Chabot Space and Science Center in Oakland, Calif., also features a smaller model of the Cassini spacecraft, along with models of the Stardust and Mars Odyssey spacecraft.
There are also several smaller models of the Cassini spacecraft on display at various educational centers around the country.
These are mobile-they can travel with various scientists and educators to promote learning about its complexity and instruments and also provide a close-up perspective of the spacecraft's construction.
In its ongoing effort to promote the missions and objectives of JPL, Chabot also has "Cassini Spacecraft at Saturn," a 12' by 25' mural on display, painted by eight young master painters at an art academy in Los Angeles called La Academia de Artes Yepes, established by Latino artist George Yepes.
The mural unveils some of the mysteries surrounding the vast Saturnian system and features Cassini's long journey to this intriguing area of the solar system.
Saturn Mural Story Ancient mythology and modern scientific research join forces in the Cassini Mural.
This 12 by 25-foot mural depicts key moments in the Cassini-Huygens mission to Saturn and Titan.
The Cassini Mural is a collaboration between the Cassini project and the Academia de Arte Yepes, a non profit academy based in Los Angeles.
picture of Cassini-Huygens mural Saturn Mural
The mural is on loan to museums and science education centers around the country.
It is currently an exhibit at the Chabot Space 
The Academia de Arte Yepes is a self-funded, nonprofit mural training academy dedicated to beautifying the Los Angeles community through education, art and culture.
Eight young Hispanic master painters worked on the mural with Charles Kohlhase of the Cassini project.
The painters of this stunning blend of art and science were: Ulysses Garcia (lead artist), Gabriel Estrada, Abel Gonzales, Daniel Gonzales, Octavio Gonzales, Francisco Vasquez, Juan Solis and Rebeca Robles.
In Greek mythology, the god depicted in the mural was first called Kronos, who attacked his father Uranus with a sickle to become king of the universe.
He was later overthrown by Zeus, who ruled from Mount Olympus.
Since the earliest times, the Romans worshipped Saturn as their god of agriculture.
Later, when the Romans accepted the Greek pantheon, Saturn was identified with Kronos.
Eventually, Saturn became associated with time, and was often depicted with wings and a scythe.
The Cassini-Huygens mission is a joint effort of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the European Space Agency and the Italian Space Agency.
The Cassini-Huygens mission is managed for NASA by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
For more information on Cassini-Huygens outreach, please contact Alice Wessen at Alice.S.Wessen@jpl.nasa.gov or Shannon Mcconnell at Shannon.L.Mcconnell@jpl.nasa.gov.
FirstGov - Your First Click to the US Governmnet + 2003 Strategic Plan + Freedom of Information Act + The President's Management Agenda + FY 2002 Agency Performance and Accountability Report + NASA Privacy Statement, Disclaimer, and Accessibility Certification + Freedom to Manage + Erasmus Executive Dashboard (NASA Only) NASA Editor: Shelley Canright NASA Official: Brian Dunbar Last Updated: November 17, 2003 + Contact NASA
