Economic and Trade Overview of Kyrgyzstan: Part 3 - Economy _________________________________________________________________ June 1998 ECONOMY STATISTICAL OVERVIEW GDP Growth: 1994 =10.7 billion som (bs), 1995 = 15.3 bs, 1996 = 22.5 bs, 1997= 30.4 bs, with real 1997 growth at about 5.5% (follows a 50% decline between 1991-94).
GDP Structure: Agriculture 43%, Industry 16%, Services and other 30%, Trade 11%.
Industrial growth: 1996=10.8%, 1997=46.8% (gold production) Agricultural growth: 1996=13.1%, Inflation rate: 1994=87%, 1995=32%, 1996= 34%, 1997=14% Budget deficit (% of GDP): 1994=7.7% of GDP, 1995= 11.2%, 1996=5.2%,1997=3.6 Private sector - 62.1% of all enterprises, 90% of land, 1639 joint stock companies and 196 limited companies, about 70% of GDP Som to Dollar: 10-11 in 1996, about 18 in 1997, remaining one of the area's most stable currencies.
International financial institution loans and assistance: about $700 million (90% preferential loans) Exports: $531 million 1996, $609 million 1997, 63% to NIS countries Imports: $782.9 million 1996, $635.7 million 1997, 61% from NIS countries Direct Foreign Investment 1997-8 (18 months) = $80 million.
Kyrgyzstan has followed a carefully planned program of reform and transition to a market economy.
Strict monetary and credit policies, major structural reforms, institutional and procedural reforms in the financial sector, and privatization have contributed to the recent high growth in Gross Domestic Product (GDP), a stable exchange rate for the Som, low inflation, a shrinking budget deficit, and an improved fiscal situation.
1997 GDP growth was spurrecd by a 46.8% growth in industrial production, heavily attributable to output from the Kumtor gold mine, a joint venture with Canada's Cameco.
Agricultural production grew by 10.7%.
Agriculture: Kyrgyzstan's agriculture and related processing account for about 43% of the GDP 90% of the land is owned by the farmers (lifetime, hereditable tenure, but saleable only for right of use).
The state has retained only the pedigree breeding and seed growing farms.
Products include meat, wool, leather, cotton, silk, tobacco, forage, vegetables, fruits and grain
Lack of a stable credit system for agriculture and the establishment of modern agricultural supply firms to get inputs to the farmer is being addressed by the Agricultural Financial Corporation.
Herd size, which was excessively large due to Moscow's constant pressure on Kyrgyzstan for meat production, is being down sized to accommodate pasturage and high forage costs, a measure that should yield considerable meat available for export in the short run.
Grain is grown in all agricultural regions, but about a quarter of grain for human consumption must be imported.
Major specialty crops include sugar beets, alpha seed, and, in particular, cotton and tobacco.
Cotton grown in Kyrgyzstan is in great demand, while tobacco production and processing is among the largest sub-branches of the agroindustrial sector, occupying 12.4 thousand hectares and growing at a rate of 58% over 1996.
Kyrgyz wines were once famous, but quality grapes are now in short supply.
Priorities for development are to provide: sufficient domestic foodstuffs, sufficient raw materials for agroprocessing, and manufacture of agricultural production for export.
Industry: Kyrgyzstan's industrial sector contributes 16% off GDP and a quarter of the employment.
Until this year, it was based on light manufacturing (cotton and wool processing, clothing, leather/shoes, electric motors), food (food processing and agricultural machinery), and heavy industry (electrical power, mining and metallurgy.
This year, gold production from Kumtor drove unprecedentedly high heavy industry growth.
Kyrgyzstan's manufacturing plants are concentrated in Bishkek, many working at less than capacity due to curtailment of traditional heavy industrial exports to the former Soviet Union and the import costs of raw materials (formerly supplied by other areas of the Soviet Union).
Unlike other developing countries faced with transferring workers from low productivity subsistence agriculture to higher productivity industry, Kyrgyzstan faces industrial restructuring to cut employment in formerly subsidized, inefficient industries and encouraging the emergence of new enterprises.
The government plans to increase industrial production to consumer goods and high technology products, in particular, microelectronics (through polycrystalline silicon manufacture)..
REFORMS
Financial Reform The banking system of Kyrgyzstan is a two tiered one, consisting of the the NBK, 20 commercial banks.
In the financial community there are also a savings company, 15 investment funds, 37 insurance companies (one state and 36 private), a Stock Exchange, 2 pension funds and 422 other financial institutions.
The Banks With independence, the National Bank of Kyrgyzstan (NBK) was established as the central bank responsible for monetary and exchange rate policy, Government banking facilities, and management of relations with foreign central banks.
The NBK is also responsible for licensing, supervision and regulation and provision of credit to commercial banks.
It is the repository for bank reserves and provides clearing services.
It develops and enforces banking legislation.
The NBK reports to the Parliament which appoints its five Board members for five year terms.
The NBK in 1996 undertook a reorganization of the financial sector (FINSAC), creating a special NBK agency for debt restructuring and reorganization of banks.
As of July 1, 1997, the entire banking system was required to operate according to the International Standards of Accounting and Reporting.
As of January 1, 1998, all Kyrgyz legal entities except state budget institutions were to operate on these standards.
Under FINSAC, the Agricultural Financial Corporation was created, which, with the credit unions, is to revive the credit market in the agricultural sector.
Foreign banks can now be opened and operated under written agreement with the Foreign Ministry (with outline of proposed activities and payment of a fee, recently $700), good for three years with subsequent mandatory reapplication for an extension.
The Stock Exchange Kyrgyzstan instituted its stock exchange in 1995, and joined the Federation of Euro-Asian stock exchanges.
In May 1995, the Stock Exchange began listing and trading securities of privatized companies.
Corporate securities worth about 11.5 billion Soms were issued in 1997, a 20-fold increase over 1996, with turnover of non-traded securities at about 1.4 billion Soms.
The Maksat Commercial Bank won a 1996 tender to be a clearing bank for the Kyrgyz Stock Exchange.
The market is regulated by the semi-autonomous State Securities Agency, which is responsible for registering securities, investment funds, licensing and monitoring the markets, and prividing disclosure and reporting standards.
Privatization Mass privatization has taken place in phases, the first of which (1992-93) saw a 97.2% privatization of all retail trade and food enterprises, and everyday services (100%).
Over 3.5 million Kyrgyz citizens received coupons for these privatizations.
Coupon auctions and auctions for money bids have involved about 1400 enterprises and shares sales to foreigners as well as Kyrgyz citizens.
Phase Two in 1994-95, resulted in privatization of medium and larger scale industrial (80.2%), transportation (47.8%), and construction (56.6%) enterprises.
By June 1997, the NBK reported that local and foreign companies brought over $5 million into the national budget through purchase of privatization coupons from the general public.
The overall level of privatization is currently between 60 and 61%.
The final stage (1998-2000) involves privatization of the largest Kyrgyz enterprises, the scale of which has led to slower speed of privatization, greater planning, and a strong effort to attract foreign investment.
These enterprises are in the mining, fuel and energy, telecommunications, civil aviation, printing and non-profit sectors of the economy.
The Kyrgyz State Property Fund, headed by its new Chairman, Jumabek Ibraimov, has developed a "demonopolization" program in response to a January 23, 1998 government resolution on the State Property Fund.
The following measures to complete privatization will be taken: Attract local and foreign consulting firms to prepare privatization projects; Select experts on privatization projects through competition; Organize auctions for the sale of the State Enterprises and other property Sell State enterprises Organize auctions for the sale of the State shares of stocks Transfer the State enterprises into corporate management -- Transfer the State shares of stocks into manager or trust administration.
The Fund will privatize more slowly due to the complexity of the companies to be privatized, using a case by case method - by auction or through the Kyrgyzstani Stock Exchange, and attract foreign and local strategic investors with expertise in international management, marketing and finances, and new technologies.
Thirty two companies, all in strategic industries, will be privatized (See list: Appendix B).
The government will keep a controlling share of State ownership, an approach intended to allow the government to support social protection programs for lower income Kyrgyz citizens.
A case by case method will be used for privatization, having as its purpose adherence to international investment standards, while providing foreign and local investors equal opportunities to invest.
For example, the joint stock company "Kyrgyzenergo" will be broken into the following structures: electric power producers, electric transmission lines, and distribution lines.
Eight percent of its shares will be transferred to the lower income population through the State Social Fund.
Additional shares will be sold to foreign and local investors; however a controlling share of the large hydropower stations will be kept by the government as in the national interests.
In the second half of 1998, privatization auctions will be held, after the government has adopted legal and normative bases for auctions,
Under control of the fund, the 32 companies are adopting new principles of management with the goal of maximizing profit to make them more attractive to investors.
The Fund also controls the process of reorganization of enterprises either by dividing production or by merging an enterprise into a larger structure.
Foreign Investment and Trade
Investment Capital investment in 1997 was 3.8 billion Som, with foreign investment at 2.4 billion Som, or 63.3% of the total.
38.3% of total investment was in metals (mainly gold).
Transport received 9.4%; energy 8%; construction 7.7%, telecommunications 5%, followed by oil processing and light industry at 2.4% each, and agriculture with 1.9%.
Investment sources other than foreign investors, were State (30%), mixed (15%), private (8%), municipalities (4%) and collectives (3%).
Foreign investment takes the form of program support for restructuring, commodity loans (grew by 50% this year), sectoral program support, investment loans, creditlines for supporting private businesses, and direct foreign investment.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). provides technical cooperation, loans, and equity investments, and debt guarantees for Kyrgyzstan.
EBRD's charter mandates that a minimum of 60 percent of its loans contribute to the privatization of state-owned enterprises.
The remaining 40 percent may be used to fund public infrastructure or environmental projects that promote private sector development.
In Kyrgyzstan, EBRD has placed priority on privatization efforts, financial infrastructure development, regulatory reform as well as agriculture and environmental protection.
Bilateral Loans Kyrgyzstan's State Property Fund's Project Implementation Unit (PIU) is implementing a Dutch Government Grant of $5 million and a $60 million credit from Japan's Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, both for structural rehabilitation, another of $30 million from Japan for balance of payment support, a Swiss Government grant of SF14 million for procurement of high voltage substations for the energy sector, and another Japanese non-project grant in aid of $12 million for procurement of various eleigible materials and equipment, and other projects.
This report is provided courtesy of the Business Information Service for the Newly Independent States (BISNIS)
[home.gif]
The slow rate of investment is possibly due to the low level of industrial development, loss of markets for many of the products and equipment traditionally produced in Kyrgyzstan, and the shortage of raw materials used in the manufacture of those products.
Canada is the largest investor with about 45% of the total, most of that invested in gold mining (the largest single project being the $500 million development of the Kumtor gold field, believed to be the world's eighth largest), followed by Turkey with 20% the U.S. with 12% and China with 10%.
Foreign investors enjoy a legal status equal to those made by Kyrgyz citizens, and sometimes enjoy enhanced status.
For example, a 30% investment in a company's capital find or a 51% stock ownership triggers a profits tax holiday of from two to five years, with subsequent reduced taxation.
PepsiCo, Coca Cola (Turkish licensee), Cadbury Schweppes, Andre 
Japan's trading companies (Mitsui, Toyota, Kanematsu) have established representative offices in Bishkek.
Foreign Trade Kyrgyzstan has decreased its imports and increased exports in recent years so that now the imports exceed exports by only about $26.4 million, a major shrinkage in the trade deficit over 1996.
Kyrgyzstan's exports to the other NIS are 53% of the total and imports from the NIS are 61% of the total imports, with Russia, Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan occupying most of the volume.
s a positive trade balance for the last three years.
Besides the NIS, main trading partners are China (leading customer at 7.2% of Kyrgyz exports), Turkey (5.7% of imports), Canada (5.1% of imports), the U.S. (4a.3% of exports/3.5% of exports), Germany, United Kingdom, France, Japan, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Finland.
Chief Kyrgyz exports are coal (22.8%), electric power (19%), food products (17%), cotton and wool products (13%), machinery and equipment (11%), and ferrous and nonferrous metals (8%, refined copper to China and Germany, and nearly all antimony to Great Britain).
Kyrgyzstan exports automotive spare parts, electrical power and electrotechnical equipment to the CIS countries and receives fuel and refined petroleum products.
Turkey and Switzerland.
Germany and Great Britain supply about one third of Kyrgyzstan's imported alcohol and non-alcohol beverages, electric machines and equipment and land based transport.
Canada supplies its mining equipment.
A series of barter type bilateral agreements with the Russia and other NIS call for supplies of goods with prices determined by world prices.
Foreign Loans and Assistance Because Kyrgyzstan has been among the most advanced of the Newly Independent States (NIS) in transitioning to a market economy, it has attracted an enormous amount of foreign loans, credits and assistance.
The following organizations are active in this realm:
IMF and World Bank In May 1993, Kyrgyzstan was the first Central Asia state to obtain a IMF memorandum of agreement accepting its economic reform program.
IMF committed a $110 million loan to be disbursed over three years, beginning in 1993.
A June 1993 conference of international agencies (IMF, World Bank) and donor states--Japan, Turkey, Russia and the United States have been major donors--agreed to support an initial aid program of $400 million designed to increase Kyrgyzstan's capacity to import investment goods and industrial and agricultural inputs.
Kyrgyzstan received over $100 million in loans under the IMF Standby Agreement and Systemic Transformation Facility and a World Bank rehabilitation loan.
In June 1995, the donor countries, in consultation with experts from the World Bank and the EBRD allocated $680 million to Kyrgyzstan in 1995-96 for implementation of a three-year program of structural transformation in the Kyrgyz economy, particularly for development of industry and agriculture and to support the balance of payments.
Kyrgyzstan is also receiving technical assistance to upgrade the organization of its public finance, banking, agricultural and other sectors, and a $60 million Rehabilitation Credit from the World Bank.
The World Bank, EBRD, the Asian Development Bank and the Japanese government concluded a joint project to upgrade the Manas Airport and the road between Osh and Bishkek.
The Asian Development Bank has provided loans to the economic sectors including a $40 million credit for farms and a $40 million special assistance loan.
The Central Asian-American Enterprise Fund (CAAEF) approved three major projects for a $3.1 investment in mineral water and soda bottling, sausage production, and a modern office building in Bishkek.
These projects followed a loan by the Asian Crossroads Loan Company (set up by CAAEF) to make loans for small businesses and entrepreneurs in the five Central Asian republics.
The United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) included Kyrgyzstan in another international program to help develop the road and rail transport infrastructure in Asia.)
The U. S. Trade and Development Agency Program (TDA) is authorized to operate in the Republic of Kyrgyzstan.
TDA provides funding for U.S. firms to carry out feasibility studies, consultancies and other planning services related to major projects in developing countries.
Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC). has signed a bilateral agreement with Kyrgyzstan authorizing it to provide loan guarantees and insurance to U.S companies establishing business ventures in Kyrgyzstan.
OPIC's Project Development Program provides U.S. businesses with up to 50 percent financing for evaluations to determine commercial viability of projects in Kyrgyzstan.
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD). provides technical cooperation, loans, and equity investments, and debt guarantees for Kyrgyzstan.
EBRD's charter mandates that a minimum of 60 percent of its loans contribute to the privatization of state-owned enterprises.
The remaining 40 percent may be used to fund public infrastructure or environmental projects that promote private sector development.
In Kyrgyzstan, EBRD has placed priority on privatization efforts, financial infrastructure development, regulatory reform as well as agriculture and environmental protection.
Bilateral Loans Kyrgyzstan's State Property Fund's Project Implementation Unit (PIU) is implementing a Dutch Government Grant of $5 million and a $60 million credit from Japan's Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund, both for structural rehabilitation, another of $30 million from Japan for balance of payment support, a Swiss Government grant of SF14 million for procurement of high voltage substations for the energy sector, and another Japanese non-project grant in aid of $12 million for procurement of various eleigible materials and equipment, and other projects.
This report is provided courtesy of the Business Information Service for the Newly Independent States (BISNIS)
[home.gif]
