International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2003* April Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
Asia Pacific Vulnerable to People Smuggling By Rita A. Widiadana and Wahyoe Boedhiwardhana, The Jakarta Post, Dateline Nusa Dua, Bali, April 30, 2003 and Ministers Vow to Continue Fight Against "Grisly" Illegal Immigration Trade By Mike Corder, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Bali, Indonesia, April 30, 2003 and People-Trading Now Accompanied by Other Transnational Crimes, Says Downer Antara -- The Indonesian National News Agency, Dateline Nusa Dua, Bali, April 29, 2003 Ministers and senior government officials from 39 countries in the Asia Pacific concluded three-days of talks April 30 at the Second Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime held in Bali, Indonesia.
The event was co-hosted by Australia and Indonesia.
Representatives from 20 additional countries -- including Europe, the Middle East, Africa, and the United States -- also attended as did delegations from 16 international organization.
The consensus was that progress had been made in controlling people smuggling since the first conference was held in Bali in February last year.
According to Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, the "Bali process" has achieved much in building contacts between governments and law enforcement officials.
Downer is quoted as saying: "The Bali process doesn't legislate.
The Bali process doesn't force anybody to do anything.
But what it does do is provide frameworks; it provides contexts; it provides priorities.
And I think it has been extraordinarily successful."
Downer also noted that people-smuggling increasingly involves other transnational crimes such as weapons and drug smuggling and money laundering.
All endanger not only national security but impact the political, economic and socio-cultural environment of nations, he said.
The Ad-Hoc Experts' Working Group on Legislative Framework, Policy Issues and Law Enforcement, led by Thailand's General Krerkphong Pukprayura, has completed a survey of the various laws nations have in place pertaining to people smuggling.
The survey also discusses networks of cooperation among relevant law enforcement agencies.
*********
For more information on the Second Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime held in Bali, Indonesia, April 28-30, 2003, see:
Department of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Indonesia
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
Full text of co-chairs' statement
*********
Croatia Accepts Chinese Illegals Feared To Have SARS Deutsche Presse-Agentur, Dateline Sagreb, April 30, 2003 Croatian officials finally accepted a group of eight Chinese illegal immigrants who had been banned from entering the country from Slovenia because they were suspected of having Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS).
Doctors later determined that none of them had the disease.
Croatia plans to deport them to neighboring Bosnia-Herzogovia.
The Chinese had flown to Sarajevo, via Moscow, after having left Beijing some 10 days previously.
According to this report, Croatia, Slovenia and Bosnia-Herzogovina are on the "Balkan route" used by traffickers to smuggle people and drugs into the European Union.
Aid Helps "Reduce Migration Pressures" By Frances Williams, Financial Times, April 30, 2003 A study recently completed by the International Organization for Migration says money spent by the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Germany and the Netherlands to control illegal immigration would be better spent in the countries of origin to keep the migrants home.
According to the study, budgets for immigration law enforcement costs the aforementioned countries two-thirds of what they spend on overseas aid.
See: Bordering on Control: A Comparison of Measures to Combat Irregular Migration in North America and Europe IOM Research Series No. 13.
German Police Find 23 Illegal Chinese Immigrants in Van Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Berlin, April 30, 2003 German police arrested 23 Chinese illegal immigrants in Perna, close to Dresden; another 16 were caught near Marienberg, also near the Czech border.
German authorities are testing illegal Chinese immigrants they arrest for the SARS virus; so far, none have tested positive.
Authorities Struggle to Keep Pace with Organized Crime By Angela Delli Santi, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Trenton, New Jersey, April 29, 2003 New Jersey law enforcement is struggling to stay ahead of Asian crime groups making huge profits smuggling illegal immigrants into the United States, this report says.
Language and cultural barriers keep Asian victims from contacting authorities, according to New Jersey State Police Detective David A. Smith.
Many victims also fear of deportation.
France Expels Some 7,000 Illegals So Far in 2003 Reuters News, Dateline Paris, April 29, 2003 France has expelled nearly 7,000 illegal immigrants this year; another 3,274 people detained while trying to enter France have also been turned back.
The figures represent a 20 percent jump from the same time period last year.
French Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy estimates that 20,000 to 30,000 illegal immigrants enter France each year; he is calling for fingerprints to be added to identity documents to help control the problem.
Regional Ministers Begin People Smuggling Conference By Rita A. Widiadana, The Jakarta Post, Dateline Nusa Dua, Bali, April 29, 2003 and Indonesia Says Iraq Unilateralism Weighs on Summit By Joanne Collins, Reuters News, Dateline Bali, April 29, 2003 and Australia Says People-Smuggling Clampdown Bolsters National Security By Mike Corder, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Bali, April 29, 2003 The second Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crimes opened in Bali April 29.
Indonesia and Australia are co-hosting the event.
More than 300 delegates, including some 30 ministers, from the Asia-Pacific, Middle East and Europe are attending the three-day conference.
In an address at the opening session, Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer emphasized that tighter control of illegal immigration would bolster national security in an era plagued by terrorism.
Indonesia's Foreign Minister Hassan Wirajuda is quoted as saying: "Unilateralism has brought about a gruesome war in Iraq and a new level of human suffering....
The full global impact of Iraq and other wars and the humanitarian disaster that it has brought about are yet to be fully gauged, but a number of dire consequences are already evident; refugees are streaming out of the country."
There are many Iraqis who have already entered Indonesia illegally; they can be found in the provinces of West Nusa Tenggara, East Java and West Java.
Indonesia, where laws against people smuggling are just now being considered, is a favored transit country for illegal immigrants from the Middle East trying to reach Australia.
Australia, on the other hand, has adopted tough policies against asylum seekers.
It detains all illegal immigrants it catches and imposes a maximum 20-year prison sentence on people smugglers.
The clampdown has produced results: No boats carrying illegal immigrants have reached Australian shores since February 2002.
At the first meeting last year, agreements were made to improve cross-border cooperation and to toughen laws against people smuggling and human trafficking.
This meeting will review the progress made to date and refine goals that will be contained in the co-chairs' statement, which will be the major outcome of this conference.
See the co-chairs' statement from 2002.
People Smuggling Conference Opens in Shadow of Jakarta Terror Attack By Mike Corder, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Bali, Indonesia, April 28, 2003 and Ministers Take Aim at People Smuggling By Alison Rehn, The Courier-Mail, (Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd) April 28, 2003 Ministers and delegates representing 32 countries are attending a three day conference in Bali to discuss security and people-smuggling issues.
The conference, which runs from April 28-30, is cohosted by Australia and Indonesia.
"Officials say there is no direct link between terrorism and people smuggling," Corder writes, "but efforts to tackle one can have spinoffs for the other -- for example people traffickers and terrorists may use the same forgers for fraudulent identification and travel documents."
Corder quotes Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer as saying: "There...is a recognition in an era of international uncertainty that knowing the identity of who is moving where between countries is a very important component of national security, and I think that's well recognized throughout the region."
The conference opened the day after a bomb exploded at Jakarta's international airport injuring 11 people.
Conference attendees are just a few miles from the Balinese vacation town of Kuta, where bombs detonated October 12, 2002 at two bars killed 202 people.
Illegal Immigrants' Detention Policy Changed; Ashcroft Allows Them to Be Held Indefinitely if Deemed Security Risk By Lyle Denniston, The Boston Globe, Dateline Washington, April 25, 2003 and Ashcroft Says National Security Concerns Can Keep Aliens in Detention By Suzanne Gamboa, The Associated Press, Dateline Washington, April 24, 2003 Attorney General John Ashcroft has ruled that illegal immigrants may be held in detention indefinitely if the U.S. government decides they could pose a national security risk.
Ashcroft's ruling is the outgrowth of a case involving Daniel Joseph, a Haitian youth who arrived by boat in Biscayne Bay, Florida, October 29, 2002, along with 215 illegal immigrants from Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
See: Interim Decision #3488, In re D-J-, Respondent, Decided April 17, 2003
Gang Wars Fear Times Newspapers, Ltd.
April 25, 2003 London police have established a special unit to hunt gangs of illegal immigrants controlling prostitution and human trafficking rings.
Twenty-four gang bosses have been identified; many Albanian.
Law enforcement authorities fear "turf war" violence from the competing criminal bosses.
Sex Slavery Is Not Quite the Scam It's Cracked Up to Be: Eastern European Women Not Idiots.
Dire Poverty at Home Makes Prostitution in the West an Attractive Proposition By Phelim McAleer, The Gazette (Montreal, Quebec) Dateline Romania, April 24, 2003 Most of the "trafficked" Eastern European women know they are going to lives as prostitutes in the West, says this report.
The women are usually smuggled by people they know, enticed by the promise of high wages.
According to Assistant Chief Constable Andy Felton, a British police officer working in Romania as part of an effort to stem illegal immigration to Britain, most of the women were prostitutes before they ever left Romania.
Felton's assessment is seconded by Major Marin Banica, who formerly was Romania's most senior police officer investigating trafficking.
Banica is quoted as saying: "Very few (of the women) go abroad without knowing exactly why they are going."
"For brothel owners," McAleer writes, "experience is essential; it makes poor business sense to trick unsuspecting girls into the trade."
According to McAleer, accounts of widespread cruelty by brothel owners do not stand up to scrutiny.
"That is not to say there are not bad and crooked brothel owners," McAleer writes.
"But the women come West voluntarily and very quickly learn through word of mouth which establishments to avoid."
N.Y.
Woman Faces 7-Count Indictment in Immigrant Jobs Ring By Tim Mcglone, The Virginian-Pilot, Dateline Norfolk, April 24, 2003 A New York woman has been charged with smuggling illegal immigrants into the United States to take low-wage jobs as laborers, housekeepers, front desk attendants and in food preparation.
Julia Del Guzzo, also known as Julia Radwaniecka, a native of Poland, is accused of harboring illegal immigrants and money laundering through her company Millennium Services.
Twenty-five undocumented workers she had employes have been arrested and face deportation.
If convicted, she could face 30 years in prison.
The arrest was part of Operation Encore, a series of federal cases involving human smuggling rings involving Eastern Europeans.
The two-year effort has resulted in the deportation of more than 100 Eastern Europeans illegally working in the United States and the arrest of some 6 ring leaders.
In most cases, the workers paid their smugglers travel fees, exorbitant rents, and job fees.
The ring leaders made hundreds of thousands of dollars and paid no taxes, this report says.
21 People Smugglers on Trial By Guo Nei, China Daily, April 24, 2003 Twenty-one alleged people smugglers are on trial in Fuzhou, capital of East China's Fujian Province.
Led by Chen Peihua, Yang Yuanhao and Lin Andi, the accused are said to have moved dozens of illegal immigrants to the United States in 2001 with forged passports, visas and other entry documents.
They also trained their clients in dealing with overseas border control and immigration officers.
Malaysia, Philippines to Hold Joint Sea Exercises Reuters News, Dateline Kuala Lumpur, April 22, 2003 In May, Malaysia and the Philippines will be holding joint air and naval patrol exercises in the Sulu Sea, senior military officials announced April 22.
The goal is to counter militancy, piracy, smuggling and illegal immigration -- problems that are prevalent in the Sulu Sea that separates islands in the southern Philippines from Malaysia's Sabah state on Borneo.
Belarusian Officials Complain About Number of Illegal Immigrants Passing Through Their Country Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Minsk, Belarus, April 18, 2003 A growing number of illegal immigrants are using Belarus to reach the West.
Andrei Savinikh, Belarus' Foreign Ministry spokesman, is quoted as saying: "Illegal migrants have become a headache for the Belarusian government since the path to the West lies exactly through Belarus."
Last year, Belarusian border guards apprehended some 1,500 illegal immigrants.
Most were from Afghanistan, China, Vietnam and countries of North Africa.
They enter Belarus via Russia, trying to reach Poland or Lithuania to get to Western Europe.
Sheriff Releases Identities of Immigrants Killed in Cane Field Fire Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Raymondville, Texas, April 18, 2003 and Lone Initial Survivor of Fire in Texas Cane Field Dies Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Raymondville, Texas, April 17, 2003 The Willacy County Sheriff's Office released the names of six illegal immigrants who died as a result of being trapped in a burning 40-acre sugar cane field on March 24.
Sheriff Larry Spence is reported as saying the illegal immigrants, who were hiding in the field, may have either been too frightened or slept through a warning broadcast.
The broadcasts are delivered in English and Spanish over a loudspeaker system growers use before setting fires to clear their fields for harvest.
Egar Isidro Rosas Lemus, ran out of the field screaming from his burns and saying others were in the field.
Three men died in the field.
Lemus and another man and woman later died from their burns at area hospitals.
Man Guilty in Smuggling of Migrants By Daniel Borunda, The El Paso Times, April 18, 2003 Ruben Patrick Valdes has been found guilty by an El Paso federal jury for his role in operating a people-smuggling ring linked to the deaths of two Mexican men who succumbed to heat in a tractor-trailer last summer.
Valdes faces a sentence of life in prison.
Valdes and his brother, Roman Martin Valdes, recruited truck drivers to smuggle illegal immigrants.
It is believed the smuggling ring moved about 900 aliens from 1999 to 2002.
Roman Valdes faces up to eight years in federal prison.
Government Records First Heat-Related Border Death of Fiscal Year Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, April 16, 2003 The U.S. Border Patrol found their first heat-related casualty on April 13 for the fiscal year that began October 1.
The man was not identified.
In the last fiscal year, about 134 illegal immigrants died from the heat attempting to cross Arizona's deserts.
Indonesia to Deport Suspected People Smuggler to Egypt This Week Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Jakarta, Indonesia, April 15, 2003 The Indonesian government announced it will be deporting suspected people smuggler Abu Quassey, an Egyptian citizen, to Egypt.
Quassey, also known as Mootaz Attia Mohammad Hasan, is wanted by Australia for his role in the drowning deaths of 374 asylum seekers attempting to reach Australia by boat.
Burden Grows for Southwest Hospitals By Michael Janofsky, The New York Times, Dateline Phoenix, Arizona, April 11, 2003 Officials at hospitals throughout the Southwest say they are treating more illegal immigrants every year.
According to the American Hospital Association, the 24 southernmost counties from Texas to California accrued $832 million in unpaid medical care in 2000 -- one quarter of that figure attributable to illegal immigrants.
U.S. federal law requires hospitals to treat emergency patients no matter where they came from or how.
Molly Collins, a policy analyst for the American Hospital Association in Washington, is quoted as saying: "The problem is moving well beyond the border states.
We don't have hard data, but it's certainly what we're hearing from hospitals and state associations.
This is a much broader issue."
Study Says Thousands of Laborers Wait in Gathering Sites for Jobs Associated Press Newswires, Dateline New York, April 11, 2003 A study on day labor in New York says that illegal immigrants make up a large proportion of the estimated 8,000 people who congregate at 57 places around the metropolitan area hoping for offers of hourly jobs.
Day Labor in New York is the work of Abel Valenzuela, professor at the University of California at Los Angeles, and Edwin Melendez, professor at New School University.
According to the authors, the day laborers they studied earned, on average, between $7.61 and $9.37 per hour.
They sent 20 to 30 percent of their earnings to their home countries, for an average of $3,641 per year.
But 50 percent of the participants in the study said their employers failed to pay them at least once; 60 percent said they had been paid less than what their employers had promised.
See the executive summary for Day Labor in New York: Findings from the NYDL Survey
Millions in Loans to Undocumented Immigrants Prompts Calls for Regulation Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Phoenix, Arizona, April 11, 2003 Unscrupulous real estate agents and lenders are increasingly targeting illegal immigrants, according to this report.
Illegal immigrants are being convinced by predatory brokers or loan officers that they can qualify for federally insured home loans.
They charge the illegal immigrants excessive fees and counterfeit the documents needed to qualify the immigrants for loans.
According to U.S. law, however, potential home buyers seeking federally insured home loans must be in the United States legally.
Federal Prosecutor in Arizona Announces Crackdown on Smugglers By Arthur H. Rotstein, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tuscon, Arizona, April 10, 2003 U.S. Attorney Paul Charlton, a federal prosecutor whose jurisdiction is Arizona, has announced a crackdown on people smugglers.
Charlton is quoted as saying: "Last year, smugglers led aliens into the Arizona desert, where over 100 of them died horrible and painful deaths.
Smugglers raped, killed, robbed and murdered countless others."
Charlton said federal, state, tribal and local law enforcement -- along with Mexican law enforcement -- will work together to dismantle smuggling operations.
Smugglers, as well as employers who recruit illegal immigrants, will be prosecuted for smuggling and any and all related crimes.
Rules Eased to Let in Skilled Workers By Marie Woolf, The Independent - London, April 10, 2003 Britain has revised its rules to allow more skilled foreigners to enter the country under the Highly Skilled Migrant Programme.
The rationale is that by helping skilled workers come to Britain legally, fewer will try to come illegally.
Work permits issued by the United Kingdom have risen from 47,000 in 1997 to 140,000 this year.
France to Launch Experimental Immigration Policy Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Paris, April 10, 2003 The French government is getting tougher on illegal immigrants while offering more ways to integrate those who enter the country legally.
Starting on July 12, legal immigrants will be asked to sign a contract pledging to respect the French constitution and laws and undergo civics training.
They will also be offered a day-long class on French customs, schools, health and employment.
France has stepped up deportation of illegal immigrants; weekly charter flights return illegal aliens to their homelands.
Each year, about 100,000 people legally immigrate to France; many more are suspected of entering the country illegally.
Baltics Expecting a Number of Operations for Preventing International Illegal Migration Baltic News Service, Dateline Riga, April 10, 2003 The Baltic Sea states are planning to conduct a number of extensive operations this year to prevent illegal migration.
The goal is to uncover the latest trends in documents forgery.
According to Konstantins Sarigins, chief of Latvia's border guard administration, Latvia cracked a cunning document forgery ring in December when it caught seven Chinese nationals trying to use the Riga airport to reach western Europe.
The operations against illegal migration are part of Task Force OPC for combatting organized crime in the Baltic Sea states.
Established in 1997 by the prime ministers and law enforcement agencies of all Baltic Sea region countries, the task force has eight working groups to deal with illegal migration, narcotics, organized crime, trafficking in women, stolen cars, money laundering, excise tax goods, and ecological crimes.
Jamaica: Authorities Investigate Possible Human-Smuggling Ring BBC Monitoring International Reports, Dateline Kingston, Jamaica, April 8, 2003 Jamaican immigration officials are investigating the possibility of a human-smuggling ring after they arrested a Chinese couple trying to fly to Miami using false U.S. visas and false immigration stamps.
Sheng-quan Chen and his girlfriend Xuejin Lan were charged for overstaying in Jamaica and using forged documents.
A Korean woman, who was escorting the couple at the Norman Manley International Airport April 2, managed to board a plane to Miami.
UNHCR Urges OSCE States to Distinguish Between Human Trafficking and Smuggling OSCE Press Release, April 8, 2003 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Ruud Lubbers urged the OSCE's (Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) 55 participating States to recognize the distinction between human trafficking and smuggling and said many refugees and asylum-seekers were now forced to turn to smugglers to reach safety.
According to Lubbers: "Many OSCE countries are faced with mixed migratory flows including refugees, asylum-seekers, economic migrants who resort to smuggling for a lack of a legitimate alternative, and persons trafficked for the purpose of exploitation.
Smugglers and traffickers often use the same routes, and in some cases there are direct links between the criminal networks involved.
For asylum systems to function well, it is vital that they take into account the broader issue of irregular migration and forces that shape it."
Full text of OSCE press release UN Palermo Protocols Latest news from the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
SARS -- Taiwan Targets Illegal Chinese Immigrants as Suspected Cases Rise to 14 AFX News Limited, Dateline Taipei, April 2, 2003 In an effort to control the spread of the deadly illness known as SARS (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome), Taiwan's Coast Guard Administration is increasing patrols in the Taiwan Strait to stop illegal immigrants entering from mainland China.
Each year, thousands of mainland Chinese are arrested attempting to enter Taiwan illegally.
The fear is that illegal immigrants who successfully enter Taiwan will increase the spread of SARS.
There are 14 suspected SARS cases in Taiwan; the disease has killed at least 78 people around the world.
Number of Illegals Down After Law Was Tightened Last Year New Straits Times, April 2, 2003 Tougher laws implemented last year have reduced the number of illegal immigrants in Malaysia by some 63 percent, according to Deputy Home Minister Datuk Chor Chee Heung.
Heung is quoted as saying that some 166 illegal arrivals were recorded during the first two months of 2003, compared to 2,717 arrested in the first two months of 2002.
Seven Sentenced in Beijing for Human Smuggling Agence France Presse, Dateline Beijing, April 1, 2003 Chinese authorities sentenced seven people who smuggled 43 Chinese into South Korea.
Their jail terms range from 3 to 14 years.
Liu Jie, Wang Zhihong and five others were arrested by South Korean police in March 2002 as they attempted to smuggle 66 Chinese into the Republic of Korea; only 23 were captured.
Troops Hold Illegal Migrants Trying To Enter E.U.
The Independent - London, April 1, 2003 Turkish troops have detained 258 illegal immigrants from the Middle East, Asia and Africa in a recent crackdown on migrants using the country for transit to the European Union.
Music of the King of Rhumba Is Netted By Lokongo Bafalikike, New African, April 1, 2003 "Papa Wemba" (born Shungu Wembadio Pene Kikumba) may have jeopardized his international fame as the Congolese Nightingale and King of Rhumba when he was arrested in Paris February 17 for people smuggling.
French immigration officials became suspicious in December 2000 when Wemba arrived in Paris with 216 people he said were musicians on a year-long tour of France.
But one fake musician now living in Belgium reportedly confessed to police that he paid Wemba $3,500 to join his entourage.
Wemba is said to have pleaded guilty in court, admitting that he used his international status to organize some 200 trips to move fake musicians from the Democratic Republic of Congo into Europe.
He used his contacts inside the French and Belgian embassies in Kinshasa to get visas for his "musicians" and "dancers."
A Belgian judge issued an international arrest warrant for Wemba just days before his arrest in Paris when 15 "musicians" were refused entry at the Brussels Airport.
Four of those who were detained confessed under questioning as to their true status.
Wemba, if convicted, could face five years in jail and have his French residence status annulled.
__________________________________________________________________
*See: Most recent IN THE NEWS FOR 2003 articles __________________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
