Prostate Cancer Item Prostate Cancer -- Cancer of the prostate is the most commonly diagnosed nonskin cancer in America.
If detected early, it can be treated successfully with no negative impact on the cancer survivor's quality of life.
However, existing forms of detection are insufficient, and available treatments frequently result in erectile dysfunction, urinary problems, or other disorders and disruptions that do negatively impact the patients quality of life.
The Committee urges NCI to place an increased priority on research through all available mechanisms, as appropriate, including clinical trials, that will result in earlier, more reliable detection methods and more effective and less disfiguring treatment regimes.
The Committee commends NCI and other NIH Institute Directors for the five-year investment strategy for prostate cancer research and encourages its implementation.
(p.70)
Action taken or to be taken
The nature and magnitude of the burden of prostate cancer has been tracked by the National Cancer Institutes surveillance program, and we estimate that about 180,000 men will be newly diagnosed with prostate cancer this year and about 37,000 will die.
Prostate cancer exacts a particularly devastating toll on African American men; incidence rates are substantially higher among African Americans, and mortality rates in African American men remain more than twice as high as rates in white men.
This catalogue of statistics, while accurate, does little to convey the pain, fear, and uncertainty experienced by every man who is diagnosed with prostate cancer.
Despite advances over the past decade, our treatments for prostate cancer are not adequate, the side effects of treatment are significant and often unacceptable, and troubling questions remain about the efficacy of early detection for the disease.
Every day, too many men in the United States hear the life-changing words You have prostate cancer.
Every day, too many men are faced with the agonizing decisions of how best to treat their prostate cancer.
And every day, too many men are dying too young of this disease.
The limited knowledge about the causes of prostate cancer, how it may be prevented, and how to treat it successfully demand a broad, robust, and clearly articulated and robust approach to research.
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has been increasing substantially its support for all types of studies relating to prostate cancer.
We wish to speed the generation of new insights into the biology and behavior of this common tumor and increase the rate at which new insights are translated into more effective interventions for prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment.
The NIH plan for a coordinated, trans-NIH prostate cancer research initiative was outlined in Planning for Prostate Cancer Research: Five Year Professional Judgment Estimates and found at the web site address http://www.nci.nih.gov/prostateplan.html.
This 5 Year Plan was provided to Congress in 1999.
The report describes prostate cancer research opportunities across NIH from 1999 through 2003.
The NCI is the lead NIH institute for prostate cancer research.
Ongoing and future research initiatives have the potential to directly improve the length and quality of life of prostate cancer patients and survivors, as well as those at risk for the disease.
Indeed, fully 70 percent of the research opportunities presented here are targeted at clinical or translational research that would have a direct impact on patients, survivors, and at-risk men.
At NCI, prostate cancer research funding increased significantly from a 1998 level of $86.9 million to a current projection of $135 million in 1999.
The NCI has aggressively sought participation from non-government researchers, advocates, and patients in reviewing the prostate cancer research portfolio and charting a plan for a vigorous expansion of the prostate cancer research program.
Over two years ago, we initiated a disease-specific planning process called a progress review group or PRG.
The Prostate Cancer PRG involved scores of individuals from all over the country -- scientists, clinicians, and advocates -- and challenged the prostate cancer research community and the NCI to review our current prostate cancer research portfolio, to develop a prioritized set of questions that needed to be answered and resources that needed to be developed or applied, and provide a vision to chart a course for research and progress in prostate cancer.
In all of the planning phases NCI made an effort to involve a variety of members of the prostate cancer communities including researchers, clinicians and advocates.
To ensure that the professional and advocacy groups were fully represented, the PRG invited the input of 32 stakeholder groups that represented both professional societies and advocacy organizations and groups.
The PRG report was presented to the NCI in September 1998 and in the time since then NCI has acted to implement a plan that we believe will fulfill the vision of progress articulated by the PRG.
NCI has begun, in an aggressive way, to accelerate funding for prostate cancer: * We have identified more than 20 initiatives through which high priority areas can be addressed and a special section of the NCI Web site serves to bring these to the attention of researchers and the public.
These may be found at web site http://www.nci.nih.gov/prostate.html.
* We have further emphasized the importance of accelerating the pace of progress against prostate cancer by promising applicants that prostate cancer grant applications will have priority for so-called exception funding.
That is, every effort will be made to fund worthy applications in the identified high-priority research areas even when peer-review assigned priority scores are not quite high enough to fit within conventional grant award paylines.
* NCI has met with the representatives of the prostate cancer research community, the PRG, and the leadership of professional societies, such as the American Urological Association, in order to communicate these initiatives and to enlist the research communitys support in responding to these opportunities.
* Extensive outreach and advertising have been developed to alert the larger research community to these opportunities to energize their participation in this prostate cancer research program.
The scientific opportunities we have identified fall into four major areas: * Clinical Science -- the near term direct testing of new interventions in patients or in those at risk for prostate cancer.
* Translational Science -- moving ideas from the laboratory to the point of clinical testing, and determining how they should be applied and tested.
* Risk, Burdens 
* Basic research and discovery -- longer term investments in gaining insight into the development and biology of prostate cancer and the development of models for study.
A few examples may help to explain some of these new initiatives: * The first stages in therapeutics development are notoriously complex and NCI has developed a series of initiatives to expedite this process.
Called Rapid Access to Intervention Development (RAID) and Rapid Access to Preventive Intervention Development (RAPID), these new programs create a drug development process that enables investigators to advance novel molecules to begin clinical trials when they have not yet found a pharmaceutical or biotechnology industry partner with the necessary resources.
We do this by giving academic investigators access, on a competitive basis, to NCIs preclinical drug development resources and expertise.
Investigators who have molecules that hold promise for cancer treatment, but without access to the development resources required for initiation of clinical studies, are invited to submit applications twice a year.
Those selected for support are assisted with necessary development steps to enable Investigational New Drug Application (IND) filing with the Food and Drug Administration and to begin initiation of proof-of-principle clinical trials.
For FY 2000, our goal is the development of three to five new therapeutic agents, each relevant to prostate cancer.
Projects already approved in 1999 include development of a bioreductive compound with potential as a radio- and chemo-sensitizer, and a gene-therapy approach that will convert inactive pro-drugs into toxic agents within prostate cancer cells.
Over five years, 15 new therapeutic agents for prostate cancer could potentially be developed if sufficient resources are available.
* The next step is testing new approaches and new agents aimed at a variety of clinical situations in initial clinical trials for patients with prostate cancer.
NCI has established Prostate Cancer Quick Trials, a new granting program providing a rapid, streamlined, funding mechanism for moving novel ideas for therapeutic interventions into Phase I and Phase II clinical trials for prostate cancer.
This program has been set up in recognition of the urgent need for new types of interventions that are effective at different stages of prostate cancer, as well as the growing number of therapeutic ideas being developed by academia and industry that are ready to be tested in patients.
In this type of project, where it is necessary to evaluate untested leads in the absence of preliminary data, conventional grant application and review procedures are not well suited.
Quick Trials utilizes a process for rapid approval of early clinical trials.
In addition, although there was little time in advance of the first submission date for applicants to familiarize themselves with the new Prostate Cancer Quick Trials initiative, twelve applications were received in the first round and 3 of these were funded in FY 1999.
The agents to be evaluated were: * A new lytic, replication-competent adenovirus (Ad5-CD/TKrep) to selectively deliver a pair of therapeutic "suicide" genes to prostate tumors (this agent was developed to this stage via the RAID mechanism) * An oral Vitamin D derivative that may avoid the hypercalcemia that has thus far precluded a therapeutic role for vitamin D in prostate cancer * 17-N-allylamino-17-demethoxy geldanamycin (1 7-AAG), the first in a new class of compounds that induce the selective degradation of proteins which bind to the Hsp90 family of chaperone proteins that play key roles in cell cycle control.
Malignant cells that express the androgen receptor (AR) and which overexpress cyclin D1, as do many prostate cancers, are sensitive to these agents.
The NCIs goals are to increase the number of patients participating in early clinical trials by two to three-fold and to initiate 10-15 new trials per year through this accelerated mechanism.
In FY 1999, eight new phase I/phase II prostate cancer trials of Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program (CTEP) sponsored agents were activated with another nine new phase I/phase II prostate cancer trials of CTEP-sponsored agents reviewed and close to activation.
Also, there were 21 new solid tumor phase I trials of CTEP-sponsored agents that may enroll prostate cancer patients activated in FY 1999 and another 20 new solid tumor phase I trials of CTEP-sponsored agents that may enroll prostate cancer patients in review and nearing activation by the end of FY 1999.
In addition, in FY 2000 through NCIs Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program, NCI will initiate approximately 35 new Phase I/II trials in Prostate Cancer with agents directed against a number of particularly promising molecular targets and mechanisms.
These targets include: * Angiogenesis and metastasis, the processes by which cancers induce new blood-vessel formation, invade these blood vessels, and spread throughout the body; * Growth factors and their receptors, which mediate growth signals to cancer cells; and * Tissue-specific genes expressed selectively in prostate or prostate cancer cells, thus allowing for the targeting of tumor-killing modalities to these cells.
Compared to the current level of effort, this plan could more than double the number of early clinical trials in prostate cancer in the first year, with another doubling projected in the next four years as per the full professional judgment estimate presented to Congress by Dr. Klausner in June 1999.
In addition to these early stage trials of new treatments, NCI will support an expanded program of new multi-center phase III clinical trials in prostate cancer.
A number of major changes in the NCIs clinical trials infrastructure are anticipated to lead to a doubling in the number of these phase III studies in the next several years.
These are studies aimed at determining definitively which treatments can be shown to offer genuine benefits to patients and what should be considered the current optimal therapies for various stages of the prostate cancer.
For instance, such studies will explore the relative utility of different treatments, such as prostatectomy and brachytherapy (seed implant) for initial management, and new hormonal and chemotherapeutic approaches for the most common clinical presentations of the disease, including
: * Adjuvant therapy in the setting of primary surgical or radiation treatment * Neo-adjuvant therapy, which has shown promising results in reducing the mortality from locally advanced prostate cancer * Treatment after hormone therapy * Treatment in the setting of rising PSA levels after definitive local therapy * Advanced disease, particularly directed at bony metastases The NCI is also moving quickly in important directions to develop complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) information and expand research opportunities for CAM investigators.
These activities are broad in scope and include strengthening the relationship with the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM), the careful evaluation of CAM therapies, and the development of accurate CAM information for the public.
Recently, Requests for Applications (RFA) have been issued by NCI in conjunction with NCCAM and other Institutes.
The intent is to establish Centers for CAM Research that would provide the resources necessary for the rigorous scientific study of CAM approaches, as well as Specialized Research Centers to investigate the biological effects of botanicals, including those that are available as dietary supplements.
Selections for Center sites are anticipated this fall.
Several studies of CAM approaches are already underway.
NCI - sponsored projects recently have suggested that both vitamin E and selenium supplements can safely prevent prostate and other cancers.
More investigation is indicated and NCI continues to support several studies addressing effectiveness in the prevention of prostate cancer by lycopene and dietary soy, as well as vitamin E and selenium.
A number of additional central questions about prostate cancer have been identified, as well as potential strategies to address them.
These include: * Testing promising preventive agents, particularly in high risk individuals * Developing new predictive molecular diagnostics * Validating current and new early detection markers * The linkage of new imaging technology to directing therapy and assessing its effects without invasive procedures * Epidemiologic studies to attempt to systematically identify correlates of the profound geographic and population differences in prostate cancer rates * Developing new animal models that faithfully reproduce human prostate cancer in order to better understand tumor development and spread, and to better test preventive and therapeutic interventions
All of these opportunities build on a strong base of existing prostate cancer research including: * Animal Models.
NCI is currently soliciting applications for the establishment of a consortium that will develop and validate murine models for human cancer.
The existence of models that truly reflect the behavior of human cancer and its responsiveness to preventive and therapeutic maneuvers would have a profound effect on our ability to understand the process of malignant transformation and to develop interventions to prevent or treat it.
Prostate-cancer investigators have already had a measure of success developing improved animal models.
NCI has also issued a call for grant supplements from investigators interested in developing mouse models for human cancer as an extension of the approved content of their grant.
Additional supplements for other model systems, including the dog, which may be of particular relevance to prostate cancer, can be considered on an individual basis.
* The Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP), the goals of which are to build an index of all genes that are expressed in tumors and support development of new technologies that will allow high throughput analysis of gene and protein expression as well as mutation detection.
The tumor type with the highest representation in the early stages of the CGAP effort is prostate cancer.
NCI has facilitated investigator collaborations of interdisciplinary studies following the recent discovery of a susceptibility gene on chromosome 1.
Leads from this effort may help to clarify genetic and gene-environment interactions responsible for black-white differences in risk.
* The Cancer Chromosomal Aberrations Project and the Genetic Annotation Initiative, which seek to integrate the chromosome, gene, and physical maps of the human genome and provide a resource to researchers comparing this information to what can be determined about tumors from examination under the conventional microscope.
* Other initiatives supporting the development of technologies for high-throughput molecular analysis of the changes associated with cancer and the development of full-length libraries of genes expressed in cancers.
* Together, these initiatives feed into the Directors Challenge for Molecular Diagnostics: The NCI Director has recently challenged the research community to revolutionize our classification of human tumors.
The classifications of diagnostic pathology have always been on a morphological basis and often carry little information about tumor behavior, prognosis, and sensitivity to treatment.
It is now time to combine technological advance in molecular detection with rapidly advancing knowledge of tumor biology in a manner that will provide more sophisticated classification of cancer based on molecular criteria.
Nowhere is this need greater than in prostate cancer.
Despite the impressive prevalence of apparently malignant change in the prostates of asymptomatic men, these morphological abnormalities do not always signify aggressive clinical behavior.
We are currently unable to predict accurately which patients should be treated aggressively and which may be followed expectantly.
* Early Detection Network.
The NCI intends to establish a multi-institutional consortium to develop sensitive and specific tests for the early detection of cancer.
This Network will link centers of expertise in tumor biology, diagnostics technologies, and clinical-trials methodology in academia and industry to develop high-throughput assays suitable for clinical testing.
The Network will have the capacity to establish estimates of the operating characteristics of candidate assays as early-detection tools.
NCI intends that prostate cancer should be one focus of activity within the new Network, and the great current interest in the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) shows the feasibility of this approach.
To expedite the discovery and development of more sensitive and specific markers for early disease, NCI will also establish links between activities of the Network and programs in academia and industry that are developing libraries of all known secreted proteins in mammalian cells.
* Cancer Genetics Network.
This recently organized multicenter consortium is a platform for studies of genetic susceptibility.
It will serve as a vehicle for gene discovery and is creating a registry of individuals at high risk for cancer.
These individuals may serve as probands for the identification of families or as participants in other types of studies of cancer susceptibility.
The Network will provide registry participants with relevant information about cancer predisposition and will facilitate access to studies focused on early detection and prevention.
This year the Network is implementing pilot projects, recruiting participants into the registry, and developing operating procedures.
The Network is planning activities to publicize the procedures by which the research community may gain access to its resources.
* Diagnostic Imaging.
The NCI has recently funded a national multi-institutional network for cooperative studies in diagnostic imaging.
This Network will develop productive interfaces with industrial sources of new imaging technology and will have the capacity to perform both limited-institution pilot studies and full-scale randomized controlled trials to assess the value of imaging innovations in the practice of oncology.
NCI expects that studies in prostate cancer will form an important part of the research agenda of this network, aided by collaborative arrangements with the clinical cooperative groups.
NCI recently announced an initiative supporting the development of image-guided minimally invasive treatment for prostate cancer.
The goal is to develop techniques to define accurately the anatomic extent of localized prostate cancer and to concentrate tumoricidal modalities (interstitial radiation, heat, cold) within the involved area in a manner that spares surrounding normal tissue, preserves function, maximizes quality of life, and reduces the cost of care.
* NCI funded (in total or in part) 246 clinical trials in prostate cancer, including 80 Phase III studies and 37 Phase II studies.
NCI clinical studies in prostate cancer have significant African-American participation.
One NCI study shows that 14.7 percent of men enrolled onto NCI sponsored prostate cancer treatment trials are African American while 10.3 percent of Americans diagnosed with prostate cancer are African American.
* Clinical Trials Restructuring.
NCI and many of the clinical researchers it supports are re-engineering the institutes clinical trials program.
The aim is to enrich the scientific input into clinical trials conception and design, streamline operations, and broaden access to trials participation among both patients and physicians across the country.
Pilot studies are planned that will test new systems for realizing these goals.
Lung and genitourinary cancers will be a special focus of these new planning and expanded access efforts.
During the next year NCI expects to begin a series of national State of the Science meetings to define the key areas for emphasis in prostate clinical research.
In a parallel effort, we shall also begin coordinating development of a common methodology for the conduct and analysis of prostate cancer trials, including common endpoints.
* NCIs ongoing Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial (PCPT) involves 18,000 healthy men over the age of 55 to determine if the drug finasteride can prevent prostate cancer.
* NCIs ongoing Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO) is assessing the efficacy of prostate cancer screening.
New PLCO sites are being added to enhance minority patient accrual.
NCI also is co-sponsoring with the Veterans Administrations a trial to determine whether there is a cohort of patients for whom conservative treatment of localized disease may be an acceptable alternative to surgery.
* NCI staff analyzing the Surveillance and End Results (SEER) Program data have shown that there are tremendously differing patterns of care among black and white men with prostate cancer.
Encouragingly, however, NCI staff and the Department of Defense have collaborated in a study of treatment data and shown that equal treatment yields equal outcome within disease stages.
This finding suggests that NCI efforts to improve prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of this disease have the potential to benefit all patients equally.
* NCI, along with the American Cancer Society and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention sponsored a Leadership Conference on Prostate Cancer in the African-American Community in November of 1997.
Developed in cooperation with the 100 Black Men of America, the Intercultural Cancer Council, the National Black Leadership on Cancer, and the National Prostate Cancer Coalition, the conference represented a significant step toward developing a strategy for the full participation of African Americans in prostate cancer research and control.
* In addition, NCI recently conducted a large interview-based study of prostate cancer in African Americans and whites.
Analysis of the results has not thus far revealed any specific factor that could explain the racial differences in risk.
However, further studies are underway, including an extensive evaluation of the role of different components of the diet.
* Health Services 
The NCI supports studies within its Cancer Surveillance Research Program on the outcomes of prostate-cancer treatment, including assessments of the quality of life.
It also is beginning studies to describe patterns of PSA usage after diagnosis and others to construct models that help explain trends in incidence and mortality as a function of screening.
Studies of economic aspects of prostate cancer diagnosis and care are also supported, including the cost-effectiveness of cancer control interventions and a grant that employs a database that links Medicare and SEER data to investigate the patterns of care and economics of cancer screening and treatment for prostate as well as lung and colon cancers.
Communicating with cancer patients, individuals at high risk for cancer, the general public, and the health care community is a central component of NCIs mission and mandate.
For prostate cancer, the institute communicates information to all of those groups, as well as to the cancer research community.
Materials available from NCI, including print, video, and web products, range from basic information about the disease, information about research now ongoing to improve understanding and management of the disease, and information for men about early detection and treatment options.
One of the most recent communications initiatives is a partnership with the prostate cancer advocacy organization, US TOO, to develop a national communications initiative, called Know Your Options, to better inform men and their families about the disease.
The initiative is based on an information package or kit that provides a solid base of information about prostate cancer to help US TOO chapters work with their hometown media.
The media, in turn, use the information provided by US TOO with the NCI endorsement to keep their readers, listeners, and viewers informed about the disease.
The kit includes the latest medical and scientific information available, as well as information about where US TOO chapter leaders can go for more information, advice, and help.
In addition, information specialists from the NCI-sponsored Cancer Information Service provide more than 60,000 people annually with information about prostate cancer, information about research on the disease, information about screening and treatment options, and information about coping with physical and psychological side effects of the disease and its treatment.
The NCI web site provides information about prostate cancer clinical trials as well as information about treatment options for every stage of the disease.
NCI is currently working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and with the Health Care Financing Administration to develop an educational video for men on issues they could face about prostate cancer screening, diagnosis, and treatment.
The video, intended to be relevant to a general male audience, will be developed to have special relevance to African-American men.
The video will provide educational material on what men need to know about prostate cancer screening options, what they need to know about diagnostic follow-up if a screening test is positive, and what they need to know about treatment options if the diagnosis is positive.
NCIs basic print product about the disease, What You Need to Know about Prostate Cancer, is now available on the web as well.
It provides information about prostate cancer; its symptoms, diagnosis, staging and treatment; clinical trials; side effects of treatment; nutrition and other support for prostate cancer patients; and what prostate cancer research holds for the future.
A new publication from NCI, Understanding Prostate Changes: A Health Guide for All Men, will soon be available on the web too.
It covers all aspects of prostate cancer in more depth than the basic booklet, but also describes non-cancerous prostate conditions.
Another product in development, called Prostate Cancer Treatment: Know Your Options, will be published in print format soon and will also be available on the NCI web site.
NCI is communicating vigorously with the cancer research community.
Earlier this year, NCI staff described all of the prostate cancer research initiatives that exist at the institute, and placed that information on its web site.
The institute then promoted the availability of that information and issued an invitation for grant applications from the scientific community.
The promotion of the information on the web site including the placement of advertisements in major scientific journals, the distribution of packets of information to the nations cancer centers, and the distribution of information through direct mail to cancer investigators.
Since the promotion began in late February 1999, the web page listing prostate cancer grant opportunities has had thousands of hits from those seeking information about the grant opportunities.
Please refer to above Action taken or to be taken of this document for NCIs response to these following significant items regarding Prostate Cancer.
Prostate Cancer -- Prostate cancer is the single most common form of cancer in men in the United States.
An estimated 179,000 men will be diagnosed with prostate cancer and 37,000 men will die from prostate cancer in 1999.
The Committee urges the NCI and other institutes to aggressively increase efforts that will lead to the development of new treatments, new preventives, and new interventions with the potential to improve or extend the lives of men touched by prostate cancer.
(p. 112)
[Prostate Cancer effecting different ethnic populations] -- The incidence and severity of prostate cancer varies in different ethnic populations.
African-American men are more than twice as likely to die of prostate cancer than Caucasian men.
In African-American men, prostate cancer is also generally more advanced at the time of diagnosis.
Chinese men living in China have incidence and mortality rates that are 3-10 times lower than U.S. men.
Reasons for the large racial difference in risk are currently unclear.
The Committee urges NCI to conduct studies to identify risk factors for prostate cancer in several populations, including African Americans and Chinese.
The Committee also encourages NCI to study the associations of dietary patterns with prostate cancer, and variations in the role of diet in different racial and ethnic groups.
(p. 112)
Prostate Cancer -- Increased use of serum analysis for prostate-specific antigen (PSA), the primary method of screening for prostate cancer, has led to an increased detection rate for prostate cancer.
However, only 30 percent of early stage disease will progress to clinically relevant disease within the lifetime of the patient.
The Committee encourages NCI to develop methods to identify those patients at risk of progression who would benefit from aggressive therapy while sparing low-risk patients the morbidity resulting from aggressive treatment of slow-growing disease.
The Committee also encourages NCI to carry out clinical trials that will determine whether yearly screening for prostate cancer using the PSA blood test will decrease mortality from prostate cancer.
(p. 112)
Prostate Cancer -- The NCI has identified a need to restructure the clinical trials program to make it faster, more flexible, more easily accessible to patients, and more responsive to key therapeutic questions.
The Committee encourages NCI to test new systems that will identify the best trials, improve trial planning, speed trial activation, and improve availability of trials to patients.
The Committee encourages NCI to implement programs to assist investigators in academia and in small businesses in getting compounds with promise for treatment and prevention of prostate cancer into clinical testing using NCIs existing development resources.
Several key treatment questions need to be addressed.
The Committee urges NCI to initiate clinical trials that will optimize hormonal and chemotherapeutic approaches for the most common clinical presentations of prostate cancer.
(p. 112)
Prostate Cancer -- The Committee is encouraged by NCIs collaborations with the Department of Defense in fighting this devastating disease, and urges NCI to continue to strengthen and expand its prostate cancer research portfolio.
The Committee further expects the NCI to accelerate spending on prostate cancer, and consult closely with the research community, clinicians and patient groups to identify promising new avenues of basic and clinical research.
(p. 112-113)
Significant Items Index
