TENNESSEE BICENTENNIAL MALL WORLD WAR II MEMORIAL PYLON E-1 TERROR Pylon E-l - AMERICA ENTERS THE WAR AGAINST FASCISM JUNE 1940 Pylon Text AMERICA ENTERS THE WAR AGAINST FASCISM June 1940 Rearmed during the 1930s under the dictatorship of Adolph Hitler, Nazi Germany invaded Poland in 1939 and, by June 1940, had conquered western Europe.
Hitler's fascist regime, celebrating 'Aryan' racial superiority, had already begun the systematic slaughter of Jews and other minorities.
Britain, fighting alone after France surrendered, gained relief when Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941.
After Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, the Axis powers - Germany, Italy, and Japan - declared war against the United States.
The challenge for America was to form a global alliance and destroy the Axis regimes.
Previously an isolationist nation, the US was now forced to fight and defend freedom on an unprecedented global scale while also supporting Soviet armies fighting Hitler.
For America, the first phase of the European war occurred in the North Atlantic Ocean.
The Navy, which now included the US Coast Guard, fought to protect US Merchant Marine and British supply convoys from German submarines.
Naval air patrol forces trained at Millington, long-range B-24 crews trained at Smyrna Army Air Field, and the Tennessee National Guard's 105th Observation Squadron helped break the U-boat blockade by mid-1943.
By the fall of 1942, the Allies, strengthened by US war production and military expansion, invaded North Africa and began to seize the strategic Mediterranean Sea.
Although veteran German forces defeated inexperienced US troops at the Battle of Kasserine Pass, the Allies gained control of North Africa by the spring of 1943 and prepared for an invasion of Italy.
INSTRUCTIONAL OBJECTIVES:
1.
Students will be able to create a globe, locate and identify the seven major continents, four major oceans, including the axis powers, ( Germany, Italy, Japan) allied powers, (United States, France,Great Britain, Soviet Union).
2.
Students will be able to locate and identify the countries of North Africa and the Mediterranean Sea.
3.
Students will be able to describe the Battle of London and analyze the effects on its people as well as the entire world.
4.
Students will be able to synthesis and identify in chronological order the early events of World War II.
5.
Students will be able to develop an understanding of the Holocaust.
PRE-VISIT ACTIVITIES: A. Make a Globe out of a Pumpkin.
Choose any size pumpkin, but try to choose one that is fairly and uniformly round!
Clean your pumpkin, removing loose particles of dirt.
Paint will not go on smoothly if the pumpkin is dirty.
Your pumpkin globe must include the following:
North and South Poles
Equator
Prime Meridian
The seven continents: North America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, and Antarctic.
The four major oceans: Atlantic, Pacific, Arctic and Indian.
Locate the Allied nations, and the Axis Powers.
Label all of the above global features on your pumpkin globe.
Also, locate and label the state of Tennessee and where you live in the state.
* On a map of the Eastern Hemisphere, identify the Axis Powers and the Allied Powers.
Also locate the following:
BODIES OF WATER
COUNTRIES
Atlantic Ocean
Rhine River
Great Britain
Spain
Sweden
North Sea
Elbe River
France
Switzerland
Finland
Mediterranean Sea
Danube River
Germany
Poland
Turkey
Black Sea
Volga River
Italy
Czechoslovakia
Egypt
Baltic Sea
Don River
Soviet Union
Tunisia
Algeria
Portugal
Norway
* Create a Who's Who by researching the leaders of the allied powers, (Winston Churchill, Franklin Roosevelt, Joseph Stalin, Charles De Gaulle) the axis powers, (Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, Hideki Tojo,).
Also the War Generals of the allied powers from the United States and Great Britain: (Eisenhower, Montgomery, Bradley, Crerar, Dempsey, Hodges, Patton).
* Create a Historical Timeline of the events listed on Pylon El.
Try to include the following: * TIMELINE/CHRONOLOGY
SEPTEMBER 18, 1931 Japan invades Manchuria (Northern China) MARCH 7, 1936 Italy invades Ethiopia JUNE 18, 1936 Germany and Italy send men and weapons to help German Franco in the Spanish Civil War MARCH 13, 1938 Germany takes over Austria SEPTEMBER 29, 1938 Munich Conference, Allies allow Hitler to take the Sudetenland Section of Czechoslovakia SEPTEMBER 1, 1939 Germany invades Poland MAY 10, 1940 Germany invades the Lowland JUNE 13, 1940 German army invades Paris, France SEPTEMBER 7, 1940 German bombing of London JUNE 22, 1941 Germany invades Russia DECEMBER 7, 1941 Japan attacks Pearl Harbor JUNE 3, 1942 Japanese Fleet defeated at Midway JUNE 1942 German advance on Suez stopped at El Alamein NOVEMBER 8, 1942 Allies invade French North Africa FEBRUARY 2, 1943 German advance stopped at Stalingrad, Russia JUNE 10, 1943 Allies invade Italy (Sicily) JUNE 6, 1944 Allies invade Normandy (France) MAY 7, 1945 Germany surrenders AUGUST 6, 1945 First Atomic Bomb dropped on Japan SEPTEMBER 2, 1945 Japan surrenders OCTOBER 24, 1945 The United Nations begins operations E. Interview a World War II Soldier in your hometown community.
Use a Video-camera or a tape recorder.
Begin by asking the following questions: 1.
In which branch of the armed services did you serve? 2.
Where were you stationed during the War? 3.
What were your duties? 4.
What kind of food did you have? 5.
Describe your living accommodations.
6.
How was morale in your unit? 7.
Which aspects of the war experience were boring? 8.
What did soldiers in your unit do for entertainment? 9.
When were you most afraid during the war? 10.
What do you remember as the worst time for America during the war? 11.
When did you start feeling that the war effort was going America's way? 12.
At the time, what did you think about: FDR? Churchill? Stalin? Hitler? Mussolini? the Bombing of London? the Japanese? the Germans? the Italians? the internment of Japanese-Americans? the dropping of the atomic bomb on Hiroshima and Nagasaki? 13.
Have any of your options changed over the years? If so, what ways? 14.
Where were you when you heard about: the invasion of Poland? the bombing of London? the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor? D-day? VE-day? VJ-day? the death of FDR? 15.
What were your feelings when you came home? 16.
How did others receive you? 17.
What problems did returning soldiers face? (Video-taped interviews could be placed in the school library or possibly the local library.
A good source of helpful information could come from your local Historical Society).
(F.) Read the following "FIFTY YEARS AFTER THE EVE OF DESTRUCTION" from the U.S. Holocaust Council, Washington, D.C.
After reading the material explaining the Holocaust, match the following terms with the appropriate definition.
THIRD REICH SOVIETS ALLIED BIG THREE NAZI FINAL SOLUTION CONCENTRATION CAMP GENOCIDE WARSAW GHETTO VICTIM MEIN KAMPH BILITZ KREIG ANTI-SEMITISM FASCIST DEATH MARCH JEWISH BADGE DISPLACED PERSON PLAN 1.
Forced marches of concentration camp inmates (usually Jews) during the German retreat near the end of the World War II.
2.
Predisposition against Jews.
3.
A book by Adolf Hitler, expounding his ideology, published in two volumes (July 1925 and December 1926).
4.
Suffer from a force or action.
5.
The willful killing of a whole race or nation.
6.
The German fascist party controlling Germany from 1933-1945.
7.
Nazi code name for the physical extermination of European Jewry.
8.
A camp where persons (as prisoners of war, political prisoners, or refugees are detained or confined.
9.
Made up of Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin, these men conducted the war against Germany.
10.
The political and military leaders of the USSR.
11.
The official name of the united German State.
12.
Set up by the Marshall Plan, it granted American citizenship to some 300,000 Europeans, many of them Jewish survivors of the Holocaust.
13.
One of the areas Jews were restricted to in order to limit their contact with Christians and to confine Jews to certain economic activities.
14.
The German army's war tactics of employing massive bombings and tank assaults to destroy resistance.
Also known as "Lighting War".
15.
A political philosophy that exalts nation and race above the individual and that stands for a centralized autocratic government headed by a dictatorial leader, severe economic social regimentation, and forcible suppression of opposition.
16._____________Badge worn by Jews in the occupied countries, on Nazi orders, in order to distinguish them from the rest of the population.
Most commonly, it was the yellow Star of David with or without the word "Jew" in the local language.
It was usually worn both on the chest and on the back.
ON SITE ACTIVITIES: (A.) From the Pylon text El, identify on the globe located at the north side of the mall, continents, oceans, allied powers, axis powers, and all areas listed from classroom exercise regarding map study lesson B. (B.) Plan a poster to advertise the Tennessee Bicentennial Mall World War II Memorial.
(C.) Create a poem, song, or a TV commercial regarding the memorial.
For the commercial, use a Video-Camera during your visit.
(D.) Take photographs during your visit at the mall with friends and create a collage describing the visit.
Place on display in your classroom or even in the hallway at school.
(E.) Create a log or journal during your visit at the memorial.
Identify any name at the Memorial of a person that is from your county or town.
Try to arrange an interview with them or maybe a member of their family.
(F.) Pretend to be a news reporter individually or create a team of journalists, and write an on-site article while visiting the memorial.
Publish your article in the local newspaper when you arrive home.
(G.)
At the World War II Memorial, try to find a person with the same last name as yours.
Try to find out if you are related.
EXTENSION ACTIVITIES: (A.) Write a biography about one of the historical figures.
(B.) Retell the historical events of choice in comic strip form.
(C.) Create your own historical picture book by drawing your favorite scenes of the mall.
(D.) Present a panel discussion.
Assemble a group of World War II experts to discuss the events from a different point of view.
(E.) Create a postcard using a 4"x 6" card.
Decorate the front to illustrate the mall.
On the back, write a note describing the scene, event, etc.
(F.) Build a model of the Tennessee Bicentennial Mall World War II Memorial.
(G.) Research the Battle of Kasserine Pass.
(H.) Research the roll of the Tennessee National Guard's 105th Observation Squadron (I.) Research the Long Range B-24 Crews that were trained at the Smyrna Army Air Field Smyrna, TN.
(J.) Interview a person who experienced the Holocaust ADDITIONAL RESOURCES: BOOKS: Bullock, Alan.
Hitler: A Study in Tyranny, New York: Harper,
Davidson, James West.
The American Nation.
New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Publishers, 1995.
Frank, Anne: The Diary of a Young Girl.
New York: 1952.
Garraty, John A.
The Story of America.
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Publishers, 1994.
Levin, Nora.
The Holocaust: The Destruction of European Jewry 1933-1945.
New York: Thomas Y.
Crowell Company, 1968 Mason, Lorna; Jesus Garcia; Frances Powell: C. Fredrick Risinger, America's Past and Promise.
Illinois: McDougal Littell/Moughton Mifflin, Publishers, 1995.
Ross, Robert W. So It Was True.
The American Protestant Press and the Nazi Persecution of the Jews.
Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press, 1980.
Sontag, Raymond J.
A Broken World, 1919-1939.
New York: Harper 
COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY RESOURCES: Compton's ---Multimedia Encyclopedia, 1997.
EnCarta----Multimedia Encyclopedia, 1997.
Golier--- --Multimedia Encyclopedia, 1997.
National Geographic -Multimedia CD ROM.
The American Chronicles Series-CD ROM.
Total History of the World --Multimedia Encyclopedia.
Total History of the United States ---Multimedia Encyclopedia.
World Book -Multimedia Encyclopedia, 1997.
World War II Encyclopedia --Multimedia Encyclopedia.
VIDEODISC: The American History Video Disc.
Instructional Resources Corp., 1993.
WORLD WIDE WEB SITES: Film Archives. www.custsru@filmicarchieves.com Library of Congress.
McDougal/Littell. www.mcdougallittell.com Holocaust Memorial Center.
Cent.info@holocaustcenter.org Tennessee Holocaust Commission.
tnholcom@etrvax.vanderbilt.edu.
The National Archives. www.nara.gov
FILMS: Survivors of the Holocaust.
Brookside Media, Trumbull, CT.
The Diary of Anne Frank B/W.
The Holocaust: In Memory of Millions.
Brookside Media, Trumbull, CT, The Winds of War The World War II Collection Norman Schwarzkopf.
Brookside Media, Trumbull, CT., War In Europe.
Brookside Media, Trumbull, CT. War and Remembrance World War II: The War Chronicles.
Brookside Media.
