Social Studies Curriculum Standards Approved by the Tennessee State Board of Education August 31, 2001 Michelle Davidson Ungurait, Social Studies Consultant FOURTH GRADE Accomplishments In Fourth Grade, students learn about the history of the United States from its early beginnings to the Civil War with a focus on regions.
Integrate the six Social Studies standards of essential content knowledge and four process skills for instructional purposes.
Culture
4.1.01 Understand the diversity of human cultures.
a.
Describe cultures of Native American tribes.
b. Explain how European settlers created a new culture.
4.1.02 Discuss cultures and human patterns of places and regions of the world.
a.
Explore similarities and differences in how groups, societies, and cultures address similar human needs and concerns.
b. Compare how people from different cultures think about and handle their physical environments and social conditions.
4.1.03 Recognize the contributions of individuals and people of various ethnic, racial, religious, and socioeconomic groups to the development of civilizations.
a. Show different cultural regions on a map identifying such things as religion, language, and ethnicity. b. Identify the reasons for the establishment of Spanish missions in early American history.
4.1.04 Understand the contributions of individuals and people of various ethnic, racial, religious, and socioeconomic groups to Tennessee.
a.
Identify the similarities and differences within and among selected racial, ethnic, and religious groups in Tennessee.
b. Identify customs, celebrations, and traditions of various cultures groups in early Tennessee.
c. Summarize the contributions of people of various racial, ethnic, and religious groups in the development of early Tennessee.
Economics
4.2.01 Describe the potential costs and benefits of personal economic choices in a market economy.
a.
Identify the economic motivations for European exploration and colonization. b. Describe how Native Americans in Tennessee and the Western Hemisphere met their basic economic needs.
c. Analyze how people in different parts of the United States earned a living in the past and do so in the present.
4.2.02 Give examples of the interaction of groups, businesses, and governments in a market economy.
a.
Explain the economic patterns of various early Native American groups in Tennessee and the Western Hemisphere.
b. Identify major industries of colonial America.
c. Explain the economic patterns of early European colonial governments and their relationships with foreign governments.
4.2.03 Understand fundamental economic concepts.
a.
Explain and demonstrate the role of money in daily life.
b. Describe the relationship of price to supply and demand and how it affected early American history.
c. Use economic concepts such as supply, demand, and price to help explain events.
4.2.04 Understand the development of economics within Tennessee and early America.
a.
Identify the economic motivations for European exploration and settlement in Tennessee and the Western Hemisphere.
b. Examine the location, distribution, and patterns of economic activities and of settlement in Tennessee.
c. Evaluate the effects of supply and demand on business, industry, and agriculture, including the plantation system, in Tennessee and various regions.
Geography
4.3.01 understand how to use maps, globes, and other geographic representations, tools, and technologies to acquire, process and report information from a spatial perspective.
a.
Locate major countries of the world on a map or globe involved with early American development.
b. Locate places on a map using cardinal and intermediate directions, latitude and longitude, and time zones.
c. Locate the routes of early explorers of North America on a map.
4.3.02 Recognize the interaction between human and physical systems around the world.
a.
Explain how physical and human characteristics of places and regions within the state and the United States developed.
b. Explain how the major river systems affected the development of early settlements.
4.3.03 Understand how to identify and locate major physical and political features on globes and maps.
a.
Explain how physical processes shape the United States features and patterns.
b. Understand the differences in early population characteristics of the state and of the United States such as density, distribution, and growth rates.
c. Describe how geography affected the development of transportation and communication networks.
d. Explain the influences of physical and human features on historical events.
4.3.04 Understand the geographic factors that determined the locations of and patterns of settlements in Tennessee.
a.
Explain how the patterns and processes of migration affect the development of Tennessee.
b. Explain how environmental issues such as water supply, air quality, and solid waste confronted humans when settling Tennessee.
Governance and Civics
4.4.01 Discuss the structure and purposes of governance.
a.
Explain how Native Americans governed their communities.
b. Give examples of how government did or did not provide for needs and wants of people, establish order and security, and manage conflict.
c. Compare the systems of government of early European colonists.
4.4.02 Describe the Constitution of the United States and the Tennessee State Constitution in principle and practice.
a.
Identify examples of representative government in the American colonies, including the Mayflower Compact, Iroquois League, and the Virginia House of Burgesses. b. Identify the purposes and explain the importance of the creation of Tennessees colonial government, and the Tennessee Constitution.
c. Explain the purposes of the United States Constitution as identified in the Preamble to the Constitution.
d. Explain the system of checks and balances. e. Identify and explain the basic functions of the three branches of state government.
4.4.03 Understand the rights, responsibilities, and privileges of citizens living in a democratic republic.
a.
Identify the purposes and explain the importance of the Declaration of Independence.
b. Identify examples of rights and responsibilities of citizens.
c. Explain action citizens take to influence public policy decisions.
4.4.04 Recognize the qualities of a contributing citizen in our participatory democracy.
a.
Identify and practice selected forms of civic discussion and participation consistent with the ideals of citizens in a democratic republic.
b. Explain the role of the individual in state and local elections.
c. Sing or recite The Star Spangled Banner and explain its history.
History
Era 1 - Three Worlds Meet (Beginnings to 1620)
4.5.01 Identify the ancient civilizations of the Americas.
a.
Identify the ancient civilizations of the Americas at the time of European arrival.
b. Explain the cultures of the Western Hemispheres native peoples prior to European contact.
4.5.02 Understand the place of historical events in the context of past, present and future.
a.
Demonstrate an ability to use correct vocabulary associated with time such as past, present, future, and long ago; read and construct simple timelines; identify examples of change; and recognize examples of cause and effect relationships.
b. Realize that geographic, technological, and scientific factors contributed to the European age of exploration and settlement in the Americas. c. Describe the immediate and long-term impact of Columbus voyages on Native populations and on colonization in the Americas. d. List the characteristics of the Spanish and Portuguese exploration and settlement of the Americas.
4.5.03 Recognize major events, people, and patterns in Tennessee.
a.
Identify Native American groups in Tennessee and the Western Hemisphere before European explorations. b. Summarize reasons for European exploration and settlement of Tennessee and the Western Hemisphere.
c. Identify accomplishments of significant explorers and explain their impact on the settlement of Tennessee.
Era 2 - Colonization and Settlement (1585-1763)
4.5.04 Recognize the role that desire for freedom played in the settlement of the New World.
a.
Discuss the search for religious, economic, and individual freedom in the settlement of the colonies. b. Describe the lives of free and indentured immigrants who came from Europe to North America and the Caribbean.
4.5.05 Understand the place of historical events in the context of past, present and future.
a.
Compare and contrast different stories or accounts about past events, people, places, or situations, identifying how they contribute to our understanding of the past.
b. Detail the growth and change in the European colonies during the two centuries following their founding with an emphasis on New England and Virginia.
c. Explain the importance of the Mayflower Compact. d. Understand the role of religion in the English colonies such as the evolution of religious freedom and the treatment of religious dissenters.
e. Explain when, where, and why groups of people colonized and settled in the United States.
f. Explain the political, economic, and social impact of the slave trade in the Americas.
4.5.06 Identify major events, people, and patterns in Tennessee.
a.
Conduct a thorough study of the differing regions of Tennessee and their history.
b. Describe the effects of political, economic, and social changes on Native Americans in Tennessee.
c. Identify characteristics of early colonial governments in Tennessee.
Era 3 - Revolution and the New Nation (1754-1820)
4.5.07 Identify the causes and results of the American Revolution.
a.
Explain the events that contributed to the outbreak of the American Revolution.
b. Study the Declaration of Independence, its major ideas, and its sources.
c. Describe the earliest armed conflict of the Revolutionary War. d. Summarize the results of the American Revolution, including the establishment of the United States.
4.5.08 Understand the place of historical events in the context of past, present and future.
a.
Demonstrate an understanding that people in different times and places view the world differently.
b. Explain the major political issues of the thirteen colonies after their independence that led to the creation of the Articles of Confederation.
c. Summarize the events that led to the creation of the United States Constitution.
4.5.09 Recognize major events, people, and patterns in Tennessee.
a.
Focus on the creation of the state of Franklin and subsequent creation of the state of Tennessee.
b. Identify the accomplishments of notable Tennessee individuals such as William Blount, and John Sevier.
Era 4 - Expansion and Reform (1801-1861)
4.5.10 Recognize American territorial expansions and its effects on relations with European powers and Native Americans.
a.
Give examples of maps, time lines, and charts that show western expansion.
b. Identify the factors that led to territorial expansion and its effects.
c. Identify the contributions of early pioneers such as Daniel Boone to the development of colonial America.
4.5.11 Understand sectional differences brought on by the Western movement, expansion of slavery, and emerging industrialization.
a.
Identify changes in society resulting from the Industrial Revolution.
b. Explain how societal changes led to conflict among sections of the United States.
c. Explain the Louisiana Purchase.
d. Recognize the significance of the Lewis and Clark expedition.
e. Recognize the significance of the War of 1812.
f. Understand the impact of territorial expansion on Native American tribes.
4.5.12 Identify major events, people, and patterns in Tennessee.
a.
Identify the impact of railroads on life in Tennessee including changes to cities and major industries.
b. Identify the impact of various issues and events on life in Tennessee such as urbanization.
c. Identify the accomplishments of notable Tennessee individuals such as Sam Houston, Andrew Jackson and James Polk.
Individuals, Groups, and Interactions
4.6.01 Recognize the impact of individual and group decisions.
a.
Analyze a particular event to identify reasons individuals might respond to it in different ways. b. Work independently and cooperatively to accomplish goals.
c. Identify leadership qualities of leaders of the past.
4.6.02 Understand how groups can impact change at the local, state, and national level.
a.
Explain how group and institutional influences such as religious beliefs, laws, and peer pressure, on people, events, and elements of culture.
b. Identify and describe examples of tension between a groups belief system and the governments policies and laws.
[BUTTON Input] (not implemented)____
