Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak to you today about counterfeiting in general and counterfeiting using computer-related technology in particular.
Less than $32 million in counterfeit U.S. currency was passed in the United States in FY'97.
Over $40 million was seized before being passed on to the public.
Although any amount of counterfeit currency is a serious concern to the United States Secret Service, the total amount of counterfeit currency passed domestically represents less than 1/100 of 1 percent of the $450 billion of the genuine U.S. currency in circulation worldwide.
Advances in computer technology have dramatically changed the nature of production used in counterfeiting.
Operations have evolved from using the traditional method of offset printing to using personal computers connected to scanners or digital input devices, together with inkjet printers and full color copiers.
Inkjet printers and copiers are relatively inexpensive, readily available, easily transportable, and user-friendly.
When using the technology currently available, these devices are capable of producing high-quality counterfeit currency.
Paramount to the process, once the image of a Federal Reserve Note is scanned or digitally captured, a personal computer may be used to enhance its quality.
The image can then be transmitted electronically - computer-to-computer over the Internet - and printed by individuals who lack any specialized computer or graphics knowledge.
As a result, today's counterfeiter is able to produce counterfeit currency using a high-quality inkjet printer that can cost as little as $300.
In fiscal year 1995, $174,924 (.5%) of all counterfeit currency passed in the United States was inkjet produced.
In comparison, $6,121,292 (19%) of all counterfeit currency passed in the United States during fiscal year 1997 was inkjet produced.
This represents an 805 per cent increase in domestic inkjet produced counterfeit notes from FY '96 - FY '97.
For the first five months of fiscal year 1998, $7,224,712 (43%) of all counterfeit currency passed in the United States was inkjet produced.
The increase in computer-generated counterfeiting represents not only a threat to our law enforcement interests, but also seriously threatens the integrity of our U.S. currency.
Maintaining confidence in U.S. currency is essential to preserving the benefits derived from the dollar's status as a world currency.
U.S. bearer obligations serve as a stable and accepted medium of exchange and store of value that is often preferred to local currencies worldwide, particularly in the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe, and Latin America.
In addition to the investment and trade benefits associated with the dollar's position as a reserve currency, the demand for U.S. paper currency provides direct economic benefits for the U.S. Government.
According to the Federal Reserve's estimate, approximately $270 to $300 billion in U.S. currency is circulating overseas.
Applying the 5.7 percent average interest rate on the Federal Reserve's portfolio of government securities during 1996, overseas currency holdings of this magnitude will generate about $16 billion in interest earnings per year.
A 10 percent reduction in overseas holdings of U.S. currency arising, for example, from concerns over counterfeiting, would decrease interest earnings and have a negative effect on the budget (and therefore increase Treasury's borrowing requirements) by about $1.6 billion per year for as long as the reduction in holdings persisted.
Any toleration of counterfeiting would seriously undermine the broad government interest in maintaining the integrity of U.S. currency.
Therefore, the Secret Service has adopted a "zero tolerance" policy for counterfeiting crimes; every case is investigated and pursued.
However, the growth in computer generated counterfeiting cases creates serious enforcement problems.
In contrast to offenders using offset presses, computer counterfeiters can easily develop or obtain counterfeit images, print them without specialized equipment in batches of any size, and transmit the images to anyone instantaneously.
Traditional law enforcement methods, as well as the sentencing guidelines, must be modified to meet the challenges created by this ever-changing technology.
The current sentencing guidelines provide for sentencing enhancements based on the amount of counterfeit currency that is produced and/or passed.
One of the issues that is not adequately addressed in the existing guidelines is the specific difference between counterfeiters who use the offset printing press, which historically has been the method of choice, versus the advanced technology related to the inkjet printer.
A counterfeiter using an inkjet printer to produce computer-generated notes can run off currency on an as-needed basis and does not need to maintain a large inventory of counterfeit currency.
This differs markedly from the more traditional offset printing method, where the cost of a single production "run" and other factors caused defendants to create large inventories of counterfeit currency at one time.
As reflected in the investigative files of the Secret Service, cases involving computer-generated notes rarely involve seized currency in excess of $2,000, much less $5,000.
As a result of the low seizure amount, the guidelines provide little, if any, sentence enhancement.
A typical defendant faces less than a year imprisonment.
Indeed, if the amount of seized counterfeit currency is less than $5,000 and a defendant accepts responsibility for his actions, under the current guidelines he may be eligible for a sentence of straight probation.
It was recently brought to my attention that a defendant arrested after passing a number of computer-generated counterfeit $50 FRNs in Virginia 3 months ago had a rather illuminating comment when told by Secret Service agents from our Richmond Field Office that he might be charged federally.
He said: "Good, under the federal sentencing guidelines, you can't do anything to me".
Another problem area for law enforcement is the inability to administratively forfeit the instrumentalities of counterfeiting.
Neither criminal nor administrative forfeiture of personal property used to facilitate counterfeiting is currently authorized by statute.
As a result, scanners, computers, and printers used to facilitate counterfeiting are often returned to perpetrators when their value does not meet minimum thresholds for civil forfeiture.
The potential for light punitive action and the return of property used to make counterfeit currency may feed the perception that counterfeiting is relatively risk free, considering its potential for quick profit.
This is precisely the perception that we do not want to foster.
The strategy to attack this problem is coordinated among the Department of the Treasury, the Federal Reserve Board (FRB), the Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP), and the U.S. Secret Service, and it is threefold:
The first initiative is to identify and implement technological fixes that should preclude, at least to a degree, counterfeiting through intervention in either the input, graphics, or output phases of the reprographic process.
The Advanced Counterfeiting Deterrence Steering Committee, which comprises senior officials of the agencies listed above, has established a solid working relationship with the computer/copier industry, and is planning a series of meetings with industry representatives to explore viable technological fixes, with an eye to both short term and long term solutions.
The second initiative is legal.
On March 5, 1998, Treasury Secretary Rubin wrote a letter to the Honorable Richard P. Conaboy, Chairman of the U.S. Sentencing Commission, requesting consideration of sentencing reform in the area of inkjet-produced counterfeit currency.
On March 12, 1998, a representative of the Treasury Department's General Counsel's office and I appeared before the U.S. Sentencing Commission and gave testimony in support of this request.
Members of the Commission expressed interest in this issue, and we intend to pursue the matter further during their next amendment cycle.
Your support of our efforts before the Commission would certainly be appreciated.
Our efforts also involve close coordination with the U.S. Department of Justice.
We have offered to provide all the necessary information for federal prosecutors to respond to the developments in counterfeiting together with the Secret Service.
The third initiative is a public education campaign identifying the security features in the new currency and stressing the importance associated with the public's scrutiny of the currency they receive, the detection of counterfeit currency; and the serious nature of counterfeiting.
The Treasury Department's Public Affairs office is working in partnership with those offices in Bureau of Engraving and Printing, the Federal Reserve Board and the U.S. Secret Service to carry out a public education campaign highlighting these features.
Public confidence in the U.S. dollar is so strong that most people "don't look at their money."
This confidence is the counterfeiter's biggest ally.
The new security features can be easily recognized by the public and once generally known, should enhance public confidence as well as make counterfeit currency more detectable.
A comprehensive list of banks, merchants, and other cash handlers has been compiled as a target audience for the dissemination of currency related publications and for seminars highlighting security features on U.S. currency and the detection of counterfeit currency.
These seminars will be conducted by Secret Service representatives at Federal Reserve Banks.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve Banks are initiating WEB sites on the Internet for the dissemination of information about security features found on genuine U.S. currency.
This public education is particularly important because the new currency design, which was the culmination of a decade long endeavor aimed at staying ahead of the potential counterfeiting threat posed by advances in the reprographic industry, incorporated new security features.
These features along with the traditional security features, are effective deterrents if the public knows about them and uses them to authenticate the currency they receive.
In closing, I would emphasize the importance of forceful action to deter counterfeiting.
If the circulation of counterfeit currency, were allowed to become widespread, it would serve to diminish the value of genuine currency, create an environment conducive to fraud, and undermine public confidence in our primary medium of exchange.
At this point, Secret Service Counterfeit Specialist Lorelei Pagano will give a short demonstration, showing the ease and speed with which these notes can be captured and printed.
After the presentation, we would be pleased to answer any questions from the Committee members.
