International Information Programs SUMMIT OF THE AMERICAS PLAN OF ACTION I. PRESERVING AND STRENGTHENING THE COMMUNITY OF DEMOCRACIES OF THE AMERICAS
1.
Strengthening Democracy
The strengthening, effective exercise and consolidation of democracy constitute the central political priority of the Americas.
The Organization of American States (OAS) is the principal hemispheric body for the defense of democratic values and institutions; among its essential purposes is to promote and consolidate representative democracy, with due respect to the principle of non-intervention.
The OAS has adopted multilateral procedures to address the problems created when democratic order has been interrupted unconstitutionally.
In order to prevent such crises, the OAS needs to direct more effort toward the promotion of democratic values and practices and to the social and economic strengthening of already-established democratic regimes.
Governments will:
Give expeditious consideration to ratifying the Cartagena de Indias, Washington and Managua Protocols to the OAS Charter, if they have not already done so.
Strengthen the dialogue among social groups and foster grass roots participation in problem solving at the local level.
Support efforts by the OAS to promote democracy by:
-- Encouraging exchanges of election-related technologies and assisting national electoral organizations, at the request of the interested state.
-- Strengthening the Unit for the Promotion of Democracy so that it can provide assistance at the request of the interested state on such matters as legislative and judicial processes, government reforms (including administration of justice, technical modernization of national legislative bodies, simplification of government regulations and promotion of participation by community organizations in local democracy), and other institutional changes.
-- Encouraging opportunities for exchange of experiences among member states' democratic institutions, particularly legislature- to-legislature and judiciary-to-judiciary.
-- Fostering understanding, dialogue and political reconciliation, at the request of the affected state and bearing in mind that national reconciliation comes from within.
-- Requesting the OAS to promote and follow up on these commitments.
2.
Promoting and Protecting Human Rights
Great progress has been made in the Hemisphere in the development of human rights concepts and norms, but serious gaps in implementation remain.
While courts ultimately have the responsibility for enforcing legal rights and obligations, reforms in other institutions are needed to contribute to the further development of a climate of respect for human rights.
There must also be universal access to justice and effective means to enforce basic rights.
A democracy is judged by the rights enjoyed by its least influential members.
Governments will:
Give serious consideration to adherence to international human rights instruments to which they are not already party.
Cooperate fully with all United Nations and inter-American human rights bodies.
Develop programs for the promotion and observance of human rights, including educational programs to inform people of their legal rights and their responsibility to respect the rights of others.
Promote policies to ensure that women enjoy full and equal legal rights within their families and societies, and to ensure the removal of constraints to women's full participation as voters, candidates and elected and appointed officials.
Review and strengthen laws for the protection of the rights of minority groups and indigenous people and communities to ensure freedom from discrimination, to guarantee full and equal protection under the law, and to facilitate active civic participation.
Support a process to review and enhance the protection o of indigenous rights in OAS member states and to develop promptly an effective United Nations declaration on indigenous rights.
Review national legislation affecting people with disabilities, as well as benefits and services for them, and make any changes needed to facilitate the enjoyment by these individuals of the same rights and freedoms as other members of society.
Undertake all measures necessary to guarantee the rights of children, and, where they have not already done so, give serious consideration to ratifying the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Guarantee the protection of the human rights of all migrant workers and their families.
Take the necessary steps to remedy inhumane conditions in prisons and to minimize the number of pretrial detainees.
Review training curricula for law enforcement agents to ensure that they adequately cover proper treatment of suspects and detainees as well as relations with the community.
Exchange experiences on protection of human rights at the national level and, where possible, cooperate in the development of law enforcement and security force training or other programs to reduce the potential for human rights violations.
Call on the OAS and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) to establish or to reinforce programs, as appropriate, to support national projects for the promotion and observance of human rights in the Western Hemisphere.
Further strengthen the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
3.
Invigorating Society/Community Participation
A strong and diverse civil society, organized in various ways and sectors, including individuals, the private sector, labor, political parties, academics, and other non-governmental actors and organizations, gives depth and durability to democracy.
Similarly, a vigorous democracy requires broad participation in public issues.
Such activities should be carried out with complete transparency and accountability, and to this end a proper legal and regulatory framework should be established to include the possibility of obtaining technical and financial support, including from private sources.
Governments will:
Review the regulatory framework for non-governmental actors with a view to facilitating their operations and promoting their ability to receive funds.
This review will emphasize the management and oversight of resources as well as transparency and the accountability to society of said actors.
Take steps to improve the participation in social activities and initiatives of groups traditionally marginalized, including women, youth, indigenous people and the extremely poor.
Exchange progress reports on activities in the civil society area at the 1996 Summit Conference on Sustainable Development in Bolivia.
Consider the development by the IDB of a new Civil Society Program to encourage responsible and accountable philanthropy and civic engagement in public policy issues.
4.
Promoting Cultural Values
Cultural development is a fundamental and integral component of development in the Americas and has an inherent capability to enrich our societies and to generate greater understanding among our countries.
In order to promote cultural values, governments will:
Encourage more dynamic relations among public and private institutions and organizations, including universities, museums, and centers of art and literature, as well as among individual cultural actors.
Such exchanges emphasize our cultural diversity, recognize the value of our local cultures and contribute to improving hemispheric understanding.
Request that the OAS and IDB reinforce their plans and programs to facilitate these cultural exchanges and the flow of cultural and historical information within and among our nations.
5.
Combating Corruption
The problem of corruption is now an issue of serious interest not only in this Hemisphere, but in all regions of the world.
Corruption in both the public and private sectors weakens democracy and undermines the legitimacy of governments and institutions.
The modernization of the state, including deregulation, privatization and the simplification of government procedures, reduces the opportunities for corruption.
All aspects of public administration in a democracy must be transparent and open to public scrutiny.
Governments will:
Promote open discussion of the most significant problems facing government and develop priorities for reforms needed to make government operations transparent and accountable.
Ensure proper oversight of government functions by strengthening internal mechanisms, including investigative and enforcement capacity with respect to acts of corruption, and facilitating public access to information necessary for meaningful outside review.
Establish conflict of interest standards for public employees and effective measures against illicit enrichment, including stiff penalties for those who utilize their public position to benefit private interests.
Call on the governments of the world to adopt and enforce measures against bribery in all financial or commercial transactions with the Hemisphere; toward this end, invite the OAS to establish liaison with the OECD Working Group on Bribery in International Business Transactions.
Develop mechanisms of cooperation in the judicial and banking areas to make possible rapid and effective response in the international investigation of corruption cases.
Give priority to strengthening government regulations and procurement, tax collection, the administration of justice and the electoral and legislative processes, utilizing the support of the IDB and other international financial institutions where appropriate.
Develop within the OAS, with due regard to applicable treaties and national legislation, a hemispheric approach to acts of corruption in both the public and private sectors that would include extradition and prosecution of individuals so charged, through negotiation of a new hemispheric agreement or new arrangements within existing frameworks for international cooperation.
6.
Combating the Problem of Illegal Drugs and Related Crimes
The problems of illegal drug and related criminal activities pose grave threats to the societies, free market economies, and democratic institutions of the Hemisphere.
Drug use imposes enormous social costs; drug money and income are net drains on economic growth; and drug lords and criminal organizations endanger the security of our people through corruption, intimidation, and violence.
While drug trafficking continues to be a significant source of illegal funds, the money laundering industry increasingly deals with the proceeds of all types of criminal activity.
An integrated and balanced approach that includes respect for national sovereignty is essential to confront all aspects of these problems.
For these reasons, a broad coordinated hemispheric strategy to reduce drug use and production, including new enforcement methods that can disrupt drug trafficking and money laundering networks and prosecute those engaged in such activities, is required.
In this context, governments note the work of the 1992 San Antonio Summit, endorse the efforts of the Inter-American Commission on Drug Abuse Control, and agree to work together to formulate a counter- narcotics strategy for the 21st Century.
Governments will:
Ratify the 1988 United Nations Convention Against the Illicit Traffic of Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances and make it a criminal offense to launder the proceeds of all serious crimes.
Enact legislation to permit the freezing and forfeiture of the proceeds of money laundering and consider the sharing of forfeited assets among governments.
As agreed by ministers and representatives of Caribbean and Latin American governments in the Kingston Declaration, November 5-6, 1992, implement the recommendations of the Caribbean Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering and work to adopt the Model Regulations of the Inter-American Commission on Drug Abuse Control (CICAD).
Encourage financial institutions to report large and suspicious transactions to appropriate authorities and develop effective procedures that would allow the collection of relevant information from financial institutions.
Work individually and collectively to identify the region's narcotics trafficking and money laundering networks, prosecute their leaders, and seize assets derived from these criminal activities.
Adopt programs to prevent and reduce the demand for and the consumption of illicit drugs.
Adopt effective and environmentally-sound national strategies to prevent or reduce substantially the cultivation and processing of crops used for the illegal drug trade, paying particular attention to national and international support for development programs that create viable economic alternatives to drug production.
Pay particular attention to the control of precursor chemicals and support comprehensive drug interdiction strategies.
Strengthen efforts to control firearms, ammunition, and explosives to avoid their diversion to drug traffickers and criminal organizations.
Hold a working-level conference, to be followed by a ministerial conference, to study and agree on a coordinated hemispheric response, including consideration of an inter-American convention, to combat money laundering.
Convene a hemispheric-wide conference of donors, including multilateral development banks and UN agencies, to seek resources for alternative development programs aimed at curbing the production, trafficking, and use of illicit drugs, and the rehabilitation of addicts.
Support the discussion the OAS has initiated with the European Union on measures to control precursor chemicals.
Support the convening of a global counter-narcotics conference.
7.
Eliminating the Threat of National and International Terrorism
National and international terrorism constitute a systematic and deliberate violation of the rights of individuals and an assault on democracy itself.
Recent attacks that some of our countries have suffered have demonstrated the serious threat that terrorism poses to security in the Americas.
Actions by governments to combat and eliminate this threat are essential elements in guaranteeing law and order and maintaining confidence in government, both nationally and internationally.
Within this context, those who sponsor terrorist acts or assist in their planning or execution through the abuse of diplomatic privileges and immunities or other means will be held responsible by the international community.
Governments will:
Promote bilateral and subregional agreements with the aim of prosecuting terrorists and penalizing terrorist activities within the context of the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Convene a special conference of the OAS on the prevention of terrorism.
Reaffirm the importance of the extradition treaties ratified by the states of the Hemisphere, and note that these treaties will be strictly complied with as an expression of the political will of governments, in accordance with international law and domestic legislation.
8.
Building Mutual Confidence
The expansion and consolidation of democracy in the Americas provide an opportunity to build upon the peaceful traditions and the cooperative relationships that have prevailed among the countries of the Western Hemisphere.
Our aim is to strengthen the mutual confidence that contributes to the economic and social integration of our peoples.
Governments will:
Support actions to encourage a regional dialogue to promote the strengthening of mutual confidence, preparing the way for a regional conference on confidence-building measures in 1995, which Chile has offered to host.
Return to Plan of Action contents
Return to The Summit of the Americas
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State.
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | What's New | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
