[top-arts3.jpg] [LINK]
Why District-Wide?
Quality arts instruction can be found in schools throughout the United States.
Often, however, these programs reach only segments of the student population.
This study examines efforts in public school districts - urban, suburban, and rural - throughout the United States to make the arts an essential part of the general education of all students.
All of the districts discussed here have been recognized at the national, state, and/or local levels for the outstanding quality of specific aspects of their instructional programs in dance, music, theater, visual arts, or other art forms.
There are lessons to be learned from each of them.
But what are the factors that make it possible for a district to reach the entire student population, to treat the arts as a subject comparable to math, science, or social studies? To probe this question in depth and to add to the information gathered from documents and phone interviews, researchers visited eight demographically and geographically different school districts.
A Central Finding
A central finding emerges.
School leaders repeatedly affirm:
The single most critical factor in sustaining arts education in their schools is the active involvement of influential segments of the community in shaping and implementing the policies and programs of the district.
The real and metaphorical walls of the school district become "permeable."
A kaleidoscope of small communities composed of individuals and groups from the broader community actively engage with one another in arts and arts education activities inside and outside of the schools.
Their interactions deepen their appreciation for and understanding of the arts and strengthen their bonds.
They form networks that actively promote the importance of arts education in the general education of all students and in the social, civic, and cultural lives of the broad community.
Their influence creates a degree of consensus among the school board, the school superintendent, and major influential segments of the general community that the arts are an essential part of learning.
They work to sustain that consensus using a repertoire of strategies, resources, and skills that can be seen in the case studies and profiles in this report.
The Local Context and Critical Success Factors
The specific characteristics of these networks and the consensus that is reached vary in response to local contexts.
Vancouver, Washington, differs in specific detail from Miami, Florida, as will be seen in the case studies.
And while a degree of consensus is the sine qua non if the arts are to be part of the education of all students, other factors must be in place to create and sustain the quality and scope of the district's arts education.
These factors can be stated generally, but the critical lessons again lie in the way they play out in concrete situations.
Not all are present in every district, but a sufficient number of the following factors must be at work to sustain arts education in the school system.
THE ARTS AND "MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES" Researchers for this study found that Dr. Howard Gardner's theory of "multiple intelligences" has deeply affected philosophies and programs in many school districts.
One district (Vancouver, WA) rearranged its learning framework to reflect many ways of learning and to include the arts.
Another (Redondo Beach, CA) created a technological laboratory which strives to include as many of the different intelligences in its teaching as possible.
Superintendents and school board members referred to the Gardner research as a reason for supporting the arts in their schools.
Again and again, the research team heard, "It's been shown, kids learn in different ways, so we need to be giving them the opportunity to do just that."
The arts, this study's researchers observed, provide multiple ways for students to exercise intellect.
THE ARTS AND INTEGRATION OF INSTRUCTION Researchers for this study noticed that teachers frequently are torn between two competing ways of organizing instruction.
One approach is to think of each school subject as a separate and distinct collection of knowledge best understood, studied, and learned by itself.
Especially at the secondary level, the school day is organized with a specified time for mathematics, music, etc.
The second way to organize instruction is to assume that every school subject has connections to other school subjects and that the best way to learn is by encouraging students to actively examine those relationships.
By providing students with large projects, themes, or problems, educators encourage them to apply complex pieces of knowledge, skills, and inquiry processes from several school subjects simultaneously.
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS FOR ACHIEVING DISTRICT-WIDE ARTS EDUCATION [dot_vline_440.gif] [checkmark-bullet.gif]
In districts with strong arts education, the community - broadly defined as parents and families, artists, arts organizations, businesses, local civic and cultural leaders and institutions - is actively engaged in the arts politics and instructional programs of the district.
The community assists in the teaching and learning activities of the faculty and students, mobilizes and supports arts education through political activity, uses school facilities as community arts venues and provides venues for faculty and student works and performances.
Formal "partnerships" of school and community arts organizations providing arts education programs to students can be found in many of these districts, and the creation of those partnerships is a strategy a number of districts use.
But the pattern of relationships in the strongest districts is more richly textured and involves a wide range of formal and informal interactions among school staff and the community.
School administrators in these districts encourage or support an array of interactions described in the profiles, including: * active parent and community involvement in school arts programs; * interdisciplinary teams of arts specialists and non-arts educators developing curricula; * arts faculty involvement as artists in community arts events; * artist residencies; * student exhibitions and performances for community audiences.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: THE SCHOOL BOARD
School districts with strong arts education programs generally have boards of education that provide a supportive policy framework and environment for the arts.
Typically, one or more influential members of the board have had personal experiences or education that developed their knowledge and valuing of the arts and use this background to: * adopt written policies that value the arts as equal to other school subjects; * support the development of plans to strengthen arts education, then apportion resources in accordance with the plan; * treat arts education equally with other subject areas when budget cuts are required; * consider the artistic qualities of buildings and the needs of arts education programs during facility renovation and development.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: THE SUPERINTENDENT
Superintendents who regularly articulate a vision for arts education are critically important to its successful implementation and stability.
Superintendents interviewed for the study generally credit school staff, key board members, and/or influential community forces with assisting or convincing them to develop a vision for schooling that includes arts education.
But the subsequent actions by the superintendent are vital to sustaining district-wide arts education.
Superintendents in these districts take such actions as: * regularly articulating in writing, memos, and speeches the importance of the arts in achieving the goals of the school district; * appointing highly effective district-wide arts coordinators; * developing a shared understanding with their district arts coordinator(s) of the role of arts education and providing support for implementation; * encouraging education staff to collaborate among disciplines to ensure district-wide initiatives apply to and include the arts; * committing personal time to attending student arts events and meeting with the arts education personnel of their district and with representatives from the arts and cultural organizations of the community.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: CONTINUITY IN LEADERSHIP
There is enough continuity in the school and community leadership to implement comprehensive arts education.
Many districts examined in this study have board members, superintendents, and/or district arts coordinators who have served in their districts for a decade or more.
Similarly, many building-level leaders have worked in the district or the same school for even longer periods.
Stability in these formal leadership positions is important in pursuing a set of educational goals, while strong community traditions that embrace the arts are important factors in shaping a consensus supporting arts education.
School leaders told the researchers that consensus was a key to continuity.
Superintendents and principals who enjoyed healthy relationships with the board and influential segments of the community had the freedom and time to pursue their educational visions.
Demographic, political, or value shifts in the community produce board and leadership turnover, a major problem in sustaining arts education.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: DISTRICT ARTS COORDINATOR
District arts coordinators facilitate program implementation throughout a school system and maintain an environment of support for arts education.
School board members and superintendents repeatedly affirm the essential role of the district arts coordinator(s) in sustaining strong arts education programs and in keeping "the arts" part of a district's definition of education.
Their first piece of advice to their colleagues in other districts is to hire an effective coordinator.
They emphasized the care with which they searched for "the right person" - some tapping a recognized leader among the ranks of the arts teachers, others wooing an outstanding arts educator from another school district.
Smaller districts often lack resources for a full-time coordinator but add the responsibility to the workload of a district curriculum specialist or an arts educator at a school.
While the approach has problems - overwork and lack of clarity among them - it is essential in these districts as well.
Effective coordinators play a number of crucial roles and provide several vital services:
They are often the staff member most actively engaged with influential segments of the community that value the arts and are instrumental in nurturing and mobilizing community support for arts education.
Board members credit arts coordinators with keeping "the arts on the table" during budget sessions.
They negotiate between board and central office policies and school-level decision making, an increasingly critical role as districts move towards site-based management.
They often participate with school-level leadership in the screening and hiring of teachers.
Teachers in turn cite the role of district coordinator in facilitating communication among individual schools and in fostering the climate of support for arts education in the community and district.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: A CADRE OF PRINCIPALS
School principals who collectively support the policy of arts education for all students often are instrumental in the policy's successful district-wide implementation.
The study reaffirms research on the role of the principal as the primary instructional leader at the individual school level.
Principals create the expectations and climate in the school building, and their support for arts education is essential.
Many principals interviewed for the study spoke of early learning or involvement in the arts or of professional development opportunities that helped them to decide to support arts in their schools.
Others were convinced by the effectiveness of arts education in addressing specific issues.
For instance, principals looking to create a thematically focused or interdisciplinary approach in an elementary or middle school have found that art forms can play a central role because of their complex content and range of activities.
Others have found that hard-to-reach students become actively engaged in the arts and, subsequently, in other aspects of the school.
Similarly, parent and family involvement in arts education enhances the overall environment for learning.
For a district as a whole to sustain the successful implementation of arts education for all of its students, a sufficient number of these building-level leaders must personally value the arts or be persuaded by other pragmatic considerations to make them an important aspect of the school.
In view of the national trend to site-based management, this factor is critical.
Recognizing this, district-level leaders in several of the districts studied include arts education in the professional development activities of school principals.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: THE TEACHER AS ARTIST
Effective teachers of the arts are allowed to - indeed are encouraged to - continue to learn and grow in mastery of their art form as well as in their teaching competence.
The presence of arts specialists in a district's schools proved time and again to make the difference between successful comprehensive, sequential arts education and those programs in development.
What the study found compelling is the vibrancy that teachers who practice their art bring to an already strong program.
Whatever their medium or métier, teachers who also pursue their artistic life repeatedly told researchers for this study that the value placed on the professional quality of their art by school administrators stimulates and refreshes their commitment both to their art and to teaching.
Administrators, in turn, pointed out that the best teachers stay actively engaged in their art form through exhibitions and performances in district and community venues.
In the strongest districts, this commitment to the teacher as artist is reflected in recruitment and hiring practices that include auditions and portfolio reviews to assess the applicant's competence in the art form.
Experienced arts teachers in the district participate in these reviews.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: PARENT/PUBLIC RELATIONS
School leaders in districts with strong, system-wide arts education seize opportunities to make their programs known throughout the community in order to secure support and funding for them.
In the districts profiled here, school leaders employ a variety of techniques to engage the total school community in arts activities that create a climate of support for arts education.
Exhibition spaces and performance venues in the schools are made available to students, faculty, and community artists.
Free tickets are provided to students, staff, and faculty for attendance at community arts events.
One district provided free piano lessons to all district staff.
Others create week-long festivals of the arts engaging the school and community organizations.
These activities are conceived as part of a general strategy to strengthen school-community ties in support of the district's general educational goals as well as the arts education budget and programs.
Principals told researchers that parents who never come to school for parent-teacher conferences will come to see their child perform, creating opportunities for building relationships important to the school and district.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: AN ELEMENTARY FOUNDATION
Strong arts programs in the elementary school years are the foundation for strong system-wide programs.
District leaders advise their colleagues to establish strong arts education in the elementary school years and to begin any rebuilding efforts at that level.
They give several reasons for doing so.
Elementary programs establish a foundation in the arts for all students, not just for those in specialized programs or those who choose an arts course of study in high school.
Moreover, in some art forms such as instrumental music, a long period of time is needed for students to achieve even a basic level of proficiency.
If such instruction is not begun in elementary grades, a district will not have quality programs at the secondary level.
The arts also have proved to be strong components in the adoption of an interdisciplinary curriculum by elementary schools.
School leaders find, too, that beginning programs in the early years builds relationships with parents and community organizations important to sustaining their support for comprehensive arts education.
These leaders advise their colleagues seeking to reestablish strong arts programs to begin with a major focus on the elementary years.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGHER LEVELS OF ACHIEVEMENT
School leaders in these districts provide specialized arts programs as part of their broad strategy for securing and sustaining community support for the district's overall educational goals.
Districts examined in this study offered a wide range of specialized programs for students of the arts, including magnet schools, Advanced Placement programs, and summer and weekend programs.
These programs create an environment of excellence that challenges teachers to continue to develop proficiency in their art forms and encourages students to aspire to professional levels of performance.
Students studying the arts in these specialized programs expressed to interviewers their intense pride in and commitment to their work.
They compete for and win recognition in arts competitions at the local, state, and national levels.
Their achievements contribute to community enthusiasm for the arts and a belief in the excellence and quality of the district's educational system.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: NATIONAL, STATE, AND OTHER OUTSIDE FORCES
Many districts in this study employ state or national policies and programs to advance arts education.
Policies, mandates, and funding from the state or national levels, will not of themselves forge the community/school consensus required for district-wide arts education.
But committed leaders in districts examined in this study marshaled such forces to strengthen the consensus to support policies and programs in the schools.
National and state standards for arts education, state education reform movements, federal funding for general school improvement or targeted programs or populations all were used to support and advance the arts education agenda in these districts.
Similarly, support from private foundations has served to stimulate reform efforts in a number of the districts examined.
System-wide implementation, however, required intense community involvement and consensus.
The case studies that follow in this report illustrate the specific ways in which consensus has been achieved and sustained in eight school districts.
They also illustrate how these critical factors contribute to the conversion of consensus into programs and practices.
The lessons from these districts offer practical guidance to school and community leaders in their parts of the country who are seeking ways to make arts education fundamental in their schools and communities.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: PLANNING
School leaders in this study advise the adoption of a comprehensive vision and plan for arts education but recommend its incremental implementation.
Leaders at the district and building levels repeatedly told researchers that it was important to combine a compelling vision of the importance of arts education with a thoughtful implementation plan that showed how resources would be apportioned over time to reach all schools and students.
The plan established confidence among arts teachers and building level administrators that resources eventually would be available, but that the increases in district-wide support must necessarily be incremental.
Districts have developed a number of strategies for allocating new resources, many of them based on stimulating a "bottom up" request for arts education funding from school sites.
[checkmark-bullet.gif] FACTOR: CONTINUOUS IMPROVEMENT
School districts that succeed in advancing arts education promote reflective practices at all levels of the schools to improve quality.
While researchers found few districts using student assessments in the arts as part of a formal accountability system, the strongest districts actively encourage the use of arts assessment techniques for improving student, teacher, and administrative performance.
A few districts, for example, used portfolio review for evaluations of principals and teachers as well as students.
Others encourage teachers to set themselves a challenge within their art form that will be addressed and assessed throughout the year - composing new music for a choral group, for instance.
What researchers observed in these districts was the disposition to reflect on and improve practice that is central to improving artistic achievement.
CONCLUSION Not every school district examined in this report exhibits these factors to the same degree.
But the more intensively the factors occur, the stronger the presence of quality arts education in their schools.
A level of agreement among formal and informal leadership in the community and school on the importance of arts education is essential.
Implementing and sustaining that agreement requires a sufficient presence of the critical success factors to achieve a level of quality that keeps the consensus intact.
The following profiles and case study reports show how this occurs in specific local contexts.
The lessons of this report are best learned by analyzing these districts.
How to Measure Commitment to Arts Education Support for arts education in school district budgets is obviously an essential factor if all students are to have access to learning in the arts.
Districts included in this report were asked to quantify their annual spending for arts education as a percentage of the total budget or to provide other measures of financial support.
They found it difficult to do so, as they would if asked to do the same for science, social studies, or other school subjects.
Budgeting methods and strategies vary from school district to school district throughout the United States, but, generally, funding for arts and other subjects is encompassed within broader categories such as personnel, facilities, materials, and so on.
The advent of site-based management further complicates the analysis as individual school buildings are often given discretion to construct their own budgets within general district spending.
Researchers for this report took another approach in assessing the financial commitment districts make to arts education.
They looked for the evidence in numbers of personnel - coordinators and arts specialists in particular - in the appropriateness of the facilities for arts instruction, in professional development programs for faculty, and in the support for students and faculty to engage with the arts and cultural resources outside of the schools.
Researchers also sought evidence that during periods of budget cutting the arts were treated comparably to other curricular areas.
As would be expected, districts with strong arts education in their schools make these commitments consistently.
Districts that are rebuilding their programs increase budgets strategically and often incrementally.
On occasion, a major new investment - in a new school building or specialized program - is a catalyst for a general spending increase for all schools in the interest of fairness or because of a new level of support in the community.
In virtually every district with strong arts education, resources from the community or other sources supplement the regular district arts education budget in the form of grants, contributed services, equipment and supplies and the like.
Personnel in these districts are entrepreneurial in their search for these supplemental funds and, in the strongest districts, treat that quest as a regular part of their professional responsibility.
Fundamental support must come from the regular school district and school budget, but the strongest districts further enliven their programs with these supplemental funds.
