212.
DUTY-FREE TREATMENT FOR CERTAIN BEVERAGES MADE WITH CARIBBEAN RUM.
Section 213(a) of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (19 U.S.C. 2703(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (5), by striking `chapter' and inserting `title'; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: "(6) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the duty-free treatment provided under this title shall apply to liqueurs and spirituous beverages produced in the territory of Canada from rum if-- "(A) such rum is the growth, product, or manufacture of a beneficiary country or of the Virgin Islands of the United States; "(B) such rum is imported directly from a beneficiary country or the Virgin Islands of the United States into the territory of Canada, and such liqueurs and spirituous beverages are imported directly from the territory of Canada into the customs territory of the United States; "(C) when imported into the customs territory of the United States, such liqueurs and spirituous beverages are classified in subheading 2208.90 or 2208.40 of the HTS; and "(D) such rum accounts for at least 90 percent by volume of the alcoholic content of such liqueurs and spirituous beverages.".
Back to Top
SEC.
213.
MEETINGS OF TRADE MINISTERS AND USTR.
(a) SCHEDULE OF MEETINGS- The President shall take the necessary steps to convene a meeting with the trade ministers of the CBTPA beneficiary countries in order to establish a schedule of regular meetings, to commence as soon as is practicable, of the trade ministers and the Trade Representative, for the purpose set forth in subsection (b). (b) PURPOSE- The purpose of the meetings scheduled under subsection (a) is to reach agreement between the United States and CBTPA beneficiary countries on the likely timing and procedures for initiating negotiations for CBTPA beneficiary countries to enter into mutually advantageous free trade agreements with the United States that contain provisions comparable to those in the NAFTA and would make substantial progress in achieving the negotiating objectives set forth in section 108(b)(5) of Public Law 103-182 (19 U.S.C. 3317(b)(5)). (c) DEFINITION- In this section, the term `CBTPA beneficiary country' has the meaning given that term in section 213(b)(5)(B) of the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act.
Back to Top
TITLE III--NORMAL TRADE RELATIONS
SEC.
301.
NORMAL TRADE RELATIONS FOR ALBANIA.
(a) FINDINGS- Congress makes the following findings: (1) Albania has been found to be in full compliance with the freedom of emigration requirements under title IV of the Trade Act of 1974.
(2) Since its emergence from communism, Albania has made progress toward democratic rule and the creation of a free-market economy.
(3) Albania has concluded a bilateral investment treaty with the United States.
(4) Albania has demonstrated a strong desire to build a friendly relationship with the United States and has been very cooperative with NATO and the international community during and after the Kosova crisis.
(5) The extension of unconditional normal trade relations treatment to the products of Albania will enable the United States to avail itself of all rights under the World Trade Organization with respect to Albania when that country becomes a member of the World Trade Organization.
(b) TERMINATION OF APPLICATION OF TITLE IV OF THE TRADE ACT OF 1974 TO ALBANIA- (1) PRESIDENTIAL DETERMINATIONS AND EXTENSIONS OF NONDISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT- Notwithstanding any provision of title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2431 et seq.), the President may-- (A) determine that such title should no longer apply to Albania; and (B) after making a determination under subparagraph (A) with respect to Albania, proclaim the extension of nondiscriminatory treatment (normal trade relations treatment) to the products of that country.
(2) TERMINATION OF APPLICATION OF TITLE IV- On or after the effective date of the extension under paragraph (1)(B) of nondiscriminatory treatment to the products of Albania, title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 shall cease to apply to that country.
Back to Top
SEC.
302.
NORMAL TRADE RELATIONS FOR KYRGYZSTAN.
(a) FINDINGS- Congress makes the following findings: (1)
Kyrgyzstan has been found to be in full compliance with the freedom of emigration requirements under title IV of the Trade Act of 1974.
(2) Since its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Kyrgyzstan has made great progress toward democratic rule and toward creating a free-market economic system.
(3)
Kyrgyzstan concluded a bilateral investment treaty with the United States in 1994.
Kyrgyzstan has demonstrated a strong desire to build a friendly and cooperative relationship with the United States.
The extension of unconditional normal trade relations treatment to the products of Kyrgyzstan will enable the United States to avail itself of all rights under the World Trade Organization with respect to Kyrgyzstan.
(b) TERMINATION OF APPLICATION OF TITLE IV OF THE TRADE ACT OF 1974 TO KYRGYZSTAN- (1) PRESIDENTIAL DETERMINATIONS AND EXTENSIONS OF NONDISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT- Notwithstanding any provision of title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2431 et seq.), the President may-- (A) determine that such title should no longer apply to Kyrgyzstan; and (B)
after making a determination under subparagraph (A) with respect to Kyrgyzstan, proclaim the extension of nondiscriminatory treatment (normal trade relations treatment) to the products of that country.
TERMINATION OF APPLICATION OF TITLE IV- On or after the effective date of the extension under paragraph (1)(B) of nondiscriminatory treatment to the products of Kyrgyzstan, title IV of the Trade Act of 1974 shall cease to apply to that country
.
Back to Top
TITLE IV--OTHER TRADE PROVISIONS
SEC.
401.
REPORT ON EMPLOYMENT AND TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
(a) IN GENERAL- Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this section, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to Congress a report regarding the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal and State coordination of employment and retraining activities associated with the following programs and legislation: (1) Trade adjustment assistance (including NAFTA trade adjustment assistance) provided for under title II of the Trade Act of 1974.
(2) The Job Training Partnership Act.
(3) The Workforce Investment Act of 1998.
(4) Unemployment insurance.
(b) PERIOD COVERED- The report shall cover the activities involved in the programs and legislation listed in subsection (a) from January 1, 1994, to December 31, 1999.
(c) DATA AND RECOMMENDATIONS- The report shall at a minimum include specific data and recommendations regarding-- (1) the compatibility of program requirements related to the employment and retraining of dislocated workers in the United States, with particular emphasis on the trade adjustment assistance programs provided for under title II of the Trade Act of 1974; (2) the compatibility of application procedures related to the employment and retraining of dislocated workers in the United States; (3) the capacity of the programs in addressing foreign trade and the transfer of production to other countries on workers in the United States measured in terms of loss of employment and wages; (4) the capacity of the programs in addressing foreign trade and the transfer of production to other countries on secondary workers in the United States measured in terms of loss of employment and wages; (5) how the impact of foreign trade and the transfer of production to other countries would have changed the number of beneficiaries covered under the trade adjustment assistance program if the trade adjustment assistance program covered secondary workers in the United States; and (6) the effectiveness of the programs described in subsection (a) in achieving reemployment of United States workers and maintaining wage levels of United States workers who have been dislocated as a result of foreign trade and the transfer of production to other countries.
Back to Top
SEC.
402.
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE.
(a) CERTIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR WORKERS REQUIRED FOR DECOMMISSIONING OR CLOSURE OF FACILITY- (1) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding any other provision of law or any decision by the Secretary of Labor denying certification or eligibility for certification for adjustment assistance under title II of the Trade Act of 1974, a qualified worker described in paragraph (2) shall be certified by the Secretary as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance under such title II. (2) QUALIFIED WORKER- For purposes of this subsection, a `qualified worker' means a worker who-- (A) was determined to be covered under Trade Adjustment Assistance Certification TA-W-28,438; and (B) was necessary for the decommissioning or closure of a nuclear power facility.
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Back to Top
SEC.
403.
RELIQUIDATION OF CERTAIN NUCLEAR FUEL ASSEMBLIES.
(a) IN GENERAL- Notwithstanding section 514 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 U.S.C. 1514) or any other provision of law, upon proper request filed with the Secretary of the Treasury not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) reliquidate as free of duty the entries listed in subsection (b); and (2) refund any duties paid with respect to such entries as shown on Customs Service Collection Receipt Number 527006753.
(b) ENTRIES- The entries referred to in subsection (a) are as follows: Entry number Date of entry 062-2320014-5 January 16, 1996 062-2320085-5 February 13, 1996 839-4030989-7 November 25, 1996 839-4031053-1 December 2, 1996 839-4031591-0 January 21, 1997.
Back to Top
SEC.
404.
REPORTS TO THE FINANCE AND WAYS AND MEANS COMMITTEES.
(a) REPORTS REGARDING INITIATIVES TO UPDATE THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND- Section 607 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(d) of division A of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999) (Public Law 105-277; 112 Stat. 2681-224), relating to international financial programs and reform, is amended-- (1) by inserting `Finance,' after "Foreign Relations,"; and (2) by inserting ", Ways and Means," before "and Banking and Financial Services". (b) REPORTS ON FINANCIAL STABILIZATION PROGRAMS- Section 1704(b) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262r-3(b)) is amended to read as follows: "(b) TIMING- Not later than March 15, 1999, and semiannually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Committees on Banking and Financial Services, Ways and Means, and International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Finance, Foreign Relations, and Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate a report on the matters described in subsection (a).". (c) ANNUAL REPORT ON THE STATE OF THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL SYSTEM, IMF REFORM, AND COMPLIANCE WITH IMF AGREEMENTS- Section 1705(a) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262r-4(a)) is amended by striking `Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate' and inserting `Committees on Banking and Financial Services and on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Finance and on Foreign Relations of the Senate'.
(d) AUDITS OF THE IMF- Section 1706(a) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 U.S.C. 262r-5(a)) is amended by striking `Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate' and inserting `Committees on Banking and Financial Services and on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Finance and on Foreign Relations of the Senate'.
(e) REPORT ON PROTECTION OF BORDERS AGAINST DRUG TRAFFIC- Section 629 of the Treasury and General Government Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(h) of division A of the Omnibus Consolidated and Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act, 1999) (Public Law 105-277; 112 Stat. 2681-522), relating to general provisions, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: "(3) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `appropriate congressional committees' includes the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.".
Back to Top
SEC.
405.
CLARIFICATION OF SECTION 334 OF THE URUGUAY ROUND AGREEMENTS ACT.
(a) IN GENERAL- Section 334(b)(2) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 U.S.C. 3592(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; (2) in the matter preceding clause (i) (as redesignated), by striking `Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(D)' and inserting `(A) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(D) and except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C)'; and (3) by adding at the end the following: "(B) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(C), fabric classified under the HTS as of silk, cotton, man-made fiber, or vegetable fiber shall be considered to originate in, and be the growth, product, or manufacture of, the country, territory, or possession in which the fabric is both dyed and printed when accompanied by two or more of the following finishing operations: bleaching, shrinking, fulling, napping, decating, permanent stiffening, weighting, permanent embossing, or moireing.
"(C) Notwithstanding paragraph (1)(D), goods classified under HTS heading 6117.10, 6213.00, 6214.00, 6302.22, 6302.29, 6302.52, 6302.53, 6302.59, 6302.92, 6302.93, 6302.99, 6303.92, 6303.99, 6304.19, 6304.93, 6304.99, 9404.90.85, or 9404.90.95, except for goods classified under such headings as of cotton or of wool or consisting of fiber blends containing 16 percent or more by weight of cotton, shall be considered to originate in, and be the growth, product, or manufacture of, the country, territory, or possession in which the fabric is both dyed and printed when accompanied by two or more of the following finishing operations: bleaching, shrinking, fulling, napping, decating, permanent stiffening, weighting, permanent embossing, or moireing.". (b) EFFECTIVE DATE- The amendments made by this section apply to goods entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Back to Top
SEC.
406.
CHIEF AGRICULTURAL NEGOTIATOR.
Section 141 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2171) is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (b)(2) to read as follows: "(2) There shall be in the Office three Deputy United States Trade Representatives and one Chief Agricultural Negotiator who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
As an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate, any nomination of a Deputy United States Trade Representative or the Chief Agricultural Negotiator submitted to the Senate for its advice and consent, and referred to a committee, shall be referred to the Committee on Finance.
Each Deputy United States Trade Representative and the Chief Agricultural Negotiator shall hold office at the pleasure of the President and shall have the rank of Ambassador.'; and (2) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following new paragraph: "(5) The principal function of the Chief Agricultural Negotiator shall be to conduct trade negotiations and to enforce trade agreements relating to United States agricultural products and services.
The Chief Agricultural Negotiator shall be a vigorous advocate on behalf of United States agricultural interests.
The Chief Agricultural Negotiator shall perform such other functions as the United States Trade Representative may direct.".
Back to Top
SEC.
407.
REVISION OF RETALIATION LIST OR OTHER REMEDIAL ACTION.
Section 306(b)(2) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2416(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking `If the' and inserting the following: "(A) FAILURE TO IMPLEMENT RECOMMENDATION- If the'; and (2) by adding at the end the following: "(B) REVISION OF RETALIATION LIST AND ACTION- "(i) IN GENERAL- Except as provided in clause (ii), in the event that the United States initiates a retaliation list or takes any other action described in section 301(c)(1)(A) or (B) against the goods of a foreign country or countries because of the failure of such country or countries to implement the recommendation made pursuant to a dispute settlement proceeding under the World Trade Organization, the Trade Representative shall periodically revise the list or action to affect other goods of the country or countries that have failed to implement the recommendation.
"(ii) EXCEPTION- The Trade Representative is not required to revise the retaliation list or the action described in clause (i) with respect to a country, if-- "(I) the Trade Representative determines that implementation of a recommendation made pursuant to a dispute settlement proceeding described in clause (i) by the country is imminent; or "(II) the Trade Representative together with the petitioner involved in the initial investigation under this chapter (or if no petition was filed, the affected United States industry) agree that it is unnecessary to revise the retaliation list.
"(C) SCHEDULE FOR REVISING LIST OR ACTION- The Trade Representative shall, 120 days after the date the retaliation list or other section 301(a) action is first taken, and every 180 days thereafter, review the list or action taken and revise, in whole or in part, the list or action to affect other goods of the subject country or countries.
"(D) STANDARDS FOR REVISING LIST OR ACTION- In revising any list or action against a country or countries under this subsection, the Trade Representative shall act in a manner that is most likely to result in the country or countries implementing the recommendations adopted in the dispute settlement proceeding or in achieving a mutually satisfactory solution to the issue that gave rise to the dispute settlement proceeding.
The Trade Representative shall consult with the petitioner, if any, involved in the initial investigation under this chapter.
"(E) RETALIATION LIST- The term `retaliation list' means the list of products of a foreign country or countries that have failed to comply with the report of the panel or Appellate Body of the WTO and with respect to which the Trade Representative is imposing duties above the level that would otherwise be imposed under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
"(F) REQUIREMENT TO INCLUDE RECIPROCAL GOODS ON RETALIATION LIST- The Trade Representative shall include on the retaliation list, and on any revised lists, reciprocal goods of the industries affected by the failure of the foreign country or countries to implement the recommendation made pursuant to a dispute settlement proceeding under the World Trade Organization, except in cases where existing retaliation and its corresponding preliminary retaliation list do not already meet this requirement.".
Back to Table of contents
Back to IRC back to Homepage
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
