Draft Agenda Symposium on the 30^th Anniversary of the President's Commission on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice June 19-21, 1997 JW Marriott Hotel Washington, DC Thursday, June 19, 1997 11:30 a.m. - 1:00 p.m. Registration and Coffee Service
1:00 p.m. - 1:30 p.m. Welcome and Opening Remarks Laurie Robinson Assistant Attorney General Office of Justice Programs U.S. Department of Justice Washington, DC
1:30 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Panel I: Roundtable on Historical Perspectives
Moderator: Frank Hartmann Executive Director Program in Criminal Justice Policy and Management Kennedy School of Government Harvard University Cambridge, Massachusetts
Discussants:
David Burnham Washington, DC Thomas Cahill San Francisco, California Samuel Chapman Sparks, Nevada Roland Chilton Amherst, Massachusetts Paul Duruz Manitowoc, Wisconsin Floyd Feeney Professor School of Law University of California Davis, California Victor Gioscia San Francisco, California Sheldon Krantz Piper 
5:00 p.m. - 6:00 p.m. Reception Friday, June 20, 1997
8:00 a.m. - 8:45 a.m.
Registration and Coffee Service
8:45 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
Opening Remarks
9:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m.
Panel II: Overview of Crime-Changing Nature of
Crime, Criminals, and Crime Problems (Guns,
Drugs, Youth Violence, Victims)
Moderator: Candice Kane Acting Executive Director Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority Chicago, Illinois
Paperwriter: Jeffrey Fagan Professor Center for Violence Research and Prevention School of Public Health Columbia University New York, New York
Discussants:
Lynn Bataglia U.S. Attorney District of Maryland U.S. Department of Justice Baltimore, Maryland David Curry Associate Professor Criminal Justice Department University of Missouri St. Louis, Missouri Lucy Friedman Executive Director Victim Services, Inc.
New York, New York Ronald Goldstock Managing Director Kroll Associates New York, New York Arthur Kellerman Director Center for Injury Control Emory University School of Public Health Atlanta, Georgia Gil Kerlikowski Chief of Police Buffalo Police Department Buffalo, New York Dennis Murphy Attorney in Charge Criminal Defense Division Legal Aid Society New York, New York David Ramirez Juvenile Court Judge Denver Juvenile Court Denver, Colorado Albert Reiss Professor Department of Sociology Yale University New Haven, Connecticut Peter Reuter Professor School of Public Affairs University of Maryland College Park, Maryland Howard Snyder Director of Systems Research National Center for Juvenile Justice Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Andrew Sonner Judge Court of Special Appeals Montgomery County Government Rockville, Maryland Terence Thornberry Professor School of Criminal Justice State University of New York at Albany Albany, New York Reggie Wilkinson Director Department of Rehabilitation and Correction Columbus, Ohio [img.gif]
11:30 a.m. - 1:30 p.m. Panel III: Changing Nature of Criminal Justice System
Responses and Its Professions
Moderator: Angela J. Davis Visiting Associate Professor Washington College of Law The American University Washington, DC
Paperwriter: Charles Wellford Professor Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice University of Maryland College Park, Maryland
Discussants:
Allen Breed Criminal Justice Consultant National Council on Crime and Delinquency San Andreas, California Michael Clark President Citizens Committee for New York City New York, New York Judy Clarke President National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers Spokane, Washington Price Foster Professor, Justice Administration University Liason for the Urban Mission University of Louisville Louisville, Kentucky Herman Goldstein Professor Emeritus School of Law University of Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin Eugene Hamilton Chief Judge Superior Court of the District of Columbia Washington, DC Clarence Harmon Mayor City of St. Louis St. Louis, Missouri Raymond Kelly Undersecretary of the Treasury for Enforcement U.S. Department of the Treasury Washington, DC Edward Loughran Executive Director Council of Juvenile Correctional Administrators Boston, Massachusetts Barry Mahoney President Justice Management Institute Denver, Colorado Jerry Sanders Chief of Police San Diego Police Department San Diego, California Michael Schrunk District Attorney Multnomah County District Attorney's Office Portland, Oregon Marlene Young Executive Director National Organization for Victim Assistance Washington, DC
1:45 p.m. - 2:45 p.m. Luncheon
Keynote: Judge Patricia M. Wald U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Washington, DC
3:00 p.m. - 5:00 p.m. Panel IV: Research and Statistics as Tools for
Measuring and Responding to Other Changes
Moderator: Wesley Skogan Professor Department of Political Science Institute for Policy Research Northwestern University Evanston, Illinois
Paperwriter: Michael Tonry Professor School of Law University of Minnesota Minneapolis, Minnesota
Discussants:
Albert Biderman Research Professor of Justice Department of Justice, Law and Society The American University Washington, DC Michael Block President Goldwater Institute Phoenix, Arizona Terence Dunworth Managing Vice President for Law and Public Policy Abt Associates, Inc.
Cambridge, Massachusetts Kim English Director of Research Colorado Division of Criminal Justice Denver, Colorado Charles Friel Professor Criminal Justice Center Sam Houston State University Huntsville, Texas George Hall Director Slater Hall Group Washington, DC Rolf Loeber Professor of Psychiatry, Psychology, and Epidemiology Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Michael Maltz Visiting Professor College of Criminal Justice Northeastern University Boston, Massachusetts Joan McCord Professor Department of Criminal Justice Temple University Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Roger Przybylski Associate Director Illinois Criminal Justice Information Authority Chicago, Illinois Dennis Rosenbaum Professor and Head Department of Criminal Justice University of Illinois at Chicago Chicago, Illinois Jeffrey Roth Senior Research Associate The Urban Institute Washington, DC Lawrence Sherman Professor and Chair Department of Criminology and Criminal Justice University of Maryland College Park, Maryland Cathy Spatz Widom Professor Criminal Justice and Psychology University of New York at Albany Albany, New York Marvin Wolfgang Professor of Criminology and of Law Sellin Criminology Center The Wharton School University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Saturday, June 21, 1997
8:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m.
Coffee Service
9:00 a.m. - 11:00 a.m.
Panel IV: Changing Nature of Society's Responses to
Crime and the Criminal Justice System
Moderator: Michael Smith Professor School of Law University of Wisconsin Madison, Wisconsin
Paperwriter: Todd Clear Associate Dean School of Criminology and Criminal Justice Florida State University Tallahassee, Florida
Discussants:
Gordon Bazemore Associate Professor School of Public Administration Florida Atlantic University Ft. Lauderdale, Florida Bennett Brummer Public Defender Dade County Miami, Florida Legrome Davis Presiding Judge of Criminal Court Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Julius Debro Associate Dean Graduate School University of Washington Seattle, Washington Ronald Earle District Attorney Travis County District Attorney's Office Austin, Texas Tony Fabelo Executive Director Criminal Justice Policy Council Austin, Texas John Feinblatt Director Center for Court Innovation New York, New York Daniel Freed Professor Law School Yale University New Haven, Connecticut Daniel Glaser Los Angeles, California Don Gottfredson President Justice Policy Research Corporation Sacramento, California Ada Pecos Melton Executive Director American Indian Development Associates Albuquerque, New Mexico Anne Seymour Criminal Justice and Victimology Consultant Washington, DC Mark Soler President Youth Law Center Washington, DC Elizabeth Watson Austin, Texas Jesse Williams Department Commissioner Department of Human Services Division of Juvenile Justice Services Philadelphia, Pennsylvania William Woodward Director Division of Criminal Justice Department of Public Safety Denver, Colorado [img1.gif]
11:15 a.m. - 12:00 p.m. Synthesis of past two days Mark Moore Professor Program in Criminal Justice Policy and Management Kennedy School of Government Harvard University Cambridge, Massachusetts
12:00 p.m.
Closing Remarks Laurie Robinson Assistant Attorney General Office of Justice Programs U.S. Department of Justice Washington, DC
