[logo_underline.gif] PA-97-050 MANAGING THE SYMPTOMS OF COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENT [bluebox.gif]
Keywords: Cognitive Development/Process Disease Prevention+
National Institute of Nursing Research National Institute on Aging National Institute of Mental Health National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
PURPOSE
The National Institute of Nursing Research (NINR), National Institute on Aging (NIA), National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), and the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) are interested in facilitating investigator-initiated research into nonpharmacological intervention strategies designed to deal with symptoms associated with cognitive impairment in adults.
Several conditions can result in cognitive impairment, including Alzheimer's disease, multi-infarct dementia, AIDS-related cognitive dysfunction, traumatic brain injury, stroke, and other neurological conditions such as Parkinson's disease.
The overall goals are to deter or delay symptoms requiring costly services or institutionalization and improve health-related quality of life for patients, caregivers, and families.
HEALTHY PEOPLE 2000
The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives of "Healthy People 2000," a PHS-led national activity for setting priority areas.
This Program Announcement (PA), Managing the Symptoms of Cognitive Impairment, is related to the priority area of chronic disabling conditions.
Potential applicants may obtain a copy of "Healthy People 2000" (Full Report: Stock No. 017-001-00474-0 or Summary Report: Stock No. 017-001-00473-1) through the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402-9325 (telephone 202-512-1800).
ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
Applications may be submitted by domestic and foreign, for- profit and non-profit organizations, public and private, such as universities, colleges, hospitals, laboratories, units of State and local governments, and eligible agencies of the Federal government.
Foreign institutions are not eligible for First Independent Research Support and Transition (FIRST) (R29) awards.
Racial/ethnic minority individuals, women, and persons with disabilities are encouraged to apply as Principal Investigators.
MECHANISM OF SUPPORT
The mechanisms of support will be the National Institutes of Health (NIH) research project grant (R01) and FIRST (R29) award.
Responsibility for the planning, direction, and execution of the proposed project will be solely that of the applicant.
Individuals applying for the FIRST award must comply with the 1994 NIH Guidelines for FIRST awards and the Just-in-Time procedures announced in the NIH Guide, Vol. 25, No. 10, March 29, 1996.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
Cognitive impairment associated with dementia or other brain disorders is a significant public health problem, with major implications for morbidity and mortality, quality of life, and health-care costs.
The financial burden of dementia, including direct care costs and lost productivity, is estimated at 100 billion dollars annually.
This estimate does not include the costs of care provided by family caregivers.
This program announcement encompasses conditions which might cause cognitive impairment, such as Alzheimer's disease and related disorders (ADRD), multi-infarct dementia, AIDS-related cognitive dysfunction, traumatic brain injury, stroke, and other neurological conditions such as Parkinson's disease.
Until more is known about the neurobiological mechanisms underlying these conditions and until treatments are developed to target those processes, research is needed to deal with the symptoms of cognitive impairment.
Five symptoms -- wandering, aggression, agitation, incontinence, and sleep disruption -- have been proposed as the most frequent reasons for institutionalization among ADRD patients.
Thus, if methods were found to deal effectively with these problems, costly and disruptive change in living situations might be delayed or prevented.
Symptoms
Although the pathology underlying cognitive impairment cannot be altered at the present time, interventions are showing that some behaviors can be changed, functional ability improved, quality of life increased, and institutionalization delayed.
If improvements are not always possible, maintaining function or delaying a decline for a period of time may provide a valuable contribution.
Symptoms that may occur during the course of the targeted conditions include:
o cognitive changes: memory deficits, language impairment, visuospatial changes, decreased executive function
o affective changes: irritability, lability, disinhibition, anxiety, dysphoria, delusions, hallucinations, apathy, withdrawal
o dementia-related behaviors: wandering, pacing, agitation, disruptive vocalizations, repetitive behaviors
o functional changes: loss of instrumental activities of daily living (telephone, financial activities); loss of activities of daily living (dressing, feeding); incontinence; immobility
o other changes: sleep and circadian rhythm disturbances, sexual alterations, appetite disturbances.
The physical status of persons with cognitive impairment also needs careful research attention.
Factors such as the correction of hearing and vision impairment might improve physical status, and may also positively influence cognition and behavioral symptoms, functioning, and quality of life.
Persons with cognitive impairment are at risk for infections, falls and injury, poor nutrition, and delirium.
Delirium can be a complication or a presenting symptom of a coexisting condition and needs careful research attention.
Dementia is a significant risk factor for the development of delirium during hospitalization or surgery and is associated with increased mortality in the hospitalized elderly.
Research instruments exist to diagnose delirium and to distinguish the confusion from the dementia, but new strategies to decrease delirium need to be developed and tested.
Additionally, drug interactions cause by the simultaneous use of multiple drugs is a common cause of cognitive decline.
Thus, the effect of polypharmacy in these individuals may also be considered.
Interventions
Promising interventions to treat the symptoms of cognitive impairment may take one or more of several approaches, including behavioral, cognitive, psychosocial, or environmental.
The goals of the interventions may vary with the specific underlying condition and stage of the disease, but can generally be classified as maximizing potential, preventing undesirable consequences, delaying the onset of symptoms, or providing palliative measures.
The types of interventions proposed for testing may include, but are not limited to the following examples.
o Interventions directed at cognitive function are difficult given the progressive decline in several of the types of dementia.
But despite being perhaps less amenable to change, even achieving small improvements or maintaining function for a time can be perceived by patients and caregivers as worthwhile.
o Interventions directed at activities of daily living are showing some promise, but need further attention.
Highly targeted training in continence, dressing, and other functions have been shown to have favorable outcomes in some settings.
o Behavioral interventions to deal with agitated and disturbed behaviors are showing some promise.
Research is underway in both homes and long-term care facilities to determine effective techniques.
Additional research is needed including methods to train staff and family in administering these treatments and strategies to sustain the treatment and outcomes over time.
o Targeted interventions to influence social participation and to determine the effects of increased social involvement are needed.
Particular attention should be given to individual patient preferences.
o Interventions related to the patients' affective states are needed.
Some research has shown that both positive and negative patient states can be measured based on nonverbal and sometimes verbal behavior.
However, additional study is needed to determine how it can be assessed more accurately and how it can be used in family and formal treatment programs.
o Environmental interventions dealing with the context of care are based on the assumption that the environment has an important effect on behavior.
Studies, such as reducing distraction or controlling excessive stimulation in long-term care facilities, need testing in a variety of settings for their effect on the symptoms of cognitive impairment.
o A variety of interventions are being tested with family caregivers, notably in the NIA/NINR cooperative agreement, Resources for Enhancing Alzheimer's Caregiver Health (REACH).
Six sites across the country are testing promising home and community based interventions for enhancing family caregiving, particularly with minority families.
In addition to a common core database managed by a coordinating center, data are being collected on interventions including an in-home skills training program, a telephone linked computer program, a primary care based intervention in the context of office visits, a family counseling program with a computer-phone component, a psychoeducational program with a support group component, and a home environmental skill building program.
Minority groups receiving special attention include Hispanic, Cuban-Hispanic, and Black family caregivers.
Additional research needs to be done with careful attention to placing the proposed studies in the context of what is already known.
Consideration may be given to several variables that could influence the effectiveness of various nonpharmacologic approaches, including type and severity of cognitive impairment; noncognitive impairments such as neurological deficits; psychiatric problems, such as depression; other physical health problems and sensory impairments; as well as differences due to personality characteristics; age; gender; ethnicity and culture; and previous life experiences and lifestyle factors.
There is a need for careful identification in the research literature of which particular approaches are effective given different patient factors.
Both community and institutional settings and various services are appropriate for research related to symptom management.
These might include long-term care facilities, homes, adult day care, hospitals, assisted living sites, home health care, special care units, respite care, and rural versus urban settings.
Research on testing specific services needs to address the issue of dose-response, including clear quantification of both the treatment and the response patterns, as well as the general services provided and the outcomes to be achieved.
Some studies are finding that the symptoms and effective treatment strategies may vary based on gender and ethnic issues.
Continued research on these factors is encouraged.
Careful attention to methodological issues is critical, including treatment integrity, masked assessment or control of rater bias, randomization, and appropriate control group(s).
The theoretical basis for the planned study must be clearly explicated and linked to the intervention to be tested.
In addition to ensuring that measures have adequate psychometric properties, the instruments should be carefully linked to the outcomes and should be sensitive to change.
Some symptoms associated with cognitive impairment have had more research than others, therefore applicants are encouraged to ensure that the proposed studies are well-grounded in the research literature.
Likewise, some interventions are ready for larger scale, multi-site studies of efficacy while other interventions need smaller scale studies to determine feasibility and effectiveness.
Applications in response to this program announcement may also include animal and other basic science studies of the mechanisms underlying behavioral symptoms of dementia, and of potential clinical interventions directed at these symptoms.
These might include, for example, studies of learning and memory impairment, aggression, or circadian disturbances in transgenic animal models of AD, animal models of traumatic brain injury, or models of cerebral hypoxia/ischemia.
The therapeutic strategies to be tested may encompass non-behavioral, as well as behavioral, components.
Outcomes
Health outcomes, defined as changes in health status that can be attributed to care, are critical components of this research endeavor.
Several of the following possible variables have been used successfully in prior research while others have not received adequate conceptual and psychometric attention.
Investigators are cautioned to select measures that are specific to the targeted outcomes and that are sensitive to change.
Multiple outcomes are generally indicated in clinical intervention research.
Consideration should be given to incorporating measures such as cognitive function, specific functional status, neurological performance, and other health status indicators.
The following list provides some possible outcomes for consideration:
o physical status: health goals may include avoidance of complications and/or coexisting conditions of dementia, e.g., infections, malnutrition, incontinence, delirium, or in later stages, seizures or pressure ulcers.
o cognitive abilities: memory, language, visuospatial skills, executive function
o affect and neuropsychiatric disorders: depression, pleasure, mood, hallucinations, delusions
o functional performance: such as mobility, activities of daily living including feeding, toileting, bathing, dressing and instrumental activities of daily living such as household tasks, shopping, managing money, using the telephone.
o behavioral symptoms: wandering, pacing, agitation, disruptive behaviors, aggression, hostility, repetitive behaviors, sleep disruption,
o psychosocial variables: communication, intimacy, sexuality, satisfaction, independent living status, vocational skills
o decision making: food preferences, end of life decisions
o quality of life: well-being, competence, environmental quality, meaningful time use
o caregiver outcomes: stress, burden, physical and psychosocial status, productivity, commitment, satisfaction, resource use, decision making, social well-being, bereavement
o costs of care, service use, institutionalization
Applications from institutions that have a General Clinical Research Center (GCRC) may wish to identify these programs as a resource for conducting the proposed research.
If so, a letter of agreement from the program director or Principal Investigator should be included with the application.
Summary
Research applications may address the issues noted in the narrative above as well as research objectives such as:
o test nonpharmacological interventions to manage the behavioral, physical, and functional problems associated with cognitive impairment, such as wandering, falls, sleep disturbances, and inadequate nutrition.
o evaluate interventions for the cognitive rehabilitation of people with conditions such as traumatic brain injury or stroke that are aimed at either remediating cognitive impairments or encouraging compensatory strategies for them.
o investigate cognitive, behavioral, attitudinal, and physiological interventions to prevent or delay the onset of cognitive impairment.
o support basic and clinical studies of neurobehavioral and cognitive effects of dementia and delirium to determine similarities and differences in these conditions and ways to assess and treat them.
o test interventions for family caregivers that mitigate the deleterious effects of the caregiving role on mood, immune function, and productivity.
o investigate interventions targeted to differences in patient management and family caregiving due to gender, ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic factors.
Primary Sources:
1.
Conference: "Defining and Measuring Outcomes in Alzheimer's Research: Do We Agree?" Sponsored by Alzheimer's Association, Advisory Panel on Alzheimer's Disease, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, Department of Veterans Affairs, National Institute on Aging, National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute of Nursing Research, University Hospitals of Cleveland.
September 11-12, 1996, Washington, DC.
To be published in a special issue in Alzheimer's Disease and Associated Disorders: An International Journal.
A summary of conference discussions and findings may be obtained from The Alzheimer's Association, Washington office, phone 202-393-7737.
2.
Conference: "Alzheimer's Disease Research Plan II," sponsored by National Institute on Aging and Fisher Medical Foundation, August 9-11, 1994, Washington, DC.
Published in International Psychogeriatrics, Volume 8, Supplement 1, 1996.
3.
NIA/NINR Cooperative Agreement, Research to Enhance Alzheimer's Caregiver Health (REACH); including investigators: L. Burgio at University of Alabama, Birmingham; R. Burns at VA, Memphis; C. Eisdorfer at University of Miami; D. Gallagher-Thompson at VA, Palo Alto; D. Mahoney at Boston Medical Center; R. Schulz at University of Pittsburgh; L. Gitlin at Thomas Jefferson University, and NIH staff: M. Ory at NIA; and M. Leveck at NINR.
4.
Conference: "Outcomes Research in Medical Rehabilitation" sponsored by NCMRR on August 29-31, 1994.
Fuhrer, J.J., 
Medical Rehabilitation Outcomes for Persons with Traumatic Brain Injury: Some Recommended Directions for Research in B.P. Uzzell 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES IN RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
It is the policy of the NIH that women and members of minority groups and their subpopulations must be included in all NIH supported biomedical and behavioral research projects involving human subjects, unless a clear and compelling rationale and justification is provided that inclusion is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects or the purpose of the research.
All investigators proposing research involving human subjects should read the "NIH Guidelines For Inclusion of Women and Minorities as Subjects in Clinical Research," which have been published in the Federal Register of March 28, 1994 (FR 59 14508-14513) and reprinted in the NIH Guide for Grants and Contracts, Volume 23, Number 11, March 18, 1994.
Investigators may access the policy via Internet on the NIH Website (http://www.nih/gov) or may obtain copies of the policy from the program staff listed under INQUIRIES.
Program staff may also provide additional relevant information concerning the policy.
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Applications are to be submitted on grant application form PHS 398 (rev. 5/95) and will be accepted at the standard application deadlines as indicated in the application kit.
Applications kits are available at most institutional offices of sponsored research and may be obtained from the Grants Information Office, Office of Extramural Outreach and Information Resources, National Institutes of Health, 6701 Rockledge Drive, MSC 7910, Bethesda, MD 20892-7910, telephone 301/435-0714, email: ASKNIH@odrockm1.od.nih.gov.
Receipt dates for new research grant applications are February 1, June 1, and October 1.
On page 1 of form PHS 398, check "Yes" in Item 2 and enter the number and title of this program announcement in the space provided.
Applications for the FIRST Award (R29) must include at least three sealed letters of reference attached to the face page of the original application.
FIRST Award (R29) applications submitted without the required number of reference letters will be considered incomplete and will be returned without review.
The complete original application and five legible copies must be sent or delivered to:
DIVISION OF RESEARCH GRANTS NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH 6701 ROCKLEDGE DRIVE, ROOM 1040 - MSC 7710 BETHESDA, MD 20892-7710 BETHESDA, MD 20817 (for express/courier service)
A number of other Institutes, Centers, and Divisions (ICDs) at the NIH may be interested in the general subject of this program announcement.
Applications submitted in response to this PA that propose research in scientific areas that overlap ICD interests will receive a funding component assignment in accord with existing referral guidelines and procedures established by the Division of Research Grants, NIH.
REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS
Applications will be assigned on the basis of established PHS referral guidelines.
Applications will be reviewed for scientific and technical merit by study sections of the Division of Research Grants, NIH in accordance with the standard NIH review procedures.
Following scientific and technical review, the applications will receive second-level review by the appropriate national advisory council.
Review Criteria
o Scientific, technical, and clinical significance and originality of proposed research;
o Appropriateness and adequacy of the experimental approach and methodology proposed to carry out the research;
o Qualifications and research experience of the Principal Investigator and staff;
o Availability of the resources necessary to perform the research;
o Appropriateness of the proposed budget and duration in relation to the proposed research;
o Adequacy of plans to include both genders and minorities and their subgroups as appropriate for the scientific goals of the research.
Plans for the recruitment and retention of subjects will also be evaluated.
The initial review group will also examine the provisions for the protection of human and animal subjects and the safety of the research environment.
AWARD CRITERIA
Applications will compete for available funds with all other approved applications assigned to that institute or center.
The following will be considered in making funding decisions: quality of the proposed project as determined by peer review, availability of funds, and program priority.
INQUIRIES
Inquiries are encouraged.
The opportunity to clarify any issues or questions from potential applicants is welcome.
For general scientific and program questions, contact
Mary D. Leveck, PhD, RN Scientific Program Administrator National Institute of Nursing Research Building 45, Room 3AN12, MSC 6300 Bethesda, MD 20892-6300 Telephone: (301) 594-5963 Fax: (301) 480-8260 Email: mleveck@ep.ninr.nih.gov
Neil Buckholtz, PhD Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging Program National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 3C307 7201 Wisconsin Avenue MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 Fax: (301) 496-1494 Email: BuckholN@GW.NIA.NIH.GOV
Jane L. Pearson, PhD Mental Disorders of the Aging Research Branch National Institute of Mental Health Parklawn Building, Room 18-101 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20957 Telephone: (301) 443-1185 Fax: (301) 594-6784 Email: jp36u@nih.gov
Eugene J. Oliver, PhD Division of Stroke, Trauma, and Neurodegenerative Disorders National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Federal Building, Room 806 7550 Wisconsin Avenue Bethesda, MD 20892-9150 Telephone: (301) 496-5680 Fax: (301) 480-1080 Email: EO11C@NIH.GOV
Louis A. Quatrano, PhD National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research National Institute of Child Health and Human Development 6100 Executive Building 2A03 Bethesda, MD 20892-7510 Telephone: (301) 402-2242 Fax: (301) 402-0832 Email: Quatranl@hd01.nichd.nih.gov
Direct inquiries regarding fiscal matters to:
Jeff Carow Grants Management Officer National Institute of Nursing Research Building 45, Room 3AN-12 MSC 6301 Bethesda, MD 20892-6301 Telephone: (301) 594-6869 Fax: (301) 480-8260 Email: jcarow@ep.ninr.nih.gov
Joseph Ellis Grants Management Officer National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Suite 2N212 7201 Wisconsin Avenue MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-1472 Fax: (301) 402-3672 Email: ellisj@GW.NIA.NIH.GOV
Diana S. Trunnell Assistant Chief, Grants Management Branch National Institute of Mental Health Parklawn Building, Room 7C-08 Rockville, MD 20857 Telephone: (301) 443-2805 Fax: (301) 443-6885 Email: Diana_Trunnell@nih.gov
Ms. Pat Driscoll Grants Management Branch National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Federal Building, Room 1004 7550 Wisconsin Avenue Bethesda, MD 20892-9190 Telephone: (301) 496-9231 Fax: (301) 402-0219 Email: PD23N@NIH.GOV
Mary Ellen Colvin Grants Management Branch National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Building 6100, 8A17 MSC 7510 Bethesda, MD 20892-7510 Telephone: (301) 496-1303 Fax: (301) 402-0915 Email: ColvinM@hd01.nichd.nih.gov
An additional contact for support of research in this area is the Alzheimer's Association, Inc.
This association is a private, national voluntary agency dedicated to research, service, and policy development related to ADRD.
Research grant opportunities are described at www.alz.org.
AUTHORITY AND REGULATIONS
This program is described in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance No. 93.361, Nursing Research and No 93.866 Aging Research.
Awards are made under authorization of the Public Health Service Act, Title IV, Part A (Public Law 78-410, as amended by Public Law 99-158, 42 USC 241 and 285) and administered under PHS grants policies and Federal Regulations 42 CFR 52 and 45 CFR Part 74 and 92.
This program is not subject to the intergovernmental review requirements of Executive Order 12372 or Health Systems Agency review.
Awards by PHS agencies will be administered under PHS grants policy as stated in the Public Health Service Grants Policy Statement (April 1, 1994).
The PHS strongly encourages all grant and contract recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote the non-use of all tobacco products.
In addition, Public Law 103-227, the Pro-Children Act of 1994, prohibits smoking in certain facilities (or in some cases, any portion of a facility) in which regular or routine education, library, day care, health care or early childhood development services are provided to children.
This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and mental health of the American people.
.
| NIMH Home | Welcome | News and Events | Clinical Trials | Funding Opportunities | | For the Public | For Practitioners | For Researchers | | Top |
For information about NIMH and its programs, please send email to nimhinfo@nih.gov Send website questions to nimhwebmaster@mail.nih.gov This page was last updated: 6/1/1999.
