Rio Grand Depot [LINK]-Utah State History [clearpixel.gif]
It provides a general interpretive look at the history of Utah, focusing on cultures, landscape, technology, and change.
Other temporary exhibitions are housed in the Society's Board and West rooms.
Because of construction and remodeling taking place at the depot, it has become necessary to take our exhibits down.
The exhibits will be completely removed by the end of 2003.
New exhibits will go up after construction is complete.
Crossroads of Early Cultures | Crossroads of Nations | Crossroads of Trade and Industry | Crossroads of Change
GENERAL DESCRIPTION:
exhibit_overview The exhibit Utah at the Crossroads looks at the general history of Utah, and focuses on people and the land.
Through looking at the crossroads of culture, nations, trade 
Artifacts present the three dimensional documents of Utah's past.These multitude of objects become mediators between the past and present.They connect visitors with the past, as do the wide and varied selection of historic photographs.Utah at the Crossroads is an interpretive exhibit that hopes to add to the overall understanding of Utah and its past.
GALLERY INFORMATION:
Gallery I Crossroads of Early Cultures
Early people came to the Intermountain Region about 12,000 years ago.
They roamed the vast area now known as Utah in nomadic groups and hunted large animals with primitive weapons chipped from stone.
Some 4,500 years later, groups of archaic people lived in caves and rock shelters.
Hunting big game became easier with the atlatla dart hurled by a throwing stick.
Milling stones ground plants, seeds, and nuts into more palatable foods.
pottery
From 600 to 1,500 years ago the Fremont and Anasazi came.
People's lives changed as they settled in villages near water supplies, and made pottery and used the bow and arrow for hunting.
They planted such crops as corn, squash, and beans and irrigated them.
These people did not live in isolation.
Ancient travelers, hunters, and traders left trails on the landscape.
Shells and stones from California and Arizona became items of trade.
People exchanged ideas and technology as well as goods.
The Fremont and Anasazi abandoned the area 600 years ago.
Ancestors of today's Utes, Paiutes, Shoshoni and Gosiutes arrived claiming the land as their home.
The Navajos, who came later, migrated from the northern Great Plains and refer to the Anasazi as the Ancient Ones.
Visitors can step thousands of years into the past in this gallery with its prehistoric Anasazi pottery and tools, a stratigraphic model of Danger Cave, an atlat, buffalo skin and skull, and other items.
Hands-on exhibits let you feel a buffalo robe and try your hand at grinding corn with a stone metate and mano.
Gallery II Crossroads of Nations
Europeans followed the Utes, Paiutes, Shoshoni, Gosiutes, and Navajos by several hundred years.
Spanish explorers from Mexico claimed but did not conquer Ute lands that bordered their empire.
However, they did affect the Native people.
The Utes traded with the Spanish, obtaining horses, metal points for weapons, cooking pots, and guns.
In 1776 Catholic fathers Dominguez and Escalante led a group from Santa Fe through Utah, seeking a new route to their missions in California.
The Spanish priests never returned to the area, but they did write about the geography and their experiences with the people.
Their journals and maps helped pave the way for future exploration.
Trappers and traders came to exploit Utah's natural resources in the 1820s.
They came to make a profit from beaver pelts, even though the land was Mexican territory.
These men associated freely with the American Indians.
Each spring, a rendezvous attracted traders, trappers, and Indians from throughout the West.
They also built forts and trading posts near rivers to serve a traveling populations.
Some trappers drew maps, wrote journals and letters, and talked about their adventures.
West bound pioneers read these journals and listened to the tales told by mountain men.
Other trappers became guides in the massive overland migration of the 1840s when thousands of pioneers came West for land and opportunity.
Government explorers discovered more about the West through scientific research.
John C. Fremont came to Utah in 1843-44 and wrote of his expedition in an 1845 report.
Mormons, planning to head West, read the report with interest.
Looking for a place of refuge, Mormon pioneers followed the overland trail toward the Great Salt Lake Valley.
On July 24, 1847, the main group descended the steep Wasatch mountains into Salt Lake Valley.
The new arrivals uprooted the Indians.
Early Mormon pioneers carefully planned and founded towns to the north, south, and east of the Salt Lake Valley.
The natural course of the land dictated settlement, the same as it had for ancient people.
Mormon farmers settled near water to irrigate crops, using both borrowed and new irrigation methods.
exhibit_porch Mormons struggled with the land but prospered in part because of Utah's central location on the westward trail.
Though the Mormons came with the desire to be left alone, gold seekers and emigrants bound for California used Salt Lake City as a supply and rest stop.
Communication lines grew.
The stage coach, pony express, and telegraph all passed through Utah.
When the railroad arrived, Mormons found themselves at the crossroads of change.
Authentic reproductions of mountain man clothing, a covered wagon containing homesteading items, a handcart and a wagon wheel odometer complement an array of artifacts that includes farming and ranching tools.
Here visitors can feel wool, card the wool and examine a western saddle.
Gallery III Crossroads of Trade and Industry
The Transcontinental Railroad was completed in Utah on May 10, 1869.
It marked the beginning of major commerce and industry.
The railroad brought people, ideas, goods, and services to Utah faster than ever before.
Mining companies brought money and new technology to remove ore and coal locked deep within the earth.
Immigrants from Asia and southern and eastern Europe joined Irish and Chinese railroad workers to work in mines, mills, smelters, and as section hands.
The cultural face of Utah changed.
Mining towns emerged.
From settlement, to camp, to town, cities such as Park City and Eureka grew unplanned around the mines.
Come towns ore_oven prospered; other went bust.
The terrain determined the layout of towns.
Winding, narrow streets, lined with houses on both sides, ran up and down steep hills.
The new cultures clashed with the old, but in time they adjusted to each other.
As mining and population increased, machines and methods in smelters, mines, and mills improved.
Labor unions came into power, and large industrial unions replaced early craft unions.
Utah became the forty-fifth state on January 4, 1896.
Social, political, and economic stability followed.
How the transcontinental railroad and mining formed the basis of trade and industry in Utah becomes apparent in this section of the museum.
A mining ore car, bucket, and cage are among the artifacts on display, along with items that show how men and women from many ethnic backgrounds came to live and work in Utah.
Many hands-on artifacts allow the visitor to experience life as a miner or railroad worker.
Gallery IV Crossroads of Change
In the 20th century, Utah turned to big business, tourism, and recreation.
The Great Salt Lake Desert serves as an example of how business and recreation have both used the land.
While companies harvested salt from the terrain, the salt flats became a popular and well known area in the automobile racing world.
licenses
Views of time and distance changed.
The automobile increased transportation and tourism.
Old trails became paved roads.
The Lincoln Highway, built beginning in 1915, was the first paved national highway.
Utah, again, was in a central eastwest position for travel.
Utah is a scenic wonder.
The state lies at the crossroads of tourism.
Highways crisscross Utah, carrying thousands of visitors throughout the West.
Salt Lake City is a western airline hub, making itself truly international.
People visit Utah for its natural beauty.
Plenty of recreation spots attract tourists, from National Parks and prehistoric sites to great skiing and the wonder of the Great Salt Lake.
Land use has changed to meet new needs.
The recreation trends in mountain biking and river rafting have turned Moab, once a landscape of uranium mining, to bike trails and tourism.
flags Tourism is big business in Utah, but other, more traditional, forms of business and industry also developed in the state.
People and programs came and went during the Great Depression.
Programs such as the Civilian Conservation Corps and Works Progress Administration produced lasting results.
World War II greatly changed Utah.
The state's inland location brought war industries.
Military installations came to Utah, putting the state at the crossroads of national defense.
In this century, technology has striven to master geography.
With such projects as the Central Utah Project, water now flows to people all over the West.
Hydroelectric power, water, and coal-produced power from Utah serve people and industries in California.
Modern technology allows Kennecott Corporation to maintain one of the most productive copper industries in the world.
Big businesses now converge on Utah to take advantage of the state's human, economic, and natural resources.
Data processing, medical, and space technology industries join mining and steelmaking.
These industries place Utah at the technology and information crossroads of the world.
War and peace, America´s love of the automobile, computers, and space exploration are discovered in this section of the museum.
Visitors can see and touch an antique gasoline pump and a 1918 Lincoln Highway sign.
Visitors can see the original Jarvik-7 artificial heart, and see a 1950s ski scene.
top of page
[clearpixel.gif]
[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
