Welcome to the World Heritage Sites Web Page, National Park Service, Department of Interior This is the List of Sites link this is the Future Nominations link this is the Map link World Heritage Home Page Links to the Past Search NPS Chaco Culture National Historical Park, New Mexico Chaco Culture National Historical Park preserves a very special chapter in human history, and was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1987, joining a select list of protected areas "whose outstanding natural and cultural resources form the common inheritance of all mankind."
Chaco Canyon Culture National Monument
Chaco Cultures main ruin, NPS Photo
Between AD 850 and 1250, Chaco Canyon was a major center of ancestral Puebloan culture.
Many diverse clans and peoples helped to create a ceremonial, trade, and administrative center whose architecture, social organization and community life was unlike anything before or since.
Chaco is remarkable for its monumental public and ceremonial buildings and its distinctive architecture.
The Chacoan people combined pre-planned architectural designs, astronomical alignments, geometry, landscaping, and engineering to create an ancient urban center of spectacular public architecture.
Chaco was connected to over 150 communities throughout the region by engineered roads and a shared vision of the world.
After 1250, the people migrated from the area, moving south, east, and west, to join relatives living on the Hopi Mesas, along the Rio Grande, and around Zuni Mountain.
The cultural sites of Chaco Culture National Historical Park are fragile and irreplaceable, and form a significant part of our global cultural heritage.
They are part of the history and traditions of the Hopi, the Pueblo peoples of New Mexico, and the Navajo, who continue to respect and honor them.
In addition to Chaco Culture, the World Heritage property includes the Aztec Ruins National Monument and several smaller Chaco sites managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
Links
Chaco Culture National Historical Park Aztec Ruins National Monument Bureau of Land Management
world heritage logo with a link to the home page
Last Modified: EDT
