National Park Service Johnstown Flood National Memorial This historic photo shows the row of large, two-story houses lining the lake shore before the flood.
NEWS New Tour -- Path of the Johnstown Flood Date 06/20/2002 Contact Tom Markwardt, 724-329-5512 Leave Your Car and Follow the Path of the Johnstown Flood National Park Service Offers New Tour
Area residents and visitors can leave their cars and tour the path of the 1889 Johnstown Flood this summer.
The National Park Service is offering a new tour of Flood related sites this summer.
The route is currently unmarked and difficult to discern while travelling, so this guided tour provides a unique opportunity to see how the floodwaters travelled to Johnstown, without following complicated road directions.
Descriptions provided by the on board guide help you understand the events and feel the power and tragedy of the Flood.
The Park Service offers this van tour Thursdays through Mondays until Saturday, August 10.
There are no tours on Tuesdays or Wednesdays.
Take this tour starting at noon at the Johnstown Flood National Memorial in St. Michael and stand on what remains of the South Fork Dam, which burst on May 31, 1889 despite valiant last minute efforts to fortify it.
The failed dam unleashed a raging torrent that destroyed the city of Johnstown and killed over two thousand people.
You will visit the Clubhouse of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club and glimpse the lives of the wealthy owners of the dam, who retreated there from Pittsburgh to beat the summer heat.
You will travel through all the local boroughs that the waters destroyed along the twenty-mile path of the Flood before arriving in Johnstown.
At the Heritage Discovery Center you will hear the stories of Johnstown's people through the eyes of immigrants.
You will pass through Grandview Cemetery where many of the victims where laid to rest, look back at the path of the Flood from the top of the Johnstown Incline, and ponder its destructive force.
The tour returns to the Flood Memorial at 4:30.
It is a good idea to eat lunch before the program begins.
Snacks and refreshments are available at the Discovery Center and the Incline.
The cost of the program is $8.50 for adults, $7.50 for seniors and $4 for children 6-16 years.
Children 5 and under are free.
The fee covers admission to the Flood Memorial and Heritage Discovery Center.
The tour is a partnership between the National Park Foundation, the National Park Service and the Student Conservation Association, and is made possible through the generous support of Ford Motor Company, a Proud Partner of America's National Parks.
"This is an exciting partnership and opportunity for the area," said Joanne Hanley, superintendent of the Flood Memorial.
"There are stories to tell here in Johnstown, and this program gives us a wonderful opportunity to connect them."
For information and reservations, contact Johnstown Flood National Memorial at 814-495-4643 or visit the web site at www.nps.gov/jofl. [spacer.gif] Return to list » Home Accessibility Activities Contact Us [pp_nav_spacer.gif]
ParkNet U.S. Department of the Interior FOIA Privacy Disclaimer FirstGov
