The Library of Congress [title_lp_short.gif] [title_comm.gif]
- Franklin Delano Roosevelt, 1942
the learning page symposium
Ask, answer, comment ... contribute to a lively, Web based discussion.
Go to The Learning Page Symposium live chat
Share your ideas about this month's theme in a Live Chat session! May 15th, 2003 8:00 P.M. (EST) 1st Floor, After School Online Register for Chat.
Logon to Chat (as a guest or a registered member).
Evaluate the chat session
View transcripts of past Live Chat sessions.
online resources
Especially for Teachers...
Born Free and Equal - (Special Presentation) This special presentation reproduces Ansel Adam's book, Born Free and Equal, which documents life in the Manzanar internment camp after World War II.
Civil War and Reconstruction - (Feature) Civil War highlights from the American Memory Timeline feature Does the Camera Ever Lie - (Special Presentation) Compare two photographs from Alexander Gardner's 1865 Sketch Book of the War and see how he rearranged the visual elements in his photographs to influence the viewer.
For European Recovery: The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Marshall Plan - (Exhibition) View an online display detailing the origins and effects of the Marshall Plan.
History of Mapping the Civil War - (Special Presentation) Learn about cartography during the Civil War era.
Mapping the American Revolution and Its Era - (Special Presentation) Learn about cartography during the Revolutionary era.
Motion Picture Goes to War: The Spanish-American War and the Philippine Revolution, The - (Special Presentation) This presentation can be used as a resource for understanding how Americans experienced the Spanish-American War through the media coverage.
On the Homefront, America During World War I and World War II - (Learning Page Activity) Through a gallery of images, this activity showcases a sampling of American Memory resources that illustrate homefront contributions during World War I and World War II.
Roger Fenton's Crimean War Photographs - (Prints and Photographs) This overview provides excellent background about the Crimean War (1853-1856).
Rosie Pictures: Select Images Relating to American Women Workers During World War II - (Prints and Photographs) These images were issued by the U.S. government or by commercial sources during World War II often to encourage women to join the work force or to highlight other aspects of the war effort.
Time Line of the Civil War - (Special Presentation) This timeline outlines the main events of the Civil War from 1861-1865.
U.S. Participation in the Great War (World War I) - (Feature) World War I highlights from the American Memory Timeline feature Veterans History Project: See and Hear Veteran's Stories - (Special Presentation) Listen to and view interview clips from the Veterans History Project.
Visit the project home page to find out how to participate in the projec War Letters: Extraordinary Correspondence from American Wars - (Cybercast) Library guests read aloud excerpts from the book, War Letters, and other war-related material.
Witness and Response: September 11 Acquisitions at the Library of Congress - (Exhibition) This exhibit features items that each major division of the Library of Congress has collected relating to the events of September 11.
Women Come to the Front: Journalists, Photographers, and Broadcasters During WWII - (Exhibition) Learn the stories of eight women who served their country on the front during World War II.
Women's Activities During the Civil War: A Select List of Photographs - (Prints and Photographs) This gallery includes images of women who, individually or as members of organizations, engaged in activities in support of the Union or Confederate war effort.
World of 1898: The Spanish-American War, The - (Special Presentation) This presentation contains helpful historical background and includes essays on the war from the perspectives of Cuba, Spain, and Puerto Rico.
World War Two - (Feature) World War II highlights from the American Memory Timeline feature.
Zoom into Maps: Military Maps - (Learning Page Activity) Explore some of the fascinating military maps in the Library of Congress collections.
Especially for your Students...
Blue and the Gray, The - (Learning Page Activity) Solve this set of puzzles and discover the theme the pictures have in common.
Documenting the Homefront - (Exhibition) During World War II, the Office of War Information took photographs recording homefront activities that supported the war effort.
First Thrill of Liberty - (Exhibition) Posters like this encouraged participation in war bond campaigns during World War I. Home Front During World War Two, The - (Exhibition) View New Yorks Penn Station during World War II.
Jump Back in Time: February 4, 1941 - (America's Library) On this date the United Service Organizations was chartered.
Jump Back in Time: June 13, 1942 - (America's Library) On this date the Office of War Information was created.
Lest Liberty Perish - (Exhibition) The Division of Pictorial Publicity produced over 700 poster designs during World War I. Meet Amazing Americans: General George C. Marshall - (America's Library) Read about a famous general best remembered for what he did for peace.
Meet Amazing Americans: General John Joseph Pershing - (America's Library) Read about a famous World War I general.
Meet Amazing Americans: Lieutenant George S. Patton Jr. - (America's Library) Meet a famous World War II general.
Meet Amazing Americans: Pocahontas A Child Keeps Peace Among Nations - (America's Library) Read how Pocahontas helped keep peace between Indians and the colonists.
Meet Amazing Americans: Theodore Roosevelt - Rough Rider - (America's Library) Find out about Roosevelt's role in the Spanish American War.
On the Homefront, America During World War I and World War II - (Learning Page Activity) Learn how Americans at home supported the war effort during World War I and World War II.
Rosie the Riveter - (Learning Page Activity) Solve this set of puzzles and discover the theme the pictures have in common.
Today in History (December 7) Air Raid on Pearl Harbor - (Today in History) How did Americans react to the attack on Pearl Harbor? Today in History (June 6) D-Day - (Today in History) World War II ended on this date.
Today in History (May 30) Memorial Day - (Today in History) How did the Memorial Day holiday begin? Today in History (November 11) Veterans Day - (Today in History) When was the first Veterans Day? War Effort, The - (Exhibition) Prominent illustrators promoted and advertised the war effort.
Y.W.C.A.
Girls in Service - (Exhibition) Organizations provided services to the armed forces during wartime.
Yanks are Coming, The - (Exhibition) Americans copyrighted more than 35,000 World War I patriotic songs, military marches, love ballads, and protest songs.
return to top
lesson plans
Use these lesson plans (created by educators for educators) to explore topics about war and peace with your students in your classroom:
Ladies, Contraband, and Spies - (Grades 10-11) Students view the perspectives of slave women, plantation mistresses, female spies, and Union women during the Civil War.
Mathew Brady Bunch - (Grades 6-12) Students become reporters, analyzing a Civil War photograph, and writing a newspaper article based on their chosen photograph.
Nothing to Fear - (Grades 5-8) Students learn what the World War II experience was like for Japanese Americans living on the West Coast.
Photojournalism - (Grades 5-8) Students explore how and why war has been photographed and also see the bias within the recording/reporting of war.
Civil War through A Child's Eye, The - (Grades 6-8) Students use literature and photographs to view the Civil War from a child's perspective.
What are We Fighting for Over There? - (Grades 10-12) Students create World War I era newspapers with different perspectives on American involvement in the war.
What Do You See? - (Grades 5-12) Students analyze Civil War photographs, and develop links between the Civil War and American industrialization.
George Washington - (Grades 8-12) Students engage in three lessons examining George Washington's leadership.
Lesson One focuses on Washington's wartime experiences.
return to top
bibliography
Is there a title (or two) that you always read to (or with) your students when teaching about the topic of war and peace? Are there invaluable reference books that you use when working with this theme? Staff from The Library of Congress have generously donated favorite titles for the "War and Peace..." theme.
We hope you will contribute your favorite titles to our growing bibliography!
return to top collection connections
Create your own collaborative lesson plans using material related to this month's theme assembled from The Learning Page Collection Connections:
America from the Great Depression to World War II: Color Photographs from the FSA and OWI, ca. 1935-1945" - (Summary and Teaching Resources) This collection includes color photographs of rural and small-town America.
Many photos examine women's contributions on the home front and various types of military training, munitions and military technology of the period.
Suffering Under a Great Unjustice: Ansel Adams Photographs of Japanese-American Internment at Manzanar - (Summary Only ) In this collection, Ansel Adams documents the life of Japanese Americans interned at the Manzanar relocation camps during World War II.
Photographs include portraits, views of daily life, agricultural scenes and sports and leisure activities.
After the Day of Infamy: 
America from the Great Depression to World War II: Black and White Photographs from the FSA and OWI, ca. 1935-1945" - (Summary and Teaching Resources) This collection includes black and white photographs of rural and small-town America.
Hundreds of images portray World War II from the perspective of the home front, including the evacuation of 110,000 Japanese-Americans to internment camps.
American Leaders Speak: Recordings from World War I and the 1920 Election - (Summary and Teaching Resources) This collection includes fifty-nine sound recordings of speeches by American leaders at the turn of the century.
Fifteen of these focus on World War I and present a variety of perspectives and reasons for supporting the war.
Band Music from the Civil War Era - (Summary Only) This collection features over 700 examples of brass band music that flourished during the Civil War period.
Civil War Maps - (Summary and Teaching Resources) This collection of more than 2,300 items provides students an opportunity to study the Civil War era through cartographic data.
Civil War Treasures from the New-York Historical Society - (Summary Only) The photographs, drawings, posters and letters in this collection document the lives of ordinary citizens who were involved in the Civil War.
Selected Civil War Photographs - (Summary and Teaching Resources) The 1,118 photographs in this collection featuring encampments, preparations for battle, battlefields and military portraits can be used as a basis for researching the Civil War.
American Revolution and Its Era: Maps and Charts of North America and the West Indies, 1750-1789, The - (Summary Only) This collection includes over two thousand maps created during the era of the American Revolution and features maps of land and sea battles; reconnaissance maps; maps showing cantonments, lines of march, and lines of fire; public information maps.
Spanish-American War in Motion Pictures, The - (Summary and Teaching Resources) This collection contains the first movies made of American troops in wartime and features troops, ships, notable figures, parades, reenactments of battles and other war-time events.
Washington During the Civil War: The Diary of Horatio Nelson Taft, 1861-1865 - (Summary Only) This collection documents life in Civil War era Washington, D.C. as seen through the eyes of Horatio Taft.
Information about Lincoln and his family is included in Taft We'll Sing to Abe Our Song Sheet Music about Lincoln, Emancipation, and the Civil War, from the Alfred Whital Stern Collection of Lincolniana - (Summary and Teaching Resources) Learn tips for integrating these historic sheet music compositions into Civil War teaching.
return to top __________________________________________________________________
The Library of Congress | American Memory Questions? Contact us Last updated 04/25/2003
