[solders.gif] Veterans Day 2000 In 1918, on the eleventh hour of the eleventh day in the eleventh month, the world rejoiced and celebrated.
After four years of bitter war, an armistice was signed.
The "war to end all wars" was over.
November 11 was set aside as Armistice Day in the United States, to remember the sacrifices that men and women made during the war in order to ensure a lasting peace.
Congress voted Armistice Day a legal holiday in 1938, twenty years after the war ended.
But Americans realized that the previous war would not be the last one.
World War II began the following year, and nations great and small again participated in a bloody struggle.
After the Second World War, Armistice Day continued to be observed on November 11.
Soon after, Congress passed a bill introduced by a Kansas congressman renaming the national holiday to Veterans' Day.
[info.gif] [veterans.gif]
Since Veterans' Day is on Saturday this year, ORNL will hold the on-site celebration on Thursday, November 9.
All Veterans are invited to wear their uniforms.
[parade.gif] 10:30 Fred Strohl will make PA announcement of ceremony and cafeteria program.
10:45 Procession of Roane County High School Band, Army Color Guard, and ORNL Veterans will begin from East Gate to flag pole.
10:55 Ceremony begins.
Flag will be raised by ORNL Veteran Guards while band plays the National Anthem.
Col. Bruce Isham will speak.
ORNL Veterans will place a memorial wreath at the flagpole.
Taps will be played.
Fred Evans will announce a moment of silence.
11:11 Moment of silence and flyover by the 134th Air-Refueling Group of the Tennessee Air National Guard.
11:13 Roger Underwood will play Amazing Grace on bagpipes.
11:15 Band, Color Guard, and Veterans will proceed to the Cafeteria.
Don't forget to sign the Veterans Board in the hall near the Weinberg Auditorium
11:30 Program will begin at Cafeteria.
Singing by: Mark Kohring, George Houser, Randy Smith, and Joe Marasco Bill Cabage Delores Cole Roger Underwood will play bagpipes.
A Veterans Day special will be available in the Cafeteria to all employees for $3.49.
[vetbar.jpg]
Pictures of the 1999 Veterans Day Celebration.
CAPTION: Veterans Day Committee
Debbie Knox, Chairperson Terry Allmond Jerry Lee (DOE) Jim Blankenship Tony Medley Teresa Ferguson Missy Pointer Ernie Ford Chris Poole Roberta Grafton Robert Santoro Howard Hubbard Fred Strohl Susie Kuliasha Dave White
This web site was created by T.J. Honeycutt, ORNL Workforce Diversity Office, in cooperation with the ORNL Values Committee who sponsors the Veterans Day Celebration.
[Count.cgi?df=t3h_veterans.dat
DISCLAIMER
ORNL Public web site
