INTERNET SECURITY IN RUSSIA By: Irina Lakaeva U.S. Commercial Service Moscow
03/12/2001 Summary: Internet security is taking on unprecedented importance in the world now, and Russia doesn't want to fall behind on this issue.
The Internet allows Russians to participate in global information exchange and though only 2.5 million Russians use the Internet regularly, indices show that the number of Internet users in Russia will rapidly increase.
According to IDC, an on-line market researcher, the total sales from e-commerce last year were $90 million.
Web servers registered in Russia totaled 45,000 in 2000, more than three times greater than in 1998, according to recent Interfax reports.
This International Market Insight Report has been prepared in response to a growing interest on the part of U.S. companies in information security issues in Russia.
It provides information on market trends in the internet security market, introduces a future trade event which U.S. firms may wish to attend, and offers U.S. firms business development support through the offices of the U.S. Commercial Service in Russia.
END SUMMARY.
1.
Market Overview: Russia is fully aware that Internet security has become one of the most pressing problems facing www-users in this decade.
The spread of information technologies here has brought with it such problems as computer crime, unauthorized access to the communication and information systems, illegal use of various secret data, either government or private.
Furthermore, currently used computers need to be upgraded in accordance with the "National Doctrine on Information Security" signed recently by President Putin.
This Doctrine envisages increased internet penetration and an improvement in IT security performance, including the wider use of different protection tools.
From the Russian government's perspective, there are two main aspects why it is important to bring Russian standards and certificate norms in conformity with international levels of IT security: · The necessity to have secure transactions with foreign countries and · The domination of foreign-brand hardware/software in the market However, excluding official organizations and entities, the majority of Russian companies are not really worried about Internet security.
According to research by Jet Info Systems, the number of hijacking attacks to corporate networks increased 30 percent in respect of 1996.
Russia represents one of the most important countries of origin for new viruses in files abroad and the percentage of viruses in files receiving from Russia is approximately 10 times higher than in the whole Europe, according to Symantec Moscow.
A random poll of IT security company managers carried out by Safety and Security Magazine (www.groteck.ru) shows that on-line security tools are actively implemented in banks (19%), state and social enterprises (15%), oil and gas companies (13%), energy and trade companies (8%).
One of the most widely used mechanisms against hijacking attacks on the Internet is firewalls (24%).
There is also a growing interest to an electronic signature (18% of respondents), encryption, and VPN (Virtual Private Networks) tools (12%).
The most sensitive aspect in providing Internet security services in Russia is obtaining a license from Federal Agency of Governmental Communications and Information (FAPSI), and a certificate from the State Technical Commission (GosTekhComissiya).
In accordance with the existing Russian regulation, FAPSI is responsible for encryption, and GosTekhComissiya is responsible for authentication/identification, access control, auditing/logging.
Firewalls are at the intermediary territory.
The majority of products are oriented to Intel/DOS/Windows platforms.
Internet security is more important for advanced corporate systems than local networks and desktops.
There are not enough certified devices at the moment.
Nevertheless, the information security industry is highly mobile and ready to respond to any increase in demand Internet access security systems.
It is quite easy for intruders to break into almost any system in Russia.
Many sites don't use passwords at all or offered guest or admin passwords that users could share.
Users doing their own passwords usually choose passwords that could be easily guessed (the names of their children or pets, their birth dates, their license plates).
However, there are companies in the Russian market offering advanced technologies like biometrics.
BioLink, an U.S.-based company offers U-Match BioLink Mouse with a finger print scanner inside.
The company claims that the best prospects for biometrics tools for autentification in the market are Internet applications (e-commerce, on-line transaction security,) and corporate information systems (banks, oil and gas companies).
Data Protection Systems (VPN, VLAN).
The construction of Virtual Private Networks attracts a considerable attention in Russia.
The reason is that VPT technology allows the reduction in expenses on dedicated communication channels with remote affiliates, and an increase in confidentiality of transactions.
One of the most popular solutions on the market is VPN -- on either Checkpoint FW-1/VPN-1 or Cisco PIX Firewall.
According to Russian legislation, state enterprises and organizations working with secret information are liable to use only local products for VPN which have relative licenses and certificates of Gostekhcomissiya and FAPSI.
A list of certified products may be found at: http://www.jetinfo.ru/annexes/3/annex-3.html.
This list is constantly increasing.
Russian-made products include Ship, Zastava, Zastava-Jet, and SecretNet.
Commercial companies have more freedom to use VPN products including foreign-certified analogues.
The primary buying factors for commercial companies are: cost, functions, quality, encryption tools and compatibility with the existing equipment.
Firewalls.
Firewalls are widely used by Russian Internet-security providers.
There are a number of companies whose firewalls products are certified in Russia to have a high level of security: Cisco, Zastava-Jet (Jet Infosystems), Zastava (Elvis+), AltaVista Firewall, CyberGuard, Gauntlet of the Trusted Information Systems, and Bay Networks.
If a foreign company wants to apply for certification of its products, the best solution is to establish a partnership with a Russian organization that has necessary licenses.
The cost of certification of firewalls is approximately 5,000 USD, but can widely vary.
The process of certification normally takes half a year.
Internet payments security solutions based on smart card technology.
Participants in e-commerce in Russia must think about the financial security of their deals.
But credit cards are not popular in Russia and that is why unwillingness to pay online is not really an obstacle for Russian e-shops.
IT security is not such an important question for e-shops organizers either.
Only 5 percent of XXL (www.xxl.ru) on-line shoppers pay with credit cards, the "Moscow Times" reported.
The owners of e-shops feel confident that if customers ask for more online service with credit cards, they will be able to add this feature quickly.
For example, Cyberplat (Platinum Bank) and Assist (www.reksoft.ru), web payment systems have a combination of in-house and purchased software to implement high-security features such as storing sensitive information in 128-encryted form, transferring data by SL3.0 protocol and antiviral software.
Cryptographic protection.
A majority of Russian companies do not want to spend money to encrypt files.
Typical clients for firms specializing in encryption are state corporate enterprises and multinationals with a wide network of remote officers.
Another obstacle to the development of encryption is total control by FAPSI.
The encryption standard in Russia is 256 bits.
The American standard DES (Data Encryption Standard) and other private key algorithms are not certified in Russia and are prohibited from importation.
The most common problem faced by foreign companies in this area is the import into Russia of a cryptographic product intended for their own company's use.
For those companies, which are planning to enter the Russian market and use encryption, it is strongly recommended to have a reliable Russian partner.
For more detailed information on Encryption Regulation in Russia see http://www.bisnis.doc.gov/bisnis/isa/9909encr.htm Anti-virus protection is one sector where Russian software companies have had export successes.
Kaspersky Lab. (www.avp.ru), founded in 1997, concentrates its efforts on the global development, marketing and distribution of anti-virus technologies and software.
Its core software product is AntiViral Toolkit Pro (AVP).
It claims that its latest versions of AVP can detect over 38,000 recognized viruses including the Love Letter strain and 80 to 90% of unknown viruses.
The distribution network of Kaspersky Lab has spread for more than 40 countries worldwide.
The company has a strong partnership relation with Microsoft, Novell, Check Point Software, ISCA and participating actively in international trade shows.
Nearly 30 computer hardware vendors install AVP on computers they sell.
Digital signatures.
The Russian State Duma has set up a committee to draft a bill on electronic digital signatures.
The draft of a law has been already introduced to the Duma but it is still uncertain when will it go through the first readings.
The lack of a law on Electronic signatures has greatly hampered the development of e-commerce and the introduction of new banking technologies in Russia.
For further information on this topic please contact Max Gutbrod or Mikhail Usubyan at Baker 
If your firm is planning to work with a Russian company which provides Internet security services, it is recommended to inquire about its: · Licenses and certificates from the State Technical Commission, FAPSI and FSB (Federal Security Service).
(FSB licenses and certificates may be needed if your client is state entity working with secret information.)
· Customer list and successful projects.
· Level of customer service including technical support and periodic upgrades.
2.
U.S.
Companies may be interested to look into Runet (Russian Internet segment) websites on IT security listed below.
Obviously this list is not meant to be comprehensive: Information Security in Russia - http://www.mascom.ru (English) Confident magazine, electronic version http://www.confident.ru/ Systems of Security, Groteck publication http://www.groteck.msk.ru/ Russian Security Server -http://www.secur.ru/ Hack Zone, information server on computer security tools ? http://www.hachzone.ru Jet Info bulletin - http://www.jetinfo.ru 3.
Companies interested in establishing contacts with potential partners in the field of Internet Security in Russia are invited to take advantage of the U.S. Commercial Service's Gold Key Service Program in conjunction with a visit to the Moscow International Safety and Security Trade Show, on April 18-21, 2001.
This is Russia's leading trade show for security and safety, information technologies and related electronic communications industries; with over 30,000 visitors each year and more than 350 exhibitors from Russia and abroad.
Our commercial specialists will assist you in identifying qualified potential business partners and provide you with full logistical support as you explore expanding business opportunities for your company in one-on-one business meetings and at this important trade show.
You can rely on the U.S. Commercial Service in Russia to arrange an extremely productive program without the hassles normally associated with business development activities in emerging markets.
The U.S. Commercial Service measures its success on the basis of your success in the global market place, and we are ready to help you succeed in this growing market.
For more information on our cost - effective, efficient and highly acclaimed Gold Key Service in Russia contact: Irina Lakaeva Commercial Assistant US
