Internet Access to New England Library Catalogs By Dorothy Kalahan, ILL Department, University of Connecticut Health Center Many New England libraries have catalogs that are accessible through the Internet.
Most require telnet to reach their catalogs.
They include public libraries, community colleges, state universities, private colleges, and medical schools.
The following is a listing of some of these libraries, arranged by state.
This listing is most likely incomplete and a little experimenting will find libraries I have missed.
Bibliomation and Connect in Connecticut, and C/W Mars in Massachusetts, are consortia with online catalogs through the CARL Corporation.
When a library requests a login, usually the word "library' will work, or specific instructions will show on the login screen.
Connecticut
Bibliomation telnet pac.carl.org Ansonia Public Library Bethel Public Library Brookfield Public Library Derby Public Library Derby Neck Public Library Ellington Public Library Fairfield Public Library Killingly Public Library Middlebury Public Library Milford Public Library Monroe Public Library Naugatuck Public Library New Haven Public Library Newtown Public Library Pequot Public Library Ridgefield Public Library Rockville Public Library Seymour Public Library Shelton Public Library Somers Public Library Southbury Public Library Terryville Public Library Thompson Public Library Waterbury Public Library Willimantic Public Library Wilton Public Library Wolcott Public Library Woodbury Public Library
Gateway Comm-Tech College.
Quinebaug Valley Comm-Tech College Housatonic Comm-Tech College Sacred Heart University Naugatuck Valley Comm-Tech College Univ. of Connecticut/Stamford Norwalk Comm-Tech College Univ. of Connecticut/Waterbury Northwestern Comm-Tech College Waterbury Public Schools
Capital Region Library Consortium-Connecticut telnet pac.carl.org
Avon Public Library Berlin-Peck Public Library Bloomfield Public Library Bristol Public Library Burlington Public Library Canton Public Library Cromwell Public Library E. Hartford Public Library E. Windsor Public Library Enfield Public Library Farmington Public Library Glastonbury Public Library Manchester Public Library Marlborough Public Library .
New Britain Public Library Newington Public Library Plainville Public Library Portland Public Library Rocky Hill Public Library Simsbury Public Library S. Windsor Public Library Southington Public Library Suffield Public Library W. Hartford Public Library Wethersfield Public Library Windsor Locks Public Library Windsor Public Library
Asnuntuck Comm Tech College Capitol Comm-Tech College Hartford Graduate Center Manchester Comm-Tech College St. Joseph College Tunxis Comm-Tech College
Connecticut State Universities telnet csulib.ctstateu.edu Central Connecticut State University Eastern Connecticut State University Southern Connecticut State University Western Connecticut State University Ferguson Library-Stamford Public Library telnet flvax.ferg.lib.ct.us (Username: guest) University of Connecticut tn3270 uconnvm.uconn.edu University of Connecticut Health Center telnet lyman.uchc.edu University of Connecticut Law Library telnet 137.99.202.99 Wesleyan University telnet ctw.wesleyan.edu Yale University tn3270 orbis.yale.edu
Maine
Bowdoin College telnet phebe.bowdoin.edu University of Maine System telnet ursus.maine.edu Univ. of Maine U. of Maine - Augusta U. of Maine - Presque Isle U. of Maine - Machias Maine State Library Univ. of Southern Maine U. of Maine - Farmington U. of Maine - Fort Kent U. of Maine School of Law Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library Bangor Public Library University of New England telnet lilac.une.edu
Massachusetts
Boston Library Consortium telnet library.bu.edu Boston College Boston Public Library Boston University Brandeis University MBL/WHOI Library Massachusetts Institute of Technology State Library of Massachusetts Tufts University U. Mass.
Amherst U. Mass.
Boston U. Mass.
Dartmouth U.Mass.
Lowell U. Mass.
Worcester Wellesley College
C/W MARS telnet pac.carl.org Adams Public Library Agawam Public Library American International College Amherst Public Library Anna Maria College Ashburnham Public Library Athol Public Library Auburn Public Library Ayer Public Library Barre Public Library Belchertown Public Library Bellingham Public Library Berkshire Community College Berlin Public Library Blackstone Public Library Bolton Public Library Boxborough Public Library Boylston Public Library Brookfield Public Library Buckland Public Library Central Mass Regional Library Charlton Public Library Chicopee Public Library Clark University Clinton Public Library Colrain Public Library Douglas Public Library Dudley Public Library East Brookfield Public Library East Longmeadow Public Library Easthampton Public Library Elms College Fitchberg Public Library Frontier Regional School Gardner Public Library Grafton Public Library Granby Public Library Great Barrington Public Library Groton Public Library Hadley Public Library Hampden Public Library Harvard Public Library Hatfield Public Library Holden Public Library Holyoke Comm College Holyoke Public Library Hopedale Public Library Hopkinton Public Library Hudson Public Library Lancaster Public Library Lee Public Library Leicester Public Library Lenox Public Library Leominster Public Library Littleton Public Library Longmeadow Public Library Ludlow Public Library Lunenburg Public Library Marlborough Public Library Milford Public Library Millbury Public Library Millville Public Library Monson Public Library Mt Wachusett Comm College No.
Adams State College No.
Brookfield Public Library Northampton Public Library Northborough Public Library Northfield Public Library Orange Public Library Oxford Public Library Palmer Public Library Paxton Public Library Pelham Public Library Pepperell Public Library Petersham Public Library Pittsfield Public Library Princeton Public Library Richmond Public Library Rutland Public Library Sheffield Public Library Shelburne Public Library Shirley Public Library Shrewsbury Public Library So.
Deerfield Public Library So.
Hadley Public Library Southampton Public Library Southborough Public Library Southbridge Public Library Southwick Public Library Spencer Public Library Springfield Public Library Springfield Coll.
STCC Sterling Public Library Stockbridge Public Library Sunderland Public Library Sutton Public Library Townsend Public Library Turner's Falls Public Library UMass Medical Upton Public Library Uxbridge Public Library Ware Public Library Warren Public Library Webster Public Library W. Boylston Public Library W. Brookfield Public Library W. Springfield Public Library Westborough Public Library W. MA Regional W. NE College Westfield Ath. Westfield State Col Westminster Public Library Whitinsville Public Library Wilbraham Public Library Williamsburg Public Library Williamstown Public Library Winchendon Public Library WPI Worcester Public Library Worcester St. Col.
State Library of Massachusetts-Five College Library System telnet fclibr.libr.umass.edu Amherst College Hampshire College Mount Holyoke College Smith College Harvard University telnet hollis.harvard.edu Massachusetts Gen. Hospital telnet magic.mgh.harvard.edu Minuteman Library Network telnet mln.lib.ma.us Acton Public Library Arlington Public Library Bedford Public Library Belmont Public Library Concord Public Library Framingham Public Library Lincoln Public Library Medford Public Library Medway Public Library Medfield Public Library Natick Public Library Needham Public Library Norwood Public Library Somerville Public Library Sudbury Public Library Wayland Public Library Waltham Public Library Watertown Public Library Weston Public Library Wellesley Public Library Westwood Public Library Winchester Public Library Framingham State College Lasell College Massachusetts Institute of Technology telnet library.mit.edu Springfield College telnet jtbowne.spfldcol.edu Stonehill College telnet lib.stonehill.edu Suffolk University telnet library.law.suffolk.edu University of Massachusetts, Boston telnet libra.cc.umb.edu University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth telnet library.umassd.edu
New Hampshire
Dartmouth College telnet lib.dartmouth.edu Howe Library telnet howe.valley.net New Hampshire State Library telnet lilac.nhsl.lib.nh.us University of New Hampshire telnet library.unh.edu
Rhode Island
Brown University telnet library.brown.edu Bryant College telnet 192.124.153.7 CLAN telnet clan.lib.ri.us Rhode Island Public Libraries-HELIN telnet library.uri.edu University of Rhode Island Roger Williams University Rhode Island College Providence College Community College of Rhode Island
Vermont
Middlebury College /Isley Public Library (Middlebury) telnet myriad.middlebury.edu Norwich University / Vermont College telnet library.norwich.edu St. Michael's College telnet smclib.smcvt.edu University of Vermont telnet luis.uvm.edu Vermont Law School telnetlibrary.vermontlaw.edu Vermont State Department of Libraries telnet dol.state.vt.us VALS (Vermont Automated Libraries System) Vermont State Colleges telnet scolar.vsc.edu Community College of Vermont Lyndon State College Castleton State College Vermont Technical College Johnson State College
[redl.gif]
[neslhome.gif] [nesltoc.gif]
