Tour Stops Select an area or floor to go to.
Go To Map 1 - current Go To Map 2 Go To Map 3 Go To Map 4 Go To Map 5 Map 1 - Stop 5 selected 1.
Rotunda 2.
The Great Seal of California 3.
Speaker of the Assembly Office 4.
Treasurer's Office 1906 5.
Basement Rotunda 
Committee Room 7.
Assembly Chamber 8.
President pro Tempore Office 9.
Senate Chamber 10.
Governor's Office 1906: Anteroom 11.
Governor's Office 1906: Main Office 12.
Governor's Office 1906:Private Office 13.
Governors' Portrait Gallery 14.
Secretary of State Office 1902 -------------------------------------------------------------------- This is an image of the basement rotunda.
Click here to see the Virtual Tour Virtual Tour Details Office of State Publishing Mathews' Murals: Panel I Epoch I Mathews' Murals: Panel II Epoch I Mathews' Murals: Panel III Epoch I Mathews' Murals: Panel I Epoch II Mathews' Murals: Panel II Epoch II Mathews' Murals: Panel III Epoch II Mathews' Murals: Panel I Epoch III Mathews' Murals: Panel II Epoch III Mathews' Murals: Panel III Epoch III Mathews' Murals: Panel I Epoch IV Mathews' Murals: Panel II Epoch IV Mathews' Murals: Panel III Epoch IV
Go To Previous Stop 5 Go To Next Stop
Basement Rotunda and Legislative Bill Room
In 1913 the California State Legislature appropriated $10,000 to decorate the Capitol rotunda as part of a trend to bring art and history to the building.
Arthur F. Mathews, a prominent San Francisco artist, was given the commission to create a series of murals that would depict the historical periods of California.
Matthews completed 12 murals in sets of three (triptychs) in time for the 1915 Pan-Pacific Exposition.
The Capitol Murals are an excellent example of a regional artistic style known as "California decorative."
Arthur and his wife Lucia Kleinhans Mathews combined a romantic classicism (and idealism) with a Renaissance color palette and California imagery to create this distinctive California decorative style.
We have included Matthew's' own words and interpretations of the murals for context and to illuminate his era's distinctive interpretation of California history.
Mathews chose to describe the four epochs and the panels within them in flourishes of language typical to his era.
Matthews' 12 murals stood in the first floor rotunda until the beginning of the Capitol's restoration project in 1976.
At that time the murals were removed and conserved.
In 1981 they were reinstalled in the basement rotunda to better preserve the original appearance of the first floor rotunda (no murals originally) and yet keep intact and in context a piece of the art and history of California and its Capitol.
The Legislative Bill Room
No laws shall be passed except by bill.
-Section 15 of the California State Constitution
As Section 15 of the Constitution shows, bills are the foundation of California laws.
In the spirit of democracy, the Constitution requires that any bill introduced into the Legislature be printed and made available to Legislators and the public before any action is taken.
The Legislative Bill Room, located next to the basement rotunda, serves as the liaison between the Office of State Printing, the Legislature, and the public.
Here you can get copies of all bills and resolutions within the past two legislative sessions, or 4 years.
You can receive up to 100 copies per year free of charge.
The amount of paper generated through the Bill Room is tremendous.
For every proposed bill, at least 2000 copies are made.
Multiply that amount by the number of bills proposed each legislative session, which can be more than 6000, and you'll get an idea of just how much paper that is! This figure doesn't even take into account the re-printing of a bill when it's amended.
Nor does it take into account other documents that are generated by the Legislature.
If you're interested in learning about the day-to-day activities of the Legislature, the Bill Room also makes these documents available to the general public.
* The Daily Journals: You can read details of the Legislature's activities in each house's Daily Journal.
These are the certified, official records of each day's proceedings.
* The Daily Files: These files, one for each house, contain the daily agenda or calendar of business.
They provide a day-by-day record of all actions taken on any given piece of legislation.
* The Legislative Index and Table of Sections Affected: Used together, these two documents form a "bill finder."
The Legislative Index provides an alphabetical index, by subject matter, of all legislation that has been introduced.
The Table of Sections Affected lists alphabetically, by code, all sections that are added to, deleted from, or amended in proposed legislation.
* The Analysis of the Budget Bill: The Legislative Analyst prepares this document, which contains a detailed critique of the Administration's proposed budget.
Together, these documents provide an up-to-date record of legislation for the current session.
* You can find out about current legislation on the Internet.
* For information on bills that are older than one year, go to the California State Archives.
* To learn about landmark legislation of the 20th century, go to California's Laws of the Century, a publication prepared by the Senate Office of Research.
Arthur Mathews' Vision of California The murals by Arthur Mathews that decorate the basement rotunda walls were commissioned in 1913.
The twelve panels are divided into four themes and provide an overview of California and its future as envisioned by Mathews.
They were originally designed for and installed in the first floor rotunda, where the lighting is more muted.
The murals were moved to the basement rotunda in 1982.
Arthur and Lucia Kleinhans Mathews' artistic work combines a romantic classicism with California imagery and a Renaissance color palette that has been labeled as California Decorative.
Roll your cursor over each panel or click the related link entitled The Mathews Murals to learn more about each panel.
Go back to top of page
