[3pix.gif] Cancer.gov [763space.gif]
Ovarian Cancer Models Publication (PubMed) 2.
Ovarian SPOREs 3.
Ovarian Cancer Models (MMHCC) 4.
Ovarian Cancer Models (MMHCC Repository) 5.
Ovarian Cancer Models (MTB) 6.
Ovarian Cancer Metastases Models (MTB) 7.
Ovarian Cancer Home Page (cancer.gov) 8.
Gynecologic Cancers Links (cancer.gov)
Treatment of Ovarian Cancer
Next
Ovarian cancer is often initially sensitive to chemotherapy, especially platinum-based regimens.^21 For many years, the gold standard in the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer (Stage IIIB-IV) was the combination of cisplatin and paclitaxel.^22 Carboplatin has been reported to have equivalent efficacy and has reduced toxicity compared with cisplatin.^23,24 Hence, carboplatin and a taxane are currently considered standard of care.
In the primary treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer, two regimens are predominantly used.
* Carboplatin at 5.0-7.5 area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 infused over 3 hours.
(Recently there has been a bias to lower the taxane dose in this regimen) * Cisplatin 75 mg/m2 and paclitaxel 135 mg/m2 infused over 24 hours.
Early Stage Ovarian Cancer
Significant controversy exists regarding the treatment of early stage epithelial ovarian cancer.
While patients with well-differentiated or moderately differentiated stage IA or IB disease have 5-year survival rates exceeding 90%, those with unfavorable prognostic indicators are at a much higher risk of relapse (25%-40%).
In these high-risk patients, adjuvant therapy is indicated.
While the combination of cisplatin or carboplatin and paclitaxel is the standard of care, the question remaining is whether to administer 3 or 6 cycles of the combination to these women.^25 GOG 157 was designed to compare adjuvant carboplatin/paclitaxel for 3 cycles versus 6 cycles in women with completely resected stage IC and II, or clear cell, or poorly differentiated stage IA and IB epithelial ovarian cancer.
The treatment groups have not yet been unblinded but preliminary results indicate a recurrence-free survival rate of 88% after 3 years, regardless of the number of cycles.
While the toxicities in the two arms are different, further analysis will have to determine if there is a difference in overall or progression-free survival between 3 or 6 cycles of carboplatin/paclitaxel for high-risk early stage ovarian cancer.^25
Advanced Stage Ovarian Cancer
The treatment of advanced epithelial ovarian cancer involves 6 cycles of either of the above regimens.
However, recently, several trials have shown a clear therapeutic advantage of carboplatin over cisplatin.
These trials include an interim analysis of Gynecology Oncology Group (GOG) trial 158.
GOG 158 enrolled over 800 women with optimal stage III disease (residual disease 
Patients were randomized to receive 6 cycles of either 1) paclitaxel 135 mg/m2 over 24 hours, followed by cisplatin 75 mg/m2 or 2) paclitaxel 175 mg/m2 over 3 hours followed by carboplatin to 7.5 AUC. Carboplatin/paclitaxel was as effective as ciplatin/paclitaxel in this patient population.
However, clear advantages for the carboplatin/paclitaxel regimen were seen in the toxicity profile, which included less grade 4 leukopenia, grade 3-4 gastrointestinal toxicity, and fever.
The carboplatin/paclitaxel group had a higher incidence of grade 3-4 thrombocytopenia.
The results of this analysis showed definitively that while equivalent in efficacy, the combination of carboplatin/paclitaxel is preferable to cisplatin/paclitaxel due to its superior toxicity profile.^21
Recurrent Ovarian Cancer
Treatment of recurrent ovarian cancer is dependent upon the nature of the recurrence, the timing of the recurrence, the prior adjuvant chemotherapy used, and the response to the prior regimen.
Upon initial diagnosis, the tumor marker CA-125 is often elevated.
After cytoreductive surgery and appropriate cytotoxic therapy, CA-125 levels may rise in the absence of symptomatic relapse or clinical relapse.
This often occurs 2 to 5 months before clinical relapse.
In the event of an elevated CA-125, but negative pelvic exam, negative abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan, and no symptoms, appropriate treatment may encompass observation, tamoxifen, or initiation of cytotoxic chemotherapy.^22
Patients who experience a clinical relapse 
Whereas those who relapse 
The goals of second-line therapy should be to improve symptoms, optimize overall quality of life, delay time to symptomatic disease progression, prolong overall survival, and to achieve an "objective response, which may include shrinkage of tumor nodules".^26 The selection of the appropriate second-line cytotoxic agent should involve the selection of the most "active" agent available, the previous toxicity encountered by the patient (anaphylactic reactions to carboplatin have been reported in up to 20% of patients^27), the potential toxicity of the available agents, individual patient/family issues, and patient choice.^26
However, combinations in general produce higher response rates and extend time to progression.
There appears to be no difference in overall survival between combination regimens or sequential use of single agents in recurrent ovarian cancer.
Use of sequential single agents has less toxicity, however, in the advanced setting, where quality of life is a major factor in treatment decisions, time off therapy may play a role in selection of the appropriate regimen.^29 A case can be made for adding a second or third agent to carboplatin for women who relapse 
DeVita and Schein developed guidelines for the selection of combinations for clinical trial testing.
Combinations should use drugs that are individually active against the tumor, have different mechanisms of actions, have nonoverlapping toxicities, and can be used in full dose.^30
What options remain for the woman who relapses 
Against recurrent ovarian cancer, response rates include topotecan 20%, gemcitabine 19%, vinorelbine 20%, pegylated liposomal doxorubicin 26%, etoposide 27% to 35%, altretamine 14%, and ifosfamine 12%.
It should be noted that treatment with pegylated liposomal doxorubicin results in a prolonged progression-free survival of 5.7 months, and a median survival of 11 months in heavily pretreated women.
The toxicity profile of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin includes reduced alopecia and myelosuppression, but a high incidence of palmar-plantar erythrodysesthesia.^22
Borderline Ovarian Cancer
Borderline tumors are tumors of low malignant potential, and tend to be diagnosed in younger women at stage 1.
As a consequence, there is a relatively high 5-year survival of 80%.
The survival is dependent on the presence or absence of microscopic invasion.
Treatment includes cytoreductive surgery including maximum effort for debulking surgery, and comprehensive staging.
If invasive implants are found, treatment should follow that for epithelial ovarian cancer.
In the absence of invasion, the patient is followed at appropriate time points, to monitor for recurrence.
If recurrence with invasive implants occurs, the patient is subjected to therapy appropriate for epithelial ovarian cancer.^22
Novel Therapeutics
The emergence of drug resistance is an obstacle for oncologists treating ovarian cancer patients.
The development of new chemotherapeutic agents is aimed at circumventing or preventing the development of drug resistance.
Oxaliplatin
Oxaliplatin is a new platinum agent with greater antineoplastic potency.
Oxaliplatin creates DNA adducts that are not recognized by the proteins of the mismatch repair system.
Deficits in the mismatch repair system is hypothesized to be a common cause of resistance to carboplatin and cisplatin.
Oxaliplatin retains activity in ovarian cancer cell lines with such deficits and has response rates of 25% to 30% in patients who have had a platinum-containing first-line regimen.
Combination of oxaliplatin with paclitaxel resulted in response rates of 48% in patients pretreated with platinum.^31
Anthracyclines
Cisplatin/cyclophosphamide/doxorubicin was once the standard of care for advanced ovarian cancer.
Due to its cardiotoxic effects, doxorubicin was removed as the "third drug" in first-line regimens.
However, the development of new less cardiotoxic analogs (epirubicin) and formulations (pegylated liposomal doxorubicin) has renewed interest in using an anthracycline with carboplatin and paclitaxel in the first-line treatment of advanced ovarian cancer.
Particularly because of the single-agent response rates seen with anthracyclines in the second-line setting.
High-dose epirubicin has been shown effective in second-line ovarian cancer therapy, and the combination of epirubicin with carboplatin and paclitaxel is feasible.^31 Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin has significantly reduced cardiotoxicity compared with conventional doxorubicin^32 and results in response rates of 26% in heavily pretreated patients with recurrent ovarian cancer.^33 Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin is administered in a convenient 60-90 minute intravenous infusion every 4 weeks and is superior to topotecan as second-line therapy in ovarian cancer.^34
Topoisomerase Inhibitors
Topotecan, a topoisomerase I inhibitor, is one of the most widely used agents in the second-line treatment of ovarian cancer.
There is a lot of interest in combining topotecan in some doublet and triplet regimens.
In standard dose regimens, it is being investigated in combination with etoposide, gemcitabine, and the combination of cisplatin and paclitaxel.
In high-dose regimens it is being combined with carboplatin and paclitaxel as well as thioepta and mitoxantrone.^31
Oral etoposide exerts its action through inhibition of topoisomerase II.
Interest in this agent in the treatment of ovarian cancer has been intensified due to a phase 2 trial of prolonged oral etoposide, which produced response rates of 27% in platinum-resistant patients.^31
Gemcitabine
Phase 2 trials have suggested that gemcitabine is equivalent to single-agent paclitaxel, with overall response rates of 19% in recurrent ovarian cancer.
With its novel mechanism of action, gemcitabine is being investigated in several trials in combination with topotecan, paclitaxel, and the combinations of cisplatin and docetaxel and carboplatin and paclitaxel.^31
Vinorelbine
Vinorelbine is the newest vinca alkaloid and has broad antitumor efficacy.
In combination with cisplatin, vinorelbine has resulted in improved response and survival rates in patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer.
Simultaneous administration with paclitaxel demonstrated additive antitumor effects against ovarian cancer.^31
Intraperitoneal Delivery
Particularly with cisplatin, intraperitoneal rather than intravenous administration, has the potential to increase dose intensity and total dose exposure.
Cisplatin, topotecan, and paclitaxel have safety advantages when administered by this route.
However, clinical results have not indicated a clear benefit for this route of administration.^31
Investigational Strategies
Vaccines
Although no known reliable tumor marker exists for any solid tumor type, several NCI-sponsored vaccine studies are aimed at the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer.
Gene Therapy
Current gene therapy approaches to the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer include the introduction of wild-type p53, in order to gain cell cycle control, and the introduction of the herpes simplex thymidine kinase gene, which makes cells sensitive to gangcyclovir.^31
Antiangiogenic Agents
As a rapidly growing solid tumor, ovarian cancer is a prime example of the necessity of a tumor to develop a distinct microvasculature.
Currently, the antiangiogenic agent, thalidomide, is being investigated in Phase 2 studies to examine the impact of this novel treatment strategy.^31
Treatment Summary
The above should be considered a brief, educational exposure to how ovarian cancer develops and is treated.
For state-of-the-art treatment algorithms, please visit the websites of the National Cancer Institute, Gynecologic Oncology Group (http://www.gog.org), or National Comprehensive Cancer Network (http://www.nccn.org).
Next
Please send comments and suggestions to emice@pop.nci.nih.gov [mailto.gif] | Privacy Notice | Accessibility Information cancer.gov nih.gov H H S logo - link to U. S. Department of Health and Human Services firstgov.gov
