[citysl.gif] Testimony New York City Department of Health Office of Public Affairs Testimony Neal L. Cohen, M.D. Commissioner of Health New York City Department of Health
before the City Council Health Committee City Hall, New York City
April 30, 2001
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) and New Variant Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (New Variant CJD)
My name is Neal L. Cohen, M.D., and I am New York City Commissioner of Health.
I appreciate this opportunity to testify before the Council Health Committee about a communicable disease that has been the focus of widening attention.
The disease, new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, is often referred to as mad cow disease.
While new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease is seen in humans, mad cow disease -- shorthand for bovine spongiform encephalopathy -- is seen in cattle.
The two diseases - new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (or new variant CJD) in humans, and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (or BSE) in cattle -- are thought to be closely related, if not identical.
Before I continue to discuss this technically complex subject, I must emphasize that, in the United States, there have been no reported cases of new variant CJD in humans.
Likewise, there have been no reported cases of BSE in cattle.
The infective agent that causes these related diseases, new variant CJD and BSE, and several other human and animal diseases also, is entirely different from the viruses, bacteria, and parasites that cause most communicable diseases, from the common cold to measles to AIDS to strep throat to Lyme disease to syphilis to TB to malaria, just to name a few.
New variant CJD and BSE are believed, instead, to be caused by prions.
Prions are proteins; proteins are normal constituents of all living things, but prions are apparently misshapen.
Prions damage tissue, and when prions come in contact with certain other proteins, prions induce those proteins to become misshapen prions, too.
Because prions do not behave anything like viruses, bacteria or parasites, prion diseases are not transmitted as are other diseases nor do they follow similar courses.
Hence, prion diseases are monitored, investigated, and prevented differently from other communicable diseases.
The group of diseases thought to be caused by prions is now called the subacute spongiform encephalopathies, or SSEs.
Subacute means the course of the disease generally is between acute - which means a short and sharp course -- and chronic -- which means a slowly-progressing and long-continuing course.
Spongiform means that, under the microscope, certain cells in the brain or nervous system take on a sponge-like appearance in the course of the disease.
Encephalopathy refers to a disease of the brain.
In this set of degenerative diseases -- the SSEs -- there is no immune system response and no inflammation (or swelling), as is typically seen in viral, bacterial and parasitic diseases.
These differences distinguish the subacute spongiform encephalopathies from various forms of encephalitis, or brain swelling, typically caused by viral or bacterial infection.
In humans, the subacute spongiform encephalopathies, or SSEs, can cause progressive dementia.
Therefore, the SSEs must be distinguished from Alzheimer's disease and from other forms of dementia.
Diagnosis of subacute spongiform encephalopathy is based upon clinical signs, analysis of electroencephalograms showing brain electrical activity, and analysis of biopsied brain tissue or cerebrospinal fluid.
Four SSEs, all prion-related diseases, are known to occur in humans, and, thankfully, since they are fatal, all of them are rare.
The most well-known is classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease, or classic CJD.
There are also four prion-related diseases identified among animals, transmissible mink encephalopathy; chronic wasting disease of American mule deer and elk; scrapie of sheep and goats; and bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE.
Bovine means simply "relating to cattle," and, again, it is bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE, that is commonly referred to as mad cow disease.
As you know, this new disease phenomenon emerged on the other side of the Atlantic in the 1980s and 90s.
BSE was first diagnosed in cattle in Great Britain in 1986, and had affected nearly 200,000 cattle by the end of the year 2000.
Another four and a half million cattle that had no symptoms were also destroyed.
BSE in cattle is thought to have originated from scrapie, a spongiform encephalopathy of sheep and goats.
Scrapie has been known in Europe since the mid-1700s, and was present in most sheep-breeding countries by the 1980s.
Scientific debate about how BSE arose in cattle continues, but most experts believe that changes in the process of rendering introduced around the year 1980 are responsible.
Rendering -- the process in which animal carcasses are milled, boiled, and separated into fat and a meat-and-bone-meal product -- somehow allowed the causative agent found in the sheep carcasses to survive in the meat and bone meal made from the sheep.
While BSE is not restricted to Great Britain, the vast majority of affected cattle are from that nation.
As of December 2000, the United Kingdom had more than 180,000 reported cases in cattle, while Ireland and Portugal had fewer than 500, Switzerland, fewer than 300, France, fewer than 200, Belgium, 18, the Netherlands, six, Germany three, Liechtenstein, two, and Denmark and Luxembourg, one.
The BSE epidemic in cattle in Britain peaked in early 1993, and is on the wane.
While reporting of BSE in certain other European nations appears to be increasing, the actual number of affected cattle reported is very low relative to Great Britain.
Some of these cattle elsewhere in Europe were imported from Great Britain, while others were infected through ingestion of contaminated feed.
The recent reporting increase outside of Britain may also reflect improved case-finding due to active surveillance and improved laboratory testing.
Thus, in the wake of the first BSE wave which devastated the British cattle industry, what we are now seeing is likely not the second BSE wave, but, rather, the second BSE reporting wave.
Because the incubation period between the time of infection and the time that symptoms develop is thought to be about five years, some uncertainty remains about the course of BSE in European cattle.
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), despite active surveillance for BSE in this country since May of 1990, including examination of more than 12,000 cattle brain specimens, the disease has not been detected here.
That surveillance effort is expanding rapidly, with the goal of doubling surveillance in the current year to 5,000 brain specimen analyses annually while simultaneously improving the geographic sampling pattern.
The USDA and the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have instituted, over more than a decade, a number of increasingly stringent protective measures so as to prevent BSE from entering the United States.
In 1989, the USDA banned importation of all ruminants -- that, is, cud-chewing animals like cows and sheep and goats -- from the U.K. and other countries where BSE had been diagnosed, and restricted importation of certain cattle products from these nations.
In 1991, USDA restricted importation of ruminant meat and edible products, and banned most byproducts of ruminant origin from countries known to have BSE.
In 1997, the Department of Agriculture prohibited the importation of live ruminants and most ruminant products from all of Europe until thorough risk assessment is completed.
And in 2000, Agriculture prohibited all rendered animal protein products from Europe, regardless of species, including those originated from, rendered or processed in, or otherwise associated with, European products.
Importation requests for certain ruminant materials and products, such as serum and glands, are considered individually by USDA, which approves only those materials that would not allow exposure to ruminants in the U.S. Additionally, all cattle presented for slaughter at USDA-inspected slaughter establishments in the United States are inspected by USDA inspectors for signs of neurologic impairment, and any animal exhibiting such impairment is condemned, its meat banned from human consumption, and its brain tested by the National Veterinary Services Laboratories.
And, in the period from 1998 through 2001, the USDA, upon learning that two flocks of sheep that had been imported from Belgium and the Netherlands in 1996 under special scrapie control restrictions had been exposed to BSE-contaminated feed, first had the sheep quarantined so they couldn't be slaughtered or sold for breeding.
Then, when several sheep tested positive for transmissible spongiform encephalopathy - there was no way to ascertain whether they had either scrapie or BSE - USDA declared an extraordinary emergency and removed them for humane euthanization.
The FDA, in 1997, prohibited the feeding of most mammalian proteins to ruminants and required process and control systems to ensure that feed for ruminants does not contain the prohibited mammalian tissues.
In 1998, the FDA required inspections of all renderers, all feed mills, and some ruminant feeders for compliance with the 1997 rule.
The identification of BSE as a new animal disease in Britain suggested the potential for a new human risk.
So as to be on the lookout for early changes in the epidemiology of the human form of the disease, the U.K. began surveillance of classic Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease in mid-1990, and other European nations followed suit three years later.
Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease is a rare, fatal brain disorder, characterized by rapid, progressive dementia and neuromuscular disturbances.
It is reported worldwide, with an annual incidence rate of one per million, usually striking between the ages of 50 and 75.
Classic CJD is believed to exist in three forms: * Sporadic CJD appears to crop up in an individual for no apparent reason.
There is no known infectious source and no family history of the disease.
Most classic CJD cases are sporadic, their origin still a mystery.
* Inherited (or familial) CJD accounts for 10 to 15 percent of cases.
Most cases of familial CJD are known to have one of several genetic mutations, which are heritable, and cause the body to "build" defective proteins, or prions, that result in the disease.
* CJD acquired through infection accounts for only a small handful of cases of this rare disease.
CJD is not "contagious" in the traditional sense, and spouses and family members who live with classic CJD patients appear to have no greater risk for the disease than anyone else.
The only known pathways for infection have been medical procedures that have introduced tainted human tissue directly or via medical instruments.
All of these routes involve a person's being directly contaminated with infected brain or nerve tissue.
Examples include corneal transplants, grafts of dura matter (the outer lining of the brain), implantation of electrodes in the brain, contaminated surgical instruments, and injections of human growth hormone derived from the pituitary glands of cadavers.
No case of CJD has been reported in which a health care professional was infected by a patient.
Nevertheless, it is imperative that clinicians and others whose activities put them at risk for exposure follow closely the guidelines and precautions developed for treating CJD patients and handling their tissues, fluids and other contaminated materials.
This applies especially to neurosurgeons, histopathology technicians and pathologists and researchers whose risks are increased by virtue of their handling of potentially-infectious material.
In mid-1995, the British CJD Surveillance Unit learned of three cases of CJD in patients aged 16, 19, and 29.
The comparative youth of these patients - which was unexpected - and other unusual neuropathological findings that set these patients apart from what was usually seen in cases of classic CJD, prompted an even more intensive search for a new category of CJD patients.
Within six months, two more CJD patients, aged 29 and 30, were identified, who also fit the new pattern and who did not appear to have classic CJD.
These became suspect cases of a new type of CJD, possibly linked to BSE in cattle.
More suspect cases arose.
Laboratory work soon confirmed that the British cases were unique and that there was no human genetic cause for them.
New variant CJD had been identified.
How exactly did the affected British patients acquire new variant CJD? Laboratory analysis showed that the prions found in BSE in cattle and the prions found in new variant CJD in humans are virtually identical.
So, the patients most likely got new variant CJD from beef.
The first case of new variant CJD in Britain occurred in early 1994, nearly a decade after the first case of BSE was recognized in cattle.
As of November 2000, there were a total of 87 definite or probable new variant CJD cases in the U.K., and one definite case in Ireland.
The Irish patient had previously lived in England.
Elsewhere in Europe, the only affected country thus far is France, where there were two definite cases and one probable case.
None of the French patients had visited the U.K., however; their infections could have arisen from either imported British beef or beef products, or from BSE-affected cattle in France.
New variant CJD has features that distinguish it from classic CJD.
New variant CJD, in contrast to the classic forms, affects younger persons (the median onset of age of onset is 28), has a longer duration of illness of at least six months, has prominent psychiatric and sensory symptoms not seen in the classic forms, and evidences a different disease pathology in the affected brain tissue.
The human new variant CJD epidemic appears to have crested in 1999, with the onset in that year of 20 new cases in the U.K., but there are uncertainties about the extent of the outbreak, especially since the incubation period for new variant CJD is unknown.
If the average incubation period is in the 5-to-10 year range, the outbreak should remain small, due to measures to eliminate animal and human exposure to BSE that began in 1987.
If the average incubation period is longer, in the 10-to-15 year range, there could be an increase in cases in the next few years.
Again, let me say that while the possibility of either BSE or new variant CJD or both being identified in this nation cannot be ruled out, there is no evidence at this time that would support an expectation of a person acquiring the disease in the U.S.
The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention states, "...BSE has not been shown to exist in the United States.
Thus, it is extremely unlikely that BSE would be a foodborne hazard in this country."
Prudent public health practice nonetheless requires that surveillance for new variant CJD be undertaken, and efforts are underway at the federal, State and local levels to enhance existing monitoring for the disease.
The CDC 's National Center for Infectious Diseases analyzes national mortality data to monitor CJD incidence in the United States.
Because CJD is invariably fatal, and because the diagnosis of CJD is best ascertained at or near the time of death, mortality data review is an effective monitoring tool.
To date, the CDC's mortality data reviews have shown relatively stable CJD death rates since 1985, with the average annual age-adjusted death rate just a little under one death per million persons.
In addition to its ongoing review of national Creutzfeldt-Jakob mortality data, the CDC has also conducted active CJD surveillance in its four established Emerging Infections Program areas, in Minnesota, Oregon, Connecticut and the San Francisco Bay area, and in metropolitan Atlanta.
Beginning in 1996, the CDC and the Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists, on the basis of the national CJD mortality data, began ongoing follow-up reviews of clinical and neuropathology records of CJD cases involving people younger than 55.
Also, beginning in 1996, the American Association of Neuropathologists, in collaboration with the CDC, alerted its members to new variant CJD pathology, and requested that any cases fitting the new variant CJD description -- regardless of the current clinical diagnosis or the patient's age -- be reported.
And in 1997, the National Prion Disease Pathology Surveillance Center was established at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland to monitor the prevalence of prion diseases in the U.S. and investigate possible cases, utilizing the latest technologies.
By November, 2000, clinical and neuropatholgic record review of 101 CJD patients under the age of 55 in the period from 1994 -1997 had been completed.
So far, all of these national efforts have detected no occurrence of new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease in the United States.
At the State level, the New York State Department of Health conducts ongoing CJD surveillance and research through its Alzheimer's Disease and Other Dementias Registry, a population-based reporting system established in 1986 for identifying, locating and investigating the occurrence, frequency, incidence, cause, effect, prognosis and other relevant data with respect to dementias.
Each time a case of dementia is diagnosed or confirmed in the State, a confidential report on the case must, by law, be submitted to the Registry.
As part of the national effort to detect the occurrence of new variant CJD in the United States, the Registry conducts ongoing CJD surveillance, linking Registry data, death records and hospital data.
Registry data indicate that there were 114 CJD deaths reported in New York State in the years 1991-1998, and 27 in New York City in the same period.
The Registry has not identified a case of new variant CJD to date.
At the local level, on March 21, the New York City Department of Health proposed that the Board of Health amend the New York City Health Code, Section 11.03(a), to make Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies mandatorily reportable, as are 72 other diseases and conditions.
This step reflects our recognition that although there have been, to date, no cases of new variant CJD in humans or BSE in cattle in the U.S., there are concerns that cases could occur among U.S. residents -- and therefore among New Yorkers - exposed to contaminated meat overseas; and even though the federal government has implemented tough preventive measures, it is always possible that locally-acquired new variant CJD cases could occur in the future.
I would like to point out that while new variant CJD and classic CJD are not yet reportable diseases in the Health Code, the Health Code does require reporting of any unusual disease manifestation or cluster -- which includes new variant CJD and the other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
Not only are physicians required to report any such unusual disease manifestations, but neuropathologists - and certainly other clinicians as well -- are keenly aware of this emerging disease with its potential to surface here in the United States, and they are communicating with us: The Department has received several reports of suspect new variant CJD in recent years.
In the same way that we investigate other unusual diseases, we work with the clinician to rapidly ensure that appropriate laboratory testing is done to confirm the diagnosis.
To date, each of these cases has been confirmed as classic, as opposed to new variant, CJD.
In the event that a case were to be identified and confirmed in the future, the patient and the patient's family would be interviewed extensively to determine possible sources of exposure, which would include, of course, consumption of beef and beef-containing products from European nations with documented bovine spongiform encephalopathy and/or new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease.
And, of course, the New York City Department of Health would investigate in close collaboration with the CDC, the USDA, and the State Department of Health, as we already do on an ongoing basis in other communicable disease areas.
I should add here that while new variant CJD has not been shown to be transmissible via human blood, researchers believe on the basis of animal studies that it may be possible.
Hence, the U.S. and several other nations have implemented policies to minimize the potential risk of new variant CJD transmission through blood donation from apparently healthy persons who may be in the incubation phase of the disease.
Current FDA policy excludes donations from anyone who lived in or visited the U.K. for a total of six months or more from 1980 to 1996.
Earlier this year, the FDA's advisory body on blood donation policy recommended expanding the exclusion to those who have spent 10 or more years in France, Portugal or Ireland.
The FDA is also considering requiring tissue and cell donors to be screened for risk of exposure to BSE.
No matter which further precautionary exclusionary policies are instituted, the potential donor pool will be reduced, and the New York Blood Center, in particular, will be affected.
We must all redouble our efforts to bring in greater numbers of qualified donors to participate regularly in the months and years ahead.
In summary, new variant Creutzfeld-Jakob Disease is a newly-emerging disease not yet seen in the United States, apparently transmissible from cattle to humans under certain circumscribed conditions.
New variant CJD is distinctly different from classic CJD, which does occur worldwide -- and in this nation, state, and city -- at a rate on the order of one in a million.
While we are hopeful that this newly-emergent human form of prion-related disease - new variant CJD - will not be found in New York City, we clearly recognize the possibility that it could occur.
We plan to conduct full investigations of all reports of potential cases to ensure our ability to rapidly detect new variant Creutzfeldt Disease or other transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, should they occur in New York City.
I would be happy to try to answer any questions you might have.
### _________________________________________________________________
Go to Testimony Index || Public Information page || NYC DOH Home page || Publications NYC.gov Home Page || Mayor's Office || City Agencies || Services || News and Features || City Life || Contact Us || Search
