Dont Trash the Planet Posters Available The Philadelphia Wooden Boat Factory is a nonprofit organization that seeks to enrich peoples lives through interactive educational programming based on the heritage of the sea.
They recently completed a project with an elementary school in Philadelphia to create a littering awareness poster.
The original idea was to educate boaters about containing trash.
Based on their research, however, they concluded that a large majority of the trash in our waterways comes from towns and cities.
As such, the students created a poster that asks people to protect marine life, waterways, and drinking water supplies by keeping trash off of streets and highways.
This project was funded by a grant from the BoatU.S.
Foundation.
To order a copy of the poster, contact the Wooden Boat Factory at 215-755-2400 or info@woodenboatfactory.org .
A small number of posters are also available from the Clean Marina office at 410-260-8776.
Mar yland Clean Marinas Under way is a quarterly newsletter published by the Waterway and Greenways Division of the Chesapeake and Coastal Watershed Service, Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative promotes and celebrates voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution from marinas and recreational boats.
The Initiative is coordinated by DNR in partnership with the marine industry
.For additional information, contact: Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Toll Free: 877-620-8DNR, x8770 or: 410-260-8770 Fax: 410-260-8779 E-mail: bvalentine@dnr.state.md.us Web Site: www.dnr.state.md.us/boating Parris N. Glendening , Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Lt. Governor J. Charles Fox, Secretary Elizabeth Fuller Valentine, Editor Donna Morrow, Layout Barbara MacLeod, Copy Editor The facilities and services of the Department of Natural Resources are available to all without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, physical or mental ability.
This document is available in alternative format upon request from a qualified individual with a disability.
Graphics from ClickArt Deluxe Image Pack 97.
Printed on recycled paper with low VOC ink.
Clean Marinas Lauded During Ceremony UNDERW Maryland Clean Marinas SEPTEMBER 2001 AY BMP Spotlight: Minimize Impacts of Pressure Washing 4 Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Twenty-three of Marylands premier boating facilities were The BMP Spotlight is a new feature honored J uly 9 th during the annual Clean Marina Award intended to help marina operators to understand Ceremony.
The event, held this year at Zahniser s Yachting what we, the Clean Marina staff, are looking for Center in Solomons, recognized those marinas that earned the when we visit a marina.
We will draw items prestigious Clean Marina Award over the previous twelve directly from the Clean Marina Award Checklist months.
and the Mar yland Clean Marina Guidebook.
The In the first year of the initiative we recognized six certified question for this issue is, Do you minimize impacts of pressure Clean Marinas.
Last summer we honored 11 newly certified washing? facilities.
In this, in our third year, we recognized To put the question another way, Is there any the accomplishments of 23 facilities that have sort of filtration between the wash down pad and been certified as either Clean Marinas or Clean the waterbody? Hay bales or a filter fabric dam Marina Partners since last summer.
Thats more are acceptable options.
A settling basin is another than our first two years combined.
This level of alternative.
A settling basin is essentially a gratecovered pit dug into the wash down pad.
The participation clearly bodes well for Marylands future and our goal of certifying 25 percent of pit may or may not have baffles.
Water from the our boating facilities by 2004.
pad flows into the pit where it is held temporarily.
Several dignitaries addressed the crowd Left-Right: Calvert Co.
Commissioner Large particles settle out while the water is held during the ceremony.
Calvert County Bobby Swann, Sarah Taylor-Rogers, and within the basin.
Once the water has risen to Commissioner Bobby Swann emphasized the Senator John Astle enjoying the award the level of an overflow pipe, it spills out into the significance of Marylands maritime heritage.
ceremony.
receiving waterbody.
Frank Morgan, vice president of the Marine Trades Sand filters are another possibility.
Paul Association of Maryland and owner of St. Michaels Marina, Bartholomew, former manager of Summit North Marina in Bear, expressed the Associations support for the Clean Marina Delaware, constructed a sand filter in his wash area.
He layered geo-fabric, 18" of sand, another layer of geo-fabric, and 1" clean Initiatives voluntary approach to environmental protection.
Senator John Astle (D-Dist. 30) was also on hand to extend his stone on a foundation of 4" ballast.
Wash water is cleaned as it congratulations.
percolates through this layer cake of materials.
In r ecognition of t heir efforts to p rotect Marylands The most technically advancedand most expensiveoption waterways, each marina operator received a citation signed by is a wash water recycling system.
These closed systems collect, Governor Parris N. Glendening that read, filter and reuse the wash water so none is released to the adjacent waterbody.
Periodically, the system does need to be emptied Be it Known: (e.g., during winterization).
The used water needs to be collected That on behalf of the citizens of this State, in recognition of: by a licensed waste hauler. your outstanding efforts to protect Mar ylands water ways There are other options for minimizing the impacts of from pollution; in honor of your leadership and commitment pressure washing as well.
Clean Marina staff will give you credit to clean water; with sincere gratitude for your participation for any method you chose, as long as it meets the goal of in the Mar yland Clean Marina Initiative; and as a salute in removing visible solids from the wash water.
recognition of your demonstrated commitment t o The goal of removing visible solids is an element of the environmental stewardship, we are pleased to confer upon General Permit for Discharges from Marinas.
You are required you this Governors Citation.
Continued on page 2 The citations were presented to 18 certified Clean Marinas: Bay Ridge Civic Association Marina, Bert Jabins Yacht Yard, Chesapeake Harbour Marina, Coltons Point Marina, Ferry Point Continued on page 2 INSIDE T Clean Marina Award Ceremony 1 BMP Spotlight: Minimize Impacts of Pressure Washing Regional Clean Marina Programs 2 New Certifications 3 Dont Trash the Planet Posters Available 4 HIS ISSUE ... 1 1 Award Ceremony continued Marina, Fishing Creek Landings Marina, Hartge Yacht Services, Lippincott Marine, Mears Marina, Mears Point Marina, Point Lookout Marina, Rockhold Creek Marina, Shipwright Harbor, Spring Cove Marina (Rock Hall), St. Michaels Marina, Sweden Point Marina, Tidewater Marina, and Zahnisers Yachting Center.
Five other facilities were lauded as Clean Marina Partners: Chesapeake Bay Maritime Museum, Green Ridge State Forest, Herrington Manor State Park, Queenstown Harbor Community Pier, and Rocky Gap State Park.
Clean Marina Partners are not true marinas yet they minimize their own pollution and promote clean boating practices.
Following the ceremony, Zahnisers General Manager Jim Sharkey led a tour highlighting some of the many pollution control measures he maintains.
For example, there is a stormwater infiltration system along the bulkhead, a settling basin to collect residue from pressure washing , and an oyster nursery.
] St. Michaels Marina is the 34th marina in Maryland to earn the Clean Marina Award.
The harbor is what draws people to St. Michaels, said Steve Kilmon, marina manager.
We are happy to do our part to protect the beauty of this area.
The marina has about 50 slips and caters to transient boaters visiting the picturesque village of St. Bob Wilson, Mears Point Michaels.
The daily influx of new customers Marina, with his Award presents a special challenge.
Each new guest as reported in June.
must be introduced to the marinas pollution prevention practices.
To meet this need, Kilmon incorporated environmental rules into the slip agreement.
For example, guests are asked to recycle cans and glass, refrain from discarding fish scraps into the harbor, and to clean up after their dogs.
Also, he asks all fuel customers to use an oil absorbent pad or a nospill jug to capture any accidental spills before they hit the water.
Sweden Point Marina in Smallwood State Park is the second St. Michaels Marina, Sweden Point Marina, and Green Ridge State Forest are Certified DNR-operated marina to earn the Clean Marina designation.
Sweden Point offers slip rentals along the Potomac River in Charles County.
There is no commercial boatyard but boaters can work on their vessels on land provided some basic rules are followed: the work must be done without creating any unsightly conditions or safety hazards.
As part of their Clean Marina certification efforts, Park staff prepared an oil spill response plan and repaired a malfunctioning marine sewage pumpout station.
The newest Clean Marina Partner is also a DNR facility.
Bonds Landing Boat Ramp is located along the Potomac River, within the 43,000 acre Green Ridge State Forest (Allegany County).
It is accessible only by dirt roads.
Boaters that find their way to this remote put-in will find portable toilets and a sign urging environmental responsibility.
Forest staff have taken measures to minimize pollution from other aspects of their operations as well.
For example, all timber contracts stipulate that loggers must leave vegetated buffers around streams to protect water quality.
] Operators of the 23 newest certified clean marinas and partners, along with dignitaries and Clean Marina program staff.
Jim S harkey led a t our o f Zahnisers Yachting Center after the award ceremony.
Our Influence is Spreading...
BMP Spotlight continued to obtain the permit from the Maryland Department of the Environment if you pressure wash boats and/or do any other vessel repairs or maintenance.
Call Ed Gertler at MDE for more information about the permit: 410-631-3323.
Everybody covered by the permit must prepare a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
An outline of a stormwater plan is printed on page 86 of the Mar yland Clean Marina Guidebook.
A more detailed template is available from the Clean Marina office: 410-260-8770.
] Imagine boaters planning their cruises to stay at certified Clean Marinas throughout the mid-Atlantic region.
Before long , boaters will have the opportunity to do just that.
Virginia launched a Clean Marina program in January 2001 (visit www.deq.state.va.us/vacleanmarina for details).
The District of Columbia and the National Park Service will be unveiling a Green Marina program this month.
And the states of Delaware and New Jersey are committed to developing Clean Marina programs as well.
Each of these efforts follows (or will follow) the structure of the Maryland Clean Marina Initiative.
Representatives from the mid-Atlantic states have been meeting periodically t o establish consistency among the respective Clean Marina programs in everything from recommended pollution prevention measures to award criteria.
By joining forces, we can ensure that boaters visiting a Clean Marina anywhere in the region will encounter the same high standards as have been adopted by Marylands certified Clean Marinas.
Also, we can combine resources for things like advertising and, thereby, reach a greater number of boaters.
Whether they are cruising the Chesapeake or Delaware Bays, the Coastal Bays, the Jersey Shore or any of the multitude of rivers that embrace the region, boaters can seek out Clean Marinas knowing that they are clean, safe,and environmentallyresponsible facilities.
] ANCHOR BAY EAST MARINA, DUNDALK BALTIMORE YACHT CLUB, BALTIMORE BAY RIDGE CIVIC ASSN., ANNAPOLIS BERT JABINS YACHT YARD, ANNAPOLIS CHESAPEAKE HARBOUR MARINA, ANNAPOLIS COLTONS POINT MARINA, COLTONS PT. CROCKETT BROS.
BOATYARD, INC., OXFORD FERRY POINT MARINA 
BEACH FT. WASHINGTON MARINA, FT. WASHINGTON HAVEN HARBOUR MARINA, ROCK HALL HERRINGTON HARBOUR NORTH, TRACYS LANDING HERRINGTON HARBOUR SOUTH, FRIENDSHIP LIPPINCOTT MARINE, GRASONVILLE LOCUST POINT MARINA, ELKTON 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Anchor Yacht Basin, Edgewater Anchorage Marina, Baltimore Annapolis City Dock, Annapolis Bay Boat Works, North East Beacon Light Marina, Baltimore Bills Boats, Baltimore Breezy Po int Marina, I nc, Chesapeake Beach Campbells Bachelor Pt. Yacht Co., Oxford Campbells Town Creek Boatyard, Oxford Casa Rio Marina, Mayo Cedar Hill Harbor Marina, Bivalve Chesapeake Bay Bridge Marina, Stevensville Chesapeake Yacht Club, Shady Side Chesapeake Yachting Center, Baltimore Coastal Properties Management Inc., Annapolis Cunningham Falls State Park, Thurmont Cutter Marine Yacht Basin, Essex Deep Creek Lake Recreation Area, Swanton Dennis Po int Marina, Inc., Drayden D rury s Marina, R idge D uffy Creek Marina, Georgetown Dundee Creek Marina, Kingsville E lk Point Marina, Elkton Fort Frederick State Park, Big Pool Frontier Town Campground, O cean City Gateway Marina 
PIER, QUEENSTOWN ROCKY GAP STATE PARK, FLINTSTONE GREEN RIDGE STATE FOREST, CUMBERLAND P ARTNERS The Clean Marina Initiative will be exhibiting at the U.S. Boat Shows in Annapolis next month.
Swing by the DNR tent in the Yacht Basin lot and see whats new! C M PL A E 2 3 G reen Point Marina, Worton Hammock Island Marina, Pa sadena Harbor Island Marina, Inc., Solomons H arbor North Marina, Chesapeake City Harbor Vi ew Marina 
The Cove, Elkton The Sailing Emporium, Rock Hall Tidewater Ya cht Service Center, Baltimore Triton Marina, Elkton Tuckahoe State Pa rk, Queen Anne Turkey Point Marina, Edgewater Weaver s Marine Service, Baltimore Washburns Boat Yard, Inc., Solomons Wikander s Marine Services, Inc., Eden Yacht Basin Company, Annapolis A S
