Window on State Government Carole Keeton Strayhorn, Texas Comptroller __________ [search_blu.gif]-Submit Texas School Performance Review Texas School Performance Review _________________________________________________________________ Lyford Consolidated Independent School District April 2002 Chapter 2 EDUCATIONAL SERVICE DELIVERY This chapter discusses the Lyford Consolidated Independent School District's (LCISD) educational service delivery system, student performance and safety and security measures in the following sections: A. Student Performance B. Curriculum and Instructional Resources C. Special Programs
Special Programs - Part 1 Special Programs - Part 2
D. Safety and Security
C. SPECIAL PROGRAMS (Part 2)
Recommendation 15:
Fully implement the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted/Talented Students.
Full implementation of the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted/Talented Students will result in a cohesive program.
This recommendation can be accomplished by following the objectives as activities set forth in the district improvement plan.
In addition, the district should actively pursue a relationship with neighboring districts to create an Advanced Academics Cooperative.
Through this cooperative, districts could share teachers, curriculum, distance learning courses and other resources.
A summer exchange program would help gifted and talented teachers.
Because the development of a cooperative arrangement is more long-term, the bulk of the implementation strategies and fiscal estimates are based on an internal development.
The district should use the Texas Association for the Gifted and Talented (
See 
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the gifted and talented committee determines the extent to which each school in the district is implementing the recommendations in the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted and Talented Students (State Plan.)
June 2002
2.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the gifted and talented committee develop a three-to-five year plan for achieving exemplary status as outlined in the State Plan and secures staff and board approval.
Ongoing 3.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the gifted and talented committee develop measures to ensure that the district follows the State Plan and principals incorporate these measures into the campus improvement plans.
August 2002 4.
The superintendent takes the lead in approaching neighboring districts to create the means to share teaching staff, services and expertise.
Ongoing 5.
The gifted and talented committee contacts other school districts with exemplary, cost-effective, gifted and talented programs and other Regions that have Advanced Academic Cooperatives for gathering best practices.
Ongoing
FISCAL IMPACT
For this recommendation, $1,200 is set aside to cover travel expenses and registration fees for one state conference per year.
Recommendation 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 Fully implement the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted/Talented Students.
($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200)
Accelerated Instruction
In addition to the regular classroom instruction program, Section 42.15 of the Texas Education Code requires that schools provide accelerated or compensatory educational opportunities for students identified as "at-risk" of failure to complete school.
The purpose of accelerated or compensatory education is increase the graduation rate and the academic performance of at-risk students.
To serve at-risk students, schools must identify all of the students that fit the at-risk criteria.
Schools can develop individual criteria, or can use the criteria provided by the state.
The following are the identification criteria listed in TEA's Financial Accountability System Resource Guide for identifying at-risk students.
Grades 7 through 12 * Was not advanced from one grade level to the next for two or more school years; * Has mathematics or reading skills that are two or more years below grade level; * Did not maintain an average equivalent to 70 in two or more courses; * Is not maintaining an average equivalent to 70 in two or more courses; * Is not expected to graduate within four years of the date the student begins ninth grade; * Did not perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument (TAAS); or * Is pregnant or a parent.
Pre-kindergarten through Grade 6 * Did not perform satisfactorily on a readiness test or an assessment instrument at the beginning of the school year; * Did not perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument (TAAS); * Is a student of limited English proficiency; * Is sexually, physically or psychologically abused; or * Engages in conduct described by Section 51.03, Texas Family Code.
In addition, several federal government funds are available and distributed based on the poverty level in the geographic area in which the school district is located.
Schedule 5B of the Federal Title I, Part A application requires districts to rank their schools based on the percent of students in the free- and reduced-lunch program.
Title I, Part A funding is for helping disadvantaged children at risk of school failure; Title I, Part C is for education of migrant students.
Though funds are distributed based on the number of economically disadvantaged students, the students served are selected based on educational need, not economic state.
Title II, Part B, Dwight D. Eisenhower funds is for professional development; Title IV is for safe and drug-free schools; Title VII provides bilingual and English as Second Language instruction for limited English proficient students, and Title VI is for innovative education programs strategies.
These funds were first authorized in 1965 as part of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act was last reauthorized in October 1994.
The amended law allows a school to be designated as a Title I, Part A, school-wide program if 50 percent or more of students at the school or in the attendance zone are low income.
In LCISD, all schools are designated Title I, Part A school-wide programs.
In school-wide programs, funds can be used throughout the school to assist the entire educational program as long as the needs of the target students are met.
In Texas, state-funded compensatory programs began in 1975 with the passage of House Bill 1126.
In 1997, Section 42.152 of the Texas Education Code includes reporting and auditing systems covering the appropriate use of compensatory education allotment funds.
Senate Bill 1873 requires state compensatory funds, like federal Title I funds, to be supplemental in nature.
Exhibit 2-30 shows the amount of money LCISD receives in compensatory funds.
Exhibit 2-30 LCISD Federal and State Program Funds 2000-01
Fund 2000-01 Title I, Regular $606,877 Title I, Migrant $95,545 Title IV $10,505 State Compensatory $696,083
Source: LCISD Budget Office, 2001.
FINDING
LCISD implements a variety of educational support programs targeted for students at-risk of school failure.
As a district-wide Title I school, LCISD follows the eight components of an effective Title I, Part A school wide program listed in Exhibit 2-31.
Exhibit 2-31 Required Components of a School-Wide Program Title I, Part A Program
Program 1.
A comprehensive needs assessment of the entire school that is based on information on the performance of children in relation to the state content and student performance standards.
2.
School wide reform strategies that: a.
Provide opportunities for all children to meet the state's proficient and advanced levels of student performance.
b.
Are based on effective means of improving children's achievement.
c. Use effective instructional strategies that: o Increase the amount and quality of learning time, such as extended school year, before- and after-school, and summer school programs.
o Help provide an enriched and accelerated curriculum.
o Meet the educational needs of historically underserved populations.
d. Address the needs of all children in the school, but particularly the needs of children of target populations of any program that is included in the school- wide program, and address how the school will determine if these needs are met.
These programs may include counseling and mentoring services, college and career preparation, such as college and career guidance, services to prepare students for school-to-work transition, and the incorporation of gender equitable methods and practices.
e.
Are consistent with, and are designed to implement, the state and local improvement plans, if any, approved under Title III of Goals 2000.
3.
Instruction by highly qualified professional staff.
4.
Professional development for teachers and aides, and where appropriate, pupil services personnel, parents, principals, and other staff to enable all children in the school-wide program to meet the state's student performance standards [in accordance with P.L. 103-382, sections 1114(a)(5) and 1119].
5.
Strategies to increaseparental involvement, such as family literacy services.
6.
Strategies for assisting preschool children in thetransition from early childhood programs,such as Head Start and Even Start, to local elementary school programs.
7.
Steps to include teachers in the decisions regarding the use of assessments.
8.
Activities to ensure that students who experience difficulty mastering any of the state's standards during the school year will be provided with effective, timely additional assistance.
The assistance must include: a.
Measures to ensure that students' difficulties are identified on a timely basis and to provide sufficient information on which to base effective assistance.
b.
To the extent the school determines it to be feasible using Part A funds, periodic training for teachers in how to identify difficulties and to provide assistance to individual students.
Source: TEA, Student Support. http://www.tea.state.tx.us/student.support/.
2001.
Exhibit 2-32 lists several programs that are available for students in LCISD.
Exhibit 2-32 LCISD Sample of Compensatory Education Programs 2000-01
Program Even Start Success for All Reading Program Optional Extended Year GEAR UP Martin Cavazos Literacy Center Ninth Grade Initiative Drug-Free Schools Rural Systemic Initiative Tutorial Assistance Grant Program Full Day Kindergarten Parent Education and Pregnancy Migrant Education Program
Source: LCISD Budget Office.
Budget Director.
Preliminary Budget 2001-02.
COMMENDATION
LCISD has implemented a comprehensive accelerated/compensatory education program to meet the needs of its students.
FINDING
Sebastian/Lyford's Elementary campus improvement plan effectively addresses cost and personnel attributed to the compensatory and accelerated instructional program.
Texas Administrative Code (TAC) 19 TAC Chapter 109, Subchapter (b), requires districts to follow specific guidelines on reporting procedures and allocation of compensatory education funds.
The rules state that:
"Each district shall ensure that supplemental direct costs and personnel attributed to compensatory education and accelerated instruction are identified in district and/or campus improvement plans at the summary level for financial units or schools.
Each district shall maintain documentation that supports the attribution of supplemental costs and personnel to compensatory education.
Districts must also maintain sufficient documentation supporting the appropriate identification of students in at-risk situations, under criteria established in TEC Section 29.091."
Sebastian/Lyford Elementary improvement plan identifies areas of need and measurable objectives.
Each section links action plans to a district goal and a campus long-range goal.
Each goal provides information regarding objectives, strategies, persons responsible, timeline, resources and evaluation action plans.
COMMENDATION
LCISD Sebastian/Lyford campus improvement plan is an effective resource for improved student performance.
FINDING
The middle school receives almost twice the allocation of state compensatory education (SCE) funds as compared to Lyford Elementary School.
The state allocates these funds to school districts based on the number of students that qualify for free or reduced meals.
These funds are for reducing the dropout rate and increasing the academic performance of students identified as "at risk" of dropping out of school.
At the elementary level, poor performance on assessments can be used to identify "at-risk" students.
In 2001, LCISD had a 75 percent passing rate in TAAS reading scores at third grade.
While this is a significant increase from the 62 percent passing rate in the previous year, it is still below desired standards.
The state also considers limited English proficient students at risk of dropping out of school.
Lyford elementary has 24 percent identified as LEP while the middle school has 13 percent.
In addition to the state criteria for identifying "at risk" students, the district may develop local criteria for allocating state compensatory funds.
This criteria must be approved by the board and is not to exceed 10 percent of the total state allocation.
Exhibit 2-33 shows that in 2000-01, Lyford Middle School received $232,627 compensatory funds and enrolled 287 economically disadvantaged students.
Lyford Elementary received approximately one-half of this amount, $121,242, but enrolled almost twice as many economically disadvantaged students, 464.
As a result, Lyford Middle School received $811 compensatory dollars per economically disadvantaged student and Lyford Elementary received $261.
Exhibit 2-33 LCISD Campuses, Economically Disadvantaged Students and Compensatory Funding 2000-01
School Number of Economically disadvantaged students Percent of Economically Disadvantaged students Number of Teachers by Compensatory Program Compensatory Funding Compensatory Funding per Student Percent of total Instructional Expenditures Total instructional Expenditure per student Sebastian 133 87.5% 0 $82,801 $623 18.8% $3,015 Elementary 464 83.9% 0 $121,242 $261 6.2% $3,657 Middle school 287 83.2% 0 $232,627 $811 17.3% $4,034 High School 356 76.4% 2 $113,047 $318 5.7% $4,371 District 1,240 81.8% 1.8 $549,717 $443 9.6% $3,903
Source: TEA, AEIS, 2000-01.
The number of economically disadvantaged students is determined by averaging the best six months enrollment in the national school lunch program or free or reduced-price lunch for the preceding school year.
In LCISD, 81.8 percent of the student population is classified as economically disadvantaged.
In 2000-01, LCISD received $549,717 in compensatory funds.
The amount of compensatory funds received at each school reported in the 2000-01 AEIS reports is shown in Exhibit 2-33, as well.
Based on Texas Education Agency's compensatory guidelines, school districts are allowed to concentrate compensatory funds on one or on a small number of schools that serve at-risk students or that support specific programs.
Districts are also required to evaluate program effectiveness, to include level of improved student academic performance and make adjustments as appropriate.
Plans for how SCE funds will be allocated and their use evaluated should be included in the District (DIP) or Campus Improvement Plans (CIP).
While LCISD complies with evaluation-related data requests required by the Texas Education Agency, it does not comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness the various educational programs funded by state compensatory and federal funds, nor does it include a description of how SCE funds will be allocated and evaluated in the DIP or middle and high school CIPs.
Student performance measures in LCISD, particularly performance on TAAS, indicate that, overall, LCISD middle and high school students perform better than do elementary level students.
TAAS scores also indicate that the district's mathematics scores are better than the reading scores.
Recommendation 16:
Locally evaluate the programs funded through state compensatory and federal Title I education and redirect additional funds to the elementary level for reading improvement.
The evaluations should examine whether current funding allocations are appropriate to improve student performance in the areas of greatest need as indicated in academic performance assessments.
The evaluations should guide allocation of compensatory funds across all district campuses.
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and coordinator for Curriculum and Instruction evaluate all of the district's Title I and state compensatory funded programs to determine the effectiveness of each program.
April 2002 2.
The superintendent, the administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and coordinator for Curriculum and Instruction use the data collected to determine the most effective allocation of funds to ensure adequate funding in areas of greatest need.
July 2002 3.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the coordinator for Curriculum and Instruction continue to monitor and evaluate program effectiveness.
Ongoing
FISCAL IMPACT
This recommendation can be accomplished with existing resources.
Dropout Prevention and Alternative Education Programs
Ensuring that all students graduate from high school should be a primary goal of all schools.
Accurately monitoring students who leave school is critical to districts achieving this goal.
TEA requires districts to report information on students who leave school.
That information is used to determine a district's dropout rate.
Districts must use the guidelines in the TEA Leaver Codes and Definitions to report information on students who withdraw from school.
School districts must also develop a comprehensive dropout prevention plan that addresses how schools will work to prevent students from dropping out of school.
Exhibit 2-34 shows dropout and attendance rates, both annual and longitudinal (four-year rate).
LCISD has an overall annual dropout rate that exceeds the state average.
It is lower, however, than the average for Region 1, Progreso and Raymondville but is much higher than the rate for the remaining peer districts.
The longitudinal rate is lower than all peers except Rio Hondo.
Exhibit 2-34 Annual Dropout and Attendance Rate LCISD and Peer Districts 1999-2000
Rio Hondo Santa Rosa La Feria Lyford Progreso Raymondville Region 1 State Avg.
Annual Dropout Rate 0.2% 0.2% 0.7% 1.5% 3.0% 3.8% 1.7% 1.3% Longitudinal (Four year) Dropout Rate 4.3% 9.7% 7.0% 5.0% 12.1% 17.3% 8.5% 7.2% Attendance Rate 96.2% 95.9% 96.1% 95.4% 96.1% 95.3% 95.9% 95.6%
Source: TEA, AEIS, 2000-01.
Dropout and attendance rates are from the 1999-2000 school year.
FINDING
LCISD has several programs designed to keep students engaged in school.
These programs promote higher education, target pregnant teens and provide extra support to the ninth grade class in an effort to prevent students from dropping out of school.
GEAR UP is a federally-funded program that provides five years of services to a cohort of students.
The program is currently in its second year, and the student cohort is in the eighth grade.
Lyford participates in this program through a partnership with Region 1.
This program supports students obtaining a higher education through counseling services, tutoring and college information.
The GEAR UP staff plans programs designed to get students excited about school and about their futures.
The district implements the Pregnancy, Education and Parenting Program (PEP).
This program offers individual and group counseling for pregnant students and helps students develop an individualized educational and career plan.
The program aims to keep pregnant students enrolled in school.
Through the Ninth-Grade Success Initiative, extra support is provided to the in-coming ninth grade students to help ensure that these students stay engaged in school life.
The program focuses on student achievement and lowering dropout rates at the ninth grade, a year identified in research as one in which the largest numbers of students leave school.
Counselors and mentors visit in-coming ninth grade students while they are in the eighth grade.
Each student is assigned mentor teachers to help with the ninth-grade transition.
Each high school teacher is assigned a group of approximately 10-15 students that they follow from ninth to twelfth grades.
These teachers mentor their students, and serve as a contact between the students and other district personnel, including the counselor and the students' teachers.
These mentors also help resolve school/family problems, as appropriate.
Through this initiative the district has succeeded in promoting 90 percent of its ninth grade class - surpassing its goal of 82 percent.
It did this primarily through tutoring, and offering students a second chance to pass Algebra and English, both required to be promoted to the tenth grade.
Many of the ninth-grade repeaters were promoted from a freshman to a junior classification because they had earned enough credits during their second year as freshman to be promoted to this level.
The LCISD police department also assists school district personnel in truancy-related issues.
Officers visit students' homes to ensure that all students are attending school.
COMMENDATION
LCISD has implemented dropout prevention measures by targeting extra support services for students at risk of dropping out of school.
School to Career Education
All students, whether they continue their education after high school or not, eventually enter the workforce.
The State Plan for Career and Technology Education 2000-2002, required under Texas Education Code (TEC) �29.182, was developed as a guide to assist school districts in their efforts to offer effective career and technology education programs that prepare students for further education and eventual employment.
The plan is based on the premise that a rigorous academic foundation contributes to success in school and in life, that all students should be provided equal opportunities to succeed, and that career and technology education should complement and enhance academic preparation by enabling students to apply academic principles to a variety of community and career situations.
Texas Administrative Code (TAC) chapter 74 subchapter A requires school districts to offer career technology education courses selected from three of eight career and technology areas: agricultural science and technology, business, health science technology, home economics, technology/industrial technology, marketing, trade, and industrial and career orientation.
Exhibit 2-35 presents thenumber and percent of students enrolled in career and technology courses in LCISD, its peer districts, Region 1 and the state.
The 22.2 percent of students enrolled in career and technology courses is similar to Santa Rosa ISD and Rio Hondo and is higher than Region 1 and the state average.
LCISD's budgeted expenditure at $1,007 per student is higher than the state and Region 1.
Compared to the peer districts, LCISD ranks second in expenditures per student.
Exhibit 2-35 Number and Percent of Career and Technology Students and Teachers Budgeted Expenditures LCISD and Peer Districts 2000-01
Career and Technology Student Enrollment CATE Teachers* Expenditures for CATE District Number Percent Number Percent Expenditure Per Student Raymondville 409 15.4% 9.7 4.9% $467,601 $1,143 Lyford 337 22.2% 8.0 7.1% $339,250 $1,007 Rio Hondo 384 19.1% 4.5 3.2% $383,799 $999 La Feria 487 17.6% 7.4 3.9% $413,897 $850 Progreso 542 26.4% 11.3 7.5% $393,326 $726 Santa Rosa 258 22.4% 5.2 6.0% $135,495 $525 Region 1 55,464 18.3% 874.0 4.4% $45,330,978 $817 State 768,200 18.9% 11,811.0 4.3% $566,681,113 $738
Source: TEA, AEIS, 2000-01.
*Expressed in Full Time Equivalents.
Exhibit 2-36 is LCISD's 2001-2002 course guide.
It includes course listings for Agricultural Science and Technology, Family and Consumer services, Office Education and Technology Preparation courses.
Exhibit 2-36 Lyford School to Career Program Offerings by Career Pathways 2000-2001
Agribusiness Livestock Zoo Keeper Course Offerings Introduction to World Agricultural Science and Technology Applied Agricultural Science and Technology Plant and Animal Production Personal Skill Development Animal Science Entrepreneurship in Ag\Food Technology Course Offerings Introduction to World Agricultural Science and Technology Animal Science Introduction to Agricultural Mechanics Personal Skill Development Animal Production Agribusiness Marketing/Range Management Veterinarian Educator Course Offerings Introduction to World Agricultural Science and Technology Animal Science Personal Skill Development Wildlife Recreation Management Agribusiness Management and Marketing Animal Production Personal and Family Development Course Offerings Keyboarding Personal Family Development Preparation for Parenting/Child Development Advanced Journalism Music Business and Management Course Offerings Band I, II, II, and IV Course Offerings Keyboarding Record keeping Business Computer Information System II Accounting Automotive Technology Digital Imaging Course Offerings Introduction to Transportation Small Engine Repair Auto Tech I or College Connection - Auto Tech I. Course Offerings Personal Skills Development Business Computer Information Systems I College Connections Advertisement Design I, II Health Occupations Child Development/Care Services Course Offerings Keyboarding Introduction Health Science/Medical Terminology Health Science/Medical Technology I, II, and III Course Offerings Personal and Family Development Individual and Family Life/Consumer and Family Economics Preparation for Parenting/Child Development Nutrition and Food Science and Technology Drafting and Design Protective Services Course Offerings Personal Skills Development Business Computer Information Systems I College Connections Drafting and Design I, II Course Offerings Introduction to Criminal Justice Personal and Family Development Crime in America Basic County Corrections Officer
Source: Lyford CISD Pre-Registration Booklet, 2000-01.
FINDING
LCISD has made a strong commitment to provide a high quality career and technology program.
While the school has some basic courses and programs already in place, it is actively pursing articulation agreements, distance learning opportunities and dual-enrollment opportunities with Region 1 area colleges and technical schools.
The district is part of the College Connection Program offered through the Texas State Technical College (TSTC) and a dual credit program with Valley Baptist Hospital in Harlingen.
Through this program, juniors and seniors who meet the criteria can concurrently accumulate both high school and college credits.
To be eligible, students must have a minimum average of 80 in all courses taught at grade level.
Exhibit 2-37 shows the courses and programs that are available through TSTC.
Exhibit 2-37 Texas State Technical College Available Programs 2000-01
Advertising Design Accounting II Heating Ventilation, Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Electronics I Automobile Collision Repair and Refinishing I Machine Shop Automotive Technician Administrative Procedures I Business Computer Information System II Plant Maintenance I Computer Programming I Welding I Engineering Computer Aided Drafting I and II Aircraft Mechanic I Building Trades I Principles of Technology I Energy 
Source: LCISD Pre-Registration Booklet, 2001-02.
LCISD offers The High School to University Program by Distance Learning.
This program offers courses in U.S. History, English, college-level Algebra and Political Science.
In addition, LCISD students can participate in the Teach for Texas Conditional Grant Program.
The purpose of the program is to encourage students to become certified teachers and to be eligible to participate in the Texas Grant Award Program.
COMMENDATION
LCISD has made a commitment to develop, enhance and expand the career and technology program by offering a variety of courses, training and employment opportunities for LCISD students.
FINDING
While LCISD is taking the right steps to prepare students in many career areas that will enable students to gain entry-level employment in high-skill, high-wage jobs or continue their education, LCISD still lacks a comprehensive career and technology education program that pays particular attention to preparing students for 21st century employment.
While the courses and course sequences offered at the high school in Agricultural Science and Family and Consumer Services are comprehensive and students interested in pursuing a degree in these areas can obtain a good foundation by taking these courses, only a limited number of options exist for student interested in technology education.
Courses involving Internet applications, like web design and web commerce, telecommunications and multimedia are not available in the program.
Several students noted that there is limited access to computers and to the Internet.
Another student said, "We need more computer classes...I'm interested in digital imaging and the school does not allow us to have that option."
The Technology Education Essential Knowledge and Skills adopted in 1997 is a guideline to assist communities in planning, developing and implementing Technology Education programs.
It provides a framework that describes what students should know and be able to do in six technology content areas and recommends a coherent sequence of courses for middle and high school programs.
TEA defined these six areas as: Bio-related Technology, Computer Technology, Construction Technology, Energy Power, Manufacturing Technology, and Transportation Technology.
Sample trades include Electric Engineering Technician, Electrician, Computer System Analyst, Computer Programmer and Computer Assisted Design.
Santa Gertrudis ISD offers a four-year career/technology program that begins with basic computer application and graphic skills instruction and culminates with actual experience in business management and entrepreneurship.
Students are organized into a company that builds and sells computers.
The high school students produce, market, sale and service computers.
Profits earned are placed in a scholarship fund for the student participants.
Recommendation 17:
Offer a school to career program that mirrors the current job market needs.
LCISD has opportunities to strengthen a program that provides an enormous benefit to students.
The district may replicate best practices used in central Texas by Austin Community College and the local public school districts in its service area.
Austin Community College has publications and additional information sources available on the website for the School Relations Office at 
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINES
1.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction directs the teacher in charge of the career and technology program to review all CATE course offerings and identifies areas that should be strengthened.
October 2002 2.
The teacher in charge of the career and technology program studies other career and technology programs in Texas schools that provide courses and career opportunities in the areas of need.
January 2003 3.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the teacher in charge of the career and technology program develop a plan for involving area businesses and universities.
February 2003 4.
The teacher in charge of the career and technology program recommends modifications to course offerings and develops a plan to include new courses.
March 2003 5.
The teacher in charge of the career and technology program and the budget director determine the impact of recommendations on district resources.
April 2003 6.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction presents recommendation to superintendent and to school board for review and approval.
May 2003 7.
The administrator for Curriculum and Instruction and the teacher in charge of the career and technology program implement the plan.
August 2003
FISCAL IMPACT
This recommendation can be implemented using existing resources.
_________________________________________________________________
Carole Keeton Strayhorn Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts Window on State Government Contact Us Privacy and Security Policy
