PART I - ADMINISTRATIVE Section 1.
General administrative information Title of project
Mckenzie River Focus Watershed Coordination BPA project number: Contract renewal date (mm/yyyy): 9607000 10/1999 Multiple actions?
Business name of agency, institution or organization requesting funding McKenzie Watershed Council Business acronym (if appropriate) Proposal contact person or principal investigator: Name John Runyon, Watershed Coordinator Mailing Address P.O. 53 City, ST Zip Springfield, OR 97477 541/741-5235 Phone Fax 541/766-8336 Email address runyon@proaxis.com NPPC Program Measure Number(s) which this project addresses 2.2, 2.4A.3, 3.1B.1, 3.3D.1, 6.1C.1, 6.5, 7.0B.4, 7.6A.1, 7.6, 7.7, 10.2C.1, 10.5, 11.3 FWS/NMFS Biological Opinion Number(s) which this project addresses NMFS Consultation Number [711], USFWS Log no. 1-7-98-F-356 Other planning document references Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife's McKenzie Sub-Basin Fish Management Plan, 1988.
Oregon Plan Supplement on Steelhead, 1997.
Willamette River Basin Task Force: Recommendations to Governor John Kitzhaber, 1997.
U.S.
General Accounting Office's Oregon Watersheds: Many Activities Contribute to Increased Turbidity During Large Storms, 1998.
Clinton Administration's Northwest Forest Plan, 1993.
Federal agency involvement: Army Corps of Engineers; U.S.D.I.
Bureau of Land Management; U.S.D.A.
Forest Service; Environmental Protection Agency; Natural Resources Conservation Service.
Oregon state agency involvement: Department of Environmental Quality; Division of State Lands; Department of Fish and Wildlife; Department of Forestry, Department of Water Resources.
Short description Continue administration of McKenzie Focus Watershed for coordinated planning, assessment, monitoring, and fish and wildlife enhancement projects Target species Native anadromous fish: spring chinook salmon Resident fish: bull trout, Oregon chub, cutthroat trout, rainbow trout, and others Wildlife: Peregrine falcon, Northern spotted owl, Western pond turtle, wolverine, Townsend's big-eared, spotted frog
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 1
Section 2.
Sorting and evaluation Subbasin Willamette
Evaluation Process Sort CBFWA caucus Mark one or more caucus Anadromous fish Resident fish Wildlife Special evaluation process If your project fits either of these processes, mark one or both Multi-year (milestone-based evaluation) Watershed project evaluation ISRP project type
Mark one or more categories Watershed councils/model watersheds Information dissemination Operation 
Section 3.
Relationships to other Bonneville projects Umbrella / sub-proposal relationships.
List umbrella project first.
Project # Project title/description
Other dependent or critically-related projects Project # 9206800 Project title/description Implementation of Willamette Basin Mitigation Program--Wildlife Nature of relationship Targets acquisition of critical fish and wildlife habitat in the Upper Willamette Basin, and specifically in the McKenzie Watershed Monitors the distribution, population trends, and habitat use of bull trout populations in the Upper Willamette Basin
9405300
Bull Trout Assessment Willamette/McKenzie
Section 4.
Objectives, tasks and schedules Past accomplishments Year 1996 Accomplishment Completed Techical Report for Water Quality and Fish 
Completed Action Plan for Water Quality and Fish 
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 2
Implemented ambient water-quality monitoring
1997
1998
Initiated collaboration with Spring Chinook Working Group and began communicating with Upper Willamette Bull Trout Working Group to address critical fish habitat issues Initiated collaboration with Habitat Conservation and Land Acquisition Working Group to plan and implement habitat acquisitions Convened Watershed Health Forum, which encouraged information sharing among scientists, natural resource managers, and the public Implemented storm event monitoring
Implemented macroinvertebrate monitoring Council Coordinator selected as board member of the Willamette Basin Restoration Initiative, to represent Willamette Basin watershed councils
and restoration projects Ongoing; tracking various parameters for water quality, which may impact fish and wildlife in the aquatic ecosystem Solidified scientific framework by which to assess and evaluate fish population and habitat conditions in the McKenzie Watershed In progress; developing an evaluation and prioritization framework for protection and restoration projects Water-quality monitoring programs related to storm events and macroinvertebrates have been implemented Ongoing; determine how high flow events impact water quality parameters and aquatic habitat Ongoing; track trends in macroinvertebrate populations, which are biological indicators Emphasize importance of McKenzie as source population for Willamette Basin fish recover y efforts
Objectives and tasks Obj 1,2,3 1 Objective Continue to coordinate McKenzie Watershed project prioritization and planning among federal, state, and local government agencies, and landowners Task a,b,c a Task Continue administration and communication of Watershed Council activities, in particular through participation in Willamette Basin Restoration Iniatiative Continue to work with interagency/resident task groups, including the Spring Chinook Working Group and the Habitat Conservation and Land Acquisition Working Group, to prioritize projects, in consultation with NMFS and USFWS Produce proposals and reports describing assessment, monitoring, acquisition and enhancement projects Implement high-priority enhancement and restoration projects and land acquisitions Implement water quality monitoring Implement effectiveness monitoring for projects Leverage resources from other funding organizations Increase contributions from Council partner organizations Provide resident/landowner education/outreach through workshops, field visits, citizen monitoring programs,
b
c
2
Coordinate implementation of watershed assessment, acquisition, restoration, and monitoring projects
a
b c 3 Secure other funding for long-term support of ongoing council operations and project implementation a
b 4 Continue watershed education/outreach program for residents and local schools for improvement of fish and wildlife a
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 3
habitat and water quality b
etc.
Continue to provide watershed education and monitoring project curricula to local schools
Objective schedules and costs Obj # 1 Start date mm/yyyy 10/1999 End date mm/yyyy 9/2000 Measureable biological objective(s) Increase effectiveness of fish and wildlife population and habitat recovery by coordinating regional efforts Increase quantity and quality of habitat for fish and wildlife populations in the McKenzie Watershed Increase presence and effectiveness of recover y efforts in the McKenzie Watershed Increase citizen support and stewardship to benefit fish and wildlife populations in the McKenzie Watershed Milestone FY2000 Cost % 40.00%
2
10/1999
9/2000
30.00%
3
10/1999
9/2000
15.00%
4
10/1999
9/2000
15.00%
Total
100.00%
Schedule constraints Inadequate funding of the proposed McKenzie watershed assessment and project prioritizations may cause delays or inefficiencies in the prioritization, planning, and implementation of coordinated fish and wildlife habitat projects Completion date Continuing project.
Section 5.
Budget FY99 project budget (BPA obligated): $105,000
FY2000 budget by line item Item Personnel Note Salary for Coordinator (0.5 FTE), Assistant Coodinator (1.0 FTE), and Education Coordinator (0.5 FTE Payroll expenses and benefits for Coordinator and Assistant Coordinator Office equipment, supplies, service, and public outreach materials Facility rent, utilities, communications, and insurance % of total %56 FY2000 58,774
Fringe benefits Supplies, materials, nonexpendable property Operations 
%16 %13 %7 %0
16,960 13,500 7,766
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 4
improvements (e.g. land, buildings, major equip.)
NEPA costs Construction-related support PIT tags Travel Indirect costs Subcontractor Other
# of tags: Mileage, hotels, per diem
Professional services
%0 %0 %0 %6 %0 %0 %2
6,000
2,000 $105,000
TOTAL BPA FY2000 BUDGET REQ UEST
Cost sharing Organization BPA Eugene Water 
BPA) %39 %12 %4 %2 %2 %2 %1 Total project cost (including BPA portion) Amount ($) 105,000 32,000 10,000 5,000 6,000 6,000 3,000 $272,000
Cash match
Outyear costs Total budget FY2001 $100,000 FY02 $95,000 FY03 $90,000 FY04 $85,000
Section 6.
References Watershed? Reference Benner P. A., and J. R. Sedell.
1997.
Upper Willamette River landscape: a historic perspective.
Pages 23-45 in A. Laenen and D.A. Dunnette, editors.
River quality: dynamics and restoration.
Lewis, New York.
Department of Environmental Quality.
1998.
The McKenzie Basin water quality report.
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Laboratory Division, Portland, OR. Howell, P., J. Hutchinson, and R. Hooton.
1988.
McKenzie Subbasin fish management plan.
Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife, Springfield, OR. Hulse, D. et al. 1997.
Possible futures for the Muddy Creek Watershed, Benton County, Oregon.
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR. Ligon, F. 1991.
The fluvial geomorphology of the lower McKenzie River.
EA Engineering, Science and Technology, 41 Lafa yette Circle, Lafayette, CA. McKenzie Watershed Council.
1996.
Technical report for water quality and fish and wildlife habitat.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, OR. Miller, J.D., et al. 1997.
Willamette Basin Task Force: recommendations to Governor John Kitzhaber.
Minear, P.J. 1994.
Historical change in channel form and riparian vegetation of the McKenzie River, Oregon.
M.S. Thesis, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR. 9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 5
Ratliff, D.E., and P.J. Howell.
1992.
The status of bull trout populations in Oregon.
Pages 10-17 in Howell, P.J. and D.V. Buchanan, editors.
Proceedings of the Gearhart Mountain Bull Trout Workshop.
Oregon Chapter of the AFS, Corvallis, OR. Sedell, J.R., B.A. McIntosh, and P.J. Minear.
1991.
Evaluation of past and present stream habitat conditions.
Report for the Army Corps of Engineers temperature control feasibility study.
Pacific Northwest Research Station, Corvallis, OR. U.S.
General Accounting Office.
1998.
Oregon watersheds: many activities contribute to increased turbidity during large storms.
GAO/RCED-98-220.
Washington, DC.
PART II - NARRATIVE Section 7.
Abstract The proposal requests continued funding during FY00 for McKenzie Focus Watershed Council coordination.
The goal of this project is to improve resource stewardship and to protect fish and wildlife resources in the McKenzie Watershed.
The objectives are: 1) to coordinate project prioritization and planning among agencies and landowners; 2) to coordinate implementation of watershed assessment, research, enhancement, acquisition, restoration, and monitoring projects; 3) to secure other funding for long-term support of council operations; and 4) to continue watershed education/outreach programs regarding fish and wildlife habitat and water quality.
In a related project, the Council proposes to complete a comprehensive watershed assessment, which will serve as the basis for project prioritization with the Spring Chinook Working Group and stakeholder groups.
The Council, with the Habitat Conservation and Acquisition Working Group, has devel oped a strategy for acquiring critical habitat and for restoring degraded habitat to improve habitat connectivity.
Measurable outcomes of the project include: 1) an increase in ecologically functioning riparian zones; 2) an increase in the protection and restoration of inchannel and riparian habitats for resident and anadromous fish and wildlife; 3) an increase in rearing habitat for juvenile spring chinook; 4) monitoring data for assessment of habitat conditions and water quality; and 5) increased public awareness and implementation of projects necessary to protect fish and wildlife habitat and water quality.
Progress of the Council's annual scope of work and staff work plans, is evaluated ever y six months.
Success of fish and wildlife programs will be evaluated by ongoing monitoring.
Section 8.
Project description a.
Technical and/or scientific background
The McKenzie Watershed encompasses an area of approximately 1,300 square miles, occupying about 12 percent of Oregon's Willamette Basin.
Bounded on the east by the crest of the Cascade Mountains, the McKenzie River joins the Willamette River just north of the Eugene-Springfield metropolitan area.
The McKenzie Watershed supports anadromous and resident fish species, including spring chinook, bull trout, and native "McKenzie redsides" rainbow trout, and provides habitat for hundreds of wildlife species.
Historical data show that the McKenzie River produced an estimated 40% of the run of spring chinook above Willamette Falls, but these runs have dramatically declined (Howell et al. 1988).
Earlier this year, the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) proposed Upper Willamette River ESU of spring chinook for listing as "threatened" under the Endangered Species Act.
In addition, bull trout were listed as "threatened" in the Lower Columbia River Distinct Population Segment by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS).
The McKenzie Watershed is the last major refuge of wild bull trout in the Oregon Cascades and now is considered the most important remaining area for the production of native Upper Willamette spring chinook (Ratliff and Howell 1992; Howell et al. 1988).
The watershed provides habitat for several wildlife species of concern both statewide and federally.
Species that utilize the McKenzie Watershed for habitat include the peregrine falcon, Northern spotted owl, Western pond turtle, northern goshawk, wol verine, Townsend's big-eared bat, spotted frog, great gray owl, and red tree vole.
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 6
The McKenzie River also produces the highest water quality of any river in the Willamette Basin and is the sole source of drinking water to over 200,000 residents of Lane County (DEQ 1998).
The McKenzie Watershed represents the best opportunity in the Willamette Basin for the longterm persistence of native fish assemblages.
The watershed supports continuous blocks of high-quality fish and wildlife habitat.
Nearly seventy percent of the watershed is in federal ownership, primarily concentrated in the upper portions of the drainage.
In a recent survey, the quantity and quality of existing spring chinook spawning habitat in the upper watershed was found to be good, with little change from what was found historically (Sedell et al. 1991).
Maintaining and expanding the connectivity of high-quality habitat areas is important to protect habitats that are large and well dispersed enough to be resilient in the face of large-scale catastrophic disturbance.
Loss of fish and wildlife habitat has occurred in the McKenzie Watershed over time, with most habitat degradation concentrated in the riparian areas and the lower portions of the basin.
The McKenzie Watershed has followed the general trend for the Willamette Basin where land use change has been greatest at the periphery of major metropolitian areas such as Eugene-Springfield (Hulse et al. 1997).
The lower McKenzie River valley (beginning at RM 40) is increasingly in urban, residential, and agricultural land uses.
This portion of the watershed was characterized historically by an unconfined valley, dynamic channel shifts, and abundant side-channel areas (Ligon 1991).
Dikes and riprapping have confined large portions of the lower river to a set channel, with dramatic decreases in hydraulic complexity, loss of large areas of side-channel habitat, and over a fift y-percent reduction in mid-channel islands (Ligon 1991).
Spring chinook salmon utilize a number of habitats throughout their life cycle, thus the diversity and complexities of habitats in the McKenzie Watershed is critical to the persistence of this species.
Juvenile salmon move downstream from upper McKenzie tributaries, through the mainstem, and take refuge in calmer, side-channel areas (McKenzie Watershed Council 1996, J. Ziller, ODFW, personal communication).
These side-channel and backwater habitats of the lower McKenzie Watershed provide essential rearing areas for juvenile spring chinook.
Loss of channel habitat structure, side channels, and islands reduces habitat important to chinook salmon rearing and wildlife (McKenzie Watershed Council 1996).
The majority of the riparian area along the river's mainstem, including the upper watershed, is privately owned and becoming increasingly fragmented through timber harvest, roads, and residential development (Minear 1994).
Much of the floodplain area in the lower valley is occupied by residences and disconnected from the active river channel due to extensive diking and riprapping.
Thus the need to reestablish such areas where they have been lost or degraded due to channelization and increase connectivity with the mainstem McKenzie River is evident.
To address these challenges to watershed health, the McKenzie Watershed Council (Council) was convened and initiated by Lane County and the Eugene Water 
The Council acts as an advisory body with the purpose of helping to address management issues in the watershed and to provide a framework for coordination and cooperation among key interests.
The mission of the 20-member council is to foster stewardship of McKenzie Watershed resources, deal with issues in advance of resource degradation, and ensure sustainable watershed health, function, and uses.
The Council devel oped a watershed planning framework to guide its future activities.
Watershed analyses and other studies have been completed in sub-watersheds covering over three-quarters of the watershed, including all federal lands and the large portion of the industrial forest land base under Weyerhaeuser ownership.
Information from these assessments, and the scientific data and expertise gathered at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest, provide a rich store of information and expertise for guiding management strategies in the McKenzie Watershed.
This knowledge base and advice from the Council's Aquatic Habitat/Water Quality Task Group served as the foundation for the devel opment of general action plans.
The Council is developing a coordinated strategy for re-establishing the historic mosaic of habitats in the watershed by protecting existing high quality habitats and restoring watershed structure and function in areas where it is degraded.
The Council has been successful at directing a coordinated approach to deal with watershed issues through communication and collaboration on projects with member organizations and others.
The strategy of the Council is to focus resources on projects that impact private lands in the lower watershed.
This approach complements management actions on the public and large industrial forest lands.
Actions are directed at improving resource stewardship and protecting fish and wildlife habitat through outreach and education and, where appropriate, protecting key areas through acquisition and restoration.
The Council, with the Spring Chinook Working Group and the Habitat Conservation and Acquisition Working Group, has developing a coordinated strategy for re-establishing the historic mosaic of habitats in the watershed by 9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 7
prioritizing and planning projects that will protect existing high quality habitats and restore watershed structure and function in areas where it is degraded.
In a related proposal to BPA, the Council proposes to complete a comprehensive watershed assessment.
The assessment project would integrate technical information from existing watershed analyses, identify data gaps, and collect information about fish and wildlife resources in these areas.
The assessment would build upon the Council's framework for species and habitat recover y by providing crucial information necessary to implement effective watershed-wide protection and restoration projects in the McKenzie. b. Rationale and significance to Regional Programs
The status of the McKenzie Watershed has regional significance.
Willamette Basin spring chinook and bull trout populations, along with populations of numerous mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians have declined dramatically (Miller et al. 1997).
In the case of spring chinook salmon and bull trout, the McKenzie Watershed supports viable wild populations that are found nowhere else in the Willamette Basin.
The persistence of chinook and bull trout in the McKenzie is critical to the recover y of these species throughout the Willamette Basin.
The importance of habitat in the McKenzie Watershed is also integral to the recover y of many wildlife species.
One hundred percent of the "Top 15 Species/Groups of Species Most at Risk" in the Willamette Basin (J. Martin, ODFW, personal communication) are found in the McKenzie Watershed.
For these and other wildlife species, the watershed may provide habitat(s) that are under-represented in other areas of the Willamette Basin.
ODFW, in cooperation with the Willamette Basin Restoration Initative, is developing a comprehensive fish and wildlife conservation plan for the Willamette Basin.
This planning process recognizes the importance of the McKenzie Watershed in recover y of fish and wildlife populations in the Willamette Basin (J. Martin, ODFW, personal communication).
Preliminary discussions bet ween the Council and ODFW suggest that the McKenzie may provide source populations of fish and wildlife to expand into historical habitat throughout the Willamette Basin.
The BPA's continuing McKenzie Focus Watershed Coordination project is integral to fish recover y efforts and protection and enhancement of habitat in the Willamette Basin for the several reasons.
The McKenzie River has the highest quality water of all upper Willamette River tributaries and is a significant refuge for native spring chinook salmon and bull trout.
The McKenzie Watershed Council is providing a model for the formation of new watershed councils in the Willamette Basin.
The Council plays a critical role in the state's basin-wide strategy for protecting and restoring fish and wildlife habitat and monitoring water quality, with the Watershed Coordinator representing the McKenzie and other watershed councils as a member of the Willamette Basin Restoration Initiative Board of Directors.
Finally, a recent U.S.
General Accounting Office (GAO) study acknowledged the need for assessment-based planning, decision-making and implementation framework for projects related not only to biological resources, but also water quality in municipal watersheds, including the McKenzie (U.S. GAO 1998).
The McKenzie Focus Watershed Coordination project addresses the following ISRP concerns: (1) What is the distribution of the species of interest within the watershed, in relation to the location of the proposed restoration activity? That is, was the project sited correctly relative to the behavior and distribution of the organism(s) of interest? Primary species of interest in the McKenzie Watershed are spring chinook salmon, which utilize habitat throughout the watershed, and bull trout, which primarily use the middle and upper McKenzie Watershed mainstem and reservoirs for foraging and rearing, and its tributaries for spawning.
While the coordination contract does not specifically fund restoration projects, the Council has a comprehensive approach to watershed protection and restoration activities.
All Council-related projects are planned and implemented with consideration of life history traits and limiting factors for species of interest at a watershed scale.
(2) How does the proposal relate to other restoration efforts within the watershed? Were restoration activities complementary or would there be potential conflicts? Again, the Council employs a comprehensive planning and implementation approach to all protection and restoration activities.
This approach attempts to involve a majority of large landowners and major stakeholders within the watershed, thus ensuring that new projects are devel oped with technical consultation from scientists and managers involved in watershed-wide implementation activities.
In addition, the Council is beginning to track its projects in a GIS. (3) Does the proposal promote the restoration of normative ecological processes within the watershed? 9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 8
The Council's approach, through assessment and monitoring, is to understand the normative ecological processes operating in the watershed, and to promote the restoration of processes when they are outside of the range of historical variation.
One example is the Council's active support of facilitating a return of the river's normative temperature regime through modification in water releases from federal dams in the McKenzie Watershed.
(4) Has the proposal considered the alternatives of passive restoration (e.g., letting the stream or riparian zone restore itself through successional habitat recover y) vs. active restoration (assisting the recover y process through intervention activities such as riparian plantings or instream structure placement)? The Council employs passive restoration activities when this approach will put the ecological system on the proper trajector y for improving watershed conditions.
For example, the Council's comprehensive approach to protection and restoration includes coordinating land acquisitions in those parts of the watershed where the active river has breached bank stabilization projects and moved into historic channels.
Also, the Council is engaging landowners in riparian fencing projects to allow passive restoration of riparian vegetation and processes.
(5) Have any steps been taken within the watershed to correct the source(s) of the problem(s)? The Council is taking steps to address sources of problems in a number of wa ys, including: a) working with County land-use planning processes to reduce residential development pressures on riparian areas; b) encouraging the use of best management practices across land uses and ownerships to reduce delivery of sediments and toxins to the stream; and c) working with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to modify water releases from federal dams.
(6) Does evidence suggest that the proposed activity would actually correct a significant limiting factor to natural production? The Council works closel y with the Spring Chinook and Upper Willamette Bull Trout Working Groups, which are composed of scientists and land managers who provide technical advice to the Council's comprehensive approach to protection and restoration.
For spring chinook salmon, two significant limiting factors have been identified in the McKenzie Watershed: unnatural water temperature regimes, and lack of floodplain and backwater habitats for rearing fish in the lower McKenzie.
The former limiting factor also has been identified for bull trout.
As outlined previousl y, the Council's approach includes endorsing a modification in water releases from federal dams and coordinating acquisition and restoration activities in those areas of the watershed that have been identified as limiting factors due to habitat degradation.
c. Relationships to other projects
Ongoing coordination funding for the McKenzie Focus Watershed Council addresses numerous goals and objectives of the 1994 Fish and Wildlife Program (FWP).
The proposal works toward the following FWP goals: (1) double salmon and steelhead runs without loss of biol ogical diversity, (2) recover and preserve health of native fish injured by hydropower system, and (3) fully mitigate for wildlife losses from hydropower in the Columbia River Basin.
More specifically, this proposal aligns with Measure 7.6A.1, "Ensure human activities affecting production of salmon and steelhead in each sub-basin are coordinated on a comprehensive watershed management basis."
The Council realizes that the watershed assessment, planning, and management approach outlined in Objective 7.6C, Coordinated Habitat Planning, is the best method to ensure effectiveness and success of watershed restoration projects, and proposes to use this objective as a model for its protection and restoration efforts in the McKenzie Watershed.
Based on this recommendation by the FWP, the McKenzie Focus Watershed Coordination project will coordinate with another McKenzie Focus Watershed project proposed for FY00 funding: Watershed Habitat Assessment and Projects Prioritization.
The Council supports a parallel strategy of "protecting the best, then restoring the rest," based on Measures 7.6C.5 and 7.6A.2, and plans to use this approach as a framework in its prioritization process for protection and restoration activities derived from the habitat assessment.
Continuing coordination of the McKenzie Focus Watershed Council complements a number of existing fish and wildlife habitat projects in the Willamette Basin.
The Council plans ongoing coordination with Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife regarding their BPA-sponsored project, Bull Trout Assessment.
The bull trout project is monitoring the distribution, population trends, and habitat use of bull trout populations in the Upper Willamette Basin.
This effort, combined with Council member actions in the McKenzie Watershed, will improve bull trout management and over time increase populations.
Another BPA-funded project, Willamette Basin Acquisition, targets acquisition of critical fish and wildlife
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 9
habitat in the Upper Willamette Basin.
The Council is working with project staff to target properties for acquisition of key habitats in the McKenzie Watershed.
The Council is developing synergistic relationships through these activities with other Willamette Basin watershed councils, state and federal agencies, and landowners, including federal agency actions taken under the aquatic conservation strategy of the Northwest Forest Plan.
These coordinated programs provide a framework for protecting and restoring fish and wildlife throughout the McKenzie Watershed and lay the foundation for the development of recovery plans for species that have been listed or are proposed for federal listing as threatened or endangered.
d. Project history (for ongoing projects)
Summary of major results achieved under Project Nos. 96-70 and 9607000 The McKenzie Watershed Council implements projects based on a sound foundation of cooperation and information.
The Council has demonstrated strong support and active involvement from multiple stakeholders.
The Council provides the primary organizing body for a coordinated approach to resource issues and has support and active involvement from landowners and local, state, and federal agencies.
To date, the Council has been very successful at securing broad-based funding from member organizations.
During the Council's FY98 contract with BPA, key accomplishments in the area of staffing include planning, facilitation, and minutes recording for meetings; forming and staffing committees to guide implementation of monitoring, education, and stewardship projects; and hiring an Education Coordinator.
In the area of project management, staff secured funding from public and private foundations, and additional funding from Council partner organizations and foundations.
The Focus Watershed Council also planned and sponsored a Water Quality and Watershed Health forum, and coordinated planning and implementation for multiple assessment, monitoring, and acquisition projects.
Project planning and implementation was completed in cooperation with the Spring Chinook Working Group and the Habitat Conservation and Acquisition Working Group.
Finally, the coordination staff expanded the Council's public outreach strategy to include newsletters, brochures, media coverage, and videos.
Coordination of these activities by the Watershed Council will improve resource stewardship and protect fish and wildlife habitat through increased collaboration among federal, state, and local government agencies, and landowners, and affected behavior and attitudes arising from expanded knowledge generated by watershed education and outreach activities.
Project reports and technical papers: Since its formation in 1993 the Council has worked to provide a watershed context for implementing actions through planning and assessment efforts.
This work has resulted in a number of watershedsponsored reports including, but not limited to: Department of Environmental Quality.
1998.
The McKenzie Basin Water Quality Report.
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Laboratory Division, Portland, OR. McKenzie Watershed Council.
1998.
McKenzie Watershed Storm Event Monitoring Pilot, 1998: Background and Process.
McKenzie Watershed Council, Springfield, Oregon.
McKenzie Watershed Council.
1997.
Action Plan for Recreation and Human Habitat.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, Oregon.
McKenzie Watershed Council.
1996.
Action Plan for Water Quality and Fish and Wildlife Habitat.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, Oregon.
McKenzie Watershed Council.
1996.
Technical Report for Water Quality and Fish and Wildlife Habitat.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, Oregon.
McKenzie Watershed Council.
1995.
McKenzie Watershed Council Primer: Perspectives on Water Quality, Human Habitat, and Fish and Wildlife Habitat.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, Oregon.
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 10
McKenzie Watershed Council.
1995.
How the McKenzie Watershed Council Got Started.
Lane Council of Governments, Eugene, Oregon.
Years underway and past costs The Northwest Power Planning Council chose the McKenzie as one of its focus watersheds and provided $100,000 in funding for FY 97 through the Bonneville Power Administration, and continued its support of the Council during Fiscal Years 1998 ($115,000) and 1999 ($105,000).
The Council budgeted these funds for continuing operations and implementing projects.
e. Proposal objectives
This proposal requests continuation of Bonneville Power Administration funding for coordination of McKenzie Focus Watershed planning, education, assessment, monitoring, and fish and wildlife protection, restoration, and enhancement projects.
The BPA funding will be used for council administration and coordination; leveraged funds and Council member monies will be used for direct project costs for FY00.
The specific coordination objectives are: 1.
Continue to coordinate McKenzie Watershed project prioritization and planning among federal, state, and local government agencies, and landowners.
2.
Coordinate implementation of watershed assessment, acquisition, restoration, and monitoring projects.
3.
Secure other funding for long-term support of ongoing council operations and project implementation.
4.
Continue watershed education/outreach program for residents and local schools for improvement of fish and wildlife habitat and water quality.
Fulfillment of these objectives, in conjuction with a completed watershed assessment and projects prioritization, will result in a collaborative approach to watershed management in the McKenzie Watershed.
Expected products include: 1) a report describing a coordinated habitat restoration and acquisition process (may be dependent on completed assessment); 2) funding proposals (to BPA and other organizations) describing habitat acquisition and restoration projects (may be dependent on completed assessment); 3) successful leveraging of funds and organizational resources for projects to protect fish and wildlife habitat; 4) reports describing monitoring activities; and 5) educational and public outreach materials.
f. Methods
Objective 1: Continue to coordinate McKenzie Watershed activities including project prioritization and planning among federal, state, and local government agencies, and landowners Tasks:
Continue administration and co mmunicat ion of Council activit ies Participate in the Willamette Basin Restoration Initiative process Participate in Co lumbia Basin technical groups and review processes Participate in periodic Willamette watershed coordinator forum sponsored by Cascade Pacific Resource Conservation and Development Work with interagency/resident task groups to prioritize projects Work with interagency/resident task groups to prioritize projects Produce proposals describing assessment, monitoring, acquisit io n, and enhancement projects - Seek funding for identified high-priority land acquisition sites - Devel op project monitoring plans
Objective 2: Coordinate implementation of watershed assessment, acquisition, restoration, and monitoring projects 9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 11
Tasks:
Develop a co mprehensive watershed assessement and priorit ize fish and wildlife habitat protection and restoration projects (see FY00 BPA proposal for McKenzie Watershed Assessment and Projects Priorit izat ion) Work with the Upper Willamette Spring Chinook Working Group and the Habitat Conservat ion and Acquisit io n Working Group to ident ify habitat restoration, enhancement and acquisit ion projects Implement high priority restoration projects and land acquisit io ns (in cooperation with BPA project 9206800) Coordinate activit ies with the Willamette Basin Restoration Init iat ive Board of Directors Implement project-level mo nitoring for restoration sites and land acquisit io ns Continue to implement water qualit y mo nitoring for base flows, storm-event mo nitoring, synoptic monitoring and macroinvertebrate monitoring Coordinate a spring chinook life history-habitat research project with the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife
Objective 3: Secure other funding for long-term support of ongoing council operations and project implementation Tasks:
Submit proposals to leverage resources and funding from private foundat ions and state and federal agencies Seek increased contributions from Council member organizat ions and watershed residents Produce proposals for assessment, monitoring, acquisit io n, and enhancement projects
Objective 4: Continue watershed education/outreach program for residents and local schools for improvement of fish and wildlife habitat and water quality.
Tasks:
Provide resident/landowner education and outreach through workshops, field visit s, and demonstration projects Sponsor training and sampling opportunit ies for residents interested in bio logical mo nitoring of watershed condit io ns Develop and distribute educational outreach materials, including newsletters and videos, regarding the watershed concept, McKenzie Focus Watershed Council activit ies, and other watershed-related informat ion Continue to provide watershed educat ion and monitoring curricula to local schools.
The Council has a GIS database for tracking project implementation in the basin.
In addition, the Council has developed a water quality monitoring program and is developing strategies for monitoring specific projects based on measurable outcomes.
The Council is coordinating monitoring activities with federal land managers and private landowners (e.g. Weyerhaeuser) in the watershed.
The Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife is tracking populations of spring chinook, bull trout, and other resident fish in the watershed.
Ongoing monitoring is designed to address these questions: 9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 12
1) Is the amount of area in ecol ogically functioning riparian zones increasing? 2) Is the protection and restoration of in-channel and riparian habitats for resident and anadromous fish and wildlife increasing? 3) Is rearing habitat for juvenile spring chinook increasing? 4) What is the status of water quality during base flows and storm events? 5) Have Council actions increased public awareness and implementation of actions necessary to protect fish and wildlife habitat and water quality? Evaluation of watershed status and trends and specific projects will be based on measurable outcomes developed from these questions.
g. Facilities and equipment
The Watershed Council maintains office space and currently has sufficient equipment to complete all of the tasks outlined in this proposal, including desktop publishing equipment necessary for public outreach and educational materials.
The Council also has acquired equipment for monitoring projects including: two ISCO automated water samplers (BPA equipment); turbidity meter; dissolved oxygen meter and kit; eight automated water temperature gauges; two pH meters; two conductivity meters, and sampling equipment for macroinvertebrate monitoring, along with a rich library of reference materials related to watershed monitoring and education.
h. Budget
The Council has demonstrated a significant multiplier effect by using federal appropriations and focus watershed funding to leverage other cash and noncash resources.
The Council has been successful at securing funding from multiple member organizations, including the Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, Eugene Water 
Currently, these local organizations provide an annual contribution of $62,000 for the implementation of the Council's monitoring program, habitat restoration projects, and public outreach activities.
The Council is devel oping a long-term funding plan that includes declining reliance on Bonneville Power Administration funding, increasing support from member organizations, and securing grants through state/federal programs and foundations.
Section 9.
Key personnel John Runyon is the Watershed Coordinator for the McKenzie Watershed Council, and has served in this capacity since March 1997.
Mr. Runyon, who has considerable expertise in watershed assessment and restoration projects, is currently serving on the Board of the Willamette Basin Restoration Initiative.
He will contine to provide coordination between the McKenzie Watershed Council, its committees, agencies and landowners for fish and wildlife habitat and water-quality monitoring projects.
JOHN R. RUNYON McKenzie Focus Watershed Coordinator -- 0.5 FTE EDUCATION M.S., Forest Ecology, Oregon State University, 1992 M.S., Political Science, University of Oregon, Eugene, 1988 B.S., Environmental Biology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 1983 CURRENT POSITION AND DUTIES Coordinator, McKenzie Focus Watershed Council Responsible for overall project management and coordination for the McKenzie Watershed Council.
Duties include project planning, coordinated implementation, and monitoring; proposal preparation; fiscal management; public outreach and communication of council activities.
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 13
EMPLOYMENT HISTORY Watershed Analysis Consultant, Corvallis, OR, 5/95 to present Senior Scientist, Dynamac, Inc., and ManTech Environmental Technology, Inc., research contractor for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Corvallis, OR, 5/95 to 7/96 Resource Monitoring Coordinator, Oregon Department of Forestry, Salem, OR, 7/92 to 5/95 Faculty Research Assistant, Forest Science Department, Oregon State University, 7/90 to 7/92 EXPERTISE Mr. Runyon has expertise in planning and managing complex ecosystem research, assessment and monitoring projects.
Mr. Runyon has extensive experience in the areas of watershed analysis, stream habitat inventories, riparian assessments, and water quality monitoring.
SELECTED RECENT PUBLICATIONS / DOCUMENTS Runyon, J.R. and K. Mattson.
1997.
Stream Habitat, Riparian and Fish Use Survey Summaries for Selected Streams in the Siuslaw, Alsea and Nestucca River Basins, Final Report for the Siuslaw National Forest, Corvallis, OR. Runyon, J.R., C. Andrus, and K. Mattson.
1996.
Mercer / Berry Watershed Analysis, Final Report for the Siuslaw National Forest, Corvallis, OR. Runyon, J.R. 1995.
Monitoring Forest Stream Enhancement Projects.
Oregon Departments of Forestry and Fish and Wildlife, Salem, OR. Runyon, J.R., R.H. Waring, S.N. Goward, and J. Welles.
1994.
Environmental limits on net primary productivity and light-use efficiency across the Oregon transect.
Ecological Applications 4: 226-237.
Runyon, J.R. 1994.
Forest Practices Monitoring Program Strategic Plan.
Oregon Department of Forestry, Salem, OR. RENEE DAVIS-BORN McKenzie Focus Watershed Assistant Coordinator -- 1.0 FTE EDUCATION M.S., Wildlife Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 1997 B.S., Environmental Science, Allegheny College, Meadville, PA, 1993 CURRENT POSITION AND DUTIES Assistant Coordinator, McKenzie Focus Watershed Council Responsible for project coordination and implementation for the McKenzie Watershed Council.
Duties include assist Coordinatior with project planning, coordinated implementation, and fiscal management; conduct water-quality monitoring; grant writing; public outreach and communication of council activities.
EMPLOYMENT HISTORY Editorial Assistant, Proceedings of the Sea-run Cutthroat Trout Symposium, Oregon Chapter of the American Fisheries Societ y, Corvallis, OR, 1996-97.
Graduate Teaching Assistant, Principles of Wildlife Conservation, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 1997.
Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Fisheries and Wildlife, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, 1995-97.
Conservation Pr ojects Coordinator, International Societ y for Endangered Cats, Columbus, OH, 1993-95.
EXPERTISE Mr. Runyon has expertise in planning and managing complex ecosystem research, assessment and monitoring projects.
Mr. Runyon has extensive experience in the areas of watershed analysis, stream habitat inventories, riparian assessments, and water quality monitoring.
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 14
SELECTED DOCUMENTS / PUBLICATIONS Davis-Born, R. 1997.
Influence of movement corridors on enclosed populations of the gray-tailed vole: Do immigrants affect reproduction and dispersal of residents in a patchy environment? M.S. Thesis, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR. Davis, R. 1994.
A feasibility study of reintroducing the Eastern cougar (Felis concolor couguar) to Allegheny National Forest, Pennsyl vania.
Proceedings of the First Annual Eastern Cougar Conference.
Section 10.
Information/technology transfer Information obtained from the McKenzie Focus Watershed Coordination project will be disseminated through a number of mechanisms.
The project will conclude with a year-end report to BPA.
Presentations about projects and activities related to the McKenzie Focus Watershed Council will given at meetings of local public offi cials and community groups, and to decision makers throughout the Willamette Basin during sessions of the Governor's Watershed Enhancement Board (GWEB) and the Willamette Basin Rest oration Initiative, as requested.
Data collected, analyzed, and interpreted as part of monitoring projects may be made available for access via a monitoring database on the Council's web site.
Finally, information will be shared through the Watershed Council's extensive public outreach program, including citizen workshops, press releases, newsletters and fact sheets.
All information generated through McKenzie Focus Watershed coordination and projects will continue to be shared through: 1) Participation in the Willamette Basin Restoration Initiative process; 2) Participation in the Willamette Basin watershed coordination process; 3) Production of monitoring and project reports; 4) Participation in Columbia Basin technical groups and review processes; 5) Presentations and displays at conferences; and 6) Publications in peer-reviewed and other journals and publications.
Congratulations!
9607000 Mckenzie River Focu s Water shed Coor dination Page 15
