Makes various changes regarding restrictions on driver's licenses.
PROPOSED REGULATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND PUBLIC SAFETY
LCB File No. R002-98
February 3, 1998
EXPLANATION - Matter in italics is new; matter in brackets [] is material to be omitted.
AUTHORITY: NRS 481.051 and 483.908.
Section 1.
NAC 483.360 is hereby amended to read as follows:
483.360 1.
The restrictions and compulsory requirements described in subsection 2 may be imposed when licensing persons to drive [:] .
2.
Restriction and Description
Criteria for Restriction
Restriction S - Mail renewal, retest required.
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a person who is out of the state at the time of renewal and is required to take a test for the renewal of his license,but is unable to do so until returning to Nevada.
Restriction T - To and from school only.
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a person between 14 and 18 years of age who is granted a restricted driver's license to drive to and from school.
Restriction U - Motorcycle not to exceed 90 cubic centimeters.
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a driver who performs the skill portion of the test on a motorcycle which has 90 cubic centimeters or less.
The driver may only operate a motorcycle having 90 cubic centimeters or less.
Restriction Z - Moped.
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a driver who performs the skill portion of the test on a moped.
The driver may only operate a moped as defined by NRS 483.088.
Restriction V - No passengers on motorcycle.
This restriction is placed on a class M driver's instruction permit and prohibits the holder from carrying passengers on a motorcycle.
Restriction W - Direct visual supervision by a person 21 years of age or older.
This restriction is placed on a class M driver's instruction permit and requires the holder, while operating a motorcycle, to be under thedirect visual supervision of a person who is licensed to operate a motorcycle and at least21 years of age.
Restriction Y - Ignition Interlock Device
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a person [when]if the department receives a copy of an order of a court of competent jurisdiction that requires that person to install a device in a motor vehicle which he owns or operates pursuant to the provisions of NRS 484.3943 [.]
Restriction 1 - No air brakes.
This restriction is placed on the driver's license of a person who does not pass a knowledge test and a driving skills test in a vehicle which is equipped with air brakes.
Restriction 2 - Intrastate operation of a commercial motor vehicle only.
This restriction is placed on the commercial driver's license of a person who does not meet the requirements set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 391.41 to 391.49, inclusive, or who is under 21 years of age.
Restriction 3 - May transport passengers in vehicles falling within class B or class C only.
This restriction is placed on the class A, commercial driver's license of a person who completes the skills test for a passenger endorsement in a vehicle falling within class B.
Restriction 4 - May transport passengers in vehicles falling within class C only.
This restriction is placed on the class A or class B, commercial driver's license of a person who completes the skills test for a passenger endorsement in a vehicle falling within class C.
Restriction 5 - May tow a vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than 10,000 pounds only when operating a non-commercial vehicle falling within class C.
This restriction is placed on a class B driver's license that contains a J endorsement.
Restriction 6 - May tow a combination of vehicles weighing less than 10,000 pounds and not exceeding 70 feet only when operating a noncommercial vehicle.
This restriction is placed on every commercial driver's license that contains an R endorsement.
Restriction 8 - May tow a forklift only.
This restriction is placed on the class A, commercial driver's license of a person if he completes the driving skills test towing a forklift.
Restriction 9 - May operate only vehicles falling within class A that are tow cars.
This restriction is placed on the class A, commercial driver's license of a person if he completes the driving skills test in a tow car.
3.
As used in this section, "tow car" has the meaning ascribed to it in NRS 484.201.
