[hdr_tsbp-logo.gif] [hdr_tsbp.gif]
Other Board Members present were Vice President Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.; Treasurer Wiki Erickson; Kim Caldwell, R.Ph.; Rosemary Forester Combs; Doyle High, R.Ph.; Oren Peacock, R.Ph.; and Bill Pittman, R.Ph. Wayne McConnell, CPA, was not present.
Staff present were Gay Dodson, R.Ph., Executive Director/Secretary; Carol Fisher, R.Ph., M.P.A., Director of Enforcement; Steve Morse, R.Ph., Director of Professional Services; Cathy Stella, Director of Administrative Services and Licensing; Kerstin Arnold, General Counsel; Julie Hildebrand, Assistant General Counsel; Lori Barta, Assistant General Counsel; Allison Benz, Assistant Director of Enforcement; Joe Lewis, Chief Investigator; and Kay Wilson, Executive Assistant.
Mr. Morse announced that continuing education (CE) credit would be available for attending the entire TSBP Board Meeting.
He advised the audience that any pharmacist who wished to receive CE credit for attending the Board Meeting should sign the log provided at the back of the room.
Certificates would be distributed at the end of the meeting.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that TSBP had purchased new microphones for the Board Room.
Public Hearing
A public hearing was held to receive comments on: * Rules to Implement S.B. 98 Concerning Automated Pharmacy Systems, S.B. 798 Concerning Emergency Medication Kits in Nursing Homes, and S.B. 65 Concerning Telepharmacy Systems New Rule §291.20 Concerning Remote Pharmacy Systems
Amendments to §291.33 and §291.36 Concerning Class A Pharmacies
Amendments to §291.74 Concerning Class C Pharmacies * Rules to Implement H.B. 99 Concerning Internet Pharmacy and the Portion of S.B. 187 Concerning Pharmacist and Pharmacy Profiles
Amendments to §281.21 Concerning Complaints on the Internet Amendments to §291.21 Concerning Notification to Consumers by a Pharmacy.
This proposed rule specifies information to be contained in a pharmacy's profile.
Amendments to §295.11 Concerning Notification to Consumers by Pharmacists.
This proposed rule specifies information to be contained in pharmacists' profiles.
* Amendments to §283.10 and §295.8 Concerning Continuing Education Requirements and Continuing Education Credit for Completion of the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP) Medication Safety Self-Assessment Tool * Rules Concerning Pharmacist Certification
New Rule §295.12 Concerning Pharmacist Certification
Amendments to §295.13 Concerning Drug Therapy Management by a Pharmacist Under Written Protocol of a Physician
Amendments to §295.15 Concerning Administration of Immunizations or Vaccinations by a Pharmacist Under Written Protocol of a Physician
(See Attachment #1.)
The proposed new rules and amendments were published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register.
President Rogers made an opening statement.
(See Attachment #2.)
The following persons presented oral testimony to the Board concerning new rule §291.20 and amendments to §291.33, §291.36, and §291.74:
Name Representing
Gary Cacciatore Cardinal Health/Pyxis Corp.
Jose E. Camacho Texas Association of Community
Health Centers, Inc.
David A. Gonzales Texas Pharmacy Association
Craig A. Walker Health Care Computer Corp.
Tim L. Vordenbaumen, R.Ph.
Texas Coalition of Long Term
Care Pharmacies
(See Attachment #3 for a summary of oral testimony.)
There were no comments concerning: * amendments to §281.21; * amendments to §291.21; * amendments to §295.11; * amendments to §283.10 and §295.8; * new rule §295.12;
* amendments to §295.13; and * amendments to §295.15.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 9:56 a.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 10:13 a.m.
Board Meeting
Announcements Concerning Board Members and Staff
President Rogers congratulated the following Board Members and staff on their appointments by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) to serve on task forces and committees: * Ms. Erickson - Member, NABP Committee on Constitution and Bylaws * Mr. Caldwell - Member, NABP Task Force on Electronic Transmission of Prescriptions * Ms. Dodson - Chair, NABP Task Force on Privacy and Confidentiality
Ms. Dodson announced that Ms. Rogers will serve as the District VI representative on the NABP Resolutions Committee.
Ms. Erickson asked about the status of the resolution introduced by TSBP at the District VI meeting.
The resolution called for an increase in the membership of the Executive Committee of NABP by one and for the new position to be slotted as a seat for a non-pharmacist public member.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the resolution was adopted by District VI and will be presented to the Resolutions Committee at the NABP Annual Meeting in 2002.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that Ms. Stella has been unofficially recognized by the State Office of Risk Management, because they are using the risk management plan developed by Ms. Stella for TSBP as a model plan.
* Ms. Benz introduced Sarah Guevara and Amy Herring, who began employment with TSBP on September 10, 2001, as Enforcement Officers.
* Ms. Rogers welcomed Ms. Guevara and Ms. Herring.
* Ms. Arnold advised the Board that Loris Tullos was married on October 5, 2001, and is now Lori Tullos Barta.
* Ms. Rogers presented a Past President's plaque to Mr. Pittman and commended him for his tenure as TSBP President.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that they had received a handout titled "Tab 36" and that it corresponds to agenda Item I.
Discussion and Approval of Minutes
President Rogers directed the Board's attention to the minutes of the August 7-8, 2001, Board Business Meeting.
(See Attachment #4.)
Mr. Pittman pointed out that on page 6, fourth line from the bottom of the page, "Board" should be changed to "Board's."
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve the minutes of the August 7-8, 2001, Board Business Meeting, as corrected.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Proposal of Rules and Rule Reviews
Rules Concerning Automated Pharmacy Systems, Emergency Medication Kits, and Telepharmacy Services (§291.20, §291.33, §291.36, and §291.74)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to proposed new rule §291.20 and proposed amendments to §291.33, §291.36, and §291.74.
(See Attachment #5.)
He explained that the proposed rules were in response to S.B. 768, 98, and 65, which were passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature, amending the Texas Pharmacy Act to permit a Class A or Class C pharmacy to provide pharmacy services at sites that are not at the same location as the licensed pharmacy.
(See Attachment #5.)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the proposed rules were based on the recommendations of two task forces that were appointed by Past President Bill Pittman.
The task forces presented their recommendations to the Board on August 7, 2001.
After receiving the reports of the two task forces, the Board reviewed and proposed new rule §291.20 and proposed amendments to
§291.33, §291.36, and §291.74.
The proposed rules would establish requirements for Class A (Community) and Class C (Institutional) pharmacies to provide remote pharmacy services through the following three methods: * emergency medication kits (primarily in nursing homes); * automated pharmacy systems (primarily in nursing homes); and * telepharmacy systems in certain health care clinics.
The proposed rules were published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register.
(See Attachment #5.)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to a document that contained the proposed rule language and a summary of the corresponding written comments received.
(See Attachment #6.)
He pointed out that with the exception of the comments presented by Mr. Vordenbaumen and TSBP staff recommendations, all comments received at the public hearing earlier in the day were included in the written comments.
At the request of the Board, Mr. Morse presented a brief overview of the comments concerning new rule §291.20, which included: * Comments from the Texas Coalition of Long Term Care Pharmacists that: + three notarized signatures required on the application in section 291.20(b)(4)(A)(i) were not necessary.
They recommended requiring the notarized signature of the pharmacist-in-charge and possibly the administrator of the nursing home.
The Board concurred with the recommendation and directed staff to make the appropriate changes to §291.20(a)(4)(A)(i), §291.20(b)(4)(A)(i), and §291.20(c)(4)(A)(i). + access to the emergency medication kit is too restrictive.
The Board concurred and directed staff to make appropriate changes.
+ the use of documented treatment protocols as a consideration when determining the drugs to be stocked in an emergency medication kit does not serve a purpose.
The Board concurred and directed staff to make appropriate changes.
+ a list of the names of personnel in the pharmacy's policy and procedure manual is unnecessary.
The Board concurred and directed staff to delete the requirement.
* Comments from the Texas Society of Health-System Pharmacists and Medicine Man Long Term Care Pharmacy supported adoption of the rule without changes.
* Comments from KVM Technologies, Inc., and Pyxis Corporation supported the use of technology represented in the stocking requirements within the rules and affirmed that pharmacist supervision is adequate in conjunction with the use of technology.
* Comments from the Texas Pharmacy Association (TPA) were as follows:
TPA indicated a concern that pharmacists will lose control of the stocking process with the use of this technology.
TPA was concerned that the rules as drafted may allow FDA-approved repackers to stock the remote pharmacy site.
The Board believed the checks and balances offered by technology maintain and even provide additional pharmacist control of the stocking process.
However, the Board directed staff to make changes to clarify that all drugs stocked in the remote pharmacy site must be delivered by the pharmacy.
* the quality assurance program should require more frequent testing than every six months.
The Board concurred but believed the frequency should be determined for each practice setting with a minimum of every six months.
The Board directed staff to make appropriate changes to the rules.
remote pharmacy systems that experience downtime should be required to consider the use of local pharmacy services to meet immediate needs of the patients of the facility.
The Board concurred but believed local pharmacy services were already available to meet immediate needs.
No changes were made.
Comments from State Representative Robert Turner and HealthCare Computer Corporation recommended deletion of the definition of "automated pharmacy system" in the telepharmacy section of the rules.
Since the term is not used in the telepharmacy section of the rules, the Board concurred and directed staff to make appropriate changes.
The Texas Association of Community Health Centers, Inc., commented that the definition of "community" in the telepharmacy section of the rules was too restrictive and might prohibit the use of telepharmacy systems in many federally funded Community and Migrant Health Clinics.
Comments from State Representative Robert Turner supported the definition of "community" as drafted in the proposed rules.
The Board directed staff to monitor the issue and bring additional information to the Board at a future date if warranted.
No changes were made.
Several comments were received concerning the limitation to the number of telepharmacy systems each pharmacist can supervise at one time.
State Representative Robert Turner, HealthCare Computer Corporation, the Texas Pharmacy Association, and one physician commented that language should be included to allow the Board to grant exceptions to the limitation under certain conditions.
The Board concurred and directed staff to make appropriate changes.
HealthCare Computer Corporation commented that the inventory requirements in the telepharmacy system section of the rules needed correction to clarify that a provider pharmacy shall conduct an inventory at each remote site.
The Board concurred and directed staff to make appropriate changes.
(See Attachment #7 for copies of the comments from the aforementioned persons.)
No comments were received concerning §291.33 and §291.36.
Following discussion, Mr. Morse advised the Board that he would make the changes the Board had approved and bring them back to the Board for approval after lunch or the following morning.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 11:46 a.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 1:31 p.m.
Announcements Concerning Board Members and Staff
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a copy of Texas Pharmacy magazine that featured a photo of Mr. High on the cover.
The magazine contained an article that Mr. High authored concerning hypertension.
Ms. Dodson also pointed out that the magazine contained photos of Ms. Erickson and Mr. Pittman taken at the TPA Annual Meeting.
Final Adoption of Rules and Rule Reviews
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the revision of the rules discussed during the morning session would be presented to the Board on Wednesday, November 14.
Rules Concerning Internet Pharmacy and Pharmacist and Pharmacy Profiles (§281.21, §291.21, and §295.11)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to the proposed amendments (See Attachment #8) and explained that: * the proposed amendments to §281.21 would clarify the methods by which the Board will accept complaints, including filing through the Internet on an online form provided for the purpose.
(See Attachment #9.)
* the proposed amendments to §291.21 would require notifications to the public by pharmacies concerning how to file a complaint to include the Board's Internet address and require pharmacies with an Internet presence to post certain information on their website.
These amendments would also implement the pharmacist/pharmacy profile requirements of S.B. 187.
(See Attachment #10.)
* the proposed amendments to §295.11 would require notifications to the public by pharmacists concerning how to file a complaint to include the Board's Internet address and require pharmacists with an Internet presence to post certain information on their website.
These amendments would also implement the pharmacist/pharmacy profile requirements of S.B. 187.
(See Attachment #11.)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that one way licensees could satisfy the requirements of these rules would be to become certified under the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy's Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Site program.
(See Attachment #12.)
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that TSBP currently collects all the information required for the pharmacy profile except: * whether the pharmacy's consumer service areas are accessible to disabled persons; * the type of language translating services that the pharmacy provides for consumers; and * insurance information concerning whether the pharmacy participates in the state Medicaid program.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the TSBP pharmacy license application and renewal forms have been modified to gather this information.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a recommended staff clarification of rule §291.21(a)(2).
The suggested rule language is: A pharmacy that maintains a generally accessible site on the Internet and that is located in Texas or sells or distributes drugs through this site to residents of this state shall post the following information on the pharmacy's initial home page and on the page where a sale of prescription drugs occurs.
After discussion, the Board accepted the clarification but deleted one word.
The clarification now reads: A pharmacy . . . on the Internet that is located . . . .(See Attachment #10.)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to the proposed amendments to §295.11 and advised the Board that TSBP currently has all the information required for the pharmacist profile except any specialty certification held by the pharmacist.
The TSBP pharmacist license application and renewal forms have been modified to gather this information.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the above-referenced proposed amendments were published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register and no comments were received.
Following review of Preambles and Orders to adopt amendments to §281.21, §291.21, and §295.11, the motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for final adoption by Board Order the proposed amendments, with the minor changes suggested by staff.
(See Attachment #13.)
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed unanimously.
The Board discussed whether the parent company website could serve as the notification site for its pharmacies and determined that it could.
Rules Concerning Continuing Education Requirements (§283.10 and §295.8)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to proposed language for amendments to §283.10 and §295.8.
(See Attachment #14.)
He explained that the proposed amendments would: * increase the number of continuing education hours for renewal of a pharmacist license from 24 hours to 30 hours every two years to match the change made during the 77^th Legislative Session; * permit three hours of CE credit for completion of the Institute for Safe Medication Practices' (ISMP) Medication Safety Self Assessment for hospital or community pharmacies; and * increase the number of continuing education hours before a pharmacist with an expired license may obtain a new license.
Mr. Morse pointed out that the Board reviewed these amendments and approved them for proposal at the August 7, 2001, Board Meeting.
They were published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register, and one comment was received from the Texas Society of Health-System Pharmacists in support of increasing the CE requirement from 24 to 30 hours every two years.
(See Attachment #14.)
Mr. Morse pointed out that staff had added language to §283.10 to clarify that January 1, 2002, was the effective date for implementation of requirements that must be met for an individual who was previously licensed in Texas or another state and has not practiced pharmacy for two years preceding his/her application for licensure to be issued a Texas pharmacist license.
Following review of the Preamble and Order, the motion was made by Ms. Erickson to approve for final adoption, by Board Order, amendments to §283.10 and §295.8, with the clarification suggested by staff.
(See Attachment #15.)
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Pharmacist Certification (§295.12, §295.13, and §295.15) Mr. Morse explained that at the August 2001 Board Meeting, the Board approved the proposal of new rule §295.12, and amendments to §295.13 and §295.15 to establish standards for the recognition and approval of pharmacist certification programs.
(See Attachment #16.)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that in 1999, the 76^th Texas Legislature passed S.B. 730, giving TSBP the authority to determine and issue standards for recognition and approval of pharmacist certification programs.
This bill included a stipulation that a pharmacist may not use the designation "board certified" unless the pharmacist has successfully completed a certification program that meets Board standards.
Past President Caldwell appointed a Task Force on Standards for Pharmacist Certification Programs, which met on April 27, and May 31, 2000.
The task force recommendations were presented to the Board at its August 2000 meeting.
The Board accepted the task force report and asked staff to draft amendments to implement the recommendations of the task force.
The Board reviewed the draft rules at the November 2000 meeting and asked staff to make revisions to the draft rules.
The Board reviewed the second draft of the rules at the February 2001 Board Meeting and approved the draft rules for proposal.
A public hearing was held on May 22, 2001.
Following the public hearing, the Board asked staff to withdraw the proposed rules and prepare a third draft of rules, incorporating the comments received at the public hearing.
(See Attachment #16 for a summary of the oral and written comments.)
The Board reviewed and proposed rules at the August 7, 2001, Board Meeting.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to additional comments that were received from Kevin Purcell, Pharm.D., President-Elect of the Texas Society of Health-System Pharmacists (TSHP) and Dana Fitzsimmons, R.Ph., M.B.A., President of TSHP.
(See Attachment #16.)
Mr. Purcell suggested the addition of two certifying entities to the list in the proposed rules.
Mr. Morse pointed out that §295.12(c)(1)(E) gave the Board the authority to approve additional certification programs.
After review of the additional certifying entities, the Board directed staff to include them on the list.
(See Attachment #17.)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to the proposed amendments to §295.13 and §295.15 and explained that the changes would correct citations and revise the rules on confidentiality.
(See Attachment #18.)
Following review of the Preambles and Orders, the motion was made by Mr. Peacock to approve for final adoption, by Board Order, new rule §295.12 with the addition of the two certifying entities and amendments to §295.13 and §295.15, as presented.
(See Attachment #19.)
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed unanimously.
Proposal of Rules and Rule Reviews
Rules Concerning Dispensing Directives and Substitution of Generically Equivalent Drug Products by a Pharmacist (§309.1-§309.8, §291.33, §291.34,
§291.36, § 291.52, §291.54 and §291.55)
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that S.B. 768, passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature, deleted the two-line prescription form and required TSBP to adopt rules by June 1, 2002, to establish a dispensing directive for the communication of substitution instructions from practitioners to pharmacists.
(See Attachment #20.)
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a copy of Chapters 562 and 563 of the Occupations Code and pointed out that Sections 562.003, 563.001, and 563.002 were repealed by S.B. 768.
Section 562.015 titled Dispensing Directive: Compliance with Federal Law was added.
She also directed the Board's attention to the federal requirements in 42 CFR 447.331, which was mentioned in the dispensing directive legislation.
(See Attachment #20.)
Ms. Dodson explained that Section 447.331 sets out Medicaid requirements.
She pointed out that under Section 447.331(c) Certification of brand name drugs, the regulation states that The upper limit for payment for multiple source drugs for which a specified limit has been established under §447.332 does not apply if a physician certifies in his or her own handwriting that a specific brand is medically necessary for a particular recipient.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that a meeting was held on October 16, 2001, with representatives from the appropriate professional associations and licensing agencies to develop recommendations for rules concerning S.B. 768.
Mr. Caldwell served as chair at the meeting.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a list of agencies and organizations that were invited to send representatives to the meeting.
(See Attachment #20.)
She advised the Board that the meeting attendees were furnished copies of the documents the Board had just reviewed.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the recommendations that were developed during the October 16, 2001, meeting.
The recommendations were as follows: * Written Prescriptions
To prevent substitution on all written prescriptions, the practitioner must write the words "brand necessary" or "brand medically necessary" in his/her own handwriting on the face of the prescription.
Recommended prescription form should contain only one signature line and a statement alerting physicians to the proper method to prevent substitution.
* Verbal Prescriptions + Prescriptions for Medicaid patients - To prevent substitution, the practitioner (or designated agent) must: o make the statement "brand necessary"; and
* send a written prescription to the pharmacist within 30 days which meets the substitution notification requirements of a written prescription.
* All other prescriptions - To prevent substitution, the practitioner (or designated agent) must make the statement "brand necessary."
The pharmacist must document on the prescription.
Follow up with a written prescription is not necessary.
* Faxed Prescriptions + Prescriptions for Medicaid patients - To prevent substitution, the faxed prescription must comply with the same requirements as a written prescription (i.e., direct image of the prescription).
* All other prescriptions - To prevent substitution, the practitioner must indicate in some manner their substitution instructions, with "brand necessary" on the face of the prescription being the preferred method.
* Electronic Prescriptions (Computer to Computer) + Prescriptions for Medicaid patients - The practitioner may not prevent substitution until a method is allowed federally.
* All other prescriptions - To prevent substitution, the practitioner must indicate in some manner their substitution instructions, with "brand necessary" on the face of the prescription being the preferred method.
* Comply with HIPAA requirements.
(See Attachment #20.)
Ms. Dodson reviewed the suggested rule language, including:
§309.2 Definitions
* the addition of definitions for generically equivalent, pharmaceutically equivalent, therapeutically equivalent, and practitioner.
§309.3 Generic Substitution
* the circumstances under which a pharmacist may dispense a generically equivalent product, which are if: + the generic product costs the patient less than the prescribed drug product; + the patient does not refuse the substitution; and + the practitioner does not certify on the prescription form that a specific prescribed brand is medically necessary as specified in a dispensing directive.
* if the practitioner has prohibited substitution through a dispensing directive, a pharmacist shall not substitute a generically equivalent drug product unless the pharmacist obtains verbal or written authorization from the practitioner and notes such authorization on the original prescription drug order.
* a written prescription drug order issued in Texas shall: + be on a form containing a single signature line for the practitioner; and + contain the following reminder statement on the face of the prescription: A generically equivalent drug product will be dispensed unless the practitioner hand writes the words "Brand Necessary" or "Brand Medically Necessary" on the face of the prescription.
Ms. Dodson reminded the Board that the two-line prescription form may be used after June 1, 2002, but signing on the dispense as written line will not prohibit substitution.
* the prescription format referenced above does not apply to the following types of prescription drug orders: + prescription drug orders issued by a practitioner in a state other than Texas; + prescriptions for dangerous drugs issued by a practitioner in the United Mexican States or the Dominion of Canada; or + prescription drug orders issued by practitioners practicing in a federal facility provided they are acting in the scope of their employment.
* a dispensing directive shall be in a format that protects confidentiality and complies with federal and state laws and rules with regard to formatting and security requirements.
* no changes were made to the rules concerning substitution of dosage form.
* prescriptions issued prior to June 1, 2002, on the two-line form shall follow the substitution instructions on the form.
* practitioners may prohibit substitution for a narrow therapeutic index drug through a dispensing directive.
§309.4-§309.8
Citations were corrected to agree with the Texas Pharmacy Act.
§309.7 Dispensing Responsibilities
Clarification was added to state that pharmacists may only substitute products that are rated therapeutically equivalent in the Orange Book and have an "A" rating.
(See Attachment #21.)
§291.33, §291.34, and §291.36 Concerning Class A Pharmacies
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the recommended changes to §291.33, §291.34, and §291.36 were essentially the same changes as reviewed above.
(See Attachment #22.)
§291.52, §291.54, and §291.55 Concerning Nuclear Pharmacies
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the recommended changes to §291.52, §291.54, and §291.55 were essentially the same changes as reviewed above.
(See Attachment #23.)
Following discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for proposal, the repeal and publication of new rules §§ 309.1-309.8, and amendments to §291.33, §291.34, and §291.36, and §291.52, §291.54, and §291.55, with changes.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Rule Reviews In accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, the Board reviewed the following: * Chapter 291 (§§291.51-291.55) concerning nuclear pharmacies (Class B) (See Attachment #24); * Chapter 305 (§§305.1-305.2) concerning educational requirements (See Attachment #25); and * Chapter 309 (§§309.1-309.8) concerning generic substitution (See Attachment #26).
The motion was made by Mr. High to approve for proposal, the review of Chapters 291, 305, and 309, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Reports and Discussions
Current Financial Update * Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the FY2001 Financial Statement (unaudited) for the period September 1, 2000, through August 31, 2001.
(See Attachment #27.)
She reported that TSBP ended fiscal year 2001 with 3.52%, or $98,290, of its budget remaining.
The primary source of the unexpended balance was salaries, due to a turnover rate of 13.79% during FY01.
She also pointed out that there was a remaining balance for Board and staff travel because of travel money saved due to lapsed field positions.
Ms. Dodson explained that the unexpended funds are transferred to the agency's fund balance, but the funds are not available for the agency to use during this biennium.
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve the TSBP FY01 Operating Budget as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed unanimously.
* Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the FY2002 Financial Statement for the month of September 2001.
(See Attachment #27.)
She pointed out that after one month of the fiscal year, there should be approximately 91% of the budget remaining, and TSBP had 89% remaining.
The slight deviation was due to expenditures that occur during the first quarter of the fiscal year only.
* Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the last item on the Financial Statement, which was $125,216 for Contingency Rider from S.B. 98.
She explained that this allocation was in response to a fiscal note submitted by TSBP asking for funds to hire one field compliance officer to conduct inspections of the remote facilities that would use an automated pharmacy system.
TSBP received the funding but was not given an additional position.
The agency certified to the Comptroller that TSBP had raised fees to cover this additional appropriation.
President Pittman sent a letter to the Legislative Budget Board and Governor's Budget Office requesting that TSBP's full-time employee cap be raised from 47 to 48.
She reported that as of the current date, there had been no response.
Mr. Pittman and Mr. Caldwell asked that staff provide them with a list of the Members of the Legislative Budget Board.
* Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the Board Member Travel Budget for FY2002.
(See Attachment #27.)
She explained that out-of-state travel for FY2002 is capped at $10,378.
At the August 2001 Board Meeting, the Board allocated $8,536 for Board out-of-state travel and $1,842 for staff out-of-state travel.
In-state travel during FY2002 is capped by budget limitations only.
* Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to information concerning H.B. 609.
(See Attachment #27.)
She explained that H.B. 609 was passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature, and requires all agencies to comply with the Texas Internal Auditing Act.
Every state agency is now required to appoint an internal auditor by January 1, 2002.
The internal auditor is charged with:
Obtaining an overall understanding of agency operations;
Developing a risk assessment methodology to evaluate any risk associated with various aspects of the agency operations;
Proposing an audit plan, based on the results of the risk assessment process;
Conducting identified audits;
Preparing audit reports; and
Continuing to update the risk assessment in subsequent years, and identifying future audits to be conducted.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that H.B. 609 requires that the Board appoint an internal auditor and designate a Chief Audit Executive from the staff who will be responsible for coordinating the audit and complying with the Act.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that four proposals had been received from firms that are interested in serving as TSBP's audit firm.
She asked for the Board's guidance on the procedure to follow in choosing an internal auditor.
The motion was made by Mr. Pittman to appoint the Executive Committee to choose an internal auditor and to appoint Ms. Stella as the Chief Audit Executive.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 3:05 p.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 3:20 p.m.
Legislation Passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature That has an Impact on TSBP or the Practice of Pharmacy
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a chart titled Legislation Passed by the 77^th Legislature that Requires Action by the Board of Pharmacy.
(See Attachment #28.)
The chart included the bill number, action, deadline, Board Meeting(s), and status of each bill that required action by TSBP.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that TSBP is currently on schedule with all required action.
Technician Certification/Registration
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that as of October 19, 2001, staff had reviewed 286 petitions for exemption from pharmacy technician certification.
(See Attachment #29.)
She reported that 85% of petitions received from pharmacy technicians employed more than ten years and 5% of petitions received from pharmacy technicians in rural areas had been granted.
The overall result was that 69% of the total number of petitions had been granted and 31% denied.
Ms. Dodson pointed out that pharmacy technicians who have been employed more than ten years must apply for exemptions by December 31, 2001.
The three rural area pharmacy technicians who have received exemptions are nurses.
She advised the Board that the technician-in-training status had been extended in situations where staff felt a real hardship existed.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a sample of a letter used to notify a pharmacy technician that exemption had been denied.
(See Attachment #30.)
Mr. Peacock asked whether a list of persons granted exemptions was available.
Mr. Morse replied that it was not at the time of the meeting, but he could make arrangements to furnish Mr. Peacock a list.
Mr. Morse pointed out that if a pharmacy technician who has been granted an exemption moves to another pharmacy, the exemption is canceled.
* Ms. Dodson advised the Board that after consultation with President Rogers, she sent letters to the three Texas associations asking for names of two pharmacists and one pharmacy technician to serve on the Task Force on Legislation Concerning Technician Registration.
Ms. Erickson and Mr. High advised President Rogers that they would like to serve on the task force.
Status Report on Health Professions Council
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the Health Professions Council agencies have been working with the other agencies located in the Hobby Building to raise the security level in the complex.
One possibility is limiting visitors' access to the building to the front doors only.
TSBP employees have had training on opening mail, and general discussions have been held concerning overall building security.
Pharmacies Under Confidential Orders
Ms. Arnold directed the Board's attention to the current language in the Texas Pharmacy Act dealing with confidentiality of Board Orders.
(See Attachment #31.)
She explained that the current procedure for dealing with a pharmacist who owns his/her pharmacy and who is being placed under a confidential Board Order is to also make the Board Order on the pharmacy confidential.
Mr. Peacock pointed out that if a pharmacy is owned by an individual, and the owner is placed under a confidential Board Order, any corresponding Board Order against the pharmacy is also confidential.
However, if a pharmacist who works for a chain pharmacy is placed under a confidential Board Order, any corresponding Board Order against the chain is not confidential.
Ms. Dodson explained that the purpose of making the Board Orders against the pharmacies owned by individuals confidential was to protect the identity of the pharmacist who was placed under the confidential Board Order.
Following discussion, the Board asked staff to change the policy concerning confidential Board Orders so that, when possible, all licensees would be treated equally.
Pharmacy Licenses * Ms. Arnold directed the Board's attention to the Texas Pharmacy Act §565.002 and explained that TSBP can discipline a pharmacy license when the license holder fails to engage in the business of pharmacy.
(See Attachment #32.)
However, she pointed out that there is no specified time period within which the license holder is required to begin operating the pharmacy.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that there have been occasions where individuals have obtained pharmacy licenses and never actually opened the pharmacies.
Following discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Pittman for staff to draft rule language for consideration at the February 2002 Board Meeting to require that a pharmacy must be opened within six months of the date of the initial application.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
* Ms. Fisher directed the Board's attention to a summary of New Pharmacy License Requirements of 47 states.
(See Attachment #33.)
She advised the Board that Katie Musil, a pharmacy student intern, had started polling other states concerning pharmacy license requirements, but was not able to finish the project during her internship.
The project was completed by Carol Willess.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that some of the problems staff had seen within the last six months concerning new pharmacy licensing included: + persons obtaining pharmacy licenses for the purpose of diversion; + fraud; and + insufficient business plan/funding.
(See Attachment #33.)
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that 27 of the 47 states surveyed, including Florida and New York, require inspection of pharmacy sites prior to issuing a pharmacy license.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that for corporations or owners who already have a pharmacy license in Texas, staff recommended not inspecting prior to opening.
Ms. Fisher reiterated that the recommendation would apply only to individuals or entities that do not currently own a pharmacy in Texas.
She reviewed staff recommendations for the Board, which included: * require photo, copy of social security card, and birth certificate for non-pharmacist owners; * require applicant to attach Certificate of Authority (if out-of-state corporation), Articles of Incorporation (if corporation), current Texas Franchise Tax Certificate of Good Standing, and copy of the approved application from primary wholesaler; * add questions to the application to obtain federal tax ID number, proposed opening date, proposed hours of operation, description of business services that will be offered and reason for business, and whether the business is self-insured or has malpractice insurance; * require on-site interview at Austin office for non-pharmacist owners; and * pre-licensing on-site inspection.
(See Attachment #33.)
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that staff also suggested seeking statutory authority for TSBP to require proof of financial responsibility of pharmacy applicants and authority to perform federal criminal background checks.
Currently, the California Board has the authority for these requirements.
Ms. Dodson explained that unless a state agency has statutory authority to run federal background checks, the Department of Public Safety will not run federal background checks.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the current TSBP rules concerning New Pharmacy License Application Procedures.
(See Attachment #33.)
Ms. Dodson also advised the Board that there is currently nothing in the TSBP rules to prohibit a pharmacy from being located in a personal residence.
The motion was made by Ms. Combs for staff to develop suggested rule language concerning new pharmacy license applications for the Board's consideration at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed unanimously.
Electronic Renewal of Pharmacist and Pharmacy Licenses
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a copy of the first screen of the Texas Online web page and the screen that allows an individual to renew his/her Texas Driver License online.
(See Attachment #34.)
She reported that TSBP has signed a contract with KPMG to have the pharmacist and pharmacy renewal process available on the Internet with an approximate implementation date for pharmacist renewals of March 2002.
The e-renewal process will enable all licensees to renew their licenses and pay by credit card and, when developed, by electronic check.
An instant confirmation will be issued to the licensee, and TSBP will receive the information electronically each night.
She advised the Board that TSBP will continue mailing out a hard copy license renewal to the licensee.
Ms. Stella explained that with the addition of electronic renewal, a licensee will have four options for license renewal: in person at the TSBP office; via postal service to the State Treasury; via postal service to the TSBP office; and electronically.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that KPMG projected that approximately 20% of licensees would be using the electronic renewal system by the third or fourth year.
She pointed out that as use of the system increases, TSBP would begin to see efficiencies in its workload.
There will also be benefits for the licensee, including instant confirmation of the license renewal.
Mr. Peacock asked if batch renewals would be available for pharmacies.
Ms. Stella responded that the issue of batch renewals was being researched.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that the fee for renewing online will be $8 for pharmacists and $11 for pharmacies when the pharmacist or pharmacy uses the electronic renewal system.
This includes a two percent fee for using a credit card.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that S.B. 187, passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature, created the Texas Online Authority and requires specific agencies to create profiles of their license holders and have these profiles available to the public on the Internet.
The bill requires participating agencies to charge a subscription fee and/or a profile system fee to its license holders, not to exceed $5 annually or $10 biennially.
The fees have not been set, but the bill requires the Authority to set the profile system fee no later than January 1, 2002, and requires the affected agencies to begin collecting the fee on January 1, 2002.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that TSBP will absorb the fees rather than increase license fees if possible.
However, if the TSBP does have to raise fees, the rulemaking process will take approximately six months.
Once the fee is in place, the charge to licensees for using the electronic renewal system will be dropped and all licensees will be paying a portion of the expense through the subscription fee.
Final Adoption of Rules
Rules Concerning Automated Pharmacy Systems (§291.20), Class A Pharmacies (§291.33 and §291.36), and Class C Pharmacies (§291.74) * Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to a Board Order and Preamble for new rule §291.20 concerning automated pharmacy systems.
(See Attachment #35.)
He reviewed the changes staff had made to the proposed rules at the Board's direction, following the public hearing on November 13, 2001, and consideration of written comments, which included:
Remote pharmacy services using automated pharmacy systems
* changing §291.20(a)(4)(A)(i) to require the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive officer) on applications to provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
* adding §291.20(a)(4)(F)(iii) to require that all drugs to be stocked in the automated pharmacy system shall be delivered to the remote site by the provider pharmacy.
Remote pharmacy services using emergency medication kits
* changing §291.20(b)(4)(A)(i) to require the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive officer) on applications to provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
* changing §291.20(b)(4)(C)(ii) to limit access to the emergency medication kit to pharmacists and licensed healthcare personnel employed by the facility.
* changing §291.20(b)(4)(E)(ii) to stipulate that the contents of the emergency medical kit will be based on clinical criteria applicable to each facility's demographics; the facility's census; and the facility's healthcare environment.
* adding §291.20(b)(4)(F)(iii) to require that all drugs to be stocked in the emergency medication kit shall be delivered to the remote site by the provider pharmacy.
* removing the requirement for the policy and procedure manual to include a list of personnel who have access to the emergency medication kit in §291.20(b)(4)(G)(i)(I).
Remote pharmacy services using telepharmacy systems * deleting the definition of automated pharmacy system in §291.20(c)(2)(A). * changing §291.20(c)(3)(C) by adding an exception to the supervision limit may be granted by the board in situations where the provider has documented a need for a pharmacist to supervise more remote sites and has demonstrated that appropriate safeguards are in place to assure proper supervision of the remote site.
After discussion, staff was directed to change the language to . . . supervise additional remote . . . and . . . supervision of each remote site. * changing §291.20(c)(4)(A)(i) to require the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive officer) on applications to provide remote pharmacy services for telepharmacy systems.
* changing §291.20(c)(4)(E)(ii) to require that the pharmacy's quality assurance program includes routine testing of the operation of the telepharmacy system at a minimum of every six months and whenever any upgrade or change is made.
* correcting §291.20(c)(5)(D)(ii) to require a provider pharmacy to conduct an inventory at each site.
(See Attachment #35 for a copy of revised rules relating to remote pharmacy services.)
* Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to an Order and Preamble to adopt amendments to §291.33 and §291.36 concerning Class A Pharmacies.
(See Attachment #36.)
He advised the Board that the proposed amendments were being presented for adoption as published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register.
* Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to an Order and Preamble to adopt amendments to §291.74 concerning Class C Pharmacies.
(See Attachment #37.)
He advised the Board that the proposed amendments were being presented for adoption as published in the September 14, 2001, issue of the Texas Register.
Following review of the Orders and Preambles, the motion was made by Mr. Peacock to adopt new rule §291.20 and amendments to §291.33, §291.36, and §291.74, with the changes presented by Mr. Morse.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Reports and Discussions
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that staff was not presenting rule language for consideration concerning central fill and central processing pharmacies because the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) had proposed rules to expand the definition of dispense to include the activities of central fill pharmacies.
The DEA's rules were still within the comment period.
(See Attachment #38.)
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that in response to the DEA's rules, TSBP will need to consider amendments to rules to address central fill and central processing facilities.
She advised the Board that HEB is the only central fill facility currently operating in Texas, and all of the pharmacies being serviced are also owned by HEB.
However, this will probably not be the case with some central fill facilities in the future, and the rules will need to be amended to allow a central fill facility to service pharmacies under separate ownership.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that some wholesalers are currently looking at providing central fill services.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board to the current definition of pharmacy in the Texas Pharmacy Act.
(See Attachment #38.)
The current definition of pharmacy is a facility at which a prescription drug or medication order is received, processed, or dispensed.
The Board discussed the operations of call centers and whether a call center could be licensed as a pharmacy.
The Board discussed which class of pharmacy would encompass call centers.
Ms. Dodson suggested that call center rules be a subset of existing rules.
The Board asked staff to draft suggested rule language for consideration by the Board at its February 2002 Board Meeting.
Pharmacist-in-Charge Requirements
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that Mr. Peacock had asked that the Board consider allowing a pharmacist-in-charge (PIC) to serve as the PIC of more than one pharmacy when a PIC is needed at a second pharmacy on an interim basis.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the current rules concerning the PIC.
(See Attachment #39.)
Mr. Peacock explained that a new PIC is not always immediately available to fill a vacancy, and pharmacies are then in violation of TSBP rules due to hardship rather than intentional violation of the rules.
Following discussion, the Board asked staff to bring amendments to the rules to the Board for consideration at the February 2002 meeting to allow a pharmacist to serve as PIC of more than one pharmacy for up to 90 days.
Ms. Rogers recessed the meeting at 5:01 p.m.
November 14, 2001
President Donna B. Rogers, M.S., R.Ph., called the meeting to order at 9:09 a.m.
Other Board Members present were Vice President Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.; Treasurer Wiki Erickson; Kim Caldwell, R.Ph.; Rosemary Forester Combs; Doyle High, R.Ph.; Oren Peacock, R.Ph.; and Bill Pittman, R.Ph. Wayne McConnell, CPA, was not present.
Staff present were Gay Dodson, R.Ph., Executive Director/Secretary; Carol Fisher, R.Ph., M.P.A., Director of Enforcement; Steve Morse, R.Ph., Director of Professional Services; Cathy Stella, Director of Administrative Services and Licensing; Kerstin Arnold, General Counsel; Julie Hildebrand, Assistant General Counsel; Lori Barta, Assistant General Counsel; Allison Benz, Assistant Director of Enforcement; Joe Lewis, Chief Investigator; and Kay Wilson, Executive Assistant.
Reports and Discussions Technician Certification/Registration * Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a map produced by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board, showing that as of September 2001, there were 20,357 Certified Pharmacy Technicians in Texas.
(See Attachment #40.)
* Mr. Lewis presented information to the Board concerning drug diversion by pharmacy staff members during the last two years.
(See Attachment #41.)
Of the documented cases of diversion during the two-year period, 50.11% of the diversion was committed by pharmacy technicians; 16.59% was diverted by pharmacists; and 18.56% was diverted by other staff members.
Mr. Lewis advised the Board that during September and October of FY2002, TSBP received reports of 328,850 dosage units being diverted.
Of the 328,850 units, 311,040 dosage units, or 98.36%, were diverted by pharmacy technicians.
The Board asked Mr. Lewis to present a similar report at future Board meetings.
* Ms. Dodson advised the Board that current TSBP rules allow a Class A pharmacy to compound for a physician's office use and that some pharmacies are using these rules to manufacture large volumes of products for doctors' offices.
She directed the Board's attention to the definition of manufacture in the Health and Safety Code and pointed out that the definition excludes compounding that is done within the practice of pharmacy and pursuant to a prescription from a practitioner for a patient.
(See Attachment #42.)
Ms. Dodson pointed out that this definition specifies that compounding must be pursuant to a prescription for a patient and, therefore, does not allow compounding for a doctor's office.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the definition of compounding in the Texas Pharmacy Act.
(See Attachment #42.)
Ms. Dodson advised the Board the staff was suggesting that the language that allows compounding for doctors' offices be removed from TSBP's rules.
She explained that staff believed some pharmacists are using TSBP's current rule to avoid being licensed as a manufacturer.
Following discussion, the Board asked staff to prepare rule language for consideration by the Board at its February 2002 Board Meeting.
Ms. Rogers asked staff to also provide the Board with more details on problems concerning compounding versus manufacturing in Texas.
Ms. Erickson asked if pharmacies that endorse alternative medicines were involved.
Ms. Dodson replied that most compounding of alternative medicines is done pursuant to a prescription.
Peer Assistance Program * Ms. Benz directed the Board's attention to the Texas Pharmacy Association PRN budget for September 1, 2000, through July 31, 2001.
(See Attachment #43.)
She advised the Board that Mr. Bob Hull, Director of the PRN program, was in the audience if the Board would like to ask questions.
In response to questions concerning outside funding, Mr. Hull advised the Board that PRN had secured $11,000 in outside funding during FY2001 and anticipates being able to raise $15,000 during FY2002.
Mr. Hull advised the Board that the PRN FY2002 budget included airfare for Ms. Arnold and one Board Member to attend the Utah school.
Mr. High asked Mr. Hull to include the number of participants in the program in his report at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
Mr. Hull advised the Board that, as of August 31, 2001, there were 64 participants who were not under TSBP Board Orders and 73 participants who were under TSBP Board Orders.
Ms. Benz stated that there were 85 impaired pharmacists under TSBP Board Orders on August 31, 2001, which includes out-of-state impaired pharmacists who are not required to participate in the PRN program.
In response to a question from Mr. Peacock concerning recidivism rate, Ms. Benz replied that the completion rate for one year was 85% and the three-year recidivism rate for relapses was 13%.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that Mr. McConnell had been serving as TSBP's representative to the PRN program.
Since Mr. McConnell's term expired August 31, 2001, she asked if one of the Board Members would like to serve as TSBP's representative to the PRN.
Ms. Rogers volunteered.
Mr. Hull advised the Board that the next Advisory Council meeting would be on February 22, 2002.
Ms. Rogers thanked Mr. Hull for his input.
* Ms. Benz advised the Board that at the August 2001 Board Meeting the
Board directed staff to prepare a request for proposal to obtain information from various vendors about drug screening services that are available.
She reported that the request for information would be going out soon.
Strategic Plan
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a summary of comments received from six external sources concerning the TSBP Strategic Plan.
(See Attachment #44.)
She pointed out that most of the issues mentioned in the comments were already covered in the current plan.
The Board discussed the comments received as well as issues raised by staff.
The comments and staff suggestions were on varied issues, including pharmacies' preparedness to deal with bioterrorism, generic substitution, replacing pharmaceutical care with patient care, responsibilities of the pharmacist-in-charge, and pharmacies increased dependence on electronics.
However, they were unsure about a recommendation made by the National Association of Chain Drug Stores (NACDS) and asked Ms. Dodson to contact NACDS for clarification.
Mr. Peacock asked staff to remove and/or update outdated references in the Strategic Plan.
Ms. Rogers directed the Board's attention to the current issue statements and asked the Board Members to volunteer to work with staff on developing the issue statements for the Strategic Plan.
(See Attachment #44.)
The following individuals will work on the issue statements: * Policy Issue #1 - The Changing Focus of Pharmacy - Dr. Anderson and Ms. Dodson
* Policy Issue #2 - Increased Use of Technology in the Practice of a Pharmacy - Mr. Caldwell, Mr. Peacock, and Mr. Morse
* Policy Issue #3 - Pharmacy Personnel and Working Conditions - Ms. Rogers and Ms. Benz
* Policy Issue #4 - To Maintain the Agency's Leadership Position in Pharmacy Practice Regulation and Establish a Key Leadership Position for Addressing Public Needs - Ms. Combs, Mr. High, and Ms. Stella
The Board discussed including the following issues in the issue statements: * bioterrorism in Issues 1 and 4; * consumer education in Issue 4; * partnerships with other agencies in issue 4; * statutory change concerning physical assessment; and * encouragement and assistance to the Texas A
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that they would receive drafts of the four issue statements for consideration at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
Mr. Peacock asked that staff consider preparing an executive overview of the Strategic Plan similar to the executive overview of the last TSBP Annual Report.
Ms. Dodson responded that staff will prepare an executive overview of the Strategic Plan.
Mr. Peacock asked Ms. Dodson to send a letter to Dean Lokhandwala concerning his resignation as Dean of the College of Pharmacy of the University of Houston (UH).
Ms. Dodson pointed out that Dr. Lokhandwala will return to teaching and research at UH.
Possible Statutory Changes
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that staff would like to ask for authority to perform federal background checks on applicants for licensure.
The Board was in favor of this request.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that she will add this issue to the issues that were requested, but not approved, during the last legislative session and present them to the Board for consideration at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 10:09 a.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 10:23 a.m.
Report on Status of Active/Pending Complaints
Notebooks containing Report on Status of Active/Pending Complaints (Report), as well as 40 Agreed Board Orders, 14 of which involved impaired pharmacists, were distributed to Board Members.
(See Attachment #45 for complaint status report.)
Ms. Fisher pointed out that the Report included annual comparisons for FY97 through FY01.
She advised the Board that there was a 7% increase from FY2000 to FY2001 in the number of complaints received, and that staff was able to close 10% more complaints during the same period.
Staff did not meet the goal of averaging 225 days for resolution of complaints during FY01.
However, there are less than 1,000 complaints currently in the backlog.
In response to questions from the Board concerning complaint resolution, Ms. Dodson replied that staff is getting complaints resolved faster than in the past and will continue to work on reducing the backlog.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that there have also been some three-day informal conferences, and this has helped reduce the backlog.
Consideration of and Action on Proposed Agreed Board Orders
Ms. Barta and Ms. Hildebrand reviewed the alleged violations as well as the recommended sanctions for each of the Agreed Board Orders (ABOs).
1.
J 
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed 9-0-0.
2.
South Post Oak Pharmacy, Inc.
ABO #K-01-009
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
3.
Uyen Phi Le ABO #K-01-008-A
4.
Canin Pharmacy ABO #K-01-008-B
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
5.
Hermann Hospital ABO #H-00-011
Dr. Anderson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
6.
John Frederick Wilhelm ABO #K-00-043-A
7.
Arlington Pharmacy-North ABO #K-00-043-B
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed 8-0-1.
Dr. Anderson abstained.
8.
Richard Farmand Arsto ABO #K-01-007-A
9.
Broadway Pharmacy ABO #K-01-007-B
Dr. Anderson made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
* Ernest T. Sanchez, Jr.
ABO #H-01-004-A * Super Value Drugs, Inc.
ABO #H-01-004-B
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed 8-0-1.
Dr. Anderson abstained.
* Shanna Dale Chapman ABO #H-00-035-A * Walgreen Co. #3600 ABO #H-00-035-B
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
* Charles E. Schilz ABO #K-01-025-A * Endoscopy Center of El Paso ABO #K-01-025-B
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed 9-0-0.
* Le Dinh Can ABO #L-01-021
Mr. Pittman made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed 9-0-0.
* Kristine Ann Roberson ABO #J-00-012 * D. Rebecca Saenz-Vargas ABO #H-01-009-A * Walgreen Co. #1624 ABO #H-01-009-B
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
* Walgreen Co. #3138 ABO #B-00-046
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
* Peter Paul Richardson ABO #L-01-009
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Pittman and passed 9-0-0.
* Germon Earl Hill ABO #L-01-014
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 9-0-0.
* Isaac Marshall Fuller ABO #K-01-014 * James Elliot Jones ABO #K-01-015
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed 8-0-1.
Dr. Anderson abstained.
* Daniel Eugene Hordge ABO #L-01-003
Mr. Pittman made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed 9-0-0.
* T. David Tichenor, Jr.
ABO #R-01-003
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed 8-0-1.
Mr. Pittman abstained.
Executive Session to Consider Confidential Agreed Board Orders
Mr. Peacock made a motion that the Board go into Executive Session to consider Agreed Board Orders involving impaired pharmacists under the authority of the Texas Pharmacy Act, Section 564.002.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
President Rogers declared the Board in Executive Session at 11:15 a.m.
At 11:30 a.m.
President Rogers announced that the Board would resume the meeting in Open Session.
President Rogers announced that no action was taken and no decisions were made during Executive Session.
Mr. Peacock made motions to approve the following confidential orders:
1.
ABO #M-01-009
2.
ABO #K-01-035
3.
ABO #K-01-021
4.
ABO #L-01-010
5.
ABO #L-01-004
6.
ABO #L-01-020
7.
ABO #L-02-001
8.
ABO #J-01-010
9.
ABO #K-01-011
10.
ABO #K-01-010
11.
ABO #K-01-030
12.
ABO #L-01-008
13.
ABO #K-01-031
14.
ABO #G-00-016
The motions were seconded by Mr. High and passed as follows:
1.
8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
2.
Unanimously
3.
Unanimously
4.
Unanimously
5.
7-0-2.
Dr. Anderson and Mr. Pittman abstained.
6.
Unanimously
7.
Unanimously
8.
8-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
9.
8-0-1.
Mr. Caldwell abstained.
10.
8-0-1.
Dr. Anderson abstained.
* 8-0-1.
Ms. Rogers abstained.
* 8-0-1.
Mr. Caldwell abstained.
* 8-0-1.
Ms. Rogers abstained.
* 8-0-1.
Ms. Rogers abstained.
Items to be Placed on Agenda for February 2002 Board Meeting * Mr. Peacock and Dr. Anderson asked that discussion of continuing education timing be placed on the agenda.
* The Board discussed a letter received from Marian W. Brown and asked staff to develop language for amendments to rules concerning waiving licensure fees for individuals who are at least 72 years old and have been licensed a total of 50 years, when all 50 years were not in Texas.
(See Attachment #46.)
* The Board discussed a letter received from Franklin Z. Wickham of fzWickham consultants.
Mr. Wickham asked to make a 30-minute presentation on biotech drug products at a future board meeting.
The Board asked staff to meet with Mr. Wickham.
(See Attachment #47.)
* Ms. Erickson asked that the Board discuss the process or procedure used for electing Board officers at the February Board Meeting.
She asked staff to ask other state boards how their officers are elected.
Announcements Concerning Board Members and Staff * Ms. Rogers advised the Board that she was working on a President's column for the TSBP Newsletter on bioterrorism.
* Mr. Pittman thanked the Board Members for taking him to lunch on Tuesday and told them that he was proud to have served with them.
Recent Conferences and Events
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that TSBP's resolution concerning the addition of a consumer member to the NABP Board was passed by District VI and will be presented at the NABP Annual Meeting next year by District VI.
Upcoming Conferences and Events
The Board reviewed upcoming conferences and events.
Ms. Dodson pointed out that the dates for the informal conferences for December had been changed to December 11-12, 2001, and the dates for the January informal conferences had been changed to January 15-17, 2002.
Mr. High reminded the Board that this meeting was the three-year anniversary of the death of Roberta High, R.Ph.
He thanked the Board Members for their support and friendship.
The following individuals volunteered to attend informal conferences: * February 2002 - Mr. High * April 2002 - Ms. Erickson
President Rogers adjourned the meeting at 11:50 a.m.
APPROVED:
_____________________________________
Donna B. Rogers, R.Ph.
President
___________________________________
Gay Dodson, R.Ph.
Executive Director/Secretary
February 5, 2002
new_pills.gif (14766 bytes)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Copyright © 2002 Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
All rights reserved.
Home - Privacy Policy - Questions/Comments - Site Map
