Environment Canada Signature Bar Canada Wordmark Skip header menu Natural Areas Canada is home to a great diversity of natural areas, which are valued by Canadians for aesthetic, economic, and ecological reasons.
This section looks at the nature and importance of natural areas in our country.
Q3.92 What do we mean by 'natural areas'? 'Natural areas' is a general term used to refer to a wide range of ecosystems that have not been radically transformed by humans.
It would thus include everything from remote wilderness to a local wetland, but not a wheat field or an industrial park.
In the latter two cases the original ecosystem has been transformed by human action to such an extent as to be unrecognizable; the composition of species, the food web, and other ecological processes have all been substantially altered.
Q3.93 What kind of natural areas are there in Canada? In Canada, there are many different natural areas including grassland prairie, coniferous and mixed deciduous forests, northern tundra, wetlands, and flowing and stagnant waterways of all sizes.
Q3.94 Why are different natural areas important? * Different ecosystems play integral parts in climate control, doing everything from absorbing carbon dioxide to purifying water and acting as water reserves.
* Different spaces provide habitats for different types of organisms.
The particular set of conditions each space provides is essential for the survival of those organisms.
* Different spaces, many of which have been made into parks or other protected areas, are important aspects of the natural heritage of Canada.
pics/primer13.gif
Q3.95 Why are wetlands important? Although wetlands used to be seen as unproductive, we have come to understand that they are a very important type of ecosystem.
In fact, wetlands are one of the key life-support systems of our planet.
In addition to providing habitat for many endangered species of animals and plants, they have other important ecological functions, including:
Water recharge.
Wetlands provide natural purification and storage of freshwater for humans and wildlife.
Shoreline protection.
Wetlands protect shorelines from wave action and erosion.
Flood reduction and control.
Through water storage and retention wetlands help control flooding.
Carbon 'sinks'.
Wetland vegetation stores carbon.
Oxygen production.
Wetland vegetation produces oxygen.
Pollutant 'sinks'.
Wetlands are natural sinks for pollutants such as sulphur and heavy metals.
Nutrient source.
Wetlands provide nutrients for connected waters.
Q3.96 Are Canada's natural spaces intact? No.
For example, over 90% of the original tallgrass prairie, 68% of Ontario wetlands, 90% of British Columbia's old-growth forest, and 65% of Atlantic coastal marshes are gone.
Q3.97 What has caused this transformation of natural spaces? Several different aspects of our society have been responsible for the transformation of our natural spaces.
Agriculture, by converting woodland and prairie into intensively managed farmland, has radically altered many natural spaces.
Similarly, the forestry industry has had a significant effect upon certain forest ecosystems.
Finally, urbanization and industrialization have together occupied or polluted large areas in the southern regions of the country.
Wildlife
The health of other species of life has been an important ethical and economic concern for humans for many years.
This section looks at the nature and importance of wildlife, and some of the threats to its existence today.
Q3.98 What is wildlife? Wildlife is the term used to refer to all of the organisms that have not been domesticated for human use or companionship.
It includes invertebrate animal species (those lacking backbones), such as molluscs and arthropods, as well as vertebrate species (those with backbones), such as mammals, birds, and reptiles.
It also includes plants.
Q3.99 How are natural areas and wildlife related? Every animal and plant species exists within a specific set of environmental conditions: climate, food availability, shelter, etc.
This set constitutes the species' 'home' or habitat.
Without the particular conditions that a species' habitat affords, it cannot exist.
These conditions may be more or less broad.
The habitat of humans and cockroaches, for example, covers an extremely wide range of ecological regions, due to their great adaptability.
The requirements of other species, however, are much narrower.
Q3.100 How many species are there in Canada? Canada is home to nearly 1,950 species of vertebrate animals, an estimated 95,000 invertebrate species, and about 4,200 known species of plants.
Q3.101 Why is wildlife important? Wildlife has great ecological, social, and economic importance.
* Bacterial, plants, algae, fungi, and invertebrates are involved in essential ecological processes, such as oxygen generation, nitrogen fixation, nutrient cycling, waste decomposition, water cleansing, and soil formation.
* Many Canadians who follow traditional lifestyles still depend directly on wild animals and plants as important sources of food, clothing, and income.
* Many wildlife species are harvested and processed to produce a variety of commercial products, ranging from food and fashions to medicines, paper, and construction materials.
* Industries such as fisheries and forestry depend upon wild animals and plants for their continued existence.
* Recreational activities, including fishing, hunting, and wildlife study and photography provide much enjoyment and substantial economic benefit (see box below).
* The planetary ecosystem is highly complex and interrelated; the disturbance or removal of just one species may disrupt the balanced functioning of the entire ecosystem.
Q3.102 Are species at risk in Canada? Yes.
As of 1993, there were 238 species, subspecies, or local populations of Canadian organisms listed as either extinct (9), extirpated (no longer found in Canada - 11), endangered (53), threatened (53), or vulnerable (112).
However, only a few of the total number of species in Canada have been assessed at this time; thus, these 238 designations do not adequately represent the current situation.
û focus The market value of recreational wildlife resources is enormous.
In 1987, Canadians spent $9.4 billion on hunting, angling, trips to observe wildlife, and other wildlife-related activities.
This resulted in $4.5 billion in taxes for governments, $11.5 billion in GDP, and it sustained jobs for roughly 284,000 people.
Q3.103 What is biodiversity? Literally, the word 'biodiversity' means variety of life.
There are millions of different species of plants, animals, and micro-organisms on our planet.
This is referred to as 'species diversity'.
There is also biodiversity within single species.
Dogs, for example, come in different shapes, sizes, colours, and temperaments.
This is referred to as 'genetic diversity' since it depends upon the variety of genetic material present in a single species.
Another form of biodiversity is 'ecosystem diversity'.
Meadows, forests, and wetlands are examples of different types of ecosystems.
They are the natural neighbourhoods of organisms; they provide different species with homes, food, and access to other members of their own species.
In a broader sense, the variety of human cultures on Earth is also a type of biodiversity.
Language, religious belief, music, and many other aspects of human life vary greatly from one culture to another.
Q3.104 Are some areas home to more biodiversity than others? Yes.
Geographical areas that are nearer to the Equator generally have higher levels of biodiversity.
the greatest levels of biodiversity are thus found in the tropics, particularly in the tropical rain forests and coral reefs.
Q3.105 Why is biodiversity important? The incredible variety of life on our planet is the product of millions of years of evolution.
This makes life on our planet far richer and healthier than it would otherwise be.
The living organisms of the Earth make up an intricate living system: since no species exists in isolation, the loss of any one species will disrupt many others.
Biodiversity is a source of strength not just for us but for our world as a whole.
Diseases, for example, often strike certain species but not others.
A forest that contains a variety of species rather than just one or two will be stronger and more stable.
Genetic diversity is important too.
Genetic material contains the instructions for producing the various characteristics and capabilities of living things; greater variety of genes makes it easier for species to adapt to new or changed environments.
Different ecosystems perform different functions, all of which are important, and different cultures provide humans with a variety of different ethical and spiritual visions, as well as different types of knowledge about different aspects of the world.
Q3.106 Is biodiversity threatened today? There is much debate today over the issue of biodiversity.
Some describe the current situation as a severe crisis, whereas others take a more optimistic view.
However, the disagreements between scientists are primarily over the extent of the problem, not over whether or not a problem exists.
Q3.107 What two things are necessary for wildlife to survive? In order to thrive, wildlife needs two things: habitat a place (or places) to live that meets all its needs for space, food, shelter, and reproduction and protection from the harmful effects of human activity.
Q3.108 What human activities have an impact on wildlife? Some wildlife species have become endangered or extinct through over-harvesting.
Currently, however, habitat destruction constitutes a greater threat to wildlife than overhunting.
This destruction may occur by the removal of living space (quantity of habitat) or by its profound alteration (quality of habitat).
Q3.109 What human activities remove wildlife habitat? The on-going extension of human activities into wilderness areas is reducing the quantity and variety of our natural areas.
* Agriculture has dramatically reduced the number and range of some species by clearing forests, replacing natural vegetation with crops, and draining wetlands.
* Logging, coupled with extensive losses caused by forest fires and insects each year, is steadily reducing the area covered by old-growth and mixed-growth forests.
The diversity of forest habitat is further limited when logged areas are replanted with seedlings of a single species.
* Urban and industrial development have also decreased available living space for wildlife.
Q3.110 What human activities alter wildlife habitat? Near or far from wilderness, human activity can greatly affect wildlife habitat.
* Acid rain has many deleterious effects, including leaching nutrients from the soil, impairing water transport in plants, and lowering viability of the eggs of aquatic organisms.
* Toxic contaminants have been blamed for instances of reproductive failure, congenital abnormality, physiological and behavioural alterations, and death of organisms.
* Any chemical or contaminant, such as fertilizers and pesticides, may destabilize natural biochemical balances.
* Fossil fuel combustion, forest removal, and other activities resulting in greenhouse gas production may contribute to global warming.
Accelerated temperature changes will alter habitats more quickly than natural evolution; many species may not be able to adapt.
* Exotic species, whether introduced accidentally or intentionally into Canada, may threaten native species with disease, hybridization, and competition.
* Use of wildlands by humans for recreation can affect both the land and certain animals that fear humans.
* The construction of dams, hydrolines, and roads fragments wildlife habitat.
Action Step
Actions that contribute to virtually all other environmental goals also contribute to the preservation of natural areas and wildlife.
Some are obvious; keeping toxics out of the environment, for example, benefits wildlife directly as much as it does humans.
Some are less direct; reducing waste by practising the four R's reduce, re-use, recycle, recover for example, lessens the need for habitat-destroying landfill.
However, to ensure the protection of our wildlife and natural areas what is also needed is a strong and assertive public interest in their survival.
All Canadians should consider the following starting points:
* Join a community environmental, conservation, or natural history organization.
* Volunteer time, money, and energy to assist local conservation efforts.
* If you own land, set some of it aside for wildlife, and take steps to make it attractive to native species.
* Many of the spaces we use can be shared with wildlife.
Backyards, for example, can be designed with plants that supply food.
* Know and abide by the laws established to protect natural heritage, and encourage others to do the same.
Did you know? As many as 38 of 83 species of reptiles and amphibians in Canada may be found to be at risk when their status is eventually examined.
Over 700 additional plant species are likely to be designated as endangered or threatened once the necessary evaluations have been completed.
Cultural Heritage
Most of us are not used to thinking about heritage and the environment at the same time.
Yet they are closely connected.
This section looks at the relationship between our cultural heritage and our place in the biosphere.
Q3.111 What do we mean by 'heritage'? Literally, 'heritage' is that which is inherited from the past.
We tend to think of our heritage as consisting of old buildings and artifacts.
Yet ideas, traditions and customs are also part of our heritage.
So too is the natural environment.
More specifically, heritage is that which gives a community its identity.
Our sense of who we are as a country where we come from, what we value, what we believe in has been shaped by many forces; our heritage is all that has gone to make up this sense of nationhood.
It is what connects citizens of the past, present, and future as members of one community.
Q3.112 What does our heritage have to do with the environment? Our environment is that which surrounds us.
This means that it includes our built environment and the culture in which we live, as well as 'nature'.
Our heritage, in turn, includes more than just cultural artifacts; we inherit the land as well as the things we have built on it.
A very important part of the Canadian identity, for example, has to do with the size and beauty of our land.
From the coasts of Newfoundland to the forests of Vancouver Island, the environment has an important place in the Canadian psyche.
It is a crucial part of the heritage from which we expect future generations of Canadians to benefit.
Caring for our heritage means, in part, caring for our natural as well as our cultural environment.
Since the rest of the primer deals with natural heritage, this section will focus upon our cultural heritage.
Q3.113 Is our cultural heritage threatened? Yes.
Tangible aspects of our cultural heritage such as landscapes and buildings are at risk from vandalism, pollution, neglect, and urban development.
Fundamentally, however, cultural heritage is threatened by the rapid pace of change which is typical of our time.
Our national identity is anchored in the land, the communities we have built, and the traditions that we have developed.
These change over time, as does the nation itself.
Very rapid change, however, can pose a problem.
In many ways economically, technologically, geographically our world is a rapidly changing one, and our heritage is threatened by these processes of change.
Historic buildings are demolished for new urban development and eroded by pollution, and advances in telecommunications technology threaten to globalize the control of and input into our cultural industries.
Yet change has also brought many benefits, such as economic prosperity, improved health, and universal access to education.
The challenge is to maintain these gains without sacrificing the links to our history and culture that some forms of growth can endanger.
Q3.114 What is heritage conservation, and why is it important? Heritage conservation consists of the identification and preservation of tangible aspects of our cultural heritage: places and things which are of special historic and symbolic significance.
Its goal is to allow us to stay in touch with our history and with each other: to help us understand ourselves, our fellow citizens, and the country to which we belong.
If we are not to lose our connection to our past, and the link between present and future generations of citizens, we must preserve our heritage.
Q3.115 Does conserving heritage mean trying to turn back the clock? No.
Heritage conservation is about managing change, not stopping it.
Change is not only inevitable, it is natural.
All things grow and develop.
Some forms of growth, however, are detrimental to the quality of life.
Rapid, massive, and irreversible change threatens to unhinge us from our past and from ourselves.
The purpose of heritage conservation is to ensure and support our link to the history of our communities.
It's about keeping alive valuable aspects of our past by preserving some of its more tangible aspects.
pics/primer14.gif
Q3.116 Can heritage conservation help the environment? Yes.
One aspect of heritage conservation involves the renovation and re-use of old buildings, where possible, as opposed to destroying them to make way for new construction.
Demolition of old buildings wastes the resources and energy embodied in existing structures, and generates large quantities of waste materials.
Conservation can also promote the revitalization of the core of the city, slowing urban sprawl and preserving farmland and wildlife habitat.
Q3.117 What is the relationship between sustainable development and heritage conservation? Heritage conservation is, in many ways, an embodiment of sustainable development; it can be both environmentally and economically beneficial.
Take, for example, the case of the conservationist approach to urban development.
While restoration and protection have costs, so does building anew.
In addition, conservation sites can become important tourist attractions.
The preservation of the walls and gates of Qu'bec City, for example, was important for heritage reasons, but in addition has helped to sustain one of the most important tourist centres in Canada.
As well, faced with flight to the suburbs and the decay of the urban core, conservation provides cities with the alternative of revitalization, attracting business and inhabitants back to the centre of town.
More broadly, sustainable development and heritage conservation have in common a certain approach to change one that emphasizes managed and multi-dimensional growth.
Q3.118 Old buildings and other historic environments are examples of people's changes to the environment.
Isn't it contradictory to say we should preserve these things and the natural environment at the same time? Not at all.
People are a species too, and we build habitats that are worthy of respect.
Like beavers and pine trees, we change the places where we take root but that is not necessarily bad for the natural environment.
Although we have made the environment worse in some cases, our creations often have actually enhanced the natural environment.
From the Taj Mahal to the Haida totems of the Queen Charlotte Islands these places show the capability of our species to create things of beauty, balance, and proportion.
We don't need to keep every hillock in an untouched state; what we need to protect is the health and diversity of the environment as a whole.
Q3.119 Does heritage conservation involve protecting only positive aspects of our past? No.
Heritage conservation can also help us learn from our mistakes, including our environmental mistakes.
While its main purpose is to conserve aspects of our culture and history which we cherish, there is also a need to keep in mind errors we have made.
It is commonplace that those who do not learn from history are condemned to repeat it.
In a broad sense then, the heritage to be 'preserved' includes negative aspects of ourselves and our past; we must preserve the memory of extinct species, lost habitats, and past abundance of renewable resources.
Action Step
Individuals can help preserve the natural aspect of their heritage in many ways: by reducing waste, by using water and energy efficiently, etc.
Individuals can help preserve the cultural aspect of their heritage by practising the four R's of heritage conservation:
* `Record' what exists * `Respect' what is there * `Retain' as much as appropriate * `Restore' before building anew
The key is to translate awareness and concern for heritage preservation into effective action.
To get an idea of the sorts of actions that follow from these principles see the Action Guide.
_______________________________________________________________________
Part of Environment Canada's Green Lane Important Notices and Disclaimers Page Last Updated: 2001-10-05
