16.00 PET ANIMAL BOARDING AND/OR TRAINING FACILITIES A. General 1.
Definition: A facility that cares for or houses pet animals in the absence of the owner or a facility that cares for pet animals in training in the absence of the owner or such owner's designee and receives compensation for said training services.
Training services include housing, training, handling, showing, grooming and transporting pet animals.
Such training services shall be for the purposes of exhibition, behavior modification or enhancement, field trial or lure course training, guard dog training, or any other type of training services.
2.
License Requirements.
No person shall operate a pet animal boarding and/or training facility unless the person holds a valid license issued by the Department pursuant to PACFA and Sections 2.00 and 3.00 of these rules and regulations.
The twelve month license period shall commence the first working day of March and must be renewed on or before the first working day of March the following calendar year.
B. FACILITY STANDARDS 1.
The following facility regulations will take into consideration the healthful, safe, humane and varied conditions in which pet animals can be maintained while being boarded or housed.
2.
Facility Plan Evaluation.
a.
Submission of Plans.
Detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Department whenever it is proposed to erect or extensively remodel any pet animal boarding and/or training facility, specifically, any remodeling that requires a building permit and affects a minimum of 25% of the square footage of the existing facility.
Plans pertaining to upgrades which are only electrical or plumbing in nature will not require plan submission.
Each facility or person intending to become a pet animal boarding and/or training facility shall be responsible for submitting all plans and specifications.
Plans shall be approved or disapproved by the Department, typically within 10 working days of submission.
Approval of plans and specifications is necessary before construction begins and final approval is required before operation.
b. Contents of Plans and Specifications.
Final plans and specifications shall show compliance with these regulations and shall include schedules describing the ventilation system, plumbing equipment and finishes of floors, walls, and ceilings, and location of cages, runs or pens, where appropriate.
Outdoor boarding and/or training facilities shall include a layout of cages, runs, or pens; proximity of perimeter protective fence and height of the perimeter fence; location of potable water supply, area lighting; drawings and detailed description of shelter from the elements, food storage and preparation area.
Plans need not be professionally drawn, providing the plans are legible, drawn or sketched to consistent scale, with dimensions indicated, accurately depicting the intended construction or remodeling.
c. Remodeling.
Plans for extensive remodeling shall show an outline of the facility and only the portion being remodeled need be detailed and approved.
3.
Plan Rejection.
Definite rejection of plans submitted will be due to, but not limited to, the following reasons: a.
Soil floors for any part of the interior floor of a boarding and/or training facility or any pet animal enclosures. b.
Any construction deviation from the plans submitted which causes the facility to not meet the provisions of these rules and regulations.
C. PHYSICAL FACILITIES 1.
Structural Standards.
Each boarding and/or training facility shall: a. Use full walls, partial walls, or portable wall panels to physically separate (may be within a single structure) pet animal housing areas for dogs, cats and other species.
Facilities built after March 1, 1995 shall utilize full walls for this separation.
Any request for exception to this provision by pet animal day care facilities shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
b.
Be constructed of building materials that will ensure the facility is of a sound physical structure.
c.
Be maintained in good repair.
d. Protect animals kept there from injury, restrict entry of other animals from outside and ensure containment within the pet animal boarding and/or training facility.
2.
Interior Surfaces.
The interior building surfaces of boarding and/or training facilities shall be constructed and maintained so that they are water resistant and readily cleaned and sanitized.
These surfaces need not extend more than 18 inches beyond the perimeter of any animal enclosure or sink.
Wood enclosure parts and accessories must be painted or sealed.
Flooring directly beneath all pet animal primary enclosure areas must be of water resistant materials that can be cleaned and sanitized.
Smooth finished, sound concrete surfaces are acceptable.
3.
Electric Power.
Electric power shall be provided.
4.
Water.
Potable water shall be provided for drinking purposes, with back flow prevention devices installed on any threaded faucets where hoses may be attached for cleaning the facility or on the main supply line to the facility.
5.
Container Cleaning, Hand Sink or Washroom. a.
A sink in good repair or a dishwasher shall be provided for washing and sanitizing food and water containers.
b.
The sink can be used for handwashing, or a washroom provided.
6.
Heating and Cooling.
Housing for pet animals shall be sufficiently heated or cooled when necessary to protect animals from cold or heat to provide for their health.
The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the requirements of the specific pet animals.
Heating shall be deemed necessary when the inside ambient temperature of the facility falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit for a period of 4 consecutive hours and cooling shall be deemed necessary when the temperature of the facility rises above 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
7.
Ventilation.
Housing for pet animals shall be ventilated with fresh or filtered air to minimize odors and moisture, and to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times.
Means for ventilation can be mechanical or natural, providing odors are minimal and the temperature range set forth immediately above is maintained, within the requirements consistent with the species.
8.
Lighting.
Boarding and/or training facilities for pet animals shall have well distributed natural or artificial light for routine inspections, and to facilitate routine cleaning and the proper care and maintenance of the pet animals.
9.
Waste Water Disposal. a.
Waste water from indoor facilities shall be disposed of by connection to a sanitary sewer or any state, county, or locally approved water disposal system.
A method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess water.
b. Outdoor enclosures shall be designed, constructed, and suitably demonstrate drainage to eliminate natural or other excess water, regardless of surfacing material.
10.
Grooming Facilities.
Grooming work areas at boarding and/or training facilities shall be physically separated from primary enclosures, animal food storage or preparation areas, and isolation areas for sick animals.
11.
Isolation Area.
All pet animal boarding and/or training facilities must provide segregation for animals that are infected with a contagious disease or suspected of being infected.
The facility shall remove such sick animals to a veterinary facility or provide an area isolated from the rest of the animal population.
D. PET ANIMAL PRIMARY ENCLOSURE STANDARDS 1.
Definition: Primary enclosures are those animal enclosures in which the pet animal rests, sleeps and/or eats.
2.
Indoor and Outdoor Facilities.
a.
General.
Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect animals from injury, to contain them, and to keep other animals or predators away from and out of any enclosure where animals are kept.
Primary enclosures shall be constructed such that they can be routinely maintained to allow animals to stay dry and clean and provide convenient access to clean food and water.
b. Floors.
The floor of the primary enclosure shall be constructed to prevent injury to the animals' feet and legs.
Enclosures for pet animals may have wire flooring provided that the wire is of adequate gauge to prevent sagging under the weight of the animals and the mesh is small enough to prevent their feet from passing through.
c. Cleaning Requirements.
All surfaces of primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so that they are water resistant and easily cleaned and sanitized. d. Space Requirements.
All primary enclosures shall be constructed to provide sufficient space to allow each pet animal to exercise normal postural movements.
(1) Primary Enclosures for Dogs.
Minimum space requirements: (a) Each individually enclosed dog that does not have access to a run or exercise area must be provided a minimum amount of floor space, calculated as follows: Find the mathematical square of the sum of the length of the dog in inches (measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail) plus 6 inches; then divide the product by 144 and multiply by 2.
The calculation is: (length of the dog in inches + 6) x (length of the dog in inches + 6) ¸ 144 x 2 = required floor space in feet.
The maximum required floor space is 24 sq. ft.
The minimum floor space is 6 sq. ft. (b) Each primary enclosure, in which a dog spends the majority of its day, shall have the following minimum requirements: x-small dogs up to 10 inches high - 4.5 sq.ft.; small dogs up to 16 inches high - 6.0 sq.ft.; medium dogs up to 22 inches high - 9.0 sq.ft.; large dogs up to 26 inches high - 12 sq.ft.; extra large dogs up to 30 inches high - 16 sq.ft.; giant breeds over 30 inches high - 18 sq.ft.
The height shall be 1½ times the height of the dog at the shoulder with a maximum height required of 48 inches and a minimum height of 18 inches.
If more than one dog occupies these primary enclosures, space will be figured for the first dog, with each additional dog needing one-half of the minimum space required.
These dimensions are not considered to be exercise areas.
An exercise area or run is required for each animal housed in such an enclosure.
The exercise area or run may be, but need not be, contiguous with the primary enclosures specified above.
Each dog housed in the specified primary enclosure space must be provided the opportunity to exercise for a minimum of 60 minutes in 24 hours.
An exercise plan is required pursuant to Subsection D2d(2)(e) below.
(c) If crates are used with the written consent of the owner to house dogs, including weaned puppies, the minimum space requirements are as follows: Dogs, regardless of weight, will have a crate that is a minimum of the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail, plus 3 inches, shall allow a minimum clearance in height at the shoulder of 3 inches while the dog is standing and shall permit the dog to turn around and lay down.
Crates of this size are not to be used for exercise areas.
Crates of these minimum dimensions shall be used to house one dog only.
An exercise area or run is required for animals housed in a crate.
Dogs housed in crates shall be provided an opportunity to exercise for a minimum of 60 minutes in 24 hours.
An exercise plan is required pursuant to Subsection D2d(2)(e) below.
(2) Runs and Exercise Areas for Dogs.
Minimum space requirements: (a) The length of the runs and exercise areas shall be a minimum of 3 times the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail; the width shall allow the dog to turn around easily; and the height shall be 1 ½ times the height of the dog at the shoulders, with the maximum height required of 48 inches, the minimum of 18 inches.
(b) Indoor/Outdoor runs that have the primary enclosure and the exercise area in combination shall for measuring purposes be considered one exercise run and shall be measured from the extreme inside to the extreme outside for length determination.
(c) Outdoor or indoor runs used as primary enclosure and exercise area in combination shall be measured from one extreme end to the other extreme end for length.
The same criteria will apply to free standing runs used for exercise areas only.
(d) Runs and Exercise Areas.
Dogs housed as described in Subsections D2d(1)(b) and (c) above shall be provided with runs or exercise areas.
i. Runs and exercise areas may have wire flooring provided that the wire is of a gauge adequate to prevent sagging under the weight of the animals or injury to the animal's feet and the mesh is small enough to prevent their feet from passing through.
ii. Exercise areas do not need shelter or dog houses if they are not primary enclosures, but must have shade provided with the shaded area of a size directly proportional to the size of the dog being shaded.
(e) Dogs housed in primary enclosures or crates described in Subsections D2d(1)(b) and (c) above shall be provided the opportunity to exercise for a minimum of 60 minutes in 24 hours.
The licensee shall submit a plan to the Commissioner for approval regarding exercise periods for dogs.
The plan shall address the owner's specific requests concerning exercise.
(3) Primary Enclosures for Cats.
Minimum Space Requirements: Each cat, including weaned kittens, that is housed in any primary enclosure shall be provided minimum vertical height and space as follows: (a) Each primary enclosure for housing cats must be at least 21 inches high.
(b) Cats up to and including 9 pounds must be provided at least 3 sq.ft. of open floor space.
(c) Cats over 9 pounds must be provided at least 4 sq.ft. of open floor space.
i.
The litter pan may be considered part of the floor space if it is the flat hooded type. ii.
If the primary enclosure floor is wire, the wire used shall be of a gauge adequate to support the animal without sagging and solid base of water resistant material shall cover the wire.
(4) Outdoor Facilities.
(a) Outdoor facilities shall meet the requirements of this Subsection D. Animals boarded or housed outdoors when the mean daily temperature is below 45 degrees Fahrenheit shall be so acclimated.
Cats (unless acclimated) or sick, infirm, aged or very young pet animals shall not be boarded or housed outside when the mean daily temperature is below 45 degrees Fahrenheit.
(b) Shelter from Weather Elements.
Animals confined for boarding and/or training at outdoor facilities shall have: i. Shelter from Sunlight.
Shade shall be provided to allow all pet animals kept outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun, to prevent overheating.
The area shaded shall be in size directly proportional to the size of the pet animal being protected; care shall be taken to position the shade so maximum protection is provided.
ii. Shelter from Rain, Snow and Cold Weather.
A primary enclosure shelter shall be provided to allow all pet animals housed outdoors protection from the weather elements.
Shelter provided shall be water resistant, constructed of durable material, have a solid floor raised off the ground, of suitable size to accommodate the pet animal and allow for retention of body heat. iii. Protection.
Fencing shall be provided to protect pet animals from predators, stray animals, and humans.
iv. Illumination.
Yard light(s) shall be provided for night time inspection of pet animals.
(5) Tethering of pet animals is acceptable, in an exercise area or when cleaning enclosures.
No female dogs in whelp or with puppies shall be tethered.
For all facilities licensed in 1999 which use dog houses with chains as a primary enclosure, said facilities shall convert 33% of the facility each year to some other acceptable primary enclosure, as set forth within these rules, beginning in the year 2000 and continuing each year thereafter until the entire facility is converted.
During the interim period, if dog houses with chains are used as primary enclosures for dogs kept outdoors, the chains shall have a swivel and shall be so placed or attached that they cannot become entangled with the chains of other dogs and any other objects.
Such chains shall be a minimum of 6 feet in length and of a type commonly used for the size dog involved and shall be attached to the dog by means of a well-fitted, nontightening collar or harness.
If tethering is used, a fence perimeter shall surround the entire tethering area to protect the tethered dogs.
Facilities that breed, train, or house Alaskan dog breeds or Alaskan breed crosses specifically for the purpose of pulling dog sleds may request the Commissioner in writing for a waiver of the prohibition against dog houses with chains (tethering) as a primary enclosure.
Such request for waiver shall be submitted annually with each application or reapplication for licensure.
Granting such waiver is in the sole discretion of the Commissioner.
(6) Primary enclosures for other pet animals.
Primary enclosure for pet animals not specifically noted in this section shall be in each species or category respectively (eg. bird breeder or small animal breeder), or as directed by the Commissioner.
E. SANITATION STANDARDS 1.
General Conditions. a.
Cleaning of Pet Animal Enclosures.
Pet animals shall be protected from exposure to water or chemical solution used for cleaning the primary enclosure.
Animal wastes shall be removed from primary enclosures daily or more frequently to prevent contamination of the pet animals contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. b. Occupied primary enclosures of minimum size shall be cleaned as often as necessary to reduce disease hazards and odors, and to maintain sanitary conditions by cleaning and sanitizing all surfaces.
Primary enclosures shall be cleaned and sanitized after one animal ceases to occupy the space, before another occupies the same space.
c. Occupied indoor runs or pens used as primary enclosures shall be cleaned on a regular basis to remove contamination from interior surfaces; sanitizing methods will be used as necessary to reduce odors and control disease.
d. Occupied outdoor runs or pens used as primary enclosures or exercise areas will be cleaned to remove contamination.
(1) Hard Surfaced Runs and Pens.
Cleaning shall be accomplished by washing all soiled surfaces with a detergent, followed by a safe and effective sanitizer.
(2) Runs, Pens, and Exercise Areas.
Gravel, sand, or soil shall be sanitized by removing the soiled gravel, sand, or soil and replacing it when the material is permeated with urine and/or fecal matter that is not removable without removing the material, or when odors are present.
2.
Waste Disposal.
Animal and food wastes, bedding, debris and other organic wastes shall be disposed of so that vermin infestation, odors, disease hazards, and nuisances are minimized.
Such wastes shall be removed at least weekly, or more frequently, from the facility where animals are kept.
3.
Premises Housekeeping.
Buildings and grounds where pet animals are kept shall be kept clean, in good repair, and free of trash.
Weeds shall be mowed or cut down in enclosures where animals are kept or exercised.
4.
Pest Control.
Boarding and/or training facilities shall use controls to keep the facility as free as possible from vermin and insects.
Food exposed to rodents shall be discarded.
5.
Supply Storage.
Food shall be stored off the floor and perishables shall be refrigerated.
Bulk dry or unsealed bagged food shall be stored in water resistant, closed containers.
F. PET ANIMAL CARE AND HANDLING STANDARDS 1.
Food and Water a.
Pet animals shall be fed consistent with the nutritional needs for the age of the animal, at least once a day, except when under special veterinary care.
The food, when provided by the licensee, shall be of such nutritional value necessary to meet the normal daily needs for the condition and size of the animal.
b. Potable water.
If potable water is not continually available to pet animals, it must be offered to pet animals as often as necessary to prevent dehydration or heat prostration, except when under special veterinary care. c. Open food and water containers shall be accessible to the pet animal and located to minimize contamination by excreta. d. Container Cleaning.
Water and food containers and all other utensils shall be cleaned and sanitized with the use of heat or chemical sanitizing solution or a dishwasher utilizing heat or chemical sanitizing solutions.
Water and food containers shall be cleaned at least weekly or more frequently if soiled, and before being used to feed and water different pet animals.
Disposable containers may be used if discarded after each use.
Self feed and water devices may be used if cleaned at least weekly, or more frequently if soiled.
2.
Classification and Separation a.
Any pet animals housed in the same primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups, with the following additional restrictions: (1) Any pet animal exhibiting an aggressive behavior shall be housed individually.
(2) Females in season (estrus) shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure or exercise area with males.
(3) Pet animals of different ownership consigned for boarding or training shall not be boarded or housed in the same enclosure without the written consent of each owner.
3.
Except as set forth in Subsection D2d(1)(a) above, facilities that do not use primary enclosure/exercise area combinations for dogs shall provide exercise areas or handlers to exercise the dogs.
Each caged dog shall be permitted a minimum of 60 minutes of exercise per 24 hours, weather permitting.
4.
Animal control devices.
a.
Definition: Any apparatus used for behavioral control of pet animals in boarding and/or training facilities.
b. Animal control devices can be used for the safety of pet animals and handlers.
Behavioral control devices shall be humane and used humanely for the manufacture's intended use. c. Battery operated or electrical devices, such as shock collars, shock prods, or electric fence shall be utilized only with the owner's consent.
G. RECORDS 1.
Records of animals boarded and/or trained shall be kept by the facility for two years from the date of the transaction, with the records kept at the address specified in the license application.
The records shall include the name and address of the owner of the pet animal, date of transaction, species/breed, specific identifying characteristics (if available), gender and age, and name of the owner's veterinarian (if available).
2.
A record shall be kept of communicable disease immunizations for each boarded or trained animal at the facility, including rabies, recording the date on which the immunization was given or the expiration date.
These records can be transferred to and kept on kennel forms.
These records shall be retained at the boarding and/or training facility for a period of 30 days after the animal leaves the facility.
3.
Disposition records for boarded or trained animals shall be maintained at the facility during the period the animal is being boarded or housed.
These records shall include a mutual agreement concerning veterinary care to treat diseased or injured animals and disposition of animals that die at the facility.
The licensee may also wish to consider a statement concerning abandonment of animals at the facility.
4.
Availability.
The above records shall be available to any inspector authorized by the Department at all reasonable times during regular business hours or as mutually agreed.
H. VETERINARY CARE/DISEASE CONTROL 1.
Veterinary Requirements. a.
Veterinary Services.
All pet animal boarding and/or training facilities shall have a working relationship with a veterinarian to provide timely treatment for injured or diseased animals.
The name and phone number of the veterinarian will be available to the inspector upon request.
b.
Any pet animal that becomes seriously ill or seriously injured must be diagnosed by a veterinarian in a timely manner and prescribed therapy followed.
Animals must be provided with timely veterinary care or provided euthanasia pursuant to PACFA § 35-80-102(7). c. Pet animals shall be observed daily by the person in charge of the pet animal boarding and/or training facility, or by an employee working under his/her supervision, for signs of disease or injury.
An animal suspected of having an infectious disease shall be physically separated from other susceptible animals and placed in an isolation area or removed to a veterinary facility until the condition is determined to be noninfectious. d. Prescription medication can only be administered to pet animals under the direction of a licensed veterinarian.
Boarding and/or training facility operators acting as agents for the owner may administer prescription medication to pet animals being boarded or housed as directed by the owner's veterinarian.
Prescription medications must be in the container issued by either a veterinarian or pharmacy.
The following information must be legible on the container: Client's name/pet animal name; Dosage; Drug name; Veterinarian's name; and Date issued.
e. Animals that die at the pet animal boarding and/or training facility may be refrigerated or frozen or disposed of in a manner that will not cause a disease hazard or nuisance in accordance with the owner's or veterinarian's instructions.
Pet animal remains intended for a necropsy will be handled per veterinarian's instruction.
The licensee may wish to refer to § 25-1-612, C.R.S., as amended, and/or local ordinances or regulations concerning proper disposal.
2.
Disease Control Requirements a.
Reporting of Zoonotic Disease.
Reporting requirements exist under § 25-1-662, C.R.S., as amended, as well as possibly other statutes, rules and regulations.
b. Cleanliness.
All areas and isolation rooms which contain pet animals having infectious or transmissible disease shall be cleaned and sanitized each day. c. Release or Transfer.
Reasonable care shall be taken to release or transfer pet animals that are free of disease.
Diseased animals can be transferred to a veterinary facility or diseased animals can be returned to the owner under veterinarian direction.
Quarantined animals shall not be released until the quarantine is rescinded, or until quarantined elsewhere.
d. Quarantine.
Quarantine requirements exist under §§ 25-5-604 and 605, 25-4-709, and 35-50-110, C.R.S., as amended, and possibly other statutes, rules and regulations.
3.
The facility inspector shall follow Department protocols concerning sanitization of footwear.
I. TRANSPORTING PET ANIMALS 1.
Primary Enclosures - Enclosures to Transport Pet Animals.
a.
Temporary enclosures, such as compartments or transport cages, or crates, used to transport pet animals shall be secured, water resistant, well constructed of cleanable material, and designed to protect the health and ensure the safety of the animals.
Such enclosures shall have ventilation to ensure the comfort and health of the pet animals at all times.
b.
Such enclosures shall be constructed or positioned in the vehicle in such manner that: (1) Each animal in the vehicle has access to sufficient air for normal breathing.
(2) The openings of such enclosures are accessible at all times for emergency removal of the animals.
(3) The animals are afforded protection from the elements.
(4) The animal areas of the vehicle shall be heated or cooled when necessary to prevent hypothermia or hyperthermia of the animals being transported.
c. Enclosures used to transport pet animals shall be large enough to ensure that each animal contained therein has sufficient space to turn, stand, and lie down.
Animals which are not conditioned to each other may not be transported in the same primary enclosure. d. Animals shall not be placed in enclosures over other animals in transit unless such enclosure is fitted with a floor of a material which prevents animal excreta from entering lower enclosures. e. Enclosures used to transport pet animals shall be cleaned and sanitized between trips, or more often if necessary.
f. Pet animals shall be removed from the vehicle a minimum of every 8 hours and allowed to urinate, defecate, and obtain exercise.
2.
Food and Water.
Food and water shall be consistent with the requirements of Subsection F1 above.
3.
Classification and Separation.
The same requirements of Subsection F2 above apply.
4.
Vehicles. a.
Vehicles used primarily in transporting pet animals shall be equipped to provide fresh or filtered air to all animals being transported without injurious drafts. b.
The animal cargo space shall be so constructed and maintained as to minimize the ingress of exhaust from the vehicle's engine.
Transportation for pet animals not specifically noted in this section shall be in accordance with regulations set forth under each species or category, respectively (eg. bird breeder), or as directed by the Commissioner.
17.00 ANIMAL RESCUE FACILITY REGULATIONS A. FACILITIES STANDARDS 1.
Definition of Pet Animal Rescue: "Pet Animal Rescue" as used herein means any person who accepts pet animals for the purpose of finding permanent adoptive homes for animals and does not maintain a central facility for keeping animals, but rather uses a system of fostering in private homes, or boarding or keeping in licensed pet animal facilities.
2.
License Requirements. a.
No person shall operate a pet animal rescue unless the person holds a valid license issued by the Commissioner pursuant to PACFA and Sections 2.00 and 3.00 of these rules and regulations.
The twelve month license period shall commence the first working day of March and must be renewed on or before the first working day of March the following calendar year. b. Persons who do not accept or release pet animals in excess of the following limits per year shall not be required to hold a license as a pet animal rescue: the limits on transfers for hobby breeders as defined in PACFA § 35-80-102 or 24 ferrets. c. Rescue agencies operating a mobile adoption unit must either be licensed themselves or choose sites licensed as pet animal dealerships.
3.
"Foster home" as used herein is a site at which, through a written agreement with a licensed rescue facility, provides care and/or rehabilitation for sick, injured, orphaned, juvenile or other pet animals which are otherwise the responsibility of the rescue facility.
4.
Structural Standards.
Places in which rescue animals are kept shall: a.
Meet the following standards: (1) Be constructed of building materials that will ensure a sound physical structure.
(2) Be maintained in good repair.
(3) Protect animals kept there from injury, restrict entry of other animals from outside the property and ensure containment of fostered pet animals within the property.
b. Electric Power.
Electric power shall be provided.
c. Water.
Potable water shall be provided for drinking purposes.
d. Heating and Cooling.
Housing for pet animals shall be sufficiently heated or cooled when necessary to protect the animals from cold or heat to provide for their health.
The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the requirements of the specific pet animals.
Heating shall be deemed necessary when the inside temperature of the facility falls below 50 degrees for a period of 4 consecutive hours and cooling shall be deemed necessary when the temperature of the facility rises above 90 degrees Fahrenheit.
e. Ventilation.
Foster homes shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air to minimize drafts, odors, and moisture condensation, and to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times.
Ventilation may be by either natural or mechanical means, such as windows, vents, fans, or air conditioning.
f. Lighting.
Natural or artificial lighting shall be provided to permit inspection and facilitate routine cleaning and the proper care and maintenance of the animals.
g. Primary Enclosures.
If primary enclosures are used the cages, pens, crates, or kennels shall meet the following requirements: (1) Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain them, and to keep predators out.
(2) Cage/Kennel Floors.
Floors of primary enclosures shall be constructed to prevent injury to the animals' feet.
Floors may be wire provided that the wire is of adequate gauge to prevent sagging under the animals' weight and the mesh is small enough to prevent their feet from passing through.
(3) Cleaning Requirements.
All the surfaces of the primary enclosure shall be constructed of material that is water resistant and can be cleaned and sanitized.
(4) Space Requirements.
All primary enclosures shall allow each pet animal to turn around, exercise normal postural movements, and experience necessary socialization with cage mates, when applicable.
Primary enclosures for pet animals shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth for each species or category respectively (eg. dog breeder, cat breeder, bird breeder, small animal breeder), or as directed by the Commissioner.
h. Sanitation.
(1) Buildings and grounds shall be kept clean and free of accumulations of trash.
(2) Animal wastes shall be removed from primary enclosures and exercise areas daily, or more frequently, if necessary.
(3) Pet animals shall be protected from exposure to water or chemical solution is used for cleaning primary enclosures.
Primary enclosures shall be cleaned and sanitized as often as necessary to reduce disease hazards and odors; minimally, after one animal ceases to occupy the space, before another occupies the same space.
B. OUTDOOR FACILITIES Outdoor facilities for rescue animals shall be in accordance with the regulations set forth for each species or category respectively (eg. dog breeder, cat breeder, bird breeders, small animal breeder), or as directed by the Commissioner.
C. CARE OF PET ANIMALS 1.
Food and Water.
Pet animals shall be fed consistent with the nutritional needs for the age and species, except when under special veterinary care. a.
Animal food shall be of such nutritional value necessary to meet the normal daily nutritional needs of the animal.
b. Perishable food shall be refrigerated.
c. Animal food containers shall be kept clean and sanitary. d. Potable water shall be available to pet animals consistent with the species, except when under special veterinary care.
2.
Classification and Separation: Any pet animals housed in the same primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups.
Any pet animal exhibiting an aggressive behavior shall be housed individually.
3.
Veterinary Care.
All rescue agencies shall have a working relationship with a veterinarian or veterinarians to provide timely treatment for injured or diseased animals.
The name and phone number of the veterinarian(s) will be available to the inspector upon request.
a.
Pet animals shall be observed daily for signs of disease or injury by the fostering individual.
b. Sick or injured animals must be provided with timely veterinary care or euthanatized humanely pursuant to PACFA § 35-80-102(7).
D. RECORD REQUIREMENTS Rescue agencies shall keep records of all animals accepted by them for two years from the date of disposition.
1.
Each record shall contain the following: a.
A physical description of the animal, including species and/or breed, color, sex, and age (when possible). b. Source of the animal, with the date of acquisition, and the name and address of the surrendering party, if applicable.
c.
All records of medical treatment while the animal is in the custody of the rescue agency.
d. Disposition of the animal, with the date of adoption, transfer of ownership, or euthanatization, and the name, address, and phone number of the adopting party.
e.
In the case of psittacine birds, the record shall include the band number or other identification approved by the Commissioner.
2.
All records shall be made available to the Commissioner at all reasonable times during business hours, or at other mutually agreeable times.
3.
Licensees shall maintain lists containing the current street address for each place or premise at which pet animals are kept or transferred.
4.
The animal rescue licensee shall report to the Commissioner on a yearly basis the number of dogs, cats and other pet animals that are accepted into the animal shelter or foster home(s).
The animal rescue licensee shall also report to the Commissioner on a yearly basis the number of dogs, cats or other pet animals that are returned to the owner, adopted to new owners, transferred to other licensed facilities, euthanized or died while at the facility.
The reports shall be submitted on forms supplied by the Commissioner.
E. INSPECTIONS 1.
The licensee shall inspect each of its foster homes at least once a year, with a record of those inspections kept at the address specified in the license application.
2.
The Commissioner may, upon request, have access to any part of a foster home in which fostered pet animals are kept.
TOP OF PAGE
PET ANIMAL CARE AND FACILITIES ACT: SECTIONS 1.00 - 10.00
PET ANIMAL CARE AND FACILITIES ACT: SECTION 11.00
PET ANIMAL CARE AND FACILITIES ACT: SECTIONS 12.00 - 15.00
PET ANIMAL CARE AND FACILITIES ACT: SECTIONS 18.00 - 19.00
INDEX
