[hdr_tsbp-logo.gif] [hdr_tsbp.gif]
Other Board Members present were Vice President Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.; Treasurer Wiki Erickson, M.A.; W. Michael Brimberry, R.Ph., M.B.A.; Kim Caldwell, R.Ph.; Rosemary Forester Combs; Doyle High, R.Ph.; and Oren Peacock, R.Ph.
Board Member Angela Myres was not present.
Staff present were Gay Dodson, R.Ph., Executive Director/Secretary; Carol Fisher, R.Ph., M.P.A., Director of Enforcement; Steve Morse, R.Ph., Director of Professional Services; Cathy Stella, Director of Administrative Services and Licensing; Kerstin Arnold, General Counsel; Julie Hildebrand, Assistant General Counsel; Lori Barta, Assistant General Counsel; Allison Benz, R.Ph., M.S., Assistant Director of Enforcement; Joe Lewis, Chief Investigator; and Kay Wilson, Executive Assistant.
President Rogers advised the Board that agenda item E.5 concerning the peer assistance program would be heard at 2:00 p.m. on May 7, and agenda item E.7 concerning a petition for a pilot project would be heard at 3:00 p.m. on May 7.
Announcements Concerning Board Members and Staff
President Rogers advised the Board that new Board Member Angela Myres was unable to attend the meeting.
President Rogers congratulated Ms. Erickson on the completion of her master's degree.
Ms. Dodson reported that NABP was seeking board members and executive officers to serve on committees and task forces in 2002-2003.
She asked the Board Members to advise her if they were interested, so letters to NABP could be prepared for their signatures.
(See Attachment #1.)
Ms. Benz introduced Jon Pate, an intern from the University of Texas College of Pharmacy, who was doing a six-week rotation at TSBP.
She advised the Board that this was Mr. Pate's final rotation and that he would be graduating the next weekend.
Ms. Benz recognized Lisa Killam-Worrell, also an intern from the University of Texas College of Pharmacy, who was completing a rotation with the Food and Drug Division of the Texas Department of Health.
She attended the meeting with Karen Tanner, R.Ph., from the Food and Drug Division.
Ms. Stella introduced Mary Helen Oviedo, who began employment with TSBP on February 11, 2002, as an Accountant II.
President Rogers welcomed Ms. Oviedo, Mr. Pate, and the guests from the Texas Department of Health.
Mr. Morse announced that continuing education (CE) credit would be available for Texas-licensed pharmacists who attend all of the public portions of the TSBP Board Meeting.
He advised the audience that any pharmacist who wished to receive CE credit for attending the Board Meeting should sign the log provided at the back of the room.
He pointed out that a pharmacist can only claim six hours of continuing education credit for attending Board Meetings during a 24-month renewal period.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the new law book, which includes a CD-rom, was available and that copies had been mailed to each of them.
Ms. Erickson questioned whether the Board had the authority to grant CE credit for attendance at Board meetings.
Ms. Dodson explained that the Board does have the authority to approve CE programs.
Discussion and Approval of Minutes
President Rogers directed the Board's attention to the minutes of the February 5-6, 2002, Public Hearing and Board Business Meeting.
(See Attachment #2.)
Mr. Brimberry pointed out that on page 28, five bullets up from the bottom, filing should be filling.
The motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve the minutes of the February 5-6, 2002, Public Hearing and Board Business Meeting, with the correction presented by Mr. Brimberry.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed unanimously.
Final Adoption of Rules and Rule Reviews
Rules Concerning Operation of a Pharmacy (§291.11)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that at the November 2001 Board Meeting, the Board approved the proposal of new rule §291.11 to clarify what constitutes operation of a pharmacy.
He reported that the proposed rule was published in the March 15, 2002, issue of the Texas Register, and no comments were received.
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to the proposed new rule and pointed out that under the proposed new rule, a person or entity who failed to open a pharmacy within six months of issuance of a license, would be in violation of TSBP rules.
(See Attachment #3.)
The rule also stipulates that a pharmacy may not be located in a personal residence.
Following discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for final adoption, by Board Order, new rule §291.11, with the correction of fo to of in §291.11(a).
(See Attachment #3.)
The motion was seconded by Ms. Combs and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Pharmacy License Application (§291.1) and Change of Ownership (§291.4)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to proposed amendments to §291.1 and §291.4 concerning requirements for applications for pharmacy licenses.
(See Attachment #4.)
He explained that at the November 2001 Board Meeting, the Board received a staff report concerning problems related to pharmacy licenses.
Major problems arise when a person with a pharmacy license has the ability to purchase drugs but either does not intend, or fails, to open and operate a bona fide business.
The Board directed staff to draft suggested rule language to address the problems.
At its February 2002 Board Meeting, the Board reviewed and proposed amendments to §291.1 and §291.4.
The proposed amendments were published in the March 15, 2002, issue of the Texas Register, and comments were received from the Texas Federation of Drug Stores (TFDS), Albertson's, the National Association of Chain Drug Stores (NACDS), and HEB.
(See Attachment #4.)
Mr. Morse pointed out that TFDS stated, "We simply do not believe that the benefits outweigh the risks in this situation.
We respectfully request that the Board strike the requirements of providing personal, confidential information such as social security cards, birth certificates and drivers licenses."
(See Attachment #4.)
He advised the Board that NACDS made virtually the same comment.
(See Attachment #4.)
Albertson's commented that "In our view, the risks associated with providing this information are not offset by any corresponding increase in the public safety of the citizens of the State of Texas.
Currently, names, home addresses, dates of birth, phone numbers and social security numbers are requested on Board applications.
This information should be more than adequate to determine the legitimacy of pharmacy applicants."
(See Attachment #4.)
Mr. Morse pointed out that HEB's comments included, "For corporations (both publicly and privately held) we would like to protect the public dissemination of private information on the executive officers (such as could be found
on a driver license) as much as possible.
Such information is also unnecessary, in my opinion, when issuing a license to a corporation or partnership that has been in business within the state often for many years."
(See Attachment #4.)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to a summary of the proposed amendments that included comments.
(See Attachment #4.)
He reviewed the comments as follows.
Concerning §291.1(a)(6)(B), which would require a copy of social security card and birth certificate of owner, or if the pharmacy is owned by a partnership or corporation, copy of social security card and birth certificate of each executive officer:
TFDS and NACDS commented that requiring the social security card and birth certificate of an owner who is not a pharmacist or is grandfathered under §291.4(e) was burdensome and exposed legitimate pharmacy applicants to breaches of privacy and identity theft.
Albertson's commented that the social security number was not an open record under Texas law but subjected TSBP to additional requirements.
They felt the birth certificate could possibly be subject to open records.
Albertson's suggested requiring the social security number and birth certificate only if the application was false or incorrect.
Ms. Arnold explained to the Board that if TSBP received an open records request for this type of personal information, staff would have to request an Attorney General's (AG) opinion on whether the information was confidential.
A separate request would have to be submitted to the Attorney General's office for each request received.
Ms. Arnold advised the Board that social security numbers and driver license numbers would probably be considered confidential, but that there was a possibility birth records would not be considered confidential.
Concerning §291.1(a)(9), which would require a copy of the current driver license or state issued photo ID card of owner, or if the pharmacy is owned by a partnership or closely held corporation, a current driver license or state issued photo ID card for each executive officer:
HEB commented that copies of these documents should not be required if the applicant holds an active license on June 1, 2002.
TFDS and NACDS commented that this requirement would unnecessarily endanger the privacy of legitimate applicants while doing little to advance the Board's goal of protecting and advancing public health and safety.
Albertson's recommended deleting the requirement, because the information might be subject to open records.
They recommended requiring the documents only if the application is false or incorrect.
TFDS and NACDS supported §291.1(e), which added a requirement for an on-site inspection of the pharmacy by TSBP prior to the issuance of a pharmacy license.
They felt that the on-site inspection, along with other non-controversial provisions, would be sufficient to protect against illegitimate pharmacies.
Concerning §291.4(b)(3), which would require that names, home addresses, dates of birth, phone numbers, and social security numbers of individual owners, and the name, title, home address, home phone number, date of birth, and social security number of all managing officers, if the owner is a partnership or corporation, HEB commented that the requirement was overreaching in its level of personal detail and is public information.
HEB suggested that the information be required only on the first application by an individual or entity for a pharmacy license, and that owners with existing pharmacy licenses as of June 1, 2002, be grandfathered.
Concerning §291.4(b)(6)(C), which would require a copy of the social security card and birth certificate of owner, or if the pharmacy is owned by a partnership or corporation, a copy of the social security card and birth certificate of each executive officer when a change of ownership occurs:
TFDS and NACDS commented that these copies are required if applicant is not a pharmacist or is grandfathered under §291.4(e).
They felt the requirement was burdensome and exposed legitimate pharmacy applicants to breaches of privacy and identity theft.
Albertson's recommended that the requirement be deleted and be required only if the application is false or incorrect.
Concerning §291.4(b)(9), which would require a copy of the current driver license or state issued photo ID card of owner, or if the pharmacy is owned by a partnership or closely held corporation, a current driver license or state issued photo ID card for each executive officer:
HEB commented that the requirement should be deleted if the applicant holds an active license on June 1, 2002.
TFDS and NACDS commented that the requirement would unnecessarily endanger the privacy of legitimate applicants while doing little to advance the Board's goal of protecting and advancing public health and safety.
Albertson's recommended deleting the requirement as it was possibly subject to open records.
They suggested requiring these documents only if the application was false or incorrect.
Mr. Morse pointed out that the recommended change to §291.4(e) was to correct a citation.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that after reviewing comments, the staff was suggesting requiring copies of the social security card; birth certificate; driver license or state issued ID card; and pre-licensing, on-site inspections for Class A Pharmacies only.
He explained that the reasons for only making these requirements for Class A Pharmacies were:
Class A Pharmacies do not have pre-licensure inspections by another state agency.
Class B Pharmacies have pre-licensure inspections by the Texas Department of Health, Radiation Control.
Class C Pharmacies have pre-licensure inspections by the Texas Department of Health.
Class D Pharmacies are low risk facilities, because they may not possess controlled drugs.
Class E Pharmacies may have pre-licensure inspections by the state of residence.
In response to a question from Mr. Caldwell concerning why this information should be collected, Ms. Fisher explained that TSBP currently collects all the previously-mentioned items from pharmacists.
Staff felt that the level of credibility needed to be raised for applicants for pharmacy licensure.
Ms. Fisher pointed out that there is a large opportunity for the owner of a pharmacy to buy and divert drugs.
She provided a recent example of a pharmacy license being issued to a person with a previously revoked Texas pharmacist license who had obtained the pharmacy license under a forged signature.
The Board reviewed the original staff recommendations for changes to procedures regarding the issuance of Class A Pharmacy licenses, a summary of other states' new pharmacy license requirements, the current TSBP pharmacy license application, current new pharmacy license application procedures, and current TSBP change of pharmacy ownership procedures.
(See Attachment #4.)
Following a lengthy discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to withdraw the proposed amendments to §291.1 and §291.4 and repropose them at the August 2002 Board Meeting, with the following modifications:
Grandfather an owner who already owns a pharmacy in Texas;
Require the aforementioned documents only on the first application submitted by an owner;
Allow alternative documentation in lieu of a copy of the birth certificate (e.g., passport);
Require the aforementioned documents only on Class A Pharmacy applications; and
If the owner is other than an individual, require the aforementioned documents only on closely-held corporations.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Pharmacists Who Have Been Licensed for 50 Years (§295.5), Pharmacist License Renewals (§295.7), and the Amount of Continuing Education Required to Activate an Inactive Pharmacist License (§295.9)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to proposed amendments to §295.5, §295.7, and §295.9.
He advised the Board that at the November 2001 Board Meeting, the Board discussed a situation where a retired pharmacist wished to renew her pharmacist license without payment of a fee due to the limited resources of a fixed income.
Mr. Morse explained that TSBP rules currently allowed a retired pharmacist to renew his/her license without payment of a fee if the pharmacist had practiced in Texas for 50 years.
At the November meeting, the Board instructed staff to draft rule language to amend the rules so that a retired pharmacist who had practiced in Texas for 50 years or who was 72 years of age could renew his/her license without payment of a fee.
Staff presented rule language to the Board at its February 2002 Board Meeting, and the Board approved the rule language for proposal.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that staff had also taken the opportunity to update citations in the affected rules.
The proposed rules were published in the March 15, 2002, issue of the Texas Register.
No comments were received.
Mr. High pointed out that an individual who placed his/her license on inactive status could reactivate the license, but would have to obtain the required number of continuing education hours.
The motion was made by Ms. Erickson to approve for final adoption, by Board Order, amendments to §295.5, §295.7, and §295.9, as presented.
(See Attachment #5.)
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Licensing Requirements for Pharmacists and Preceptor Certification Requirements (283.1 and §283.6)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to proposed amendments to §283.1 and §283.6.
(See Attachment #6.)
He explained that the proposed amendments would change a pharmacist preceptor's certification renewal period to coincide with his/her pharmacist license renewal period, require three hours of preceptor training every two years rather than every three years, and update citations to the new codified Texas Pharmacy Act.
The proposed amendments were approved by the Board at its February 2002 Board Meeting.
The rules were published in the March 15, 2002, issue of the Texas Register.
A comment in support of the proposed amendments was received from the Texas Society of Health-System Pharmacists.
(See Attachment #6.)
In response to a question from Ms. Erickson, Mr. Morse explained that 30 hours of continuing education is required for a pharmacist to renew every two years.
Of the 30 hours, three hours must be preceptor training for a pharmacist preceptor.
The motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve for final adoption amendments to §283.1 and §283.6, by Board Order, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed unanimously.
Proposal of Rules
Rules Concerning Responsibilities of Pharmacists-in-Charge, Pharmacists, and Pharmacy Owners in Class A Pharmacies (§291.32 and §291.36)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to suggested amendments to §291.32 and §291.36 that would allow a pharmacist to serve as pharmacist-in-charge (PIC) of multiple Class A Pharmacies.
(See Attachment #7.)
He explained that at the February 2002 Board Meeting, the Board discussed the duties of the PIC and the pharmacy owner.
At that time, the Board decided to change only the rules relating to the duties of the PIC.
Mr. Morse pointed out that, as originally approved by the Board for proposal, the rule language would allow a pharmacist to serve as PIC of more than one Class A Pharmacy under limited circumstances.
He reported that the TSBP Compliance Officers reviewed the proposed rule language and pointed out that Class A Pharmacies Compounding Sterile Pharmaceuticals may only be open a few hours per week.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that staff was suggesting that the rules be amended to additionally keep the provision to allow a pharmacist to serve as PIC of more than one Class A Pharmacy, if the pharmacies are not open to provide pharmacy services simultaneously.
(See Attachment #7.)
Mr. Morse reviewed the new suggested language for amendments to §291.32 and §291.36, including the following:
§291.32(a)(1)(A)(i) and §291.32(a)(10)(A)(ii) to specify that a pharmacist may be the PIC of: more than one Class A pharmacy, if the additional Class A Pharmacies are not open to provide pharmacy services simultaneously; or up to two Class A Pharmacies open simultaneously if the PIC works at least 20 hours per week in each pharmacy.
§291.32(a)(2) to add under responsibilities that the PIC shall have responsibility for the practice of pharmacy at the pharmacy for which he or she is the PIC.
The PIC may advise the owner on administrative or operational concerns.
§291.32(a)(2)(A)-(E) were deleted and §291.32(a)(2)(F)-(O) were relettered (A)-(J).
§291.32(a)(2)(G) - establishment of was changed to supervising a system to assure.
§291.32(a)(H) - maintenance of was changed to assuring that and are maintained was added between system and such.
New section §291.32(b) was added as follows:
(B) Owner.
The owner of a Class A pharmacy shall have the responsibility for all administrative and operational functions of the pharmacy.
The PIC may advise the owner on administrative and operational concerns.
The owner shall have responsibility for, at a minimum, the following, and if the owner is not a Texas licensed pharmacist, the owner shall consult with the PIC or another Texas licensed pharmacist:
(1) establishment of policies for procurement of prescription drugs and devices and other products dispensed from the Class A pharmacy;
(2) establishment and maintenance of effective controls against the theft or diversion of prescription drugs.;
(3) if the pharmacy uses an automated pharmacy dispensing system, reviewing and approving all policies and procedures for system operation, safety, security, accuracy and access, patient confidentiality, prevention of unauthorized access, and malfunction; and
(4) providing the pharmacy with the necessary equipment and resources commensurate with its level and type of practice.
§291.32(b) was renumbered §291.32(c) and paragraph (4)(E) was changed to specify that . . .
The dispensing process shall include, but not be limited to, drug regimen review and verification of accurate prescription data entry, packaging, preparation, compounding, and labeling, and performance of the final check of the dispensed prescription.
The same changes were recommended in §291.36.
(See Attachment #7 for suggested rule language.)
Following discussion, a motion was made by Dr. Anderson to withdraw the amendments approved for proposal at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
A motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve for proposal amendments to §291.32 and §291.36, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell.
Following discussion, the motion was modified by Dr. Anderson to approve for proposal amendments to §291.32 and §291.36, with 20 hours changed to 10 hours in §291.32(a)(1)(A)(ii) and §291.36(c)(1)(A)(i)(II).
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell, as modified, and passed unanimously.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 10:30 a.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 10:46 a.m.
Rules Concerning Non-Sterile Compounding (§291.33)
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to suggested language for amendments to §291.33 concerning compounding pursuant to a prescription.
(See Attachment #8.)
She explained that the amendment would allow compounding only pursuant to a practitioner's prescription order or in anticipation of a practitioner's drug order.
She further explained that the amendment would delete a portion of the current rules that allows a pharmacist to compound for use in a physician's office.
Ms. Dodson pointed out that in the Texas Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, manufacture means the process of preparing, propagating, compounding, processing, packaging, repackaging, labeling, testing, or quality control of a drug or drug product, but does not include compounding that is done within the practice of pharmacy and pursuant to a prescription from a practitioner for a patient.
(See Attachment #8.)
In the Pharmacy Act, compounding means the preparation, mixing, assembling, packaging, or labeling of a drug or device as the result of a practitioner's prescription drug order or the practitioner's initiative based on the practitioner-patient-pharmacist relationship in the course of professional practice or in anticipation of a prescription drug order based on a routine, regularly observed prescribing pattern.
(See Attachment #8.)
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to §291.33(i)(2)(D) and pointed out that the portion that allows compounding for physician's use would be deleted, resulting in the remaining rule, which states, Drug products may be compounded for the exclusive use of the pharmacy where the products are compounded.
Compounded drug products may not be distributed for resale, including distribution to pharmacies under common ownership or control.
The portion that would be deleted is . . . except that a practitioner may obtain compounded drug products for administration to patients, but not for dispensing.
Products compounded for physician administration to patients shall be labeled.
Such label shall contain: the statement "For Office Use Only"; name and strength of the compounded medication or list of the active ingredients and strengths; facility's control number; "use by" date as determined by the pharmacist using appropriate documented criteria; and quantity or amount in the container.
(See Attachment #8.)
Ms. Dodson explained that these amendments were approved by the Board for proposal at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
However, they have not been published in the Texas Register because previously adopted rules in this section will not become effective until June 1, 2002.
Therefore, these rules are being resubmitted to the Board because of a letter received from the Texas Pharmacy Association Academy of Compounding Pharmacists (TPA) asking the Board to reconsider publishing the rules in the Texas Register and to form a task force to study the issue.
(See Attachment #8.)
Ms. Dodson then directed the Board's attention to a copy of a letter from the U.S. Department of Health 
(See Attachment #8.)
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that in response to the letter from TPA and in light of a recent Supreme Court ruling on the issue of pharmacy compounding regulation, staff was recommending that the Board withdraw the amendments and appoint a task force to study the issue.
President Rogers stated that she was in favor of withdrawing the amendments and appointing a task force.
A motion was made by Dr. Anderson to withdraw the amendments to §291.33, as proposed at the February 5-6, 2002, Board Meeting, and appoint a task force to study the issue of compounding pursuant to a prescription.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed unanimously.
There was further discussion concerning compounding and manufacturing.
Dr. Anderson and Mr. Peacock advised President Rogers that they would like to serve as Board liaisons to the task force.
Rules Concerning the Display of Pharmacy Technician's License in Class C Pharmacies (§291.73)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that at the February 2002 Board Meeting, the Board directed staff to submit suggested rule language to allow pharmacies to maintain their pharmacy technicians' PTCB certificates in files rather than posting them on the wall.
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to suggested amendments to §291.73.
(See Attachment #9.)
He explained that these amendments would permit a pharmacy to maintain these certificates in a file at a Class C Pharmacy provided the technician does not work in an outpatient pharmacy.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that staff believed the change was reasonable for the following reasons:
in an inpatient setting, the public does not generally have access to the areas where certificates/licenses are posted; and
technician certificates will be easier to locate during compliance inspections if maintained in one file.
He explained that the amendment would require that the pharmacist-in-charge maintain the copies of certificates on file for inspection by Board representatives.
Mr. Caldwell suggested that the rule language be changed to specify that the technician's current certificate be on file at the technician's primary place of practice and that a copy be on file at any other locations where the technician practices.
The motion was made by Mr. Brimberry to approve for proposal amendments to §291.73 with the changes suggested by Mr. Caldwell.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Remote Pharmacy Systems (§291.20)
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to suggested amendments to §291.20 concerning remote pharmacy services.
(See Attachment #10.)
He advised the Board that Ms. Dodson received a letter from Senator Jane Nelson pointing out that new rule §291.20(a), as adopted, does not allow assisted living centers to have automated dispensing systems since they are not licensed under the Health and Safety Code chapters listed in the rule.
(See Attachment #10.)
Mr. Morse explained that Senator Nelson was correct and that the task force that recommended the rule and staff incorrectly believed that assisted living centers were included.
Therefore, staff was recommending that the rule be amended to include assisted living centers.
In addition, Mr. Morse advised the Board that currently the renewal application for remote pharmacy services required the same information as the initial application.
He reported that staff was recommending the deletion of the requirement for the
signature of the medical director or other person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility on renewal applications in §291.20(a)(4)(A)(ii), §291.20(b)(4)(A)(ii), and §291.20(c)(4)(A)(ii).
He also pointed out that in §291.20(a)(4)(A)(i) office was being corrected to officer.
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for proposal, as submitted, amendments to §291.20 concerning remote pharmacy services.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Administrative Practice and Procedures (§281.2, §281.4, §281.14, §281.17, §281.27, §281.33, §281.43, and §281.45)
Mr. Morse explained that the Board is required to review all TSBP rules every four years to determine that a need for the rules still exists.
He advised the Board that staff uses the rule review process as an opportunity to update and correct citations, etc.
He directed the Board's attention to suggested amendments to §281.2, §281.4, §281.14, §281.17, §281.27, §281.33, §281.43, and §281.45 and explained that the amendments were being suggested by TSBP's General Counsel.
(See Attachment #11.)
He briefly reviewed the amendments, which included:
§281.4 - changing Open Records to Public Information.
§281.14 and §281.17 - changing General Services Commission to Texas Building and Procurement Commission.
§281.27, §281.33, §281.43, and §281.45 - changing Texas Rules of Civil Evidence to Texas Rules of Evidence.
§281.33(b) - changing Texas Rules of Civil Procedure to Texas Rules of Procedure.
§281.33(d)(1)(C) - deleting Rule 166b.
§281.33(h)(2) - deleting 166b(3).
(See Attachment #11.)
The motion was made by Mr. Brimberry to approve for proposal amendments to §281.2, §281.4, §281.14, §281.17, §281.27, §281.33, §281.43, and §281.45, §281.33(b), and to disregard the changing of Texas Rules of Civil Procedure to Texas Rules of Procedure in §281.33(b).
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Rules Concerning Participation by Telephone in Contested Cases (§281.40)
Ms. Arnold advised the Board that staff was recommending the repeal of §281.40 and simultaneous proposal of new rule §281.40.
She directed the Board's attention to the new rule language and explained that the new rule would be consistent with rules adopted by the State Office of Administrative Hearings (SOAH).
(See Attachment #12.)
The new language establishes rules whereby a party may request to appear by telephone or videoconferencing or to present testimony of a witness before SOAH.
Ms. Dodson pointed out that TSBP is required to follow SOAH's rules, and this new rule would make TSBP's rules agree with SOAH's.
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for proposal the repeal of §281.40 and simultaneous proposal of new rule §281.40.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Rule Reviews
Chapter 281 In accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, the Board reviewed Chapter 281 concerning administrative practices and procedures.
(See Attachment #13.)
The motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve for proposal, the review of Chapter 281, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed unanimously.
§295.15 In accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, the Board reviewed §295.15 concerning administration of immunizations and vaccinations by a pharmacist under written protocol of a physician.
(See Attachment #14.)
The motion was made by Mr. Peacock to approve for proposal, the review of §295.15, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Chapter 301
Mr. Morse advised the Board that staff recommended the repeal of §301.1 concerning fraud, deceit, and misrepresentation in the practice of pharmacy.
(See Attachment #15.)
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to repeal §301.1.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed unanimously.
In accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, the Board reviewed Chapter 301.
(See Attachment #13.)
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for proposal, the review of Chapter 301, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed unanimously.
Chapter 311
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to suggested amendments to §311.1, which were as follows:
§311.1(f) - change his to the.
§311.1(g) - change executive director-secretary to executive director.
(See Attachment #16.)
The motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve for proposal amendments to §311.1, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed unanimously.
In accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, the Board reviewed Chapter 311 concerning code of conduct.
(See Attachment #16.)
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to approve for proposal, the review of Chapter 311, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed unanimously.
Reports and Discussions
Interagency Contract With Texas Department of Human Services for Inspection of Emergency Kits in Nursing Homes
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that during the last legislative session the responsibility for regulating emergency medication kits in nursing homes was moved from the Department of Human Services to TSBP.
She pointed out that although TSBP received funding for inspections of the 1,200 nursing homes with emergency medication kits, TSBP did not receive any additional personnel.
She explained that TSBP would not be able to inspect the additional sites with current personnel without reducing the inspection frequency of other pharmacies.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that TSBP staff met with personnel from the Department of Human Services (DHS) to explore the possibility of an interagency contract whereby DHS would continue to perform the inspections.
She pointed out that DHS was already inspecting the nursing homes and has been inspecting emergency medication kits.
She reported that following the meeting, on April 24, 2002, TSBP submitted a letter to DHS outlining conditions for the interagency contract.
No response had been received to date.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that although TSBP's request for permission to exceed its FTE cap by one person had been denied, she had received a call from Senator Jane Nelson's office asking for copies of the documentation submitted to the Governor's Budget Office and the Legislative Budget Board.
In response to a question from Mr. Brimberry, Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the funding for remote sites was contingency funding based on the passage of SB 98 and SB 768.
Current Financial Update * Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the FY2002 Financial Statement for September 1, 2001, through February 28, 2002.
(See Attachment #17.)
She pointed out that on February 28, TSBP should have 50% of its budget remaining and actually had 57.61% remaining.
She explained that TSBP continues to lapse funds from the Contingency Rider from Senate Bill 98.
Ms. Stella explained that item 3545 was for computer support to Northrop Grumman (NG).
She pointed out that normally TSBP would pay NG around $100,000 per year, but there had been extra expenses budgeted for FY2002 for implementing new projects due to statute changes.
These projects included pharmacist certification, remote pharmacies, preceptor project to coincide with pharmacist renewal, profile programming, new license fees, continuing education changes, electronic renewal of pharmacists' licenses, and an electronic inspection project.
Ms. Dodson explained that the electronic inspection project involved placing the compliance inspection form on a hand-held computer for use by compliance officers during inspections.
Ms. Stella also explained that item 7219 was the subscription fee the agency has to pay to the Department of Information Resources for on-line registration of pharmacists.
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the Board Member Travel Budget for FY2002.
(See Attachment #18.)
Strategic Plan for FY2003-2007
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a draft of the TSBP Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2003-2007.
(See Attachment #19.)
She explained that the Board approved the issue statements contained in the plan at the February 2002 Board Meeting.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that the Strategic Plan is the foundation for the TSBP budget for the next biennium (FY2004-2005), as well as goals and objectives for the next fiscal year.
She advised the Board that they would consider the TSBP Goals and Objectives for FY2003 later in the meeting.
Ms. Stella briefly reviewed the plan.
She advised the Board that the plan was due in the Governor's office on June 3.
Mr. Caldwell pointed out that HIPPA should be corrected to HIPAA.
The motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve the TSBP Strategic Plan for the Fiscal Years 2003-2007 for submission to the Governor's office, with the correction noted by Mr. Caldwell.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High and passed unanimously.
Customer Service Survey
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that SB 1563, passed by the 75^th Texas Legislature, required all state agencies to conduct a customer satisfaction survey (survey) every two years.
The legislation was very specific about the information to be gathered from the survey.
She reported that TSBP's first survey was conducted in FY2000 by TSBP staff.
Ms. Fisher reported that the second TSBP survey was conducted during the current fiscal year, and that TSBP was assisted by Ashish Patel, a Master's Degree Option II student with the University of Texas College of Pharmacy.
Mr. Patel conducted the survey as his master's project.
Ms. Fisher directed the Board's attention to the cover letter and survey that were mailed to 3,593 individuals.
(See Attachment #20.)
The survey was mailed to 2,704 licensees (pharmacists, pharmacy owners, and interns) and 889 non-licensees (complainants, attorneys, and individuals who submitted open records requests.)
She pointed out that the survey was mailed on November 1, 2001, and respondents were given until December 15, 2001, to reply.
The response rate was 27.5% (989).
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that the response rate for the survey conducted in FY2000 was around 49%.
Ms. Fisher briefly reviewed a report on the survey, which included:
Background;
Inventory of External Customers;
Information-Gathering Methods;
Levels of Service Quality;
Analysis of Findings; and
Future Plans.
Ms. Fisher pointed out that TSBP's customers were most pleased with the web page and staff.
They were least pleased with timeliness in returning phone calls and in handling complaints.
Ms. Fisher directed the Board's attention to a summary of written suggestions received on the survey form.
(See Attachment #20.)
She pointed out that of the 32 suggestions received, eight had already been accomplished, staff had taken action on four, three would be considered if funding was available, seven would require changes to existing laws, four were not within TSBP's jurisdiction, and two were not in line with TSBP's mission.
In response to a question from Ms. Erickson concerning a 1-800 number, Ms. Fisher explained that currently the only 1-800 number available for TSBP customers is a number customers can call to request a form to file a complaint.
The number is on the Health Professions Council phone system.
The Board discussed the feasibility of TSBP installing a 1-800 line.
In response to one comment, the Board discussed that the home addresses of licensees are public record.
The Board directed staff to place this issue on the list of possible statutory changes during the next session.
Ms. Fisher directed the Board's attention to a sampling of positive comments received on the returned surveys.
(See Attachment #20.)
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that another survey will be due in FY2004, and that staff is going to use a different distribution method.
Rather than a mass mailing, beginning September 1, 2002, surveys will be included with every renewal license, new license, and letter closing a complaint.
Envelopes will be provided, but postage will not be prepaid.
Staff will be able to determine from the response rate whether this is a more efficient method of conducting the survey.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 12:10 p.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 1:52 p.m.
Peer Assistance Program
Ms. Benz directed the Board's attention to the Pharmacy Recovery Network (PRN) budget for September 1, 2001, through February 28, 2002.
(See Attachment #21.)
She advised the Board that Bob Hull, Director of the PRN program, was available to answer questions.
There were no questions.
Ms. Benz directed the Board's attention to the final audits of activities and performance measures for PRN for FY2001.
(See Attachment #22.)
In response to a question from Dr. Anderson concerning external funding, Mr. Hull responded that PRN was on target in FY2001 and were where they should be at this point in FY2002.
He advised the Board that a possible source of outside funding would be attorneys he had worked with at informal conferences, and that he had a commitment from one attorney for $1,000-3,000.
Dr. Anderson referenced the current PRN budget report that the Board had reviewed earlier and suggested that the column headed $Over Budget be retitled Variance.
(See Attachment #21.)
The Board commended Mr. Hull on the work he was doing.
Ms. Benz advised the Board that at the end of the second quarter of FY2002 (February 28, 2002) there were 148 licensed pharmacists in the peer assistance program.
Of the 148, 75 were on in-state TSBP disciplinary orders, 15 were on out-of-state TSBP disciplinary orders, and 58 were being monitored only by PRN.
(See Attachment #23.)
Ms. Benz directed the Board's attention to a draft of bid specifications for the pharmacist drug screening program.
(See Attachment #24.)
She advised the Board that staff would be sending the bid specifications out for responses if the specifications were approved by the Board.
Mr. Hull advised the Board that NCPS of Newport News, Virginia, was currently performing drug screens for PRN, and NCPS was doing a wonderful job.
The motion was made by Mr. Peacock to approve the bid specifications for the drug screening program as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Proposed Budgets for FY2004-2005 PRN Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the proposed PRN budget for FY2004-2005.
(See Attachment #25.)
She explained that the legislative cap for the PRN program is $160,000 per year and is funded with a surcharge to each pharmacy/pharmacist license.
The surcharge is currently $12 per pharmacist and pharmacy license on a biennial basis.
Ms. Stella explained that TSBP has a two-year contract with PRN that ends on August 31, 2003, to pay PRN $108,000 per year.
The remaining $52,000 per year is allocated to TSBP for expenses incurred in monitoring licensees who are under Impaired Board Orders.
In response to a question from Ms. Dodson, Mr. Hull advised the Board that PRN was requesting a $20,000 per year increase for FY2004-2005 for a total increase over the biennium of $40,000.
He explained that the cost of evaluations had increased significantly, with evaluations sometimes costing as much as $1,000.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that staff had requested that PRN increase the level of the evaluations, and this had resulted in increased costs.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that in order to increase funding for PRN, the Board would need to seek an increase in the Legislative Appropriations Request or cut the TSBP budget by the amount of the increase.
Following discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Peacock to approve the PRN budget for FY2004-2005 at $128,000 per year, contingent on an additional appropriation of $20,000 per year.
If the additional appropriation is not received, the PRN budget will remain at $108,000 per year.
The motion was seconded by Mr. High.
Discussion followed concerning the use of unexpended funds at year-end by PRN.
The motion passed unanimously.
TSBP
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a summary of TSBP's budget request for FY2004-2005.
(See Attachment #26.)
She explained that the basis for the supplemental budget request was primarily the pharmacy technician registration program.
The supplemental budget request included ten positions and the associated salaries, set up, and technology increases.
The supplemental budget request was reviewed as follows:
Ms. Stella advised the Board that the registration of pharmacy technicians would involve registering at least 20,000 individuals.
This would double the number of registrants currently serviced by TSBP.
She explained that the program administrator and two administrative technician positions were essential for the Licensing Division to be able to administer the program.
Ms. Dodson explained that the information specialist would assist staff in keeping the web page current and would help with web design.
This position could also assist with information technology.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that the addition of a field compliance officer and two field investigators was essential, because with the implementation of pharmacy technician registration, the number of audits would probably increase due to the fact that pharmacy technicians are responsible for the majority of thefts and losses of controlled substances in pharmacies.
The bulk of complaints concerning pharmacy technicians will probably result in field investigations.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that two of the three administrative technicians being requested would provide additional support for complaint resolution in the Enforcement Division.
Ms. Arnold advised the Board that the third administrative technician would handle the more routine matters in the Legal Division.
This would free the legal assistants to provide more assistance with drafting of preliminary notice letters, etc.
Ms. Stella pointed out that the remainder of the supplemental budget request included funding for a salary increase for the executive director, computer/software replacement costs, merit raises, and subscription/profile fees for pharmacists, pharmacies, and pharmacy technicians.
The Board discussed investigations of thefts and audits.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that the agency receives approximately 250 theft reports per year.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that TSBP was given three new programs during the last legislative session.
TSBP requested six new FTEs to implement these programs, and received the funding for two FTEs, but did not receive an increase to the FTE cap.
Therefore, no FTEs could be hired without approval from the Legislative Budget Board and the Governor's Budget Office.
Ms. Stella pointed out that if the salary of the Executive Director is not increased, there will be pharmacists on the TSBP staff making more than the Executive Director.
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a summary of the fees necessary to support the budget request for FY2004-2005.
She pointed out that the pharmacist license fee is now $227, and the pharmacy license fee is now $363, and no increase would be necessary.
The supplemental budget request would be supported by a pharmacy technician fee, set at $25 per year.
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a table with revenue estimates for 2002-2005, assuming the agency receives the entire amount of the supplemental budget request.
(See Attachment #26.)
Following discussion, the motion was made by Dr. Anderson to approve the TSBP Legislative Appropriation Request, as submitted.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 3:08 p.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 3:18 p.m.
Pilot Project
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the agency received a petition for a pilot project from Cardinal Health Provider Pharmacy Services, Inc.
(Cardinal).
The pilot project was proposed to evaluate the potential benefits of a pharmacy support center to provide order processing services for Texas hospital pharmacies.
(See Attachment #27.)
Mr. Morse introduced Richard J. Burnett, Pharm.D., Director of New Projects for Cardinal, and Gary G. Cacciatore, Pharm.D., J.D., Director of Regulatory Affairs for Cardinal.
Mr. Morse reported that President Rogers appointed a task force composed of Ms. Rogers, Mr. Brimberry, staff members Ben Santana and Steve Morse, and Lois Taylor, R.Ph., Director of Pharmacy, Northeast Baptist Hospital, San Antonio, to review the proposal.
The task force met once, on April 9, 2002.
Mr. Morse reported that after the review of the pilot project, the task force recommended that the pilot project be approved with modifications.
Following the meeting of the task force, Cardinal submitted an addendum to the proposal for the pilot project, dated April 12, 2002.
(See Attachment #27.)
Mr. Morse advised that the location of the project will be Cardinal Health Provider Pharmacy Services, Inc., 1330 Enclave Parkway, Houston.
Mr. Morse explained that although Cardinal will operate as a Class A Pharmacy for the project, the medication order processing services that will be provided will match the services offered by a Class C Pharmacy.
Therefore, Cardinal intended to abide by Class C Pharmacy rules and was requesting exemption from all Class A rules and Class C rules concerning drug possession, dispensing, and inventories, technician training, environment, and equipment.
(See petition for rules to be exempted -- Attachment #27.)
Mr. Morse reviewed the pilot project, as follows:
Cardinal was issued a Class A Pharmacy license for the Pharmacy Support Center on April 3, 2002.
Pharmacists at the Pharmacy Support Center will receive training to familiarize them with the host hospital's procedures and order entry protocols.
Policies and procedures for order entry will be kept at the Pharmacy Support Center for reference purposes.
The Pharmacy Support Center's computer workstations will link directly to a participating hospital's existing information system.
Hospitals will transmit orders to the Pharmacy Support Center utilizing high-resolution fax machines or digital scanning technology.
Within 60 minutes of receipt, a pharmacist will review the order and the patient medication profile by accessing the hospital pharmacy's patient computer profile.
This will be accomplished by directly linking the computers using a high-speed virtual private network.
Once the order has been reviewed, data entered, and the DUR performed, nurses at the hospital will be notified that the medication has been authorized for administration or that further clarification by a hospital pharmacist is required.
Pharmacists will be available via a 1-800 number to answer patient specific, medication-related questions from the medical staff and nursing.
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to a list of conditions developed by the task force for the pilot project.
(See Attachment #27.)
The Board discussed that the Pharmacy Support Center should not be used in place of local pharmacists, when the pharmacists are available.
Dr. Burnett pointed out that hospital pharmacies are open a limited number of hours, and most hospitals are dealing with a shortage of pharmacists.
He advised the Board that Cardinal felt this
was an innovative approach and would create an off-site center with the resources to deliver a needed service.
Dr. Burnett briefly reviewed the process for the Board.
Dr. Cacciatore advised the Board that he felt the pilot project would fit in well with the direction the Board was discussing concerning central processing of prescriptions.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the task force was recommending approval of the pilot project.
Ms. Rogers commended Dr. Burnett and Dr. Cacciatore on the development of the pilot project.
The motion was made by Mr. Brimberry to approve the pilot project as presented, with the conditions developed by the task force.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
Internal Audit
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to a copy of the TSBP Internal Audit Plan for FY2002.
(See Attachment #28.)
She advised the Board that the audit plan was developed by Porterfield and Associates (Porterfield) and was approved by the Executive Committee on April 14, 2002.
Ms. Stella advised the Board that in developing the audit plan, Porterfield used a risk assessment model to identify the risks various activities posed and to identify whether there is an associated business risk.
Porterfield then used the risk assessment model to rank and prioritize the identified risks according to their impact and probability of occurring.
Ms. Stella directed the Board's attention to the items that were ranked as high/high and high/medium that will be audited this year, which included:
Licensing - employee turnover/succession planning and adequacy of staff/work ratio;
Administration - employee turnover/succession planning;
Enforcement - delays in complaint resolution and compliance with legislative mandates;
Information Systems - computer security and loss of data/record retention problems/imaging; and
Legal Counsel - employee turnover/succession planning.
Ms. Stella reported that the Executive Committee recommended that computer security and complaint resolution activity be audited each year.
She advised the Board that they would receive the audit report from Porterfield at the August 2002 Board Meeting.
The audit report is due to the Governor's Budget Office, the Legislative Budget Board, and the Sunset Commission by October 31, 2002.
Legislation Passed by the 77^th Texas Legislature that has an Impact on TSBP or the Practice of Pharmacy
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a chart titled Legislation Passed by the 77^th Legislature that Requires Action by the Board of Pharmacy.
(See Attachment #29.)
The chart included the bill number, action, deadline, Board Meeting(s), and status of each bill that required action by TSBP.
Mr. Morse directed the Board's attention to a copy of a letter concerning the changes in generic substitution law that was sent to all practitioners in Texas who have prescription authority.
(See Attachment #29.)
Mr. Morse advised the Board that there was also an article regarding these changes in the last TSBP Newsletter, and there will be another article in the next Newsletter.
House and Senate Interim Committees
Ms. Rogers reported that TSBP had been included in the following meetings:
Ms. Rogers and Ms. Dodson testified before the House Appropriations Committee, Subcommittee on Regulatory.
Ms. Dodson testified before the Senate Health and Human Services Committee.
Ms. Dodson attended a hearing of a task force of stakeholders concerning hydrocodone for the Senate Health and Human Services Committee.
Ms. Dodson attended a hearing of the House Interim Committee on Insurance.
Technician Certification/Registration
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the Task Force on Technician Registration had held one meeting, and a second meeting was scheduled for May 9.
She reported that the opinion of most members of the task force appeared to be that technician registration should go forward as outlined in the current law.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that staff challenged the members of the task force to be sure that their recommendations had the approval of the associations they represent.
Mr. Morse advised that the Board will need to address whether TSBP should require proof of recertification for renewals.
Mr. Morse reported that staff was checking with other states to determine how they handle registration renewals for pharmacy technicians.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that as of March 31, 2002, staff had reviewed 329 petitions for exemption from pharmacy technician certification.
(See Attachment #30.)
He reported that 86% of petitions received from pharmacy technicians employed more than ten years and 7% of petitions received from pharmacy technicians in rural areas had been granted.
Mr. Morse advised the Board that the current rules state that an exemption from certification for a pharmacy technician only applies to the pharmacy where the technician is employed when the exemption is granted.
He explained that staff had been contacted by a pharmacy technician who had not changed employment, but the ownership of the pharmacy had changed.
Mr. Morse asked for the Board's guidance.
The Board directed staff that in such a situation the exemption would remain in force.
However, if the pharmacy technician moves to another pharmacy, the exemption would be void.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that there were currently 22,825 certified pharmacy technicians in Texas.
Mr. Lewis directed the Board's attention to a report regarding Theft or Loss (TL) of Controlled Substances (September 1, 2001, through March 31, 2002).
(See Attachment #31.)
He pointed out that the report included 151 TL reports, involving 129 individuals, who diverted 748,414 dosage units.
He reported that 81.07% of the diversion was committed by pharmacy technicians.
Mr. High commented that these figures supported the registration and discipline of technicians.
Ms. Fisher advised the Board that she would like to correct an earlier statement.
She previously stated that the agency receives approximately 250 theft and loss reports per year.
TSBP received 425 theft and loss reports during FY2001.
Methods for Calculating Ratios of Pharmacists to Pharmacy Technicians and Minimum Performance Levels for Pharmacy Personnel
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the Board rules concerning pharmacy technicians (See Attachment #32.)
She pointed out that the ratio of pharmacists to pharmacy technicians may not exceed 1:2, except that the ratio may be 1:3 if one of the three technicians is certified.
Ms. Dodson reported that in mail service pharmacies, where there are different areas involved in filling a prescription, the pharmacy may be exceeding the required ratio in a particular area, but because there are pharmacists in other areas, the pharmacy claims that they meet the ratio overall.
Ms. Dodson indicated that staff had concerns about pharmacist to technician ratios as high as one pharmacist to 15-20 technicians in areas where technicians are data entering prescriptions into the computer system.
Ms. Dodson asked the Board how they viewed this situation.
Mr. Peacock asked Mary Ryan of Merck Medco (MM) for information on MM's mail order facilities.
Ms. Ryan explained that at MM's facility in Texas, the pharmacy technician enters a shell prescription (insurance, doctor's name, and DEA number, if applicable), and the pharmacist enters the body of the prescription (drug, strength, directions, etc.).
Ms. Ryan advised the Board that at MM's Nevada facility, the technician enters most of the information, and the pharmacist does not check the information, but the pharmacist reenters some of the fields, and they must match or the system will not release the prescription.
The ratio of pharmacists to technicians in this area is in compliance with Texas rules.
She explained that DUR occurs when the pharmacist is entering the drug information.
Ms. Ryan answered questions posed by the Board.
Following discussion, the Board advised staff that they agreed with staff's concerns and directed staff to develop suggested language to clarify the rule regarding pharmacist to technician ratio and bring it to the Board for consideration at the August 2002 Board Meeting.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that staff would contact other states to see how they handle the ratio and supervision issues in mail order pharmacies.
Requirement that Pharmacists Maintain and Sign a Daily Printout or Log Book
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a letter from Paul Davis, R.Ph., of HEB.
(See Attachment #33.)
She explained that with the letter, Mr. Davis forwarded a copy of a letter he sent to DEA asking that the requirement that a pharmacist maintain and sign a daily log book be eliminated.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that Mr. Davis's letter was being provided to them for information only.
The log book requirement is federal, and TSBP's rules mirror the federal regulations.
Ms. Dodson reported that Mr. Davis had received a response from DEA that they had reviewed his request and did not believe the requirement should be eliminated.
(See Attachment #33.)
Prescriptions that are Electronically Generated by Hand-Held Devices and Printed in the Physician's Office
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a letter from Mr. Clifford Berman of Allscripts.
(See Attachment #34.)
She read a portion of the letter, as follows, I asked whether the rules could be interpreted to allow the "brand necessary" instructions to be electronically written on computer-generated paper prescriptions.
You indicated that, in light of the requirements in Rule 309.3 that "brand necessary" be handwritten on written prescriptions, it would require a rule change to allow the phrase to be electronically written.
I am writing to request that the Board make that change.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to TSBP rules concerning written prescription drug orders.
Following discussion, the Board directed staff to advise Mr. Berman that the rules would not be changed at this time, but that staff would monitor the situation.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 4:59 p.m.
May 8, 2002
President Donna B. Rogers, M.S., R.Ph., called the meeting to order at 9:01 a.m.
Other Board Members present were Vice President Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.; Treasurer Wiki Erickson, M.A.; W. Michael Brimberry, R.Ph., M.B.A.; Kim Caldwell, R.Ph.; Rosemary Forester Combs; Doyle High, R.Ph.; and Oren Peacock, R.Ph.
Board Member Angela Myres was not present.
Staff present were Gay Dodson, R.Ph., Executive Director/Secretary; Carol Fisher, R.Ph., M.P.A., Director of Enforcement; Steve Morse, R.Ph., Director of Professional Services; Kerstin Arnold, General Counsel; Julie Hildebrand, Assistant General Counsel; Lori Barta, Assistant General Counsel; Allison Benz, R.Ph., M.S., Assistant Director of Enforcement; Joe Lewis, Chief Investigator; and Kay Wilson, Executive Assistant.
Reports and Discussions
Central Fill/Central Processing
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the working group on central fill/central processing will meet prior to the August 2002 Board Meeting.
Electronic Renewal of Pharmacists' Licenses
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that the electronic licensing program should be running by the end of the month.
The July 1 renewal notices, which will be mailed June 1, should be the first mailing with the notification that on-line renewal is available.
FY2003 Calendar of Events
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a draft of the TSBP FY2003 Calendar of Events.
(See Attachment #35.)
She pointed out that during FY2003 informal conferences will be scheduled for three days, except for December and April, which will be two-day conferences.
TSBP Board Meetings were scheduled for November 19-20, 2002; February 4-5, 2003; May 13-14, 2003; and August 5-6, 2003.
Following review of the calendar, the motion was made by Ms. Erickson to approve the FY2003 Calendar of Events, as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
The following Board Members are scheduled for the indicated informal conferences:
September 2002 Ms. Combs
October 2002 Mr. Peacock
December 2002 Mr. High
January 2003 Mr. Caldwell
July 2003 Ms. Erickson
FY2001 Annual Report
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a draft of the TSBP FY2001 Annual Report.
(See Attachment #36.)
Ms. Dodson briefly reviewed the significant accomplishments that were achieved during FY2001, which included:
Internal reorganization, resulting in the following four divisions:
Administrative Services and Licensing;
Enforcement;
Legal; and
Professional Services.
The accomplishment or partial accomplishment of 100% of the agency's 102 objectives for FY2001.
The confirmation by the Senate of the appointments of Dr. Anderson, Ms. Combs, and Mr. Peacock to the TSBP Board.
The development of Guidelines for Establishing Peer Review Committees.
This document was the outcome of the work of the Task Force to Develop Standards for Pharmacist Peer Review Committees.
Development of uniform objectives for employee evaluations by the management staff.
The passage of significant legislation by the 77^th Texas Legislature that impacts the operation of the agency and/or practice of pharmacy in Texas, including SB 768, SB 98, and SB 65.
Ms. Dodson briefly reviewed the significant disappointments/constraints experienced by TSBP during FY2001, including:
High turnover in agency staff.
An increase in the average time to close a complaint.
The unfunded mandate for TSBP to implement the registration of pharmacy technicians, as passed during the 76^th Texas Legislative Session.
The motion was made by Mr. Peacock to approve for publication, with the correction of the President on the front cover from Mr. Caldwell to Mr. Pittman, the TSBP FY2001 Annual Report.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed unanimously.
NABP Annual Meeting
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that Ms. Erickson, Mr. Peacock, Ms. Rogers, and she would be attending the NABP Annual Meeting.
She reported that Ms. Rogers is on the NABP Resolutions Committee.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to the proposed amendments to the NABP Constitution and Bylaws and Resolutions that will be considered during the annual meeting.
(See Attachment #37.)
Ms. Dodson explained that TSBP was asked to resubmit its resolution concerning the addition of a consumer member to the NABP Executive Committee.
She directed the Board's attention to a letter to Melissa Madigan of NABP, submitting the resolution as an amendment, in three different versions.
(See Attachment #37.)
The Board briefly reviewed the resolutions to be considered at the meeting.
Ms. Erickson advised the Board that if an at-large position on the NABP Executive Committee should become available during the meeting, it was her intention to seek the position.
Possible Statutory Changes
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to a list of Recommendations for Action During the 2001 Texas Legislative Session That Were Not Accomplished.
(See Attachment #38.)
The Board discussed each item and determined that the following items should be added to the list of possible statutory changes during the 78^th Legislative Session:
The transfer of $850,000 from the Board of Pharmacy fund balance in the General Fund to the Higher Education Coordinating Board to fund the Roberta High Memorial Pharmacy Residency Program.
Authorize the agency to exceed the full-time equivalent employment cap for positions associated with the Summer Intern Program of the Board of Pharmacy.
Amend the Pharmacy Act to make a second order against a person who has a chemical, physical, or mental impairment a non-confidential order at the discretion of the Board.
Amend the Pharmacy Act to remove the restriction that faculty members of colleges of pharmacy cannot serve as TSBP Board Members.
Amend the Pharmacy Act to allow the Board to discipline a licensee who has been convicted of or received deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor or a felony involving a violation of the Dangerous Drug or Controlled Substances Act.
Amend the Pharmacy Act to allow the Board to discipline a pharmacy technician who has been convicted of or received deferred adjudication for a misdemeanor or a felony involving a violation of the Dangerous Drug or Controlled Substances Act.
Return the ability to cancel a license.
Clarify that pharmacists have professional discretion when deciding to dispense a prescription or medication order.
The motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to carry the above-listed items forward to the action list for the 78^th Texas Legislative Session and to add an additional item, to allow a pharmacist to specify an address other than a home address for licensure records.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Combs and passed unanimously.
The Board did not move one item forward from the list for the 2001 Legislative Session.
The deleted item was to amend the Pharmacy Act to give the Board the authority to have discretion in setting the delinquent fees for a pharmacist's license.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 9:58 a.m.
Proposal for Decision in the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith, R.Ph. (Pharmacist License #21079)
Ms. Arnold advised the Board that Ms. Barta had represented TSBP at a hearing before State Office of Administrative Hearings Judge Suzanna Formby Marshall on December 19, 2001, in the matter of Jimmy D. Smith.
Ms. Barta directed the Board's attention to the following documents:
TSBP Board Order #K-01-006, SOAH Docket No. 515-01-3986, styled In the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith (Pharmacist License #21079);
Proposal for Decision in the Matter of Texas State Board of Pharmacy vs. Jimmy D. Smith, Pharmacist License No. 21079;
TSBP Agreed Board Order #G-98-024, styled In the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith (Pharmacist License #21079);
TSBP Agreed Board Order #M-91-004, styled In the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith;
TSBP Board Order #B-86-034-A-1, styled In the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith; and
TSBP Agreed Board Order #B-86-034-A, styled In the Matter of Jimmy D. Smith.
(See Attachment #39 for copies of the above-referenced documents.)
Ms. Barta advised the Board that TSBP staff brought action against Mr. Smith, seeking revocation of his pharmacist license, based on allegations that he failed to comply with the provisions of Agreed Board Order #G-98-024, which placed his pharmacist license on a probated suspension with conditions for a period of five years and required Mr. Smith to submit, within 24 hours, to the performance of unscheduled urinalysis tests or other types of drug or alcohol analysis tests as specified by Board staff.
Ms. Barta explained that on January 15, 2001, Mr. Smith submitted to a urinalysis and tested positive for cocaine metabolite.
Mr. Smith did not provide documentation that the controlled substance was prescribed by a physician for a legitimate medical purpose, and he failed to submit himself for subsequent testing.
(See Attachment #39.)
Ms. Barta reviewed the proposed Findings of Fact against Mr. Smith in the Proposal for Decision, which included:
On or about November 15, 2000, TSBP entered confidential Agreed Board Order #G-98-024 (ABO) against Mr. Smith's license.
The ABO was based on Mr. Smith's positive response for cocaine on two random drug screens at the request of his employer in 1999.
The ABO placed Mr. Smith's pharmacist license on a probated suspension with conditions for five years and required that he remain drug free and obey federal and state laws and rules with respect to pharmacy, controlled substances, and dangerous drugs, and not violate the terms of the ABO.
The ABO required that Mr. Smith submit to unannounced urinalyses or other types of drug analyses as specified by Board staff.
Mr. Smith submitted to a urine drug screen on January 15, 2001, which tested positive for cocaine metabolites, in violation of the ABO.
Mr. Smith failed to submit to the performance of a subsequent drug screen, as ordered under the ABO.
Ms. Barta advised the Board that Mr. Smith was not present at the SOAH hearing.
Ms. Barta advised the Board that SOAH Administrative Law Judge Suzanne Formby Marshall found that Mr. Smith violated the laws of the state of Texas and federal laws relating to the use of controlled substances and dangerous drugs, and he engaged in unprofessional conduct as defined by TSBP rules.
Judge Marshall concurred with staff and recommended that the pharmacist license of Jimmy D. Smith be revoked.
Ms. Barta advised the Board that staff concurred with the Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law submitted by Judge Marshall and urged the Board to adopt Board Order #K-01-006, revoking Mr. Smith's pharmacist license.
The motion was made by Mr. Peacock to adopt the Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and recommendations of the Administrative Law Judge in the matter of Jimmy D. Smith and to adopt Board Order #K-01-006, as presented, to revoke the pharmacist license of Jimmy D. Smith.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Petition from Cecily Arvis Scott, R.Ph., Pharm.D., to Serve as a Preceptor Ms. Fisher directed the Board's attention to a letter from Cecily A. Scott, Pharm.D., R.Ph., requesting that the Board allow Mr. Scott to serve as a preceptor.
(See Attachment #40.)
Ms. Fisher explained that Mr. Scott entered into Agreed Board Order #B-97-010-A on February 10, 1998.
(See Attachment #40.)
TSBP rule §283.6 states that No pharmacist may serve as a preceptor if his or her license to practice pharmacy has been the subject of an order of the board . . . within the three-year period immediately preceding application for approval as a preceptor.
Following discussion, the motion was made by Mr. Caldwell to deny the petition of Cecily A. Scott, Pharm.D., R.Ph., to serve as a preceptor.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed unanimously.
Board Procedures for Complaint Resolution
Ms. Dodson explained that Ms. Rogers had asked that this item be placed on the agenda.
Ms. Rogers advised the Board that a San Antonio pharmacist had contacted her after the pharmacist had received a letter regarding a complaint filed against the pharmacist with TSBP.
Ms. Rogers explained the nature of the complaint and stated that TSBP should not have mailed the letter to the pharmacist since he did not fill the prescription.
Ms. Fisher stated that TSBP's investigation of the pharmacy's records reflected the pharmacist who received the letter was the pharmacist who committed the alleged error.
In response to Ms. Rogers' question, Ms. Fisher stated that approximately 400 letters regarding complaints were mailed in FY2001.
These letters indicate that the complaints are being closed with the letters.
Ms. Rogers asked if a Board Member reviews these complaints prior to the letters being mailed.
Ms. Fisher indicated that no Board Member reviewed the complaints but that staff was operating under guidance of Board established policy.
Ms. Rogers asked what percentage of complaints were reviewed by Board Members, and Ms. Fisher directed the Board to page 83 of the TSBP 2001 Annual Report, which indicated that the Board had reviewed 11% of the complaints received by TSBP in FY2001 (complaints resulting in disciplinary action).
Ms. Rogers stated that she was concerned that only 11% of the closed complaints are reviewed by Board Members.
In response to Mr. Peacock's question, Ms. Fisher stated that TSBP receives about 20 written responses per year from subjects of complaints who receive a warning letter from TSBP.
Ms. Dodson directed the Board's attention to TSBP's Policies and Procedures for Handling Complaints Received by the Texas State Board of Pharmacy, an article concerning complaints that appeared in the TSBP Newsletter, and TSBP rules concerning disciplinary guidelines.
(See Attachment #41.)
Ms. Dodson explained
that the agency has a good complaint process that is based on the Board established guidelines for handling complaints.
The Board's procedures have been complimented by the staff of the Sunset Advisory Commission.
If the Board wanted to change the procedures to review all of the complaints, they should consider the increased time and effort that would be required by the Board Members and the effect this will have on the time required to resolve complaints.
Ms. Arnold stated that the letters that are mailed to subjects of complaints are not disciplinary action and the letters essentially close/dismiss the complaints.
Ms. Dodson indicated that staff had recently changed its procedure to have all letters signed by a pharmacist.
Mr. Peacock suggested that staff reorganize these letters to place the paragraph that indicates that the complaint is being dismissed at the beginning rather than at the end of the letters.
After further discussion, the Board concurred with the procedure being used by staff to close complaints, including the suggestion by Mr. Peacock.
Report on Status of Active/Pending Complaints Notebooks containing Report on Status of Active/Pending Complaints (Report), as well as 43 Agreed Board Orders, 14 of which involved impaired pharmacists, were distributed to Board Members.
(See Attachment #42 for complaint status report.)
Ms. Fisher pointed out that the FY2002 midyear report indicated that, for the first time in five years, TSBP had closed more complaints than it had received, enabling the agency to reduce its complaint backlog.
She advised the Board that as of May 8, 2002, there were 847 active/pending complaints.
Consideration of and Action on Proposed Agreed Board Orders
Ms. Barta and Ms. Hildebrand reviewed the alleged violations as well as the recommended sanctions for each of the Agreed Board Orders (ABOs).
1.
Roy J. Mazzagate, Jr.
ABO #A-01-015
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
2.
Sheila Renee Pitre ABO #L-01-026
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
3.
Hollis Steve West ABO #H-01-049
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
4.
Veronica Olumbunmi Winter ABO #H-01-056-A 5.
Wal-Mart Pharmacy #10-1055 ABO #H-01-056-B
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
6.
Eckerd Drugs #2030 ABO #B-99-034
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 6-0-2.
Ms. Combs and Mr. Peacock abstained.
7.
Barbara Barard White ABO #H-99-016-A
8.
Kroger Pharmacy #516 ABO #H-99-016-B
Mr. Brimberry made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
9.
Walgreen Co. #3341 ABO #H-01-017
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
10.
James H. Glatz ABO #H-01-035-A
11.
Albertson's Pharmacy #4210 ABO #H-01-035-B
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
12.
Max E. Hooten ABO #H-00-034-A
13.
Hoots Pharmacy ABO #H-00-034-B
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
14.
Shannon Michael Maguadog ABO #K-01-012-A
15.
Piney Point Pharmacy ABO #K-01-012-B
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
16.
Jaime Padilla ABO #L-01-024
17.
Inosencio Fred Alaniz ABO #H-01-057-A
Dr. Anderson made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
18.
Eckerd Drugs #2514 ABO #J-01-015
Mr. Caldwell made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed 6-0-2.
Ms. Combs and Mr. Peacock abstained.
19.
Bestcare Pharmacy ABO #L-02-004
Dr. Anderson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
20.
Sam Martin Durso ABO #E-02-001
Ms. Erickson made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Brimberry and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
21.
Leonard Eugene Spykerman ABO #E-02-003
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 8-0-0.
22.
Charles Joseph Anselmo ABO #J-00-002
Mr. Brimberry made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Dr. Anderson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
23.
Willie Lloyd Ruffin ABO #E-01-005
Mr. Brimberry made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. High abstained.
24.
William Adams Stallknecht ABO #J-00-013-A
25.
The Pill Box Pharmacy ABO #J-00-013-B
26.
The Pill Box Pharmacy ABO #J-00-013-C
Mr. Brimberry made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed 6-0-1.
Dr. Anderson abstained.
Mr. High was not present for the vote.
27.
Ricardo Nuncio ABO #H-01-011-A
28.
Walgreen Co. #5422 ABO #H-01-011-B
Dr. Anderson made the motion to approve the Orders as presented.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed 7-0-1.
Ms. Combs abstained.
29.
Richard Clay Hudson ABO #E-01-004
Mr. Peacock made the motion to approve the Order as presented.
The motion was seconded by Ms. Erickson and passed 7-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
Reports and Discussions
Ms. Dodson announced that the meeting of the Task Force on Technician Registration scheduled for Thursday, May 9, had been cancelled because so many members had called TSBP to report that they were unable to attend the meeting.
Executive Session to Consider Confidential Agreed Board Orders
Mr. Peacock made a motion that the Board go into Executive Session to consider Agreed Board Orders involving impaired pharmacists under the authority of the Texas Pharmacy Act, Section 564.002.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
Mr. High left the meeting at 11:45 a.m.
President Rogers recessed the meeting at 11:45 a.m.
President Rogers reconvened the meeting at 11:53 a.m.
President Rogers declared the Board in Executive Session at 11:55 a.m.
At 12:10 p.m. President Rogers announced that the Board would resume the meeting in Open Session.
President Rogers announced that no action was taken and no decisions were made during Executive Session.
Mr. Caldwell made motions to approve the following confidential orders:
1.
ABO #M-02-003
2.
ABO #K-02-012
3.
ABO #G-02-014
4.
ABO #G-00-005
5.
ABO #G-01-004
6.
ABO #G-02-005
7.
ABO #G-00-003
8.
ABO #B-99-045
9.
ABO #R-01-004
10.
ABO #L-02-008
11.
ABO #K-02-001
12.
ABO #B-01-004
13.
ABO #K-01-036
14.
ABO #B-01-008
The motions were seconded by Mr. Peacock and passed as follows:
1.
6-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
2.
Unanimously.
3.
Unanimously.
4.
6-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
5.
Unanimously.
6.
6-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
7.
6-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
8.
6-0-1.
Mr. Brimberry abstained.
9.
Unanimously.
10.
Unanimously.
11.Unanimously.
12.
Unanimously.
13.
Unanimously.
14.
Unanimously.
Ms. Rogers asked the Board if they would like to receive informal conference notebooks prior to the informal conferences.
Mr. Brimberry advised the Board that he had received a notebook prior to informal conferences, and it was very helpful.
It was the consensus of the Board that it would be helpful to receive the attorney's summaries of the cases prior to the informal conferences.
Ms. Arnold pointed out that any information contained in the notebooks was potentially confidential and should be handled with upmost care.
Recent Conferences and Events
Ms. Rogers advised the Board that the TSHP Annual Meeting held in Galveston on April 12-17 was a great meeting.
Mr. Caldwell advised the Board that he attended the AMCP Annual Meeting in Salt Lake City, Utah, on April 3-6, and that it was a very good meeting.
Upcoming Conferences and Events
The Board reviewed upcoming conferences and events.
Ms. Dodson advised the Board that there would be a Board Forum at the TPA Annual Meeting.
She also advised the Board that there was $1,000 available from NACDS to help defray costs of Board Members attending the NACDS Annual Meeting in San Diego in August.
However, she reminded the Board that in order to accept the funds from NACDS, a Board Member would have to be a part of the program for the meeting.
Personnel Matters
President Rogers directed the Board's attention to the form for the evaluation of the Executive Director.
(See Attachment #43.)
Dr. Anderson made a motion that the Board go into Executive Session to conduct the annual evaluation of the TSBP Executive Director under the authority of the Texas Government Code, Section 551.074.
The motion was seconded by Mr. Caldwell and passed unanimously.
President Rogers declared the Board in Executive Session at 12:20 p.m.
At 12:55 p.m. President Rogers announced that the Board would resume the meeting in Open Session.
President Rogers announced that the evaluation of Executive Director Gay Dodson was conducted during Executive Session.
Ms. Erickson added that the evaluation was excellent and the Board wanted to encourage Ms. Dodson to continue her employment with the Board.
Ms. Rogers added that the Board felt it was important that staff develop a succession plan for the TSBP management positions.
She also expressed concern about the limited salary range for the Executive Director position.
President Rogers adjourned the meeting at 1:56 p.m.
APPROVED:
_____________________________________
Donna B. Rogers, M.S., R.Ph.
President
___________________________________
Gay Dodson, R.Ph.
Executive Director/Secretary
August 6, 2002
new_pills.gif (14766 bytes)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Copyright © 2002 Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
All rights reserved.
Home - Privacy Policy - Questions/Comments - Site Map
