Secretary Tippett Announcement of NCDOT's Acquisition of Hoke County Property January 29, 2002 at 2 p.m.
Thank you, G.R., for that introduction.
Today's event is important for the department and the state but it's particularly meaningful to me.
Having grown up in a small town in Johnston County, I have always been a CHAMPION of this state's GREAT NATURAL RESOURCES.
I know I'm not the only one here today who remembers a time when open fields and lush forests like these were JUST FOOTSTEPS AWAY.
I've always believed that we humans have a RESPONSIBILITY to take our very best care of nature's gifts.
This responsibility is MAGNIFIED for public officials because it is up to us to SET AN EXAMPLE FOR OTHERS.
That's why I've made protecting the environment one of my top goals at DOT, starting at the HIGHEST LEVEL-and I've been very pleased by our success so far.
LAST FEBRUARY, for example, I named Roger Sheats as the department's first Deputy Secretary for Planning, the Environment and Local Government Affairs.
And in MARCH, the Board of Transportation's first Environmental Planning and Policy Committee was established to help integrate an environmental ethic into all of the department's work.
We also expanded and improved our relationship with the Department of the Environment and Natural Resources.
In JUNE, DENR Secretary Bill Ross and I signed an agreement signifying a shared responsibility to meet the state's transportation needs while protecting the environment.
In response to Gov. Easley's charge to focus on improving water quality in the state's 17 river basins, our departments agreed to regularly measure progress toward meeting this objective.
As significant as these achievements are, I think that the fruits of our labor are best demonstrated by partnerships like the one we're announcing today.
The acquisition of these 2,500 acres is a victory for everyone.
It helps the department because this property will serve as a resource for current and possibly future mitigation needs for highway construction projects like the Fayetteville Outer Loop.
Most importantly, it helps the federally-endangered RED-COCKADED WOODPECKER because it preserves their habitat, which has been shrinking for some time now.
I've learned a lot about this bird recently and let me tell you, it's not unique just because it's endangered.
The red-cockaded woodpecker is the only woodpecker known to build its nest cavity in live pine trees, a process that may take breeding pairs up to two years.
In fact, the red-cockaded woodpecker is very picky about its home, preferring mature pine trees at least 30 years old.
Another rare trait is this bird's cooperative breeding process.
Although only the dominant male and female birds of each colony mate each year, the younger male birds stay behind and help tend the young.
So what can today's families learn from all this?
First, keep shopping until you find the oldest house on the block.
Next, spend two years fixing it up before you bring your young ones into the world.
And finally, when you do have kids, keep those boys at home as long as you can!
Not bad advice, when you think about it.
Seriously, the point of studying animals is that it helps us develop a deeper understanding of our own behavior.
It sounds simple but it's worth reminding ourselves that, in order to study these birds, WE MUST HAVE THEM AROUND.
Can you imagine what we would know today if the Carolina parakeet, the ivory- billed woodpecker and the passenger pigeon were still with us?
Sadly, we'll never know because they're gone.
The good news-THE GREAT NEWS-is that the red-cockaded woodpecker still has a chance.
And the acquisition of this property-and its long-term management-may well be the key to this bird's survival.
We are fortunate that this property is largely undeveloped and is blessed with a wide range of long leaf pines.
In fact, by preserving this property, we'll also be UNITING EXISTING PUBLIC TRACTS OF A LONGLEAF PINE ECOSYSTEM which used to run through the entire southeast.
All of these reasons point out the importance of preserving this land.
What's good for the birds.and what's good for the pines.
is good for all North Carolinians.
Today's event calls to mind an old saying.
IF YOU LOVE SOMETHING, SET IT FREE.
And this leads me to our next step.
The Department of Transportation has paid more than $5 MILLION for this property-and in addition to these funds, we have invested a great deal of time and energy of staff.
After we survey the property, we'll be turning over the property to THE NATURE CONSERVANCY, which will work with WILDLIFE RESOURCES COMMISSION AND THE U.S. FISH 
I am confident that with their great care we'll not only protect the existing five colonies of birds, we'll actually increase their numbers in the future.
And I can't think of any better neighbors for this property than FT. BRAGG.
As we all know, Ft. Bragg has a vested interest in the welfare of Hoke County and has long shared our concern for this endangered species.
And finally, we'll be looking to HOKE COUNTY to help us achieve our dream of sharing this land with the public.
And this is probably the capstone of today's announcement-SETTING THIS PROPERTY FREE.
At this time, I'd like to commend the leadership of Raeford and Hoke County for their cooperation in helping us acquire this very important tract of land.
Thank you for all you have done make this acquisition a reality.
Providing generous access to this property for the public is the best possible thing we can do to ensure the long-term survival of the red-cockaded woodpecker.
Because unlike the Carolina parakeet, the ivory-billed woodpecker or the passenger pigeon, our children and our grandchildren won't have to rely on a picture book to imagine what this bird was like.
Hopefully, they'll be able to take a walk through these beautiful pines and experience the beauty of the red-cockaded woodpecker in living flight.
My charge to all our partners and friends here today is very simple.
Let's work together to find more opportunities like these-partnerships that protect nature's gifts for our future generations.
Let's continue to set the very best example we can for our young people, in the hopes that they will take their lead from us.
And finally, on a personal note, celebrate the great outdoors as often as you can.
Back to Index
Back to Index
