[hdr_tsbp-logo.gif] [hdr_tsbp.gif]
Complaints
§291.21.
Notification to Consumers (Pharmacies)
§295.11.
Notification to Consumers (Pharmacists )
Amendments to these rules:
(1) clarify the methods by which the Board will accept complaints, including filing through the Internet on an online form provided for the purpose;
(2) require notifications to the public concerning how to file a complaint to include the Board's Internet address;
(3) require pharmacies with an Internet presence to post certain information on their website; and
(4) implement the pharmacist/pharmacy profile requirements of S.B. 187.
§283.10.
Requirements for Application for a Pharmacist License Which Has Expired
§295.8.
Continuing Education Requirements
Amendments to these rules:
(1) increase the number of continuing education (CE) hours for renewal of a pharmacist license from 24 hours to 30 hours ever two years;
(2) permit 3 hours of CE credit for completion of the Institute of Safe Medication Practices' (ISMP) Medication Safety Self Assessment for hospital or community pharmacies; and
(3) increase the number of continuing education hours before a pharmacist with an expired license may obtain a new license consistent with the increase indicated in (1) above.
§291.20.
Remote Pharmacy Practice
§291.33.
Operational Standards (Class A Pharmacies)
§291.36.
Class A Pharmacies Compounding Sterile Pharmaceuticals
§291.74.
Operational Standards (Class C Pharmacies)
New rule 291.20 and amendments to the other three rules will establish requirements for Class A (Community) and Class C (Institutional) pharmacies to operate the following remote pharmacy services under the pharmacy's license at a location separate from the pharmacy:
(1) automated pharmacy systems primarily in nursing homes;
(2) emergency medication kits primarily in nursing homes; and
(3) telepharmacy systems in certain health care clinics.
§291.12.
Pharmacist Certification Program
This new rule establishes standards for the recognition and approval of pharmacist certification programs.
§291.13.
Drug Therapy Management by a Pharmacist under Written Protocol of a Physician
§291.15.
Administration of Immunizations or Vaccinations by a Pharmacist under Written Protocol of a Physician
Amendments to these rules make changes to citations required by the codification of the Texas Pharmacy Act and updates the confidentiality section to match state statutes.
RULE LANGUAGE
Chapter 281.
Administrative Practice and Procedures
Subchapter B. General Procedures in a Contested Case
§281.21.
Complaints
Complaints may be filed with the agency in writing or by submitting a completed complaint form to the agency by mail or other method of delivery or through the Internet.
A complaint form shall be maintained on the agency's Internet site and at the agency's office for use by a complainant.
The complaint form shall request information necessary for the proper processing of the complaint by the agency, including, but not limited to:
(1)-(5) (No change.)
Chapter 283.
Licensing Requirements for Pharmacists
§283.10.
Requirements for Application for a Pharmacist License Which Has Expired
(a)-(e) (No change.)
(f) Persons practicing pharmacy in another state.
Beginning January 1, 2002, the board may issue a license to a person who was licensed as a pharmacist in Texas, moved to another state, is licensed in the other state, and has been engaged in the practice of pharmacy in the other state for the two years preceding the application if the person meets the following requirements:
(1) makes application for licensure to the board on a form prescribed by the board;
(2) submits to the board certification that the applicant:
(A)-(B) (No change.)
(C) has completed a minimum of 30 contact hours of approved continuing education during the preceding two license years;
(3)-(4) (No change.)
(g) Persons not practicing pharmacy.
Beginning January 1, 2002, the board may issue a license to a person who was licensed as a pharmacist in this state, but has not practiced pharmacy for the two years preceding application for licensure under the following conditions.
(1) The person's Texas pharmacist license has been expired for less than 10 years, the person shall:
(A)-(C) (No change.)
(D) complete approved continuing education and/or board approved internship requirements according to the following schedule:
(i) if the Texas pharmacist license has been expired for more than one year but less than two years, the applicant shall complete 15 contact hours of approved continuing education;
(ii) if the Texas pharmacist license has been expired for more than two years but less than three years, the applicant shall complete 30 contact hours of approved continuing education;
(iii) if the Texas pharmacist license has been expired for more than three years but less than four years, the applicant shall complete 45 contact hours of approved continuing education;
(iv)-(ix) (No change except "36 contact hours" changed to "45 contact hours" in each clause.)
(2)-(5) (No change.)
Chapter 291.
Pharmacies
Subchapter A.
All Classes of Pharmacies
§291.20.
Remote Pharmacy Services.
(a) Remote pharmacy services using automated pharmacy systems.
(1) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the provision of pharmacy services by a Class A or Class C pharmacy in a facility that is not at the same location as the Class A or Class C pharmacy through an automated pharmacy system as outlined in Section 562.109 of the Texas Pharmacy Act (Chapters 551-566, Occupations Code, as amended).
(2) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
All other words and terms shall have the meanings defined in §291.31 of this title (relating to Definitions for Class A (Community) Pharmacies)).
(A) Automated pharmacy system - a mechanical system that dispenses prescription drugs and maintains related transaction information.
(B) Dispense - Preparing, packaging, compounding, or labeling for delivery a prescription drug or device in the course of professional practice to an ultimate user or his agent by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner.
(C) Remote site - a facility not located at the same location as a Class A or Class C pharmacy, at which remote pharmacy services are provided using an automated pharmacy dispensing system.
(D) Prepackaging - the act of repackaging and relabeling quantities of drug products from a manufacturer's original commercial container, or quantities of unit dosed drugs, into another cartridge or container for dispensing by a pharmacist using an automated pharmacy system.
(E) Provider pharmacy - the community pharmacy (Class A) or the institutional pharmacy (Class C) providing remote pharmacy services.
(F) Remote pharmacy service - the provision of pharmacy services, including the storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, in remote sites.
(G) Unit dose - an amount of a drug packaged in a dosage form ready for administration to a particular patient, by the prescribed route at the prescribed time, and properly labeled with name, strength, and expiration date of the drug.
(3) General requirements.
(A) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system to a jail or prison operated by or for the State of Texas, a jail or prison operated by local government or a healthcare facility regulated under Chapter 142, 242, or 252, Health and Safety Code provided drugs are administered by a licensed healthcare professional working in the jail, prison, or healthcare facility.
(B) A provider pharmacy may only provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system to inpatients of the remote site.
(C) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services at more than one remote site.
(D) Before providing remote pharmacy services, the automated pharmacy system at the remote site must be tested by the provider pharmacy and found to dispense accurately.
The provider pharmacy shall make the results of such testing available to the Board upon request.
(E) A provider pharmacy which is licensed as an institutional (Class C) pharmacy is required to comply with the provisions of §291.31 - 291.34 of this title (relating to Definitions, Personnel, Operational Standards, and Records for Class A (Community) Pharmacies) and this section.
(F) The pharmacist-in-charge of the provider pharmacy is responsible for all pharmacy operations involving the automated pharmacy system located at the remote site including supervision of the automated pharmacy system and compliance with this section.
(G) A pharmacist from the provider pharmacy shall be accessible at all times to respond to patient's or other health professionals' questions and needs pertaining to drugs dispensed through the use of the automated pharmacy system.
Such access may be through a 24 hour pager service or telephone which is answered 24 hours a day.
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application for permission to provide pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
(i) A Class A or Class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive office), and include the following:
(I) the name, address, and license number of the provider pharmacy;
(II) name and address of the facility where the remote pharmacy services will be provided;
(III) a statement indicating that the provider pharmacy and the facility have entered into a written contract or agreement which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party in fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations; and
(IV) documentation that the automated pharmacy system is located where medications are administered by license healthcare professionals and is:
(-a-) a facility regulated under Chapter 142, 242, or 252, Health and Safety Code; or
(-b-) a jail or prison, operated by the State of Texas or local government.
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the application for renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal petition shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph.
(iii) Upon approval of the application, the provider pharmacy will be sent a certificate which must be displayed at the remote site.
(B) Notification requirements.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall notify the board in writing within ten days of a change of location, discontinuance of service, or closure of:
(I) a remote site where an automated pharmacy system is operated by the pharmacy; or
(II) a remote pharmacy service at a remote site.
(ii) A provider pharmacy shall comply with appropriate federal and state controlled substance registrations for each remote site if controlled substances are maintained within an automated pharmacy system at the facility.
(C) Environment/Security.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall only store drugs at a remote site within an automated pharmacy system which is locked by key or combination so as to prevent access by unauthorized personnel.
(ii) An automated pharmacy system shall be under the continuous supervision of a provider pharmacy pharmacist.
To qualify as continuous supervision, the pharmacist is not required to be physically present at the site of the automated pharmacy system if the system is supervised electronically by a pharmacist.
(iii) Automated pharmacy systems shall have adequate security and procedures to:
(I) comply with federal and state laws and regulations; and
(II) maintain patient confidentiality.
(iv) Access to the automated pharmacy system shall be limited to pharmacists or personnel who:
(I) are designated in writing by the pharmacist-in-charge; and
(II) have completed documented training concerning their duties associated with the automated pharmacy system.
(v) Drugs shall be stored in compliance with the provisions of 291.33(f) of this title including the requirements for temperature, proper storage containers, and handling of outdated drugs.
(D) Prescription dispensing and delivery.
(i) Drugs shall only be dispensed at a remote site through an automated pharmacy system after receipt of an original prescription drug order by a pharmacist at the provider pharmacy in a manner authorized by §291.34(b) of this title.
(ii) A pharmacist at the provider pharmacy shall control all operations of the automated pharmacy system and approve the release of the initial dose of a prescription drug order.
Subsequent doses from an approved prescription drug order may be removed from the automated medication system after this initial approval.
Any change made in the prescription drug order shall require a new approval by a pharmacist to release the drug.
(iii) A pharmacist at the provider pharmacy shall conduct a drug regimen review as specified in §291.33(c) of this title prior to releasing a prescription drug order to the automated pharmacy system.
(iv) Drugs dispensed by the provider pharmacy through an automated pharmacy system shall comply with the labeling or labeling alternatives specified in §291.33(c) of this title.
(v) An automated pharmacy system used to meet the emergency medication needs for residents of a remote site must comply with the requirements for emergency medication kits in subsection (b) of this section.
(E) Drugs.
(i) Drugs for use in an automated pharmacy system shall be packaged in the original manufacturer's container or be prepackaged in the provider pharmacy and labeled in compliance with the board's prepackaging requirements for the class of pharmacy.
(ii) Drugs dispensed from the automated pharmacy system may be returned to the pharmacy for reuse provided the drugs are in sealed, tamper evident packaging which has not been opened.
(F) Stocking an automated pharmacy system.
(i) Stocking of drugs in an automated pharmacy system shall be completed by a pharmacist or a certified pharmacy technician under the direct supervision of a pharmacist, except as provided in clause (ii) of this subparagraph.
(ii) If the automated pharmacy system uses removable cartridges or containers to hold drugs, the prepackaging of the cartridges or containers shall occur at the provider pharmacy unless provided by an FDA approved repackager.
The prepackaged cartridges or containers may be sent to the remote site to be loaded into the machine by personnel designated by the pharmacist-in-charge provided:
(I) a pharmacist verifies the cartridge or container has been properly filled and labeled;
(II) the individual cartridges or containers are transported to the remote site in a secure, tamper-evident container; and
(III) the automated pharmacy system uses bar-coding, microchip, or other technologies to ensure that the containers are accurately loaded in the automated pharmacy system.
(iii) All drugs to be stocked in the automated pharmacy system shall be delivered to the remote site by the provider pharmacy.
(G) Quality assurance program.
A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through an automated pharmacy system at a remote site shall operate according to a written program for quality assurance of the automated pharmacy system which:
(i) requires continuous supervision of the automated pharmacy system; and
(ii) establishes mechanisms and procedures to routinely test the accuracy of the automated pharmacy system at a minimum of every six months and whenever any upgrade or change is made to the system and documents each such activity.
(H) Policies and procedures of operation.
(i) A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through an automated pharmacy system at a remote site shall operate according to written policies and procedures.
The policy and procedure manual shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(I) a current list of the name and address of the pharmacist-in-charge and personnel designated by the pharmacist-in-charge to have access to the drugs stored in the automated pharmacy system;
(II) duties which may only be performed by a pharmacist;
(III) a copy of the portion of the written contract or agreement between the pharmacy and the facility which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party relating to the operation of the automated pharmacy system in fulfilling the terms of the contract in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(IV) date of last review/revision of the policy and procedure manual; and
(V) policies and procedures for:
(-a-) security;
(-b-) operation of the automated pharmacy system;
(-c-) preventative maintenance of the automated pharmacy system;
(-d-) sanitation;
(-e-) storage of drugs;
(-f-) dispensing;
(-g-) supervision;
(-h-) drug procurement;
(-i-) receiving of drugs;
(-j-) delivery of drugs; and
(-k-) recordkeeping.
(ii) A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through an automated pharmacy system at a remote site shall, at least annually, review its written policies and procedures, revise them if necessary, and document the review.
(iii) A pharmacy providing remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system shall maintain a written plan for recovery from an event which interrupts the ability of the automated pharmacy system to dispense prescription drugs.
The written plan for recovery shall include:
(I) planning and preparation for maintaining pharmacy services when an automated pharmacy system is experiencing downtime;
(II) procedures for response when an automated pharmacy system is experiencing downtime; and
(III) procedures for the maintenance and testing of the written plan for recovery.
(5) Records.
(A) Maintenance of records.
(i) Every record required under this section must be maintained by the provider pharmacy for two years.
(ii) The provider pharmacy shall maintain original prescription drug orders for drugs dispensed from an automated pharmacy system in compliance with §291.34(b) of this title.
(iii) if prescription drug records are maintained in a data processing system, the system shall have a workable (electronic) data retention system which can produce a separate audit trail of drug usage by the provider pharmacy and each remote site for the preceding two years as specified in §291.34(e) of this title.
(B) Prescriptions.
Prescription drug orders shall meet the requirements of §291.34(b) of this title (relating to Records for Class A (Community) Pharmacies).
(C) Records of dispensing.
Dispensing records for a prescription drug order shall be maintained by the provider pharmacy in the manner required by §291.34(d) or (e) of this title.
(D) Transaction information.
(i) The automated pharmacy system shall electronically record all transactions involving drugs stored in, removed, or dispensed from the system.
(ii) Records of dispensing from an automated pharmacy system for a patient shall be maintained by the providing pharmacy and include the:
(I) identity of the system accessed;
(II) identification of the individual accessing the system;
(III) date of transaction;
(IV) name, strength, dosage form, and quantity of drug accessed; and
(V) name of the patient for whom the drug was accessed.
(iii) Records of stocking or removal from an automated pharmacy system shall be maintained by the pharmacy and include the:
(I) date;
(II) name, strength, dosage form, and quantity of drug stocked or removed;
(III) name, initials, or identification code of the person stocking or removing drugs from the system;
(IV) name, initials, or identification code of the pharmacist who checks and verifies that the system has been accurately filled;
(E) Patient medication records.
Patient medication records shall be created and maintained by the provider pharmacy in the manner required by §291.34(c) of this title.
(F) Inventory.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall:
(I) keep a record of all drugs sent to and returned from a remote site separate from the records of the provider pharmacy and from any other remote site's records; and
(II) keep a perpetual inventory of controlled substances received and dispensed or distributed from each remote site.
(ii) As specified in §291.17 of this title (relating to Inventory Requirements for All Classes of Pharmacies), a provider pharmacy shall conduct an inventory at each remote site.
The following is applicable to this inventory.
(I) The inventory of each remote site and the provider pharmacy shall be taken on the same day.
(II) The inventory of each remote site shall be included with, but listed separately from, the drugs of other remote sites and separately from the drugs of the provider pharmacy.
(b) Remote pharmacy services using emergency medication kits.
(1) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the provision of pharmacy services by a Class A or Class C pharmacy in a facility that is not at the same location as the Class A or Class C pharmacy through an emergency medication kit as outlined in Section 562.108 of the Texas Pharmacy Act (Chapters 551-566, Occupations Code, as amended).
(2) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
All other words and terms shall have the meanings defined in §291.31 of this title.
(A) Automated pharmacy system - a mechanical system that dispenses prescription drugs and maintains related transaction information.
(B) Dispense - Preparing, packaging, compounding, or labeling for delivery a prescription drug or device in the course of professional practice to an ultimate user or his agent by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner.
(C) Emergency medication kits - controlled substances and dangerous drugs maintained by a community pharmacy (Class A) or an institutional pharmacy (Class C) at an institution licensed under Chapter 242 or 252, Health and Safety Code, to meet the emergency medication needs of a resident at that institution.
(D) Remote site - a facility not located at the same location as a Class A or Class C pharmacy, at which remote pharmacy services are provided using an emergency medication kit.
(E) Prepackaging - the act of repackaging and relabeling quantities of drug products from a manufacturer's original commercial container, or quantities of unit dosed drugs, into another cartridge or container for dispensing by a pharmacist using an emergency medication kit.
(F) Provider pharmacy - the community pharmacy (Class A) or the institutional pharmacy (Class C) providing remote pharmacy services.
(G) Remote pharmacy service - the provision of pharmacy services, including the storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, in remote sites.
(3) General requirements.
(A) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit to an institution regulated under Chapter 242, or 252, Health and Safety Code.
(B) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services at more than one remote site.
(C) A provider pharmacy shall not place an emergency medication kit in a remote site which already has a kit from another provider pharmacy.
(D) A provider pharmacy which is licensed as an institutional (Class C) pharmacy is required to comply with the provisions of §291.31 - 291.34 of this title and this section.
(E) The pharmacist-in-charge of the provider pharmacy is responsible for all pharmacy operations involving the emergency medication kit located at the remote site including supervision of the emergency medication kit and compliance with this section.
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application for permission to provide pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit .
(i) A Class A or Class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive office, chief operating officer), and include the following:
(I) the name, address, and license number of the provider pharmacy;
(II) name and address of the healthcare facility where the remote pharmacy services will be provided;
(III) a statement indicating that the provider pharmacy and the healthcare facility have entered into a written contract or agreement which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party in fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations; and
(IV) documentation that the emergency medication kit is located in a facility regulated under Chapter 242, or 252, Health and Safety Code.
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the application for renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal petition shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph.
(iii) Upon approval of the application, the provider pharmacy will be sent a certificate which must be displayed at the remote site.
(B) Notification requirements.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall notify the board in writing within ten days of a change of location, discontinuance of service, or closure of:
(I) a remote site where an emergency medication kit is operated by the pharmacy; or
(II) a remote pharmacy service at a remote site.
(ii) A provider pharmacy shall comply with appropriate federal and state controlled substance registrations for each remote site if controlled substances are maintained within an emergency medication kit at the facility.
(C) Environment/Security.
(i) Emergency medication kits shall have adequate security and procedures to:
(I) prevent unauthorized access;
(II) comply with federal and state laws and regulations; and
(III) maintain patient confidentiality.
(ii) Access to the emergency medication kit shall be limited to pharmacists and licensed healthcare personnel employed by the facility.
(iii) Drugs shall be stored in compliance with the provisions of 291.33(f) of this title including the requirements for temperature, proper storage containers, and handling of outdated drugs.
(D) Prescription dispensing and delivery.
(i) Drugs in the emergency medication kit shall be accessed for administration to meet the emergency medication needs of a resident of the remote site pursuant to an order from a practitioner.
The prescription drug order for the drugs used from the emergency medication kit shall be forwarded to the provider pharmacy in a manner authorized by §291.34(b) of this title.
(ii) The remote site shall notify the provider pharmacy of each entry into an emergency medication kit.
Such notification shall meet the requirements of paragraph 5(D)(ii) of this subsection.
(E) Drugs.
(i) The contents of an emergency medication kit:
(I) may consist of dangerous drugs and controlled substances; and
(II) shall be determined by the consultant pharmacist, pharmacist-in-charge of the provider pharmacy, medical director, and the director of nurses and limited to those drugs necessary to meet the resident's emergency medication needs.
For the purpose of this subsection, this shall mean a situation in which a drug cannot be supplied by a pharmacy within a reasonable time period.
(ii) When deciding on the drugs to be placed in the emergency medication kit, the consultant pharmacist, pharmacist-in-charge of the provider pharmacy, medical director, and the director of nurses must determine, select, and record a prudent number of drugs for potential emergency incidents based on:
(I) clinical criteria applicable to each facility's demographics;
(II) the facility's census; and
(III) the facility's healthcare environment.
(iii) A current list of the drugs stored in each remote site's emergency medication kit shall be maintained by the provider pharmacy and a copy kept with the emergency medication kit.
(iv) An automated pharmacy system may be used as an emergency medication kit provided the system limits emergency access to only those drugs approved for the emergency medication kit.
(v) Drugs for use in an emergency medication kit shall be packaged in the original manufacturer's container or prepackaged in the provider pharmacy and labeled in compliance with the board's prepackaging requirements for the class of pharmacy.
(F) Stocking emergency medication kits.
(i) Stocking of drugs in an emergency medication kit shall be completed at the provider pharmacy or remote site by a pharmacist or certified pharmacy technician under the direct supervision of a pharmacist, except as provided in clause (ii) of this subparagraph.
(ii) If the emergency medication kit is an automated pharmacy system which uses removable cartridges or containers to hold drugs, the prepackaging of the cartridges or containers shall occur at the provider pharmacy unless provided by and FDA approved repackager.
The prepackaged cartridges or containers may be sent to the remote site to be loaded into the machine by personnel designated by the pharmacist-in-charge provided:
(I) a pharmacist verifies the cartridge or container has been properly filled and labeled;
(II) the individual cartridges or containers are transported to the remote site in a secure, tamper-evident container; and
(III) the automated pharmacy system uses bar-coding, microchip, or other technologies to ensure that the containers are accurately loaded in the automated pharmacy system.
(iii) All drugs to be stocked in the emergency medication kit shall be delivered to the remote site by the provider pharmacy.
(G) Policies and procedures of operation.
(i) A provider pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through an emergency medication kit at a remote site shall operate according to written policies and procedures.
The policy and procedure manual shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(I) duties which may only be performed by a pharmacist;
(II) a copy of the written contract or agreement between the pharmacy and the facility which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party in fulfilling the terms of the contract in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(III) date of last review/revision of the policy and procedure manual; and
(IV) policies and procedures for:
(-a-) security;
(-b-) operation of the emergency medication kit;
(-c-) preventative maintenance of the automated pharmacy system if the emergency medication kit is an automated pharmacy system;
(-d-) sanitation;
(-e-) storage of drugs;
(-f-) dispensing;
(-g-) supervision;
(-h-) drug procurement;
(-i-) receiving of drugs;
(-j-) delivery of drugs; and
(-k-) recordkeeping.
(ii) A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through an emergency medication kit at a remote site shall, at least annually, review its written policies and procedures, revise them if necessary, and document the review.
(iii) A pharmacy providing remote pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit which is an automated pharmacy system shall maintain a written plan for recovery from an event which interrupts the ability of the automated pharmacy system to provide emergency medications.
The written plan for recovery shall include:
(I) planning and preparation for maintaining pharmacy services when an automated pharmacy system is experiencing downtime;
(II) procedures for response when an automated pharmacy system is experiencing downtime; and
(III) procedures for the maintenance and testing of the written plan for recovery.
(5) Records.
(A) Maintenance of records.
(i) Every record required under this section must be maintained by the provider pharmacy for two years.
(ii) The provider pharmacy shall maintain original prescription drug orders for drugs dispensed from an emergency medication kit in compliance with §291.34(b) of this title.
(B) Prescriptions.
Prescription drug orders shall meet the requirements of §291.34(b) of this title.
(C) Records of dispensing.
Dispensing records for a prescription drug order shall be maintained by the provider pharmacy in the manner required by §291.34(d) or (e) of this title.
(D) Transaction information.
(i) A prescription drug order shall be maintained by the provider pharmacy as the record of removal of a drug from an emergency medication kit for administration to a patient.
(ii) The remote site shall notify the provider pharmacy electronically or in writing of each entry into an emergency medication kit.
Such notification may be included on the prescription drug order or a separate document and shall include the name, strength, and quantity of the drug removed, the time of removal, and the name of the person removing the drug.
(iii) A separate record of stocking, removal, or dispensing for administration from an emergency medication kit shall be maintained by the pharmacy and include the:
(I) date;
(II) name, strength, dosage form, and quantity of drug stocked, removed, or dispensed for administration;
(III) name, initials, or identification code of the person stocking, removing, or dispensing for administration, drugs from the system;
(IV) name, initials, or identification code of the pharmacist who checks and verifies that the system has been accurately filled; and
(V) unique prescription number assigned to the prescription drug order when the drug is administered to the patient.
(E) Inventory.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall:
(I) keep a record of all drugs sent to and returned from a remote site separate from the records of the provider pharmacy and from any other remote site's records; and
(II) keep a perpetual inventory of controlled substances received and dispensed or distributed from each remote site.
(ii) As specified in §291.17 of this title, a provider pharmacy shall conduct an inventory at each remote site.
The following is applicable to this inventory.
(I) The inventory of each remote site and the provider pharmacy shall be taken on the same day.
(II) The inventory of each remote site shall be included with, but listed separately from, the drugs of other remote sites and separately from the drugs of the provider pharmacy.
(c) Remote pharmacy services using telepharmacy systems.
(1) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the provision of pharmacy services by a Class A or Class C pharmacy in a healthcare facility that is not at the same location as a Class A or Class C pharmacy through a telepharmacy system as outlined in Section 562.110 of the Texas Pharmacy Act, Chapter 551-566, Occupations Code.
(2) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
All other words and terms shall have the meanings defined in §291.31 of this title.
(A) Board - The Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
(B) Dispense - Preparing, packaging, compounding, or labeling for delivery a prescription drug or device in the course of professional practice to an ultimate user or his agent by or pursuant to the lawful order of a practitioner.
(C) Drug regimen review - An evaluation of prescription drug or medication orders and patient medication records for:
(i) known allergies;
(ii) rational therapy-contraindications;
(iii) reasonable dose and route of administration;
(iv) reasonable directions for use;
(v) duplication of therapy;
(vi) drug-drug interactions;
(vii) drug-food interactions;
(viii) drug-disease interactions;
(ix) adverse drug reactions; and
(x) proper utilization, including overutilization or underutilization.
(D) Patient counseling - Communication by the pharmacist of information to the patient or patient's agent, in order to improve therapy by ensuring proper use of drugs and devices.
(E) Prepackaging - The act of repackaging and relabeling quantities of drug products from a manufacturer's original commercial container into a prescription container for dispensing by a pharmacist to the ultimate consumer.
(F) Provider pharmacy - The community pharmacy (Class A) or the institutional pharmacy (Class C) providing remote pharmacy services.
(G) Remote site - a facility not located at the same location as a Class A or Class C pharmacy, at which remote pharmacy services are provided using a telepharmacy dispensing system.
(H) Remote pharmacy service - The provision of pharmacy services, including the storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, drug regimen review, and patient counseling, at a remote site.
(I) Still image capture - A specific image captured electronically from a video or other image capture device.
(J) Store and forward - A video or still image record which is saved electronically for future review.
(K) Telepharmacy system - A system that monitors the dispensing of prescription drugs and provides for related drug use review and patient counseling services by an electronic method which shall include the use of the following types of technology:
(i) audio and video;
(ii) still image capture; and
(iii) store and forward.
(L) Unit of use - A sufficient quantity of a drug for one normal course of therapy as determined by the pharmacist-in-charge and the prescribing practitioner(s) at the healthcare facility.
(3) General requirements.
(A) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services using a telepharmacy system to:
(i) a rural health clinic regulated under 42 U.S.C.
Section 1395x(aa), as amended;
(ii) a health center as defined by 42 U.S.C.
Section 254b, as amended; or
(iii) healthcare facility located in a medically underserved area as defined by state or federal law.
(B) A provider pharmacy may not provide remote pharmacy services if a Class A (Community) or Class C (Institutional) pharmacy that dispenses prescription drug orders to out-patients is located in the same community.
For the purposes of this subsection a community is defined as:
(i) the census tract in which the remote site is located, if the remote site is located in a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as defined by the United States Census Bureau in the most recent U.S. Census; or
(ii) within 10 miles of the remote site, if the remote site is not located in a MSA.
(C) The provider pharmacy shall have sufficient pharmacists on duty such that each pharmacist may supervise no more than three remote sites that are simultaneously open to provide services.
An exception to the supervision limit may be granted by the board in situations where the provider has documented a need for a pharmacist to supervise additional remote sites and has demonstrated that appropriate safeguards are in place to assure proper supervision of each remote site.
(D) Before providing remote pharmacy service, the telepharmacy system at the off-site facility must be tested by the provider pharmacy and found to operate properly.
The provider pharmacy shall make the results of such testing available to the board upon request.
(E) A provider pharmacy which is licensed as an institutional (Class C) pharmacy is required to comply with the provisions of §291.31 - 291.34 of this title and this section.
(F) The pharmacist-in-charge of the provider pharmacy is responsible for all operations at the remote site including supervision of the telepharmacy system and compliance with this section.
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application to provide pharmacy services using a telepharmacy system.
(i) A Class A or class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using a telepharmacy system.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of pharmacist-in-charge, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive office, chief operating officer), and include the following:
(I) the name, address, and license number of the provider pharmacy;
(II) name and address of the healthcare facility where the remote pharmacy services will be provided;
(III) a statement indicating that the provider pharmacy and the healthcare facility have entered into a written contract or agreement which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party in fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(IV) documentation that the healthcare facility is:
(-a-) a rural health clinic regulated under 42 U.S.C.
Section 1395x(aa), as amended;
(-b-) a health center as defined by 42 U.S.C.
Section 254b, as amended; or
(-c-) located in a medically underserved area as defined by state or federal law; and
(V) documentation that a Class A (Community) or Class C (Institutional) Pharmacy that dispenses prescriptions drug orders to out-patients is not located within the community, as defined in paragraph (3)(B) of this subsection, where the remote site is located.
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal application shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph.
(iii) On approval of the application, the provider pharmacy will be sent a registration certificate, which must be displayed at the remote site.
(B) Notification requirements.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall notify the board in writing within ten days of a change of location, discontinuance of service, or closure of:
(I) a remote site where a telepharmacy system is operated by the pharmacy; or
(II) a remote pharmacy service at a remote site.
(ii) A provider pharmacy shall comply with appropriate federal and state controlled substance registrations for each remote site, if controlled substances are maintained.
(C) Environment/Security.
(i) A remote site shall be under the continuous supervision of a provider pharmacy pharmacist at all times the site is open to provide pharmacy services.
To qualify as continuous supervision, the pharmacist is not required to be physically present at the remote site and shall supervise electronically through the use of the following types of technology:
(I) audio and video;
(II) still image capture; and
(III) store and forward.
(ii) Drugs shall be stored in compliance with the provisions of 291.33(f) of this title including the requirements for temperature, proper containers, and handling of outdated drugs.
(iii) Drugs for use in the telepharmacy system shall be stored in an area that is:
(I) separate from any other drugs used by the healthcare facility; and
(II) locked by key or combination, so as to prevent access by unauthorized personnel.
(iv) Access to the area where drugs are stored at the remote site and operation of the telepharmacy system shall be limited to pharmacists employed by the provider pharmacy or personnel who:
(I) are licensed healthcare providers or certified pharmacy technicians;
(II) are designated in writing by the pharmacist-in-charge; and
(III) have completed documented training concerning their duties associated with the telepharmacy pharmacy system.
(v) Remote sites shall have adequate security and procedures to:
(I) comply with federal and state laws and regulations; and
(II) maintain patient confidentiality.
(vi) The provider pharmacy shall have procedures that specify that drugs may only be delivered to the remote site by the provider pharmacy and shall:
(I) be shipped in a sealed container with a list of drugs delivered;
(II) signed for on receipt by an employee of the healthcare facility;
(III) be quarantined in a locked area, if personnel designated to receive the drugs by the pharmacist-in-charge is not available; and
(IV) be checked by personnel designated by the pharmacist-in-charge to verify that drugs sent by the provider pharmacy were actually received.
The designated person who checks the order shall document the verification by signing and dating the list of drugs delivered.
(D) Prescription dispensing and delivery.
(i) Drugs shall only be dispensed at the remote site through a telepharmacy system after receipt of an original prescription drug order by a pharmacist at the provider pharmacy in the manner authorized by §291.34(b) of this title.
(ii) Drugs may be dispensed by the provider pharmacy through a telepharmacy system at a remote site only in unit-of-use containers that are:
(I) prepackaged in suitable containers at the provider pharmacy and appropriately labeled as specified in §291.33(c)(4) of this title ; or
(II) in original manufacturer's containers.
(iii) The following duties shall be performed only by a pharmacist at the provider pharmacy:
(I) receiving a oral prescription drug order;
(II) interpret the prescription drug order;
(III) verify the accuracy of prescription data entry;
(IV) select the drug product;
(V) interpret the patient's medication record and conduct a drug regimen review as specified in clause (iv) of this subparagraph;
(VI) authorize the telepharmacy system to print a prescription label at the remote site as specified in clause (v) of this subparagraph;
(VII) perform the final check of the dispensed prescription as specified in clause (vi) of this subparagraph to ensure that the prescription drug order has been dispensed accurately as prescribed;
(VIII) counsel the patient as specified clause (vii) of this subparagraph.
(iv) A pharmacist at the provider pharmacy shall conduct a drug regimen review as specified in §291.33(c) of this title prior to delivery of the dispensed prescription to the patient or patient's agent.
(v) The dispensed prescription shall be labeled at the remote site with the information specified in §291.33(c) of this title except that:
(I) the label shall contain both the name, address, and phone number of the provider pharmacy and the name and address of the remote site; and
(II) the unique identification number of the prescription on the label shall in some manner identify the remote site which dispensed the prescription using a telepharmacy system.
(vi) A pharmacist at the provider pharmacy shall perform the final check of the dispensed prescription before delivery to the patient to ensure that the prescription has been dispensed accurately as prescribed.
This final check shall be accomplished through a visual check using electronic methods.
(vii) A pharmacist at the provider pharmacy shall counsel the patient or patient's agent as specified in §291.33(c) of this title.
This counseling may be performed using electronic methods.
Non-pharmacist personnel may not ask questions of a patient or patient's agent which are intended to screen and/or limit interaction with the pharmacist.
(viii) If the remote site has direct access to the provider pharmacy's data processing system, only a pharmacist or a certified pharmacy technician may enter prescription information into the data processing system.
The original prescription shall be sent to the provider pharmacy and a pharmacist shall verify the accuracy of the data entry.
(ix) Drugs which require reconstitution through the addition of a specified amount of water may be dispensed by the remote site only if a certified pharmacy technician or licensed healthcare provider reconstitutes the product.
(E) Quality assurance program.
A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through a telepharmacy system at a remote site shall operate according to a written program for quality assurance of the telepharmacy system which:
(i) requires continuous supervision of the telepharmacy system at all times the site is open to provide pharmacy services; and
(ii) establishes mechanisms and procedures to routinely test the operation of the telepharmacy system at a minimum of every six months and whenever any upgrade or change is made to the system and documents each such activity.
(F) Policies and procedures.
(i) A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through a telepharmacy system at a remote site shall operate according to written policies and procedures.
The policy and procedure manual shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(I) a current list of the name and address of the pharmacist-in-charge and personnel designated by the pharmacist-in-charge to have:
(-a-) have access to the area where drugs are stored at the remote site; and
(-b-) operate the telepharmacy system;
(II) duties which may only be performed by a pharmacist;
(III) a copy of the written contact or agreement between the provider pharmacy and the healthcare facility which outlines the services to be provided and the responsibilities and accountabilities of each party in fulfilling the terms of the contract or agreement in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations;
(IV) date of last review/revision of policy and procedure manual; and
(V) policies and procedures for:
(-a-) security;
(-b-) operation of the telepharmacy system;
(-c-) sanitation;
(-d-) storage of drugs;
(-e-) dispensing;
(-f-) supervision;
(-g-) drug and/or device procurement;
(-h-) receiving of drugs and/or devices;
(-i-) delivery of drugs and/or devices; and
(-j-) recordkeeping
(ii) A pharmacy that provides pharmacy services through a telepharmacy system at a remote site shall, at least annually, review its written policies and procedures, revise them if necessary, and document the review.
(iii) A pharmacy providing remote pharmacy services through a telepharmacy system shall maintain a written plan for recovery from an event which interrupts the ability of a pharmacist to electronically supervise the telepharmacy system and the dispensing of prescription drugs at the remote site.
The written plan for recovery shall include:
(I) a statement that prescription drugs shall not be dispensed at the remote site, if a pharmacists is not able to electronically supervise the telepharmacy system and the dispensing of prescription drugs;
(II) procedures for response when a telepharmacy system is experiencing downtime; and
(III) procedures for the maintenance and testing of the written plan for recovery.
(5) Records.
(A) Maintenance of records.
(i) Every record required under this section must be maintained by the provider pharmacy for two years.
(ii) The provider pharmacy shall maintain original prescription drug orders for medications dispensed from a remote site using a telepharmacy system in the manner required by §291.34(b) of this title.
(iii) If prescription drug records are maintained in a data processing system, the system shall have a workable (electronic) data retention system which can produce a separate audit trail of drug usage by the provider pharmacy and by each remote site for the preceding two years as specified in §291.34(e) of this title relating to Records in a Class A (Community) Pharmacy).
(B) Prescriptions.
Prescription drug orders shall meet the requirements of §291.34(b) of this title.
(C) Patient medication records.
Patient medication records shall be created and maintained at the provider pharmacy in the manner required by §291.34(c) of this title.
(D) Inventory.
(i) A provider pharmacy shall:
(I) keep a record of all drugs sent to and returned from a remote site separate from the records of the provider pharmacy and from any other remote site's records;
(II) keep a perpetual inventory of controlled substances and other drugs required to be inventoried under §291.17 of this title, that are received and dispensed or distributed from each remote site.
(ii) As specified in §291.17 of this title.
A provider pharmacy shall conduct an inventory at each remote site.
The following is applicable to this inventory.
(I) The inventory of each remote site and the provider pharmacy shall be taken on the same day.
(II) The inventory of each remote site shall be included with, but listed separately from, the drugs of other remote sites and separately from the drugs at the provider pharmacy.
(d) Confidentiality.
(1) A pharmacy shall provide adequate security of prescription drug orders, and patient medication records to prevent indiscriminate or unauthorized access to confidential health information.
If prescription drug orders, requests for refill authorization, or other confidential health information are not transmitted directly between a pharmacy and a physician but are transmitted through a data communication device, confidential health information may not be accessed or maintained by the operator of the data communication device unless specifically authorized to obtain the confidential information by this subsection.
(2) Confidential records are privileged and may be released only to:
(A) the patient or the patient's agent;
(B) a practitioner or another pharmacist if, in the pharmacist's professional judgement, the release is necessary to protect the patient's health and well being;
(C) the board or to a person or another state or federal agency authorized by law to receive the confidential record;
(D) a law enforcement agency engaged in investigation of a suspected violation of Chapter 481 or 483, Health and Safety Code, or the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 U.S.C.
Section 801 et seq.);
(E) a person employed by a state agency that licenses a practitioner, if the person is performing the person's official duties; or
(F) an insurance carrier or other third party payor authorized by a patient to receive such information.
(3) A pharmacy shall comply with:
(A) the privacy provisions of the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-191) and the any rules adopted pursuant to this act;
(B) the requirements for Medical Records Privacy contained in Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code;
(C) the Privacy of Health Information requirements contained in Chapter 28B of the Insurance Code; and
(D) any other confidentiality provisions of federal or state laws.
§291.21.
Notification to Consumers
(a) Pharmacy.
(1) Every licensed pharmacy shall provide notification to consumers of the name, mailing address, Internet site address, and telephone number of the board for the purpose of directing complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy to the board.
Such notification shall be provided as follows.
(A) If the pharmacy serves walk in customers, the pharmacy shall either:
(i) post in a prominent place that is in clear public view where prescription drugs are dispensed a sign furnished by the board which notifies the consumer that complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the board and list the board's name, mailing address, Internet site address, telephone number of the board, and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints; or
(ii) provide with each dispensed prescription a written notification in a type size no smaller than ten point Times Roman which states the following: "Complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the Texas State Board of Pharmacy at: (list the mailing address, Internet site address, telephone number of the board, and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints)."
(B) If the prescription drug order is delivered to patients at their residence or other designated location, the pharmacy shall provide with each dispensed prescription a written notification in type size no smaller than ten point Times Roman which states the following: "Complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the Texas State Board of Pharmacy at: (list the mailing address, Internet site address, telephone number of the board, and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints)."
If multiple prescriptions are delivered to the same location, only one such notice shall be required.
(C) The provisions of this section do not apply to prescriptions for patients in facilities where drugs are administered to patients by a person required to do so by the laws of the state (i.e., nursing homes).
(2) A pharmacy that maintains a generally accessible site on the Internet that is located in Texas or sells or distributes drugs through this site to residents of this state shall post the following information on the pharmacy's initial home page and on the page where a sale of prescription drugs occurs.
(A) Information on the ownership of the pharmacy, to include at a minimum, the:
(i) owner's name or if the owner is a partnership or corporation, the partnership's or corporation's name and the name of the chief operating officer;
(ii) owner's address;
(iii) owner's telephone number; and
(iv) year the owner began operating pharmacies in the United States;
(B) The Internet address and toll free telephone number that a consumer may use to:
(i) report medication/device problems to the pharmacy; and
(ii) report business compliance problems.
(C) Information about each pharmacy that dispenses prescriptions for this site, to include at a minimum, the:
(i) pharmacy's name, address, and telephone number;
(ii) name of the pharmacist responsible for operation of the pharmacy;
(iii) Texas pharmacy license number for the pharmacy and a link to the Internet site maintained by the Texas State Board of Pharmacy; and
(iv) the names of all other states in which the pharmacy is licensed, the license number in that state, and a link to the Internet site of the entity that regulates pharmacies in that state, if available.
(3) A pharmacy whose Internet site has been awarded a Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Site (VIPPS) certification by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy shall be in compliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection by displaying the VIPPS seal on the pharmacy internet site.
(b) Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
On or before January 1, 2005, the board shall establish a pharmacy profile system as specified in Section 2054.2606, Government Code.
(1) The board shall make the pharmacy profiles available to the public on the agency's Internet site.
(2) A pharmacy profile shall contain at least the following information:
(A) name, address, and telephone number of the pharmacy;
(B) pharmacy license number, licensure status, and expiration date of the license;
(C) the class and type of the pharmacy;
(D) ownership information for the pharmacy;
(E) names and license numbers of all pharmacists working at the pharmacy;
(F) whether the pharmacy has had prior disciplinary action by the board;
(G) whether the pharmacy's consumer service areas are accessible to disabled persons, as defined by law;
(H) the type of language translating services, including translating services for persons with impairment of hearing, that the pharmacy provides for consumers; and
(I) insurance information including whether the pharmacy participates in the state Medicaid program.
(3) The board shall gather this information on initial licensing and update the information in conjunction with the license renewal for the pharmacy.
Subchapter B. Community Pharmacy (Class A)
§291.33.
Operational Standards
(a) Licensing requirements
(1)-(9) (No change.)
(10) A Class A (Community) pharmacy engaged in the provision of remote pharmacy services, including storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, shall comply with the provisions of §291.20 of this title (relating to Remote Pharmacy Services).
(b)-(j) (No change.)
§291.36.
Class A Pharmacies Compounding Sterile Pharmaceuticals
(a)-(c) (No change.)
(d) Operational standards.
(1) Licensing requirements.
(A)-(I) (No change.)
(J) A Class A (Community) pharmacy compounding sterile pharmaceuticals engaged in the provision of remote pharmacy services, including storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, shall comply with the provisions of §291.20 of this title (relating to Remote Pharmacy Services).
(2)-(9) (No change.)
(e)-(f) (No change.)
Subchapter D. Institutional Pharmacy (Class C)
§291.74.
Operational Standards
(a) Licensing requirements.
(1)-(10) (No change.)
(11) A Class C (Institutional) pharmacy engaged in the provision of remote pharmacy services, including storage and dispensing of prescription drugs, shall comply with the provisions of §291.20 of this title (relating to Remote Pharmacy Services).
(b)-(j) (No change.)
Chapter 295.
Pharmacists
§295.8.
Continuing Education Requirements
(a) Authority and purpose.
(1) Authority.
In accordance with §559.003 of the Texas Pharmacy Act, (Chapters 551-566, Occupations Code), all pharmacists must obtain continuing education to renew their license as follows.
(A) Effective September 1, 1999, all pharmacists must submit proof of completion of 12 contact hours (1.2 CEUs) of approved continuing education for each year of their license period in order to renew their license to practice pharmacy (i.e., 12 contact hours (1.2 CEUs) for annual renewals and 24 contact hours (2.4 CEUs) for biennial renewals).
(B) All pharmacists with licenses expiring on or after August 31, 2003, must complete and report 30 contact hours (3.0 CEUs) of approved continuing education obtained during the previous license period in order to renew their license to practice pharmacy.
(2) (No change.)
(b) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(1) (No change.)
(2) Act--The Texas Pharmacy Act, Chapters 551-566, Occupations Code.
(3)-(8) (No change.)
(9) Credit hour-- A unit of measurement for continuing education equal to 15 contact hours.
(10)-(14) (No change.)
(c) Methods for obtaining continuing education.
A pharmacist may satisfy the continuing education requirements by either:
(1) successfully completing the number of continuing education hours necessary to renew a license as specified in subsection (a)(1) of this section;
(2) (No change.)
(3) taking and passing the standardized pharmacy examination (NAPLEX) during the preceding license period, which shall be equivalent to the number of continuing education hours necessary to renew a license as specified in subsection (a)(1) of this section.
(d) Reporting Requirements.
(1) (No change.)
(2) Failure to report completion of required continuing education.
The license of a pharmacist who fails to report completion of the required number of continuing education contact hours shall not be renewed and the pharmacist shall not be issued a renewal certificate for the license period.
A pharmacist who practices pharmacy without a current renewal certificate is subject to all penalties of practicing pharmacy without a license.
The following is also applicable if a pharmacist fails to report completion of the required continuing education.
(A) (No change.)
(B) The pharmacist shall be subject to the delinquent fees specified in the Act, §559.003.
(3)-(4) (No change.)
(e) Approved Programs.
(1)-(4) (No change.)
(5) Completion of an Institute for Safe Medication Practices' (ISMP) Medication Safety Self Assessment for hospital pharmacies or for community/ambulatory pharmacies shall be recognized for continuing education credit as follows.
(A) Pharmacists shall receive credit for three contact hours (0.3 CEUs) towards their continuing education requirement for completion of an ISMP Medication Safety Self Assessment.
(B) Proof of completion of an ISMP Medication Safety Self Assessment shall be:
(i) a continuing education certificate provided by an ACPE approved provider for completion of an assessment; or
(ii) a document from ISMP showing completion of an assessment.
(6) Upon demonstrated need the board may establish criteria to approve programs presented by non ACPE approved providers.
(f)-(g) (No change.)
§295.11.
Notification to Consumers
(a) Pharmacist.
Every pharmacist who practices pharmacy other than in a licensed pharmacy shall provide notification to consumers of the name, mailing address, Internet site address, and telephone number of the board for the purpose of directing complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy to the board.
Such notification shall be provided as follows.
(1) If the pharmacist maintains an office and provides pharmacy services to patients who come to the office, the pharmacist shall either:
(A) post in a prominent place that is in clear public view where pharmacy services are provided a sign furnished by the Texas State Board of Pharmacy which notifies the consumer that complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the board and list the mailing address, Internet site address, telephone number of the board, and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints; or
(B) provide to the patient each time pharmacy services are provided a written notification in type size no smaller than ten point Times Roman which states the following: "Complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the Texas State Board of Pharmacy at: (list the mailing address, Internet site address, telephone number of the board, and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints)."
(2) If the pharmacist provides pharmacy services to patients not at the pharmacist's office, the pharmacist shall provide to the patient each time pharmacy services are provided, a written notification in type size no smaller than ten point Times Roman which states the following: "Complaints concerning the practice of pharmacy may be filed with the Texas State Board of Pharmacy at: (list the mailing address, telephone number of the board, Internet site address and if applicable a toll free telephone number for filing complaints)."
Such notification shall be included:
(A) in each written contract for pharmacist services; or
(B) on each bill for service provided by the pharmacist.
(3) The provisions of this section do not apply to prescriptions for patients in facilities where drugs are administered to patients by a person required to do so by the laws of the state (i.e., nursing homes).
(b) Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
On or before January 1, 2005, the board shall establish a pharmacist profile system as specified in Section 2054.2606, Government Code.
(1) The board shall make the pharmacist profiles available to the public on the agency's Internet site.
(2) A pharmacist profile shall contain at least the following information:
(A) pharmacist's name;
(B) pharmacist's license number, licensure status, and expiration date of the license;
(C) name, address, telephone number, and license number of all Texas pharmacies where the pharmacist works;
(D) the number of years the person has practiced in Texas;
(E) professional pharmacy degree held by the licensee, the year it was received, and the name of the institution that awarded the degree;
(F) whether the pharmacist is preceptor;
(G) any speciality certification held by the pharmacist; and
(H) whether the pharmacist has had prior disciplinary action by the board.
(3) The board shall gather this information on initial licensing and update the information in conjunction with the license renewal for the pharmacist.
§295.12.
Pharmacist Certification Programs.
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the recognition and approval of pharmacist certification programs as authorized by Section 554.0021, Occupations Code.
(b) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(1) ACPE -- The American Council on Pharmaceutical Education.
(2) Approved Provider of Pharmacist Certificate Programs -- An individual, institution, organization, association, corporation, or agency that is approved by the board and recognized by ACPE in accordance with its policy and procedures, as having:
(A) met criteria indicative of the ability to provide quality continuing education programs; and
(B) met the ACPE "Standards and Quality Assurance Procedures for ACPE Approved Providers of Continuing Pharmaceutical Education Offering Certificate Programs in Pharmacy."
(3) Board -- The Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
(4) Disease State Management (STEVE MORSE) Exam -- A Disease State Management Examination offered by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy.
(c) Board Certified Pharmacists.
(1) The Texas State Board of Pharmacy shall recognize as certified, any pharmacist that successfully completes:
(A) any program offered by a approved provider of pharmacist certificate programs;
(B) any Disease State Management Examination offered by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy;
(C) any program that meets the requirements of §295.15 of this title (relating to Administration of Immunizations or Vaccinations by a Pharmacist under Written Protocol of a Physician);
(D) any certification offered by the:
(i) Board of Pharmaceutical Specialities;
(ii) American Society of Consultant Pharmacists;
(iii) American Board of Clinical Pharmacology;
(iv) American Board of Applied Toxicology; and
(v) American Academy of Pain Management.
(E) any additional certifications approved by the board and published in the minutes of the board.
(2) Texas pharmacists may not identify themselves as board certified unless they have completed one of the programs specified in paragraph (1) of this subsection.
§295.13.
Drug Therapy Management by a Pharmacist under Written Protocol of a Physician
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the maintenance of records of a pharmacist engaged in the provision of drug therapy management as authorized in Chapter 157 of the Medical Practice Act and Section 554.005 of the Act.
(b) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(1) Act-- The Texas Pharmacy Act, Chapter 551-566, Occupations Code, as amended.
(2)-(4) (No change.)
(5) Medical Practice Act The Texas Medical Practice Act, Subtitle B, Occupations Code, as amended.
(6) (No change.)
(c) Notification.
(1) (No change.)
(2) Continuing requirements.
A pharmacist engaged in drug therapy management shall:
(A) (No change.)
(B) notify the board of any change in supervising physician or change in the address where the records of drug therapy management are maintained.
(d) Supervision.
Physician supervision shall be as specified in the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 157 and shall be considered adequate if the delegating physician:
(1)-(6) (No change.)
(e) (No change.)
(f) Confidentiality.
(1) A pharmacist shall provide adequate security to prevent indiscriminate or unauthorized access to confidential records.
If confidential health information is not transmitted directly between a pharmacy and a physician, but is transmitted through a data communication device, the confidential health information may not be accessed or maintained by the operator of the data communication device unless specifically authorized to obtain the confidential information by this subsection.
(2) A confidential record is privileged and a pharmacist may release a confidential record only to:
(A) the patient or the patient's agent;
(B) a practitioner or another pharmacist if, in the pharmacist's professional judgement, the release is necessary to protect the patient's health and well-being;
(C) the board or to a person or another state or federal agency authorized by law to receive the confidential record;
(D) a law enforcement agency engaged in investigations of a suspected violation of Chapter 481 or 483, Health and Safety Code, or the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 U.S.C.
Section 801 et.
Seq.);
(E) a person employed by a state agency that licenses a practitioner, if the person is performing the person's official duties; or
(F) an insurance carrier or other third party payor authorized by the patient to receive the information.
(3) A pharmacist shall comply with:
(A) the privacy provisions of the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-191) and any rules adopted pursuant to this act;
(B) the requirements of Medical Records Privacy contained in Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code;
(C) the Privacy of Health Information requirements contained in Chapter 28B of the Insurance Code; and
(D) any other confidentiality provisions of federal or state laws.
(4) This section shall not affect or alter the provisions relating to the confidentiality of the physician patient communication as specified in the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 159.
(g) Construction and Interpretation.
(1) As specified in the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 157, this section does not restrict the use of a pre established health care program or restrict a physician from authorizing the provision of patient care by use of a pre established health care program if the patient is institutionalized and the care is to be delivered in a licensed hospital with an organized medical staff that has authorized standing delegation orders, standing medical orders, or protocols.
(2) As specified in the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 157, this section may not be construed to limit, expand, or change any provision of law concerning or relating to therapeutic drug substitution or administration of medication, including the Act, Section 554.004.
§295.15.
Administration of Immunizations or Vaccinations by a Pharmacist under Written Protocol of a Physician
(a) Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to provide standards for pharmacists engaged in the administration of immunizations or vaccinations as authorized in Chapter 554 of the Act.
(b) Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
(1) ACPE - The American Council on Pharmaceutical Education.
(2) Act - The Texas Pharmacy Act, Chapter 551-566, Occupations Code, as amended.
(3)-(9) (No change.)
(10) Medical Practice Act - The Texas Medical Practice Act, Subtitle B, Occupations Code, as amended.
(11)-(13) (No change.)
(c) Pharmacist certification requirements.
Pharmacist who enter into a written protocol with a physician to administer immunizations or vaccinations shall:
(1) complete a course provided by an ACPE approved provider which:
(A)-(C) (No change.)
(2) (No change.)
(d)-(h) (No change.)
(i) Confidentiality.
(1) A pharmacist shall provide adequate security to prevent indiscriminate or unauthorized access to confidential records.
If confidential health information is not transmitted directly between a pharmacy and a physician, but is transmitted through a data communication device, the confidential health information may not be accessed or maintained by the operator of the data communication device unless specifically authorized to obtain confidential information by this subsection.
(2) A confidential record is privileged and a pharmacist may release a confidential record only to:
(A) the patient or the patient's agent;
(B) a practitioner or another pharmacist if, in the pharmacist's professional judgement, the release is necessary to protect the patient's health and well-being;
(C) the board or to a person or another state or federal agency authorized by law to receive the confidential record;
(D) a law enforcement agency engaged in investigations of a suspected violation of Chapter 481 or 483, Health and Safety Code, or the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 U.S.C.
Section 801 et.
Seq.);
(E) a person employed by a state agency that licenses a practitioner, if the person is performing the person's official duties; or
(F) an insurance carrier or other third party payor authorized by the patient to receive the information.
(3) A pharmacist shall comply with:
(A) the privacy provisions of the federal Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (Pub. L. No. 104-191) and any rules adopted pursuant to this act;
(B) the requirements of Medical Records Privacy contained in Chapter 181, Health and Safety Code;
(C) the Privacy of Health Information requirements contained in Chapter 28B of the Insurance Code; and
(D) any other confidentiality provisions of federal or state laws.
(4) This section shall not affect or alter the provisions relating to the confidentiality of the physician patient communication as specified in the Medical Practice Act, Chapter 159.
new_pills.gif (14766 bytes)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Copyright © 2002 Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
All rights reserved.
Home - Privacy Policy - Questions/Comments - Site Map
