Back to Home [nutrition2_top.gif] [shim.gif]
Diabetes includes previously diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes defined by fasting plasma glucose greater than or equal to 126 mg/dL. (age-std=age-standardized) Managing Your Diabetes
Diabetes is a major public health concern in our country today.
Almost everyone knows someone who has this disease.
An estimated 16 million Americans have diabetes - about 7.3 percent of the population - and one-third of them don't know that they have the disease.
Approximately 800,000 people each year are diagnosed with diabetes.
What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disorder of metabolism - the way our bodies use digested food for growth and energy.
Most of the food we eat is converted into glucose, the body's main source of energy.
Cells only can absorb glucose when insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas, is present.
When someone has diabetes, they do not produce or respond to insulin.
In diabetes, glucose builds up in the blood, overflows into the urine, and passes out of the body.
Thus, the body loses its main source of fuel.
Left unchecked, diabetes can cause both short-term and long-term complications including kidney failure, blindness, heart disease and stroke.
Many cases of diabetes could have been prevented.
What are the symptoms of diabetes? The most common symptoms of diabetes are excessive thirst (polydipsia), excessive hunger (polyphagia), and excessive urination (polyuria).
Other symptoms can include blurred vision, unintended weight loss, tingling or numbness in feet or hands, sores that are slow to heal, and dry itchy skin.
People with diabetes can have some or none of these symptoms.
If you think you may have diabetes, it is very important to consult your doctor.
Learn more about the symptoms and risk factors for diabetes.
What are the risk factors for diabetes? Risk factors for diabetes include being overweight or obese, having a family history of diabetes, or having an inactive lifestyle.
Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, African-Americans, and Native Americans have a higher risk of Type 2 diabetes than Non-Hispanic Whites.
What are the different types of diabetes? Type I diabetes develops most often in children and young adults and is considered to be an autoimmune disease.
Type II diabetes, on the other hand, usually develops in adults age 40 and older, and is often associated with overweight or obesity.
Gestational diabetes develops only during pregnancy in some women.
Click on these links to learn more about diabetes and the different types of this disease.
How is diabetes managed? Today, healthy eating, physical activity, and insulin via injection or an insulin pump are the basic therapies for type I diabetes.
The amount of insulin used must be balanced with food intake and daily activities.
Blood glucose levels must be closely monitored throughout the day.
Healthy eating, physical activity, and blood glucose testing are the basic management tools for type 2 diabetes.In addition, some people with type II diabetes require oral medication and/or insulin to control their blood glucose levels.
For more information.
What can you do to help prevent and control diabetes? The cause of diabetes is still not known, although both genetics and lifestyle factors such as obesity and lack of exercise appear to be important in Type II diabetes.
Diet and exercise are two major ways to keep diabetes under control.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) currently recommends that 50-60% of a person's diet should come from carbohydrates (starches and sugars), 10-20% from protein, and less than 30% from fats.
Specific meal plans should be based on an individual's usual food intake.
People with Type I diabetes should eat at about the same time each day and try to be consistent with the types of food they choose.
This helps to prevent blood sugar levels from becoming too high or low.
Type II diabetics should consume a diet that is well balanced and low in fat.
Moderate physical activity for at least 30 minutes every day for adults and children will help you reach and stay at a weight that is healthy for your body and keep your blood sugar in a normal range.
A healthy diet and physical activity will also help prevent heart disease, stroke, some forms of cancer, and is a recipe for overall good health.
Check with your doctor about ways to prevent diabetes, how it's detected, and if you have it, how it can be managed effectively.
In recent years, advances in diabetes research have led to better ways to manage diabetes and treat its complications.
Scientists are intensifying efforts to find new ways to prevent, detect, and treat this disease.
Click here to learn how to control diabetes for life.
[shim.gif]
