I-G 98-30 Refer: Rich Howard, Boise, Idaho - 208/378-5243 Susan Saul, Portland, Oregon - 503/231-6121 March 23, 1998 NORTHERN IDAHO GROUND SQUIRREL PROPOSED FOR PROTECTION AS THREATENED SPECIES The U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service today announced a proposal to list the northern Idaho ground squirrel, a species already protected by the State of Idaho, as threatened under the Federal Endangered Species Act.
Federal protection would bolster protections already given to the species by Idaho.
This rare squirrel has the most restricted geographical range of any squirrel and one of the smallest ranges among all North American mainland mammals.
The northern Idaho ground squirrel is found only in Idaho and occurs on public and private lands northwest of Council, Idaho.
Its entire range is about 18 by 20 miles, although historically, its range may have been much larger, extending southeast to Round Valley near Cascade, Idaho.
As recently as 1985, about 5,000 individuals were counted in Adams and Valley counties.
By 1997, fewer than 1,000 individuals were found in 21 colonies, primarily on privately-owned lands and lands administered by the Payette National Forest.
Colony sizes range from 3 to 40 acres.
The northern Idaho ground squirrel occurs in shallow, dry, rocky meadows usually associated with deeper, well-drained soils and surrounded by ponderosa pine or Douglas-fir forests at elevations of about 3,800 to 5,200 feet.
It eats mainly grass seeds and stems, and herbs.
It needs large quantities of these foods to store body energy for the long period it spends in torpor underground from August through late March of each year.
Another subspecies, the Columbian ground squirrel, lives in the same habitat as the northern Idaho ground squirrel and competes for the same food and space.
It is about one-third larger than the northern Idaho ground squirrel.
Habitat loss due to forest encroachment into meadows is the main threat to the northern Idaho ground squirrel.
Forest expansion into natural meadows is a result of fire suppression.
Other threats include agricultural conversion, residential development of the squirrel's habitat, and recreational shooting of squirrels in colonies adjacent to towns and farms.
The State of Idaho recognizes the northern Idaho ground squirrel as a "species of special concern," which protects it from taking and possession.
The Fish and Wildlife Service has been working with Federal, state and private landowners to reduce threats and undertake recovery actions that may reverse the steep decline of this species.
The Payette National Forest signed a conservation agreement with the Service in 1996 to protect and enhance habitat for the northern Idaho ground squirrel.
The Forest Service is making habitat improvements for the squirrel, including thinning stands of timber to open more meadow habitat to squirrel recolonization, and conducting controlled burning of shrubby meadows to create additional grassland and herbs.
For example, 3.3 million board feet of timber is proposed for harvest in the Lick Creek drainage in 1998.
The conservation agreement also sets the stage for translocation of animals from strong colonies to weak or recently wiped out colonies.
Annual evaluations of the habitat modifications and conservation actions during the next 5 years will document the success and corrections needed for this strategy.
One private landowner also previously developed a management agreement with The Nature Conservancy to help protect one of the largest remaining colonies.
An experimental transplant plan, developed by scientists from Cornell University in Ithaca, New York, and Albertson College in Caldwell, Idaho began in 1997.
Forty-nine squirrels were transplanted to two sites, but results will not be known until monitoring is completed this spring.
The Service will hold a public hearing on the proposed listing in Council, Idaho on May 5 from 6-8 p.m. at the Council Elementary School, 202 Highway 95.
Public comments on this proposal are invited until May 22, 1998.
Comments should be sent to the Supervisor, Snake River Basin Office, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 1387 South Vinnell Way, Room 368, Boise, Idaho 83709.
The proposal to list the northern Idaho ground squirrel as threatened was published in the Federal Register on March 23, 1998.
x x x
Note to Editors: Photographs of the northern Idaho ground squirrel are available by contacting Rich Howard at (208) 378-5243.
