Congresswoman Louise M. Slaughter, New York's 28th Congressional District subbanner, New York's 28th Congressional District, Home page link [navigation_tab_trans_begin.gif] Welcome [navigation_tab_trans_middle.gif]
Representative Louise Slaughter
28th District - New York 202.225-3615 - 202.225-7822 (fax) Contact Louise
News Release
For Immediate Release September 28, 2000 Printer Friendly Version Contact: Megan Thompson 202-225-3615
Remarks of Rep. Louise M. Slaughter (D-NY) Business Travel Coalition Internet Air Competition Summit, Omni Shoreham Hotel, Washington, DC September 28, 2000
First, I want to give a special thanks to Kevin Mitchell of the Business Travel Coalition.
Once again, Kevin, you've pulled together the players that shape this nation's aviation policy.
I am confident the ideas put forward by this summit will impact this industry in the months ahead.
Most of you in the audience are not stranger to the ongoing debate regarding fair competition within the airline industry.
I entered this debate as a member of Congress who represents a region of the country reeling from the impact of high air fares in recent years.
According to the Department of Transportation, my district of Rochester, New York has the fourth highest airfares in the country.
We are not community accustomed to finding itself at the mercy of any outside entity.
Indeed, we are the proud headquarters of a number of Fortune 500 companies such as Eastman Kodak, Xerox Corp., and Bausch and Lomb, and Johnson 
Moreover, hundreds of small and mid-sized high technology firms have grown in our region over the past several years.
These companies are now critical to the lifeblood of our community.
But my community's success has been continually threatened by exorbitant airfares and the inability to get a decent flight schedule.
Many of these firms and business are either moving out or choosing to expand in other regions of the country in the quest for cheaper air fares.
Today, a flight from Rochester to Chicago will run you $1100 dollars, regardless of the airline.
I can say with confidence, however, that we have come a long way since I last addressed this forum two years ago.
Most recently, JetBlue airlines began service to our region, and I was proud to work closely to secure commitments from Rochester's business community.
We were also successful in securing access to JFK airport for JetBlue, as well as loosening restrictions for regional jets at LaGuardia airport for increased service to the upstate region.
Several of these carriers have announced expanded service with regional jets to Rochester in the months ahead.
My colleagues and I were also succeeded in getting the executive branch in on the act.
For twenty years, both the Department of Transportation and the Department of Justice had turned a blind eye to the destructive practices of many major carrier.
That indifference devastated many communities.
Today, I can say with confidence that both DOT and Justice are on high alert to stop many of the predatory practices that consolidated the industry into a handful of carriers.
But the aviation industry continues to present Congress with new challenges... challenges that can wipe out much of the progress that has been made in this Congress.
These challenges are only exacerbated by the lack of trust lawmakers feel towards many in the aviation industry.
For example, the major carriers last year were offered a golden opportunity to prove their willingness to address growing and alarming concerns from the flying public.
Complaints of overbooking, overpricing, poor service, and mysterious flight cancellations have skyrocketed .
As my colleagues and I were preparing to enact comprehensive legislation to address passenger concerns, major carrier approached the leadership with a promise to do better, a promise to provide basic customer service.
But as airline profits have soared, passenger rights have been left on the runway.
As DOT Secretary Slater can confirm for you later, consumer complaints have reached new heights this summer.
The promise by the airlines to do better in lieu of government oversight has come to naught.
I wish I could adequately describe the visceral rage my colleagues and I encounter from airline passengers when we fly.
I have been in public life for thirty years rarely have I been involved in an issue that impacts the well-being of so many people and the economic well-being of so many communities.
Be assured that Congress will once again put forward comprehensive legislation to address these concerns, and I will be leading the pack.
Another aviation issue of high priority in the Congress is the proposed merger between United Airlines and US Airways.
I have very strong concerns about the impact of this merger, a merger that many in the aviation industry have dubbed a sham.
This merger will substantially reduce airline competition, particularly in the Northeast, and especially for my district of Rochester, New York.
Right now, US Air provides 43 percent of our flights in Rochester.
If US Airways is swallowed by United , I worry that my constituents and your constituents will face fewer choices, wretched service, and a pricing structure that would make a mafia Don blush.
What's more, we hear of more mergers being contemplated that would essentially reduce the industry to three major airlines.
Congress cannot allow a handful of carriers to determine which regions of the country live and which regions of the country die based on their access to affordable air transportation.
My district of Rochester is typical of many mid-sized cities served by United and U.S. Airways.
To be blunt, deregulation failed us.
During the 1980's, thirteen air carriers served our region, affording consumers choices and creating a competitive environment that produced reasonable fares.
Now, we have only a handful of airlines, with US Airways the dominant carrier.
Today, Rochester has 3 daily nonstop jet flights between Reagan National and Rochester.
But with the proposed spin off carriers, DC Air, the number of seats available would be cut by more than half! Demand will remain the same, but with less supply, prices will rise.
Currently, there are 11 express flights between Rochester and Dulles.
Seven are on United and the other 4 commuter flights are on US Airways.
These four will certainly disappear in the merger, further reducing service between this region and Rochester.
This notion that a new carrier, DC Air, will somehow increase competition has been ridiculed by virtually every independent analysis of the proposed merger.
From what I can surmise, DC Air won't actually compete on any United routes.
With these concerns in mind, I have requested a report from the General Accounting Office to shed some light on the true impact of this merger.
I want to thank the Ranking Member of the House Transportation subcommittee, Jim Oberstar for joining me in that request.
This report will be a comprehensive investigation that I am confident will shed some harsh light on this proposal.
I know GAO has been in contact with many of you in the audience as they prepare this report.
Government officials, airlines representatives and labor leaders are all being consulted, and we expect GAO to produce their findings early next year.
If this Congress and the Administration are serious about improved competition in the airline industry, we cannot turn these valuable slots at Washington National Airport over to another major carrier poised to further gouge the flying public.
When these slots were first distributed, DOT made clear to the airlines that slots were government property, owned by the American people.
The government reserved the right to reclaim them at a future date to promote fair competition.
With the growing move by large airlines to consolidate, such action is long overdue.
I am going to bet that JetBlue and other low-cost carriers would love to offer service to National Airport, if only given the opportunity.
But airlines like JetBlue will remain locked out of national if DC Air is handed those valuable take-off and landing rights.
It doesn't have to be this way.
As Southwest Airlines has proven in the past, when a low cost carrier enters an expensive airline market, it spurs increased competition that benefits the consumers with cheaper fares.
Finally, let me address the purpose of this conference, namely the Internet's role in the marketing of airline services.
This issue is of critical importance is to airline travelers and the airline and travel agency industries.
As you know, the Department of Transportation is investigating whether the airlines' use of the Internet raises competition and consumer deception issues that may require regulatory action.
Congress has not been presented with their final conclusions.
The Internet is rapidly capturing a growing share of travel bookings.
Consumers who are comfortable using the Internet can easily research travel destinations, conveniently find out what travel services are available, and plan trips.
And clearly there is a cost-saving component.
According to a 1999 study cited by a recent General Accounting Office (GAO) report, for example, each booking made through traditional travel agencies cost America West $23, a booking made through an electronic travel agency cost $20, a booking made through the airline's reservations agents cost $13, and a booking made through the airline's website cost $6.
Many low-cost carriers that I have championed in the Congress are encouraging customers to use their websites for bookings.
Southwest and JetBlue, two airlines with a low-fare operating strategy, now obtain at least a quarter of their total bookings from the airline's website.
The efforts of these airlines to encourage travelers to book through the airline website are consistent with their overall strategy of keeping their costs low, a strategy which requires them to reduce their distribution costs along with their other costs.
The Justice Department is currently investigating the development by five major airlines of a joint website--Orbitz --for the sale of travel services raises questions on whether their operation of Orbitz may involve some potentially anticompetitive behavior.
I don't know the answer I am personally hopeful on-line purchases will provide consumers some relief.
Indeed, our nation's antitrust laws allow competitors to create a joint venture when doing so provides efficiency benefits without unreasonably or unnecessarily restricting competition between the participants.
But let me be clear: nothing will invite federal oversite faster than the continued perception by consumers that they are being deceived.
If airlines begin to use the Internet in ways that may reduce the availability of impartial and comprehensive travel information to consumers, Congress will act.
I urge the industry to keep this in mind as they move forward with this technology.
###
Official site of Congresswoman Louise M. Slaughter Rochester Office 3120 Federal Building 100 State Street Rochester, New York 14614 (585) 232-4850 [phone] (585) 232-1954 [fax]
(Last Updated: Tuesday, January 21, 2003) | Privacy Policy | Problems, questions, suggestions about this site? Contact the Web Administrator Welcome - Contact Louise - News - Serving You - Legislation - 28th District - Photo Gallery - About Louise - Students' Page
