Answers 11/20/1991 T91-74 Chris Lecos Nov. 20, 1991 (202) 245-1144
SHIP BALLAST, HOLDING TANK WATERS TO BE CHECKED FOR CHOLERA
FDA is receiving inquiries about plans to test ballast and holding tank waters of some 60 ships docking at certain U.S. ports to ensure that they do not harbor illness-producing strains of cholera.
Ballast water is taken aboard a vessel to increase its draft and thereby its stability and maneuverability.
The holding tank is used for sewage and waste water storage.
The expanded testing program, in cooperation with the U.S. Coast Guard and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), will apply to freighters docking at Miami, San Francisco, Los Angeles/Long Beach, New York City, Baltimore, Norfolk, Philadelphia, New Orleans, Mobile and possibly other ports if the ships have come from Latin American ports to which the cholera epidemic has spread.
The decision to undertake this testing was prompted by confirmation of the Latin American cholera strain in ballast, holding tanks and fire main water samples of two freighters docked at the Port of Mobile in Alabama.
The strain is known as Vibrio cholerae (El Tor, Inaba) 01.
One freighter had come from Brazil and the other from Colombia.
-MORE-
Page Two, T91-74, Cholera The two ships were among nine freighters from which FDA scientists, accompanied by U.S. Coast Guard authorities, collected samples with the permission of the ships' captains.
The sample collection began Oct. 30.
The purpose of the investigation was to determine whether ship traffic from Latin America might be responsible for the Vibrio cholerae strains found in oyster and finfish samples in Mobile Bay earlier this year.
The cholera epidemic began in January 1991 and has spread to 12 Latin American countries.
Senators Howell Heflin and Richard Shelby of Alabama have voiced concern over how the cholera organism was introduced in the waters of Mobile Bay.
The Alabama Department of Public Health also announced interim guidelines on Nov. 19 in response to the identification of the cholera-causing organisms on the two ships.
State and county health officials have requested ships entering the Port of Mobile from foreign ports to exchange their ballast water twice while on high seas prior to entering the harbor.
FDA first identified a possible illness-producing strain of cholera in oyster and finfish samples collected from Mobile Bay waters in July.
The area had been closed by the state to commercial harvesting at the time.
Three more samples later proved to be positive as sampling continued into September.
Since then, all seafood samples analyzed by FDA and CDC have been negative.
The state reopened the oyster beds in Mobile Bay on Nov. 4.
Although the shipboard samples were found to be positive for the Latin American strain on Nov. 6, oyster samples from Mobile Bay waters on Nov. 12 showed no evidence of the organism.
FDA will continue sampling Mobile Bay oyster beds to ensure that they remain free the organism.
To date, Alabama -MORE-
Page 3, T91-74, Cholera health authorities have reported no cases of cholera in the state, nor has any cholera associated with Mobile Bay shellfish been reported elsewhere.
Consumers have been advised not to eat raw oysters or raw seafood and to thoroughly cook them as a precaution against illness.
Thorough cooking destroys the cholera organism.
Federal testing of Gulf Coast seafood products as well as products from Latin American countries has failed to disclose any evidence of the toxin-producing cholera strain on any foods sold in this country.
The Coast Guard plans to notify shipping agents and owners and urge them to comply with the voluntary guidelines of the International Maritime Organization for the exchange of ballast water.
The International Maritime Organization recently adopted voluntary guidelines for the at-sea exchange of ballast water in order to reduce the spread of disease and nonindigenous nuisance species that might be in the water.
Many vessels have a large holding tank similar to the one tested positive for cholera in the Port of Mobile.
It is illegal to discharge the contents of a holding tank into U.S. navigable waters.
Vessel operators may either discharge on the open ocean or to a shoreside reception facility.
The Coast Guard also can deny entry of a ship to any other U.S. port if it is found to have a water sample positive for the cholera strain.
The U.S. State Department will notify other countries that may be future ports of call for any ship found to contain the illness-producing cholera strain.
