Home Page - DefendAmerica [NOTE: Because of increased web traffic, you may experience delays.
Please be patient.]
Skip Navigation space Government space FirstGov space EPA space FAA space FEMA space Homeland Security space Justice Department space State Department space Treasury Department space White House space War on Terror Sites space space Military space DefenseLINK space Army space Navy space Air Force space Marines space Coast Guard space Reserve Affairs space Army Reserve space Navy Reserve space Air Force Reserve space Marine Reserve space Coast Guard Reserve space National Guard space Air National Guard space Army National Guard space Merchant Marines space space How To Help space Civil Air Patrol space Coast Guard Auxiliary space FBI space Liberty Unites space Red Cross space Salvation Army space USA Freedom Corps space USO space Fisher House space space Transcripts space Defense Department space State Department space White House
[hLine2.gif]
Soldiers Help Settle Local Dispute in Northern Iraq
By U.S. Army Spc.
Robert Woodward 101st Airborne Division Journalist
MOSUL, Iraq -- Iraq's fertile crescent, referred to as the birthplace of civilization, may today be closer to a new birth -- of a democratic society.
Arab and Kurd representatives met May 10 in the farming community of Makhmor, roughly central to Mosul, Erbil and Kirkuk, to settle a farmland dispute stemming from the "Arabization" policies of the Ba'ath Party regime.
Infantrymen of the 101st Airborne Division secured the meeting area; Apache and Black Hawk helicopters flew overhead as a show of force; and a crowd of Kurds gathered chanting, "We don't want them! We don't want them," referring to the Arab farmers now living on land once theirs.
One banner read, "Thank you to the Coalition Forces for freeing us, now keep the usurpers off our ground."
Elected representatives of the regions affected by the farming dispute met with Brig. Gen. Benjamin Freakley, assistant division operations commander, 101st Abn. Div., who would serve as chief mediator.
Attending were Saad Abdulla, agricultural minister for the Kurdistan region; Khanim Al Basso, mayor of Mosul; Akram Mintik, mayor of Erbil; Sheik Al Said Najim, the Arabic farmers' representative; Khalid Saaed, the Kurdish farmers' representative; and Abdul Rahman Belaf Al Barazanji, the district manager for Makhmor.
At one point early in the meeting, the delegates asked if they could break from the U.S.-led discussion and have a private Arab-Kurdish meeting.
Freakley said, "They had a caucus, if you will, in a small room with a small group, for about 40 minutes alone.
They came out with a signed document."
The resulting Makhmor Accord may be the first democratic document signed into law in the north of Iraq, if not the entire country, said Freakley, who hopes that the peaceful, democratic solution will be the model for the rest of Iraq, which is beset with historical, ethnic and religious divisions.
At the close of World War I, Great Britain carved Iraq out of parts of the defunct but ethnically diverse Ottoman Empire.
The agriculturally rich north was included because the fledgling Iraqi state had few natural resources.
Kurds who hoped for an independent state were crushed by the decision, and from then on Arab-run governments in Baghdad promoted the expulsion of non-Arabs from the region to solidify control there.
After its rise to power in 1968, the Ba'ath Party proved no different, instituting what Kurds call "Arabization."
Since then, more than 200,000 Kurds were expelled into the far north of Iraq, according to the Erbil-based Committee for Confronting Arabization in Kurdistan.
Arabization, called "nationality correction" by Ba'ath Party authorities, increased after Operation Desert Storm in 1991, when Kurds were periodically given the chance to declare themselves Arabs or be deported north into the no-fly zone.
Southern Arabs were given incentives to take their place, such as new housing, plots of farmland, fertilizer and tractors.
If not for Arabization, Freakely said, Arabs and Kurds would have lived together in relative harmony, and did so for generations.
After all, as the cultural center of the north, Mosul is perhaps the most cosmopolitan city in Iraq.
It is
geographically close to Turkey, Syria and Iran, populated by at least six ethnic groups, and home to both medical and liberal arts universities.
Economically, too, the Mosul area is strong, with abundant agriculture resources, good irrigation and large oilfields.
"The greater-Mosul area posed an intellectual, cultural, agricultural and economic threat to Iraq at large," Freakley said.
"Saddam Hussein purposely tried to drive the people of this area apart so they would not coalesce, build those elements of power together, and be stronger than cities in the South."
The Makhmor Accord's five points provided for the fair sharing of money made from the sale of this year's wheat and barley crops and, because they did not call for the expulsion of Arabs, may have strengthened the Arab-Kurd relationship.
According to the first point, in the area outside Makhmor the owners of the land and the farmers would split the proceeds in half.
In the contentious area of Makhmor, they decided to give 55 percent to the Arab farmers and 45 percent to the Kurdish farmers.
In the meeting, the Kurdish position was to give Kurdish farmers and landowners 100 percent of the revenue from this year, and leave the Arabs nothing.
In fact, Kurds also wanted to be repaid for more than 10 years of lost revenues in their land.
"This is quite a concession on the part of the Kurds," Freakley said.
"I think they wanted to use this harvest as an example, in a new time of freedom, of being able to work together as Iraqis, Arab and Kurd."
In the second point, the delegates decided that regardless of who owned the combine used to reap the harvest, the owner of the land would pay for the combine to be employed.
The third point states that all the barley harvested to date would be brought to a silo, secured by the 101st Airborne Division, and split between the owners and the farmers to ensure fairness.
The harvest would also be stopped until all of the farmers went to the local town leadership of Makhmor and registered for the harvest.
The fifth and final point declared that anyone who brings a combine to the area could compete to harvest the crop.
This would include Arab farmers from the Mosul area going down to Makhmor, a Kurdish area, and bidding on each field.
After the agreement was reached, each leader took his turn speaking to the crowd in support of the accord, drawing nearly as much applause as there was rancor before the meeting.
"There will be people that are very disappointed," Freakley said.
"I think there will also be people that understand that instead of some arbitrary whim of an oppressive dictator being carried out, that they are being governed by law, elected officials and principled men who have agreed to have the best outcome for all the people in that area."
[hr_profile.gif] A simpler version of this page for printing Printer-friendly Version Email a copy of this page to a friend or colleague Email A Copy
space
Ballistic Missile Defense | Defense Department Overview | Joint Chiefs of Staff CENTCOM | EUCOM | JFCOM | NORAD | NORTHCOM | PACOM | SOCOM | STRATCOM | SOUTHCOM | TRANSCOM Maps | Recruiting | Today's Military | DoDBusOpps Home | Privacy 
