NYC.gov - always open [pixel.gif] Mayor's Office City Agencies Services News 
The Mayor's Volunteer Center (MVC) has no control over, and does not guarantee the accuracy or completeness of information contained in the pages of Web sites linked to this Web site and MVC does not necessarily endorse such Web sites or the products or services referred to in such other Web sites.
MVC is not responsible for direct, indirect, special or consequential damages, howsoever caused, arising out the use of this Web site.
For further information about volunteer opportunities at any of the organizations listed, you must call that organization directly and not MVC.
If you would like to be added to this list please email us with your request.
MVC will only post volunteer opportunities for 501(c)(3) not-for-profit organizations located in New York City.
Volunteer opportunities are listed for the following causes: Advocacy 
Sports 
Doctors Without Borders: Doctors Without Borders/Medecins Sans Frontieres is an independent humanitarian medical aid agency committed to two objectives: providing medical care wherever needed, regardless of race, religion, politics of sex and raising awareness of the plight of the people they help.
Volunteer help in the form of clerical assistance is often needed in their New York City offices, for more information on how you can volunteer, please visit http://www.doctorswithoutborders.org/volunteer/office/ or email office_volunteers@msf.org.
Planned Parenthood: Planned Parenthood's mission is to protect women's reproductive rights and maintain their access to safe, effective and confidential care.
These goals are achieved through a state-of-the-art clinical services, education and professional training, and advocacy.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.ppnyc.org/new/volunteering.html
ANIMALS
Staten Island Zoo: The Staten Island Zoo is a small zoo with a diverse collection of animal (their specialty is reptiles).
They rely on volunteers to serves as docents - offering educational presentations and tours as well as being present around the Zoo with biofacts and handleable animals and sharing information with anyone who is interested.
For more information on becoming a volunteer call (718) 442-3101.
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA): The first humane society in the USA and one of the largest humane societies in the world.
The ASPCA's purpose is to provide effective means for the prevention of cruelty to animals throughout the United States.
For information on volunteering, please call Eric Grant at (212) 876-7700 ext. 4397 or email ericg@aspca.org.
Bide-A-Wee Home Association: Bide-A-Wee is the companion animal welfare society whose no-kill adoption centers have found loving homes for more than one million dogs, cats, puppies and kittens.
For information on volunteering, please call Tara Schapers at (212) 532-4986 or email tara.schapers@bideawee.org.
New York Aquarium: The mission of the New York Aquarium's Docent Program is to educate and inform visitors about the animals and exhibits on the grounds while enhancing the public's positive impression of the Wildlife Conservation Society as a well-run organization that cares about its mission to save wildlife and wild places.
For information on volunteering, please call Susan Ruocco, Volunteer Coordinator, or Ann-Marie Baillargeon, Assistant Volunteer Coordinator, at 718-265-3450, or email NYADocent@wcs.org.
For further information on volunteering, please visit http://wcs.org/home/getinvolved/volunteers/nyaquarium/34353/.
The New York City Audubon Society: The New York City Audubon Society (NYCAS) works to protect and preserve wildlife and wildlife habitats in New York City; educate and inform the public about environmental issues; and defend and improve the quality of green spaces and the environment in New York City for both wildlife and people.
NYCAS relies on a strong network of volunteers to provide support for a variety of projects which further their mission.
For more information on volunteering, visit: http://www.nycas.org/volunteers/ or call (212) 691-7483.
ARTS AND CULTURE (see also Parks and Recreation)
All Stars Project Inc.: The All Stars Project, Inc.
(ASP) creates outside of school, educational and performing arts activities for tens of thousands of poor and minority young people.
It sponsors community and experimental theatre, develops leadership training and pursues volunteer initiatives that build and strengthen communities.
For further information about volunteer opportunities contact Gail Elberg, Director of Volunteers, or Julie Lenner at (212) 941-9400 or julielenner@yahoo.com.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden: The mission of the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens is to serve all the people in its community and throughout the world by: displaying plants, engaging in research, teaching children, reaching out and providing information.
For information on volunteering, please call Lou Cesario at (718) 623-7261 or email louiscesario@bbg.org.
Brooklyn Public Library: It is the mission of Brooklyn Public Library to ensure the preservation and transmission of society's knowledge, history and culture, and to provide the people of Brooklyn with free and open access to information for education, recreation and reference.
For information on volunteering, please call Gerald Aiello at (718) 230-2406 or email j.aiello@brooklynpubliclibrary.org.
Museum City of New York: The Museum advances its mission through exhibitions, educational activities, and publications and by acquiring, preserving, and documenting original cultural materials which reflect New York City's history.
For information on volunteering, please call Robert Forloney at (212) 534-1672 ext. 250 or email rforloney@mcny.org.
South Street Seaport Museum: The South Street Seaport Museum preserves Maritime History in New York through education, exhibits and family fun.
For information on volunteer opportunities visit the volunteer page http://www.southstseaport.org/ or call Richard Dorfman at (212) 748-8727 or email Rdorfman@southstseaport.org.
CHILDREN AND YOUTH
Ice Hockey in Harlem (IHIH): IHIH is a non-profit community-based organization for youth that uses the sport of hockey to promote academic achievement, responsibility and teamwork.
In addition to their time on the ice, kids attend class and do community service projects.
For more information on volunteering, call Caroline Baumis at (212) 722-0044.
All Stars Project Inc.: The All Stars Project, Inc.
(ASP) creates outside of school, educational and performing arts activities for tens of thousands of poor and minority young people.
It sponsors community and experimental theatre, develops leadership training and pursues volunteer initiatives that build and strengthen communities.
For further information about volunteer opportunities contact Gail Elberg, Director of Volunteers, or Julie Lenner at (212) 941-9400 or julielenner@yahoo.com.
Big Brothers Big Sisters of NYC: The goal of Big Brothers Big Sisters of NYC is to make New York City a place where every young person who wants one has a quality one-to-one mentor in a long-lasting relationship.
For further information on how you can become a Big Brother or Big Sister, visit http://www.bigsnyc.org/volunteer/.
The Children's Aid Society (CAS): The mission of CAS is to ensure the physical and emotional well-being of children and families, and to provide each child with the support and opportunities needed to become a happy, healthy and productive adult.
Volunteers are needed for a variety of needs all over the city.
For further information, please contact Jenny Selig at 917-286-1530 or jennys@childrensaidsociety.org or contact Sarena Wallack at 212-949-4683 or sarenaw@childrensaidsociety.org.
For online information on volunteering, please visit http://www.childrensaidsociety.org/volunteer.
Make-A-Wish Foundation of Metro New York: Make-A-Wish Foundation grants the wishes of children with life-threatening illnesses to enrich the human experience with hope, strength and joy.
The purpose of a wish is to provide a critically ill child and his or her family with a respite during a time of pain and suffering.
It is a time for the entire family to come together and share in the positive power of a wish.
Make-A-wish Foundation serves the children living in the five boroughs of New York City and Nassau County.
For further information about volunteering contact Norma J. Blank, Volunteer Development Associate, at 516-944-6212 ext. 52 or njblank@wish.org.
For online information on volunteering please visit http://metrony.wish.org/volunteering.
Publicolor: Publicolor's, mission is to catalyze change in inner-city schools and neighborhood facilities through the power of color and collaboration.
The goal is not only to transform the space but the people who use them as well.
They do this through the Paint Club and COLOR Club programs which train at-risk students the marketable skill of commercial painting.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.publicolor.org/get_involved.html
Seamen's Society for Children and Families: Seamen's Society for Children and Families is a comprehensive social service agency serving over 7,500 children and families in Staten Island and Brooklyn.
Seamen's Society's Education Bound Program recruits and trains volunteers to provide tutoring and mentoring services to school age youth.
They also send birthday cards to every one of the 1,000 children they place in foster care - put a smile on a child's face today by mailing birthday cards to Linda Herschfeld at Seamen's Society.
For further information about volunteering call 888-83-ROOTS or visit: http://community.silive.com/cc/rootsandwings COMPUTERS 
Digital Clubhouse Network: The Digital Clubhouse Network promotes service, community and digital literacy by teaching young people to use technology to work with and give voice to people of all backgrounds and abilities.
For information on volunteering, please contact Kawi Mailutha at (212) 2690-4284.
IMentor: iMentor matches young people from underserved communities in New York City with adult volunteers.
Mentors 
For more information on becoming an imentor, call (718) 923-2852 or email info@imentor.org.
DISASTER RESPONSE
American Red Cross: Each year over one million Americans serve as Red Cross volunteers serving local community needs - helping people in emergencies, providing half the nation's blood supply, teaching first aid and CPR courses, etc.
For further information on how you can become a Red Cross volunteer please visit their volunteer website http://www.redcross.org/donate/volunteer/.
DISABLED
Light House International: Light House International's mission is to overcome vision impairment for people of all ages through worldwide leadership in rehabilitation services, education, research, prevention and advocacy.
For information on volunteering, please call (212) 821-9405/9406 or email Volunteers@lighthouse.org.
The National Multiple Sclerosis Society: The National Multiple Sclerosis Society supports more MS research and serves more people with MS than any other voluntary organization in the world.
The New York City Chapter provides services and programs critically needed by thousands of New Yorkers who have MS and their families.
For information on volunteering, please contact Nilsa Cordero at (212) 463-7787 or email info@msnyc.org.
New Alternatives for Children: New Alternatives for Children (NAC) is a not-for-profit health and social services agency whose exclusive mission is to serve children with disabilities and their families by providing comprehensive health and social services to support family preservation, reunification, or adoption.
New Alternatives for Children, Inc.
(NAC) needs volunteers to fill a number of volunteer positions.
If you are a positive, responsible, and caring adult, you would make a great volunteer (and/or) mentor to a child at NAC, information on what volunteers do may be found on http://www.nac-inc.org/how_you_can_help/how_you_can_help_frameset.html ?toppage=how_you_can_help.
For further information on volunteering, please contact the Director of Volunteers and Special Events at (212) 696-1550 or via email at volunteers@nac-inc.org.
New York Therapeutic Riding Center: The Riding Center conducts year-round therapeutic horseback riding class for people with disabilities.
To see individuals with disabilities ride horses is to watch them extend their dreams beyond the confines of their disabilities.
Volunteers are needed to lead horses and help support the riders throughout their classes, volunteers do not need any prior experience with horses.
For more information on volunteering, please contact Richard Brodie at 212- 535-3917.
EDUCATION AND LITERACY
IMentor: iMentor matches young people from underserved communities in New York City with adult volunteers.
Mentors 
For more information on becoming an imentor, call (718) 923-2852 or email info@imentor.org.
Interfaith Neighbors: Interfaith Neighbors is dedicated to helping at-risk children in East Harlem to success in school, discover their strengths and build healthy and happy lives through programs and services that support the whole child.
To learn more about volunteering, please call (212) 472 3567.
International Center: The International Center is a non-profit, privately funded, unique language-learning Center for immigrants and foreign-born newcomers to New York City volunteers teach English and American culture and, in the process, learn about other culture.
For information on volunteer opportunities, http://www.intlcenter.org/volunteer.html or email volunteer@intlcenter.org.
Learning Leaders: Learning Leaders recruits, screens, trains and supports volunteers who provide one-on-one and small group instructional support and other services to New York City public school student.
For information on volunteering, please see their Volunteer website http://www.learningleaders.org/volunteer.html.
Literacy Partners: Literacy Partners is an organization that teaches adults to read, write and do mathematics in tutorial and family literacy programs staffed by volunteers and professionals.
For information on volunteering, please email volunteermanager@literacypartners.org or phone (212) 725-9200 or visit their Volunteer website http://www.literacypartners.org/index_volunteers.shtml.
Staten Island School Reading Volunteer Program: Sponsored by the Staten Island Mental Health Society, and operated in cooperation with District 31 of the NYC Board of Education, this program assists more than 500 elementary and public school children improve their reading skills.
For more information on volunteering, please call (718) 442-2225.
StreetWise Partners, Inc.: StreetWise works with low-income individuals in search of administrative jobs and businesses in need of qualified entry-level workers.
Clients learn valuable and necessary computer, interviewing and job skills through weekly sessions with volunteers from companies throughout New York City.
For information on volunteering please call Angie Datta, Executive Director, at 212-828-3999 or Angie_datta@streetwisepartners.org and visit their volunteer website http://www.streetwisepartners.org/volunteer.php.
Two together: STwo Together is a nationally recognized tutorial program of the Jewish Child Care Association of New York.
Two together provides free individual remedial reading and math instruction to school-age children at their locations in lower Manhattan and Queens.
Trained volunteers tutor children under the supervision of learning specialists.
Workshops for parents, cultural experiences and educational projects reinforce the program.
For more information on volunteering, call (212) 425-3333 or email 2together@jccany.org.
FAITH -BASED ORGANIZATIONS
Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services: JBFCS is one of the premier voluntary mental health and social service agencies in the United States.
Voluntary opportunities include outreach to people with AIDS, children's services, outreach to �migr�s, holiday outreach, undergraduate student internships, volunteering with troubles adolescents, young adult leadership and adult services.
For information on volunteering, please call Dana Horowitz at (212) 632-4685, email DHorowitz@jbfcs.org or visit their Volunteer webpage http://www.jbfcs.com/ucanhelp/volunteer/volunteer.htm.
Volunteers of America, Greater New York City: VOA is a national faith-based service organization, assisting those least able to help themselves, while providing meaningful opportunities for individuals and organizations to build stronger communities.
For information on volunteering, please call Andrea Marmo at (212) 496-4307 or email amarmo@voa-gny.org.
LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL AND TRANSGENDER
SAGE: Senior Action in a Gay Environment is the nation's oldest and largest social service and advocacy organization dedicated to LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) senior citizens.
For information on volunteering, please call 212-741-2247.
Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC): Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) is a not-for-profit, volunteer-supported and community-based organization committed to national leadership in the fight against AIDS.
Their mission is to reduce the spread of HIV disease, help people with HIV maintain and improve their health and independence, and keep the prevention, treatment and cure of HIV an urgent national and local priority.
In keeping with their mission, GMHC is also committed to fighting homophobia.
There are a number of different ways in which you can help out.
For more information on volunteering visit http://www.gmhc.org/volunteer or call 212-367-1030.
HEALTH AND HOSPITALS
American Lung Association: The mission of the American Lung Association is to prevent lung disease and promote lung health.
For information on volunteering, please call Sheri Wilensky at (212) 315 8723 or email SWilensky@lungusa.org.
Lenox Hill Hospital: Lenox Hill Hospital is dedicated to compassionate patient care, outstanding medical education, research and scholarly activity and quality service to the community.
The Volunteer Services Department of Lenox Hill Hospital offers a variety of patient contact and non-patient contact volunteer placements.
To learn more about volunteering contact Hillary Ganton, Administrative Director, Volunteer Services at (212) 434-2600 or volunteers@lenoxhill.net or visit www.lenoxhillhospital.org.
Manhattan Eye, Ear 
Knowledgeable, skilled and compassionate volunteers enhance the daily lives of patients.
Volunteers are students, corporate executives, retirees, and neighbors who share a commitment to helping others.
To learn more about volunteering contact Hillary Ganton, Administrative Director, Volunteer Service at (212) 434-2600, email volunteers@lenoxhill.net or visit http://www.lenoxhillhospital.org/help/volunteer.jsp.
The Mount Sinai Hospital: Since its creation in 1852, Mount Sinai has believed that medical excellence requires both scientific expertise and respect for the patient as an individual.
Mount Sinai volunteers support and assist patients, families and staff in meeting these goals.
The Mount Sinai Department of Volunteer Services has opportunities for individuals who are interested in helping and making a difference.
For further information please contact the Volunteer Department at (212) 659-9180 or e-mail cynthia.levy@mssm.edu.
National Aphasia Association (NAA): The National Aphasia Association promotes public education, research, rehabilitation and support services to assist people with aphasia and their families.
For information on volunteering, please call (212) 267-2814 or email naa@aphasia.org.
New York Hospital Queens: NYHQ is devoted to the provision of comprehensive healthcare services for the Queens community while at the same time delivering cutting-edge therapies to a patient population drawn from around the country and the world.
For information on volunteering, please call Maria Burns at (718) 670-1125 or email mab9021@nyp.org.
New York Presbyterian: NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, a non-profit institution, is dedicated to helping people from all walks of life.
The Hospital provides about $100 million annually in charitable and uncompensated care to patients without means.
For information on volunteering, please call Evelyn Ramos at (212) 305-2542 or email ramosev@nyp.org.
The Visiting Nurse Service of New York Certified Home Health Care Agency: The Visiting Nurse Service of New York, VNSNY, plays a leadership role in identifying and addressing the important health issues faced by the people of New York City.
VNSNY provides innovative services that enable people to function independently in their community.
Volunteers are needed for programs in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan, Nassau County, Queens and Staten Island.
For information on volunteering please call, Michael Ambrosini, Director of Volunteer Services at (212) 794-6343, email MichaelA@vnsny.org or visit http://www.vnsny.org/mh_about_volunt.html.
The Visiting Nurse Service of New York Hospice Care: VNSNYC Hospice Care's mission is to provide compassionate and skilled care to the terminally ill and their families, with acknowledged respect for their worth, dignity, comfort and freedom of choice, maximizing their quality of life during the dying process and providing support in bereavement.
Volunteers provide the compassionate-end of life care for patients and support to their families.
If you are interested in volunteering please contact, Taren Sterry, Volunteer Coordinator for Brooklyn and Queens, at (718) 463-9848 or Taren.Sterry@vnsny.org.
For Manhattan and the Bronx, please contact Robin Mozarsky, Volunteer Coordinator at (212) 290-3916 or Robin.Mozarsky@vnsny.org.
United Hospital Fund: The United Hospital Fund's mission is to shape positive change in health care for the people of New York.
The United Hospital Fund seeks to mobilize and channel the energies of health care volunteers through its volunteer committees and task forces.
Fund volunteers look at where the health care system is being strained and where it needs support, work to help hospitals solve their problems, act as advocates and educators, and bridge the gap between the hospital and the community.
For further information on volunteering, please contact UHF at 212-494-0700 or via Email info@uhfnyc.org.
HIV/AIDS
Bailey House: People with HIV/AIDS deserve to live with dignity.
Bailey House achieves this through supportive housing, good health, self-sufficiency and an improved quality of life.
For information on volunteering, please call Tamesha Harper at (212) 633-2500, ext. 215 or email tharper@baileyhouse.org.
Bronx AIDS Services: Bronx AID services is an organization that helps Bronx residents with an array of HIV/AIDS related free services designed to meet the needs of the ethnically and culturally diverse community.
For information on volunteering, please call 718 295-5605 or visit http://www.basnyc.org/volunteer/index.htm.
Children's Hope Foundation: The Children's Hope Foundation provides help for children living with AIDS and their families.
For information on volunteering, please visit their Volunteer website http://childrenshope.org/Volunteering.htm.
Housing Works: Housing Works is an AIDS Service Organization that strives to improve the lives of New Yorkers living with AIDS by providing supportive housing, medical care, job training, case management, advocacy and HIV prevention, counseling and testing services.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.housingworks.org/volunteer/index.html.
Staten Island AIDS Task Force: The Staten Island AIDS task force focuses on developing a community of caring to help those living with HIV/AIDS and their family members, through support and advocacy, to help the community stay healthy, through education and risk reduction.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.siatf.org/volun.htm.
Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC): Gay Men's Health Crisis (GMHC) is a not-for-profit, volunteer-supported and community-based organization committed to national leadership in the fight against AIDS.
Their mission is to reduce the spread of HIV disease, help people with HIV maintain and improve their health and independence, and keep the prevention, treatment and cure of HIV an urgent national and local priority.
In keeping with their mission, GMHC is also committed to fighting homophobia.
There are a number of different ways in which you can help out.
For more information on volunteering visit http://www.gmhc.org/action/volunteer.html or call 212-367-1030.
HOMELESS AND HOUSING
CityMeals on Wheels: CityMeals-on-Wheels provides home-delivered nutritious meals for homebound elderly New Yorkers on weekends, holidays, and times of emergency, when these vulnerable seniors would otherwise go with out food.
For information on volunteering, please call Leora Jontef at (212) 687-1234 or email leora@citymeals.org.
New York City Rescue Mission: The Mission provides spiritual hope, good, clothing, and shelter to the destitute.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.nycrescue.org/volunteer.htm.
HUNGER AND SOUP KITCHENS
City Harvest: City Harvest is committed to feeding hungry people in New York City using a variety of innovative, practical and cost-effective methods in order to rescue food that otherwise would be wasted and deliver it to those who serve the hungry.
City Harvest depends on volunteers for a variety of jobs, from gathering fresh produce at a greenmarket to delivering food to a shelter during a lunch hour.
For more information on the many volunteer opportunities you can participate in please visit http://www.cityharvest.org/volunteer/index.html, volunteer applications can be filled out online and a member of the City Harvest team will get in touch with you on how you can best help the needy of NYC.
CityMeals on Wheels: CityMeals-on-Wheels provides home-delivered nutritious meals for homebound elderly New Yorkers on weekends, holidays, and times of emergency, when these vulnerable seniors would otherwise go with out food.
Volunteers help with meal delivery, friendly visiting, answering letters from clients and serving meals at holiday parties.
Volunteers serve from their offices, their schools, at senior centers or seniors' homes.
For information on volunteering, please call Leora Jontef at (212) 687-1234 or email leora@citymeals.org.
God's Love We Deliver: GLWD prepares and delivers nutritious meals to men, women and children living with HIV/AIDS and other serious illnesses.
For information on volunteering, please call Pamela Primeau at (212) 294-8181 or email pprimeau@glwd.org.
Holy Apostles: Holy Apostles Soup Kitchen has been a symbol of hope and compassion in the Chelsea area for the past 20 years.
The Soup Kitchen serves over 1,100 hot nutritious meals each and every weekday, including holidays.
For information on volunteering, please contact Clyde Kuemmerle at clyde@holyapostlesnyc.org.
The Food Bank for New York City: The mission of the Food Bank For New York City, Food For Survival, is to end hunger by organizing food, information and support for community survival and dignity.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.foodbanknyc.org/index.cfm/bay/content.view/pcat/178/catid/1 97.htm.
IMMIGRANTS AND REFUGEES
Arab-American Family Support Center: The International Center works with community based organizations to reach immigrants, refuges, and political asylees, in the neighborhoods where they live and work.
This particular program, located in Brookyln, is on English conversation and the American culture for Arab immigrants and newcomers to the U.S.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.intlcenter.org/Current_Opportunities.html.
International Center: The International Center is a non-profit, privately funded, unique language-learning Center for immigrants and foreign-born newcomers to New York City.
For information on volunteer opportunities, visit http://www.intlcenter.org/volunteer.html or email volunteer@intlcenter.org.
INTERNATIONAL
Big Apple Greeter: Big Apple Greeter is a not-for-profit organization whose mission is to enhance New York City's worldwide image and to enrich the New York experience by connecting business and leisure travelers with knowledgeable and enthusiastic volunteers.
For information on volunteering, please contact Alicia Pierro at (212) 669-2364 or visit their Volunteer webpage http://www.bigapplegreeter.org/index.aspx?content=volunt.
JUSTICE AND LEGAL
InMotion: InMotion seeks to make a real and lasting difference in the lives of women - low income, under-served, abused - in the New York metropolitan area.
The legal and related services promote equal access to justice and an empowered approach to life.
InMotion provides free, quality services, primarily in the areas of matrimonial and family law, in a way that acknowledges mutual respect, encourages personal growth, and nurtures individual and collective strength.
For information on volunteering, please visit their volunteer website http://www.inmotiononline.org/what_main.html.
MEDIA AND BROADCASTING
Museum of Television and Radio: The Museum of Television 
The work of the museum includes research, library, curatorial and visitor services.
For information on volunteering, please call Robert Eng at (212) 621-6600.
NY Artists Unlimited: Off-Broadway Online, the official website of Off-Broadway, is presented by the Alliance of Resident Theatres/New York (A.R.T./New York).
A.R.T./New York is the service organization for the nation's largest most artistically influential, and most culturally diverse theatre community.
For information about volunteering, please call Melba LaRose at (212) 242-6036.
On Television, Ltd.: On Television is an independent not-for-profit organization devoted to public education about TV and telecommunications policy and has developed program materials for national broadcast and classroom use since 1977.
For information on volunteering, please contact Nomi Roher at (212) 925-5289.
MENTORING
All Stars Project, Inc.: The All Stars Project, Inc. non-traditional production house has been creating innovative theater since it founding in 1981.
A special focus of the productions is the use of performance and performed activity to promote human growth and development.
For information on volunteering, please call Gail Elberg at (212) 941-9400 or email Gailelberg@aol.com.
Art Start: The purpose of Art Start is to value and nurture the voices, hearts and minds of under-served children and teenagers and help them transform their lives through the creative process using a multi-disciplines approach to arts education that is centered on the kids and their interests.
Art Start has developed a comprehensive, art-based Mentoring Program for volunteers to work one-on-one, on a long-term basis, with Art Start kids who are in dire need of intensive personal support.
Led by an Art Start social worker (M.S.W.), mentors are trained to have a greater impact on the artistic, personal and academic development of our children.
For further information about these programs or to sign up online for volunteer information, please visit http://www.art-start.org/help_donate.php.
Catholic Big Brothers for Boys 
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.cbbnyc.org/vol.htm or call Michele Rattien, Recruitment Coordinator, at 212-477-2250 x16 or mrattien@cbbnyc.org.
Everybody Wins: Everybody Wins is a privately funded national non-profit organization devoted to increasing children's prospects for success in school and in life through one-to-one reading experiences.
For information on volunteering, please visit their volunteer webpage http://www.everybodywins.org/volunteers/index.shtml.
IMentor: iMentor matches young people from underserved communities in New York City with adult volunteers.
Mentors 
For more information on becoming an imentor, call (718) 923-2852 or email info@imentor.org.
International Center: The International Center is a non-profit, privately funded, unique language-learning Center for immigrants and foreign-born newcomers to New York City.
Volunteers teach English and American culture and, in the process, learn about other cultures.
For information on volunteer opportunities, visit http://www.intlcenter.org/volunteer.html or email volunteer@intlcenter.org.
Mentoring USA: Mentoring USA (MUSA) provides structured, one-to-one mentoring to particularly "at risk" populations: young children who are at risk of educational failure, children in foster care, children who have been involved with the juvenile justice system, and children who have been homeless or have recently immigrated to this country.
Mentoring USA offers programs throughout the five boroughs.
For information about volunteer opportunities for foster care mentoring contact Steve Larosiliere at (718) 253-1194 x 463 or slarosiliere@mentoringusa.org and for ESL and general mentoring Aviva Strauss at (212) 253-1194, ext. 454 or astrauss@mentoringusa.org.
The Mentoring Partnership of New York: The Mentoring Partnership's mission is to be an advocate for the expansion of quality mentoring opportunities for New York City youth and a resource for mentors and mentoring initiatives citywide.
For further information about how you can become a mentor or to attend an orientation session, please call 1-800-83-YOUTH or email Mary Beth Zurat at mzurat@mentoring.org.
PARKS AND RECREATION (see also Arts and Culture)
Staten Island Zoo: The Staten Island Zoo is a small zoo with a diverse collection of animal (their specialty is reptiles).
They rely on volunteers to serves as docents - offering educational presentations and tours as well as being present around the Zoo with biofacts and handleable animals and sharing information with anyone who is interested.
For more information on becoming a volunteer call (718) 442-3101.
Bronx Zoo, Wildlife Conservation Society: The Bronx Zoo has award-winning, cutting-edge exhibits featuring over 4,000 animals.
The Bronz Zoo is always in need of Zoo Docents -- special volunteers who are committed to educating schoolchildren and the general public about our natural world and the need for conservation.
For information on volunteering contact Claire Deroche, Coordinator of Volunteers, at (718) 220-5142 or cderoche@wcs.org.
For further information on volunteering please visit http://wcs.org/home/getinvolved/volunteers/bronxzoo/.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden: The mission of the Brooklyn Botanic Gardens is to serve all the people in its community and throughout the world by: displaying plants, engaging in research, teaching children, reaching out and providing information.
For information on volunteering, please call Lou Cesario at (718) 623-7261 or email louiscesario@bbg.org.
City of New York Parks and Recreation: The NYC Parks and Recreation Department offers hundreds of fun volunteering opportunities to improve your community's parks, greenstreets, recreation programs and urban gardens.
For further information on the many ways you can get involved please visit the Parks Volunteer website http://www.nycgovparks.org/sub_opportunities/volunteer_opportunities.h tml.
Friends of Fort Tryon Park.
Inc.: FFTP's mission is to involve the entire community surrounding the park in maintaining and improving the park's appearance and condition and promoting its use by the public.
Such involvement and cooperation should help solidify and enliven the community and make it and the park more attractive, safe and desirable.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.hhoc.org/fftp/join.html and scroll to the bottom of the page.
The New York Botanical Garden: The New York Botanical Garden is an advocate for the plant kingdom.
The Garden pursues its mission through the wide-ranging programs of The International Plant Science Center; through its role as a museum of living plant collections arranged in gardens and landscapes across its National Historic Landmark site; and through its comprehensive education programs in horticulture and plant science.
For information on volunteering, please call (718) 817-8564.
Prospect Park Alliance: The Prospect Park Alliance is a public/private partnership with the City of New York, which, through fund raising and advocacy, furthers the restoration and preservation of Prospect Park, and the development of the Park as a resource for the people of New York City.
For information on volunteering please call (718) 965-8960, email david.schilling@parks.nyc.gov or visit http://www.prospectpark.org/help/main.cfm?target=volunteer.
Wave Hill: Wave Hill is a public garden and cultural center overlooking the Hudson River and Palisades in the Bronx.
For information on volunteering, please call Liz Sharp at (718) 549-3200 or email lizs@WaveHill.org
The New York City Audubon Society: The New York City Audubon Society (NYCAS) works to protect and preserve wildlife and wildlife habitats in New York City; educate and inform the public about environmental issues; and defend and improve the quality of green spaces and the environment in New York City for both wildlife and people.
NYCAS relies on a strong network of volunteers to provide support for a variety of projects which further their mission.
For more information on volunteering, visit: http://www.nycas.org/volunteers/ or call (212) 691-7483.
SENIORS
Burden Center for the Aging: The Burden Center promotes the well-being of elderly residents on the Upper East Side of Manhattan through direct social services and volunteer programs oriented to individuals, family and community needs.
The Center supports the efforts of older people to remain in their own homes living independently, safely, and with dignity.
For information, on volunteering, please visit http://www.burdencntr.org/volunteer/volunteer.html.
CityMeals on Wheels: CityMeals-on-Wheels provides home-delivered nutritious meals for homebound elderly New Yorkers on weekends, holidays, and times of emergency, when these vulnerable seniors would otherwise go with out food.
Volunteers help with meal delivery, friendly visiting, answering letters from clients and serving meals at holiday parties.
Volunteers serve from their offices, their schools, at senior centers or seniors' homes.
For information on volunteering, please call Leora Jontef at (212) 687-1234 or email leora@citymeals.org.
DOROT: DOROT's mission is to enhance the lives of Jewish and other elderly in the Greater New York City Metropolitan area through a dynamic partnership of volunteers, professionals, and elders: to foster mutually beneficial interaction between generations; and to provide education, guidance and leadership in developing volunteer-based programs for the elderly.
For information on volunteering, please call Lisa Horowitz at (212) 769-2850 ext. 3711 or email www.dorotusa.org.
Kateri Residents: The mission of Kateri Residence is to provide loving care for all residents in a manner that bespeaks respect, compassion, sensitivity and concern while meeting the needs of the elderly residents and their families.
For information on volunteering, please call Mary Fisher at (646) 505-3536 or email mfisher@chcsnet.org.
The Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale: The Hebrew Home is committed to providing the best possible care and the highest quality of life for older people and their families.
Volunteers are needed to assist with transporting nursing home residents to and from recreational and cultural programs (the beauty parlor and doctors' appointments) on premises.
Additionally, through discussion, sharing stories, reading and walking along the home's campus on the Hudson River volunteers can visit socially with residents on a regular basis to provide them with companionship.
For more information, please contact Connee Kaufman, Director of Volunteer Services at 718-581-1404 or via e-mail at volunteer@hebrewhome.org.
Lenox Hill Hospital: Lenox Hill Hospital is dedicated to compassionate patient care, outstanding medical education, research and scholarly activity and quality service to the community.
The Volunteer Services Department of Lenox Hill Hospital offers a variety of patient contact and non-patient contact volunteer placements.
To learn more about volunteering contact Hillary Ganton, Administrative Director, Volunteer Services at (212) 434-2600 or volunteers@lenoxhill.net.
or visit www.lenoxhillhospital.org.
RSVP: The Retired 
RSVP participants serve from a few to over forty hours a week, providing service to hundreds of organizations including schools, hospitals, nursing homes, soup kitchens, libraries, and homeless shelters.
RSVP involves seniors in service that matches their personal interests and makes use of their skills and life experiences.
For further information on how to become a volunteer, you may contact any RSVP office throughout the five boroughs http://www.cssny.org/rsvp/contacts.html or call 212-674-RSVP.
SAGE: Senior Action in a Gay Environment is the nation's oldest and largest social service and advocacy organization dedicated to the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) senior citizens.
For information on volunteering, please call Susan Levine at (212) 741-0364 or email slevine@sageusa.org.
SPORTS AND RECREATION
Ice Hockey in Harlem (IHIH): IHIH is a non-profit community-based organization for youth that uses the sport of hockey to promote academic achievement, responsibility and teamwork.
In addition to their time on the ice, kids attend class and do community service projects.
For more information on volunteering, call Caroline Baumis at (212) 722-0044.
Bike New York (BNY): Bike New York promotes and encourages bicycling and bicycle safety through education and public events such as the annual BIKE NEW YORK: Great Five Boro Bike Tour.
BNY often works in collaboration with community and government organizations to achieve the objectives of its mission.
For information on how to volunteer during the annual five boro bike ride, please contact the volunteer office at 212-932-2453, ext 133.
The Downtown Boathouse: The Downtown Boathouse is an all-volunteer organization that is dedicated to providing access to the Hudson River for everyone by providing kayaks and lessons to the general public.
The Boathouse has two locations in the Hudson River Park and one location in Riverside Park.
Volunteers provide and maintain everything needed to keep the boathouses functional.
The Downtown Boathouse encourages everyone to try volunteering.
Volunteers age 18 and over and who can swim are needed at all levels.
All programs are free, and it's a great way to get active in the local paddling scene.
For more information on how to become a volunteer or to attend volunteer-training and orientation sessions email info@downtownboathouse.org and ask to be put on the volunteer email list.
NYC2012: As more than a thousand world-class athletes descend on New York this summer for a hat-trick of major international sporting events, exciting volunteer opportunities are available for individuals who want to help bring the Olympic Games to the World's Second Home.
The 42nd World Archery Championships and 3rd Annual New York City Triathlon and The 2003 ITU New York City World Cup will need hundreds of New Yorkers to help make these events the best ever held in each sport.
Volunteers can sign up to help directly through the NYC2012 website at http://www.nyc2012.com/news.20030411.1.html.
Sports Buddies New York: Sports Buddies comes out of a proud tradition, the Big Brothers Big Sisters program, and focuses the mentoring relationship around a shared love of sports.
For information on becoming mentor, please call (212) 563-BIGS or email cbbnyc@aol.com.
WOMEN
InMotion Justice for all Women: InMotion seeks to make a lasting difference in the lives of women - low-income, under-served, abused - in the New York metropolitan area.
Legal and related services promote equal access to justice and an empowered approach to life.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.inmotiononline.org/home_main.html.
Women's Prison Association (WPA): WPA's mission is to create opportunities for change in the lives of women prisoners, ex-prisoners, and their families.
It also provides public information and advocacy designed to ameliorate jail and prison conditions for women.
WomenCare, a program of the Women's Prison Association, is a mentoring program that provides women with a unique opportunity to develop a mutual beneficial relationship with a woman returning to the community from prison.
This relationship is a crucial source of encouragement to women as they work to achieve self-sufficiency and successfully re-entry the community.
For information on becoming a volunteer please contact Dolores Williams, Mentor Coordinator, at (718) 637-6878, email dwilliams@wpaonline.org or visit http://www.wpaonline.org/WEBSITE/help.htm.
VOLUNTEER OPPORTUNITIES FOR YOUTH
Children For Children Foundation presents Kids for Community - a free website designed to help young people find age-appropriate volunteer opportunities in New York City.
For information on volunteering, visit http://www.kidsforcommunity.org/.
Lenox Hill Hospital: Lenox Hill Hospital is dedicated to compassionate patient care, outstanding medical education, research and scholarly activity and quality service to the community.
The Volunteer Services Department of Lenox Hill Hospital offers a variety of patient contact and non-patient contact volunteer placements.
To learn more about volunteering contact Hillary Ganton, Administrative Director, Volunteer Services at (212) 434-2600 or volunteers@lenoxhill.net.
or visit www.lenoxhillhospital.org.
YSOP: Youth Service Opportunities Project is a nonprofit organization, founded by Quakers in 1983, which is committed to making young people a part of the solution to societal problems by helping them learn what a difference they can make in the lives of others.
For information on how to volunteer, please call (212) 598-0973 or email ysopnyc@ysop.org.
ZOOM into Action: Channel Thirteen/WNET's ZOOM into Action website features volunteer opportunities for children as well as highlighting children who already volunteer.
Use their website to find a volunteer opportunity for a child and then tell ZOOM all about it for a chance to be featured on their weekly segment.
MORE RESOURCES -- Still haven't found what you were looking for? Check out these resources for links to thousands of volunteer opportunities.
New York Cares: New York Cares unites and enables caring New Yorkers to help people in need and improve the city through volunteer service and creative giving.
New York Cares offers volunteer opportunities in almost every sector.
For information on volunteering, please visit http://www.nycares.org/html/volunteer.opportunities.html or call (212) 228-5000.
USA Freedom Corps: As a Coordinating Council housed at the White House and chaired by President George W. Bush, the USA Freedom Corps works to strengthen the culture of service and help find opportunities for every American to start volunteering.
To find a volunteer opportunity, visit the following website and answer a few questions about your preferences in order to find opportunities near you http://www.usafreedomcorps.gov/for_volunteers/find_opps.asp.
VOLUNTEER VACATIONS
Volunteer vacations are for those people who want to have an enjoyable time on their days off, but at the same time, want to give something back by helping the environment, poor children, restoration, teaching children English or other types of volunteer work.
Following are organizations which offer volunteer vacation:
Earthwatch International
ARF, Animal Rescue Foundation Contact Gail Taylor at 787 823-7167 or P.O.Box 592, Rincon, Puerto Rico
PAWS, Puerto Rico Animal Welfare Society Contact Dr. Lun Gwen-Davis, President at 787 872-0204 P.O. Box 250370, Aguadilla, Puerto Rico
Wilderness Volunteers
Arizona State Park
Alaska State Park
American Hiking Society MVC Home | NYC.gov Home Page | Mayor's Office | City Agencies | Services | News and Features | City Life | Contact Us | Search
