Wildlife and the Outdoors Wildlife and Freshwater Fisheries Division Alabama Department of Conservation and Natural Resources 64 North Union Street Montgomery, AL 36130 www.dcnr.state.al.us Phone (334) 242-3151 Honeysuckle and Kudzu for White-tailed Deer By Rick Roberts, Biologist I Each year many hunters and landowners spend countless dollars trying to increase white-tailed deer nutrition through wildlife plantings or supplemental feeding programs.
While these programs increase the nutrition deer consume, they may not always be the best way to operate on a tight budget.
Many existing forage species can be managed to provide high quality browse in a cost-effective manor.
Japanese honeysuckle and kudzu are not native to Alabama, but are very adaptive and grow well on most soil types throughout the state.
These plants are preferred deer forages and are readily browsed where they occur.
Kudzu is an extremely aggressive plant and in most places considered a pest; however, in areas where it can be controlled, kudzu can add protein to your herd's diet.
The diet of white-tailed deer must consist of about 16 percent crude protein to achieve maximum body and antler potential.
In natural stands, honeysuckle contains about 11 percent protein.
Studies have shown that fertilizing stands will double plant growth and increase protein content to 17 percent.
Fertilizer should be applied at a rate of 300 pounds of 13-13-13 per acre in early spring prior to new growth.
A second application of ammonium nitrate, at a rate of 100 pounds per acre, should be applied in mid May.
Fertilizing honeysuckle can provide high quality browse at a cost much lower than wildlife plantings.
Kudzu contains a crude protein content of 15 to 18 percent depending on management and growing season.
Since kudzu is such an aggressive plant, fertilization could cause more problems than benefits.
In areas where kudzu patches are easily accessed, mowing periodically can help control the spread of the vine.
Mowing will also stimulate new succulent growth, which is more attractive to deer.
Utilization of existing plant species is often overlooked by many hunters.
However, managing these forages is more cost effective than new wildlife plantings or supplemental feeding programs.
For more information, contact Rick Roberts, Area Biologist, Cahaba River Management Area, 10398 Montevallo Rd., Brierfield, AL 35035.
The Department of Conservation and Natural Resources does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, age, gender, national origin, or disability in its hiring or employment practices nor in admission to, access to, or operations of its programs, sexes or activities.
This publication is available in alternative formats upon requests.
[pawbar.gif]
