VCR 99-007 Predicting Glycemic Control and Hypoglycemia in Type II Diabetic Veterans Glen H. Murata, MD
New Mexico VA Health Care System; Albuquerque, NM
Funding Period: October 1999 - September 2002
BACKGROUND / RATIONALE:
Randomized trials have shown that aggressively managing hyperglycemia reduces the frequency and
severity of microvascular complications in type II diabetes mellitus.
A substantial proportion of diabetic
veterans continue to have poor glycemic control and suffer preventable complications.
OBJECTIVE(S):
The principal objectives are to conduct a comprehensive analysis of self-care behaviors affecting
glycemic control in stable, insulin-treated, type II diabetic veterans and to develop multivariate models
predictive of poor control and hypoglycemia.
METHODS:
Prospective subjects were randomly selected from pharmacy files at the Albuquerque, Tucson and
Phoenix VAMCs.
Consenting patients were given a battery of 8 standardized questionnaires on all
aspects of diabetes self-care.
At the beginning, a subset measured their blood sugars before meals and
at bedtime for 8 weeks.
Multivariate analysis was used to examine the relationship between questionnaire
and monitoring data and HbA1c at 0, 6 and 12 months.
FINDINGS / RESULTS:
From 400+ enrolled subjects, 150 completed the monitoring protocol.
Optimal testing times identified for
once- and twice-daily monitoring differed from those used in conventional practice.
Intensified monitoring
resulted in a sustained reduction of HbA1c that was attributed to a decrease in late postprandial glucose
levels.
Innovative multivariate methods were developed to quantify the contribution of each reading to
glucose load; the fasting glucose elevation was shown to be the greatest contributor to an elevated HbA1c.
Poor compliance with intensified monitoring was related to perceived inability to perform self-care and
barriers to self-monitoring but not to lack of motivation, cognitive dysfunction, depression, or lack of
diabetes knowledge.
Among the entire cohort, we found that age, education level, preferred language,
depression score, mini-mental status score and diabetes duration were independent predictors of diabetes
knowledge.
Analysis of racial differences in glycemic control showed that Black subjects had significantly
higher baseline HbA1c and received lower doses of insulin than non-Hispanic Whites.
These findings could
not be attributed to ethnic differences in attitudes, BMI, diet, exercise, or other treatment modalities.
No
discrepancies were found in the control of macrovascular risk factors.
Obese patients scored lower on
scales on adherence to self-care and self-care abilities, were more highly educated and depressed, and
more likely to perceive physical disabilities and barriers to exercise.
Quantifying lifestyle factors showed
that obesity was more closely associated with excessive caloric and fat intake than lack of exercise.
The
Diabetes Care Profile was found to be an exceptional instrument for rating attitudes; 8 of 14 subscales
were correlated with HbA1c or scores on other psychological instruments.
Individual scores were also
correlated with HbA1c after adjusting for BMI, dietary compliance, exercise, and treatment intensity,
suggesting that certain attitudes drive other important self-care behaviors.
Measurements of routine
physical activities showed that many subjects were sedentary and that limitations were mostly due to
irreversible disabilities and diabetes complications.
Adherence to ADA dietary recommendations was poor
and attributable to social and occupational factors but not to poor attitudes, lack of knowledge, or
disabilities related to shopping or cooking.
STATUS:
Enrollment has been closed and data collection completed.
Final analysis is underway.
IMPACT:
Current methods for blood glucose monitoring and intensification of insulin treatment may have to be
completely revised.
Psychosocial profiling should be incorporated into the standard evaluation of diabetic
veterans.
Diabetes care programs should be restructured to include periodic reassessment of knowledge,
level of depression, and cognitive functioning.
Insulin management should accommodate the special
needs of minorities because of their vulnerability to poor glycemic control.
Quantification of dietary intake
should be done in obese patients because of the strong association between BMI and dietary indiscretion.
Dietary modifications must accommodate social and occupational factors and cannot rely only upon
educational or motivational strategies.
Together, these findings suggest that fundamental revisions should
take place in microvascular risk management programs for veterans.
PUBLICATIONS:
In Press
1.
Hoffman RM, Shah JH, Wendel CS, et al..
Evaluating once- and twice-daily self-monitored blood
glucose testing strategies for stable insulin-treated patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care.
2002; In press.
Conference Presentations / Abstracts
2.
Adam KD, Dalton C, Murata GH, Duckworth WC, Wendel CS, Bokhari SU, Montagnini MT, Shah JH.
Factors Affecting Diabetes Knowledge in Insulin-Treated Veterans with Type II Diabetes Mellitus.
HSR
19th Annual Meeting.
Washington, DC 2001.
3.
Hoffman RM, Wendel CS, Dalton C, Adam KD, Duckworth WC, Shah JH, Bokhari SU, Murata GH.
Selecting a Parsimonious Blood Glucose Monitoring Strategy for Insulin-Treated Veterans with Type II
Diabetes Mellitus.
HSR
Washington, DC 2001.
4.
Murata GH, Adam KD, Hoffman RM, Wendel CS, Dalton C, Montagnini MT, Bokhari SU, Shah JH,
Duckworth WC.
The Risks of Hypo- and Hyperglycemia in Insulin-Treated Type II Diabetic Veterans.
HSR
Washington, DC 2001.
5.
Murata GH, Hoffman RM, Wendel CS, Adam KD, Dalton C, Montagnini MT, Bokhari SU, Duckworth
WC, Shah JH.
Can Insulin-Treated Veterans With Type II Diabetes Mellitus Monitor Thier Blood Sugars
Four Times Daily?.
HSR
Washington, DC 2001.
6.
Shah JH, Duckworth WC, Dalton C, Adam KD, Bokhari SU, Wendel CS, Hoffman RM, Murata GH.
A
Parsimonious Cost-Effective Blood Glucose (BG) Monitoring (BGM) Strategy for Insulin-Treated Type 2
Diabetic (DM-2) Patients (pts).
Scientific Assembly of the American Diabetes Association.
Philadelphia,
PA 2001.
7.
Wendel CS, Dalton C, Shah JH, Adam KD, Bokhari SU, Montagnini MT, Duckworth WC, Murata GH.
Access Barriers, Lifestyle and Glycemic Control in Insulin-Treated Veterans with Type II Diabetes - A
Comparison of Hispanic and Non-Hispanic Whites in the Southwest.
HSR
Washington, DC 2001.
search citations database
DRAs: Chronic Diseases; Health Services and Systems
DREs: Prevention; Quality of Care; Resource Use and Cost
Keywords: Behavior (patient) - includes compliance/adherence; Diabetes; Self-care
