City Clerks Office Back to Flag, U.S.
Flag Etiquette
GENERAL DISPLAY
It is the universal custom to display the flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open.
However, when a patriotic effect is desired, the flag may be displayed twenty-four hours a day if properly illuminated during the hours of darkness.
1.
When displayed either horizontally or vertically against a wall, the union should be uppermost and to the flag's own right, that is, to the observer's left.
When displayed in a window, The flag should be displayed in the same way, with the union or blue field to the left of the observer in the street.
Wall Mounting
No other flag or pennant should be placed above, or, if on the same level, to the right of the flag of the United States of America, except during church services conducted by naval chaplains a sea... for personnel of the Navy... when the church pennant may be flown above the flag.
No person shall display the flag of the United Nations or any other national or international flag equal, above, or in a position of superior prominence of honor to, or in place of, the flag of the United States at any place within the United States or any Territory or possession thereof; Provided, that nothing in this section shall make unlawful the continuance of the practice heretofore followed of displaying the flag of the United Nations in a position of superior prominence or honor, and other national flags in positions of equal prominence or honor, with that of the flag of the United States at the headquarters of the United Nations.
When flags of States, cities, or localities, or pennants of societies are flown on the same halyard with the flag of the United States, the latter should always be a the peak.
When the flags are flown from adjacent staffs, the flag of the United States should be hoisted first and lowered last.
No such flag or pennant may be placed above the flag of the United States or to the United States flag's right.
Always Raise the United States Flag First, and Lowered Last
The flag of the United States of America, when it is displayed with another flag against a wal from crossed staffs, should be on the right, the flag's own right, and its staff should be in front of the staff of the other flag.
Staff of United States Flag is in Front 5.
The flag of the United States of America should be a the center and at the highest point of the group when a number of flags of States or localities or pennants of societies are grouped and displayed from staffs.
United States Flag Must be at the Highest Point when Flying amongst other Flags
6.
When flags of two or more nations are displayed, they are to be flown from separate staffs of the same height.
The flags should be of approximately equal size.
International usage forbids the display of the flag of one nation above that of another nation in time of peace.
National Flags are Displayed at the Same Height
PODIUMS, CHURCHES, AUDITORIUMS
7.
When displayed on a speaker's platform, the flag, if displayed flat, should be displayed above and behind the speaker.
When displayed from a staff in a church or public auditorium, the flag of the United States of America should hold the position of superior prominence, in advance of the audience, and in the position of honor at the clergyman's or speaker's right as he faces the audience.
Any other flag so displayed should be placed on the left of the clergyman or speakers or the right of the audience.
Podium Display HALF-STAFF
The flag, when flown at half-staff, should be first hoisted to the peak for an instant and then lowered to the half-staff position.
The flag should be again raised to the peak before it is lowered for the day.
On Memorial Day, the flag should be displayed at half-staff until noon only, then raised to the top of the staff.
By order of the President, the flag shall be flown at half-staff upon the death of principal figures of the United States Government and the Governor of the State, territory or possession, as a mark of respect to their memory.
In the event of the death of other officials or foreign dignitaries, the flag is to be displayed at half-staff according to Presidential instructions or orders, or in accordance with recognized customs or practices not inconsistent with law.
In the event of the death of a present or former official of the government of any State, territory or possession of the United States, the Governor of that State, territory or possession may proclaim that the National flag shall be flown at half-staff.
