STATEMENT OF MAJOR GENERAL PAUL A. WEAVER, JR. DIRECTOR, AIR NATIONAL GUARD HEADQUARTERS, UNITED STATES AIR FORCE
AIR NATIONAL GUARD
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear before this committee, not only on behalf of the 105,000 men and women of the Air National Guard, but also as part of the Total Force team.
This new millennium brings numerous challenges to the forefront.
These challenges include reshaping our Air National Guard structure, supporting the Expeditionary Aerospace Force (EAF) construct, and [INS: emphasizing :INS] quality of life issues for Guard members and their families.
I welcome this opportunity to provide you my assessment of the Air National Guard.
How we address these issues will define our course and our character for years to come.
Introduction
I will first provide my personal, focused comments on the progress that we had for Fiscal Year 1999.
Then, I will provide my assessment of the overall financial health of the Air Guard, as well as trends and concerns regarding people, readiness, modernization and infrastructure.
I will conclude by presenting my vision for the future of the Air National Guard.
Background-Roles and Missions
Mr. Chairman, against this backdrop allow me to share with you an array of relevant Air National Guard issues for Congressional consideration in reviewing our role as an integral part of the national defense strategy.
An overview of the Air National Guard roles and missions is essential to keep our unique focus on national as well as domestic responsibilities.
The basic mission of the Air National Guard is to provide combat-ready units and individuals, as required by the Constitution and the National Security Strategy.
Unlike the other Reserve Components, the Army and Air National Guard have dual federal and state roles.
Congress has consistently reaffirmed this dual status, established by the Constitution.
It reflects the fundamental concept of America's citizens mobilizing for the common defense.
There are 54 National Guard organizations, made up of the 50 states plus Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, and the District of Columbia.
Each state organization is led by an Adjutant General who reports to the governor.
The Air National Guard is currently comprised of 105,000 citizen airmen with state as well as federal responsibilities.
The Air National Guard has 88 flying units and 239 mission support units in 50 states, 3 US territories and the District of Columbia.
With nearly 1,200 aircraft, the Air National Guard performs 100 percent of the air sovereignty mission and contributes one-third of the fighters, almost half of the tactical airlift and air refueling aircraft, and 70 percent of the combat communications and theater air control assets in the Total Force.
In our state capacity, we are subject to state call-up to protect life and property in state emergencies such as riots, floods, earthquakes or forest fires.
We also support state and local law enforcement agencies in counter-narcotics and other operations.
In our federal capacity, we are called on to maintain well trained and equipped units available for rapid mobilization in the event of war or national emergency.
During peacetime, combat-ready units carry out missions that enhance their readiness for mobilization, such as training for contingency operations.
As a Total Force player, our people and equipment are significantly integrated with the missions of the active Air Force.
Disaster Relief - State and Local
As you are well aware Mr. Chairman, this past year many of our Guard units also provided disaster and community assistance.
Helping local communities recover in the aftermath of natural disasters represents some of the most high profile missions undertaken by the Air National Guard.
These disasters represent an urgent, real-world need for skilled personnel and specialized equipment to assist with search and rescue, medical care, emergency shelters, and logistical support to provide food, clothing, and other necessities.
Total Force
The Air Force mobilization planning process is based upon the Total Force, which requires the full integration of the Air National Guard into operational planning by the combat commands.
We are organized, trained, and equipped for any mobilization situation and are capable of deploying within 72 hours of notification.
The Air National Guard will continue to play a pivotal role in the Total Force.
We anticipate performing expanded roles in the Air Force's space, intelligence, and training missions.
In addition, we are a full partner in the EAF, deploying operational, and support forces.
Based on these important new roles, we will bring new meaning and effectiveness to the concept of the Total Force.
In addition, the Air National Guard represents a vital element in the military's ability to maintain its ties with the civilian community.
Operating a network of units composed of individuals who live and work in a community helps strengthen the bond between the public and its armed forces.
Those relationships bring a special added benefit when the use of military force is being considered -- widespread support for the deploying troops.
New Missions
We are likely to be called on with ever-increasing frequency in the coming decade.
As the number of small-scale contingencies escalates around the world, guardsmen and women will continue to relieve the burden of high operational tempo among active forces.
Moreover, declining numbers of active duty forces mean that the Reserve Components must be prepared to assume new responsibilities.
For example, the Air National Guard was given operational control of the Senior Scout unmanned reconnaissance and surveillance program -- a most critical program in the intelligence arena.
This program could support all of Southern Command's signal intelligence collection requirements, as well as those of the Pacific and European Commands.
Our Space and Intelligence community in the ANG is busy, working many different programs and initiatives involving space, intelligence, and information warfare.
Currently, from among eight units and over 1,800 space and intelligence personnel, our intelligence squadrons in Little Rock, Arkansas; Birmingham, Alabama; Reno, Nevada; and Salt Lake City, Utah are actively supporting the Air Force's Distributive Common Ground System (DCGS).
In addition, Senior Scout continues to provide the Air Force a one-of-a-kind airborne tactical intelligence collection platform.
The ANG recently established an associate unit at Tyndall Air Force Base, Florida, to work with our active duty counterparts to train F-15 Eagle pilots.
Over the next two years, the unit will hire and train 16 full-time instructor pilots and another 18 traditional Guard pilots.
This program allows the Air Force to keep experienced pilots in their fighter wings, while expanding training through use of highly skilled ANG pilots.
The Air National Guard has established a Future Forces Team to realign Guard forces for greater participation in the new EAF concept.
This team is working with adjutants general from across the country to ensure that the national defense requirements are shared equally by all regions of the United States.
The Air National Guard will commit over 25,000 airmen during a single, 15-month Aerospace Expeditionary Force (AEF) cycle.
Most of these patriots are traditional guardsmen, whose main source of income is drawn from a full-time job outside of the military.
After two complete AEF cycles, approximately half of the Air National Guard personnel will know first-hand what it means to be part of the EAF.
As a result, many more civilian employers will also feel the impact of their ANG member employees deploying overseas.
TEMPO and Contingencies
In Fiscal Year 1999, the Air National Guard participated in Operation Allied Force in Kosovo with KC-135 and A-10 aircraft, Ground Tactical Air Control squadrons, and tactical and strategic airlift units.
Ground mobile radar units also deployed to contingency areas in the Balkans and Southwest Asia.
Additional ANG units supported several other operational missions, including Operations Northern and Southern Watch, to enforce the No-Fly Zones over Iraq.
In support of these missions, the Guard provided 18 KC-135 tanker aircraft with 376 personnel, 28 C-130 airlift aircraft with 827 personnel, 17 fighter aircraft with 216 personnel, and one HC-130 refueler aircraft with 10 personnel.
Homeland Defense
Homeland defense is a vital mission for the Air National Guard.
Our nation's right to exercise absolute control and authority over its national airspace above its territory, international waters, and territorial seas, better known as "Air Sovereignty," is an enduring mission.
In January 1994, 1^st Air Force was placed under the command of an Air National Guard general officer.
This transition of the air defense command and control organization to the Air National Guard strengthens the air defense role.
In Fiscal Year 1999, because of the Quadrennial Defense Review, four dedicated air defense units remissioned to general-purpose fighters.
The Air National Guard continues to play an important role in our nation's defense against such threats as domestic terrorism, weapons of mass destruction and counterdrugs.
Homeland defense will require tremendous flexibility, teamwork and integration on the part of all components of the force.
The Army Guard has already begun staffing and training members of 10 Weapons of Mass Destruction Civil Support Teams (previously known as RAID Teams) to assist first responders (i.e., law enforcement, medical, rescue and firefighting personnel) in the event of a chemical or biological incident.
The Air National Guard has funded 132 positions in Fiscal Year 2000 and an additional 48 in Fiscal Year 2001 as more teams are being established throughout the country.
The most effective counter to domestic threats is a community-based network of concerned citizens willing to become involved.
Citizen involvement captures the very essence of the Air National Guard.
As we acquire and integrate evolving technologies, we will exploit these technologies in support of our domestic mission.
The Air National Guard is uniquely postured to pursue this course of action, and we can truly make a difference.
Recruiting and Retention
Similar to the Active forces, the Air National Guard faced one of its toughest challenges in recruiting new members and retaining experienced personnel during Fiscal Year 1999.
A strong job market and economy, lower propensity to enlist, and competition among all military services for eligible recruits affects our ability to meet recruiting goals.
Congressional adds in Fiscal Year 2000 have allowed us to increase our advertising budget and boost the number of recruiting support days available to recruiting offices.
The cost and time involved in replacing a Guardsman has also highlighted the need to improve retention statistics.
New incentive programs are aimed at encouraging members to reenlist.
A Web-based exit survey is now used to learn why people leave the Guard.
Another major challenge is ensuring that family members understand both the benefits and obligations of service in the Air National Guard.
Training and Readiness
The Air National Guard received 173 undergraduate pilot training slots in Fiscal Year 1999, up from 99 slots the previous year.
The projected pilot shortage for most of the next decade made it imperative to increase the pipeline flow to help sustain the Guard's combat readiness.
Despite an environment of critical pilot shortages and training shortfalls, current projections indicate that 173 pilot allocations per year will stabilize the Air National Guard force and sustain long-term readiness.
The ANG also faces difficulty in retaining navigators.
The Guard received 33 navigator slots in Fiscal Year 1999, but had difficulty in filling them due to a lack of applicants.
This is largely because improved technology is expected to eliminate the requirement for most navigators in the future except for a few specialized weapon systems.
Air National Guard allocations for follow-on pilot training fell short of the pilot requirements for the F-16, KC-135, and C-130.
Weapons systems F-16 training allocations were especially short of the requirement, which then created a bow-wave of pilots waiting for follow-on training.
F-16 pilot shortages are so severe that initiatives are underway to create additional interim and permanent training bases to offset the lack of training capacity.
Follow-on training for KC-135 and C-130 pilots also fell short of the requirements, though not as severely as for the F-16.
Initiatives are underway to establish follow-on training bases for the KC-135 and C-130 pilots to offset training capacity shortfalls.
Additional ANG F-16 pilot training units are being established at Kelly Air Force Base, Texas, and Springfield, Ohio.
The recently converted F-15 school at Kingsley Field, Oregon, is also expanding student production.
The Air Control Squadron in Phoenix, Arizona, is converting to a schoolhouse unit to train Guard, Reserve, and active duty personnel.
People
The Air National Guard work force is the most highly trained and capable force of all the Reserve Components.
I am extremely proud of our most vital resource -- the men and women of our Guard.
Approximately 61 percent of ANG personnel have prior service experience.
A noteworthy 97 percent of Air Guard pilots have more than 500 hours of experience flying their particular aircraft.
They served honorably with increasing personal sacrifice to defend the freedom of our great nation.
Like the men and women of other services, Air National Guard members are "world ready" and primed for the unique challenges of tomorrow.
As such, a "world ready" organization deserves to work in an environment that provides the equipment, facilities and operational support structure to accomplish the Total Force objectives.
The Air National Guard is committed to providing training, benefits and compensation, balanced tempo and quality of life to these dedicated professionals.
We are convinced the Air National Guard is second-to-none in readiness and meeting today's challenges.
The Air National Guard is implementing a recent Air Force decision to include Air National Guard Active Guard Reserves (AGR) in the Aviator Continuation Pay (Pilot Bonus) program.
This marks the first time ever that the Air Force supported Reserve Component participation in this program.
The Reserve Component will pay up to $25,000 per year bonuses to eligible Active Guard Reserve (AGR) pilots.
We are expecting a nearly 100 percent take rate on this bonus with an estimated $8 to $10 million cost.
Mr. Chairman, in 1979, the AGR program began as a test in the Air National Guard.
Twenty years later our AGRs make up 33 percent of our full-time force.
The test is over, and without a doubt, I believe this program has paid outstanding dividends to the total force construct.
In Fiscal Year 2001, legislation seeks to provide OSD the authority to exceed AGR controlled grade ceilings by 2 percent.
We have sought controlled grade relief to support implementation of various mission essential programs to the Air National Guard.
The Air National Guard's continued integration into joint, departmental and major command headquarters, as well as significant growth in operational units, generates higher-grade position requirements.
These new missions, coupled with the maturity of the force, emphasize the importance of controlled grade relief.
Your continued support in addressing these mission essential programs is imperative.
The Air National Guard is in the process of upgrading over 25,000 traditional Guard enlisted positions to the minimum rank of E-5 to give career advancement opportunities to our highly experienced and valuable enlisted force -- nearly 93,000 strong today.
As part of the Air National Guard road map of specific objectives outlined in the beginning of my watch, I said that I would use the second year of my tenure as "The Year of the Enlisted Force."
This has been an ANG-wide collaborative success.
It is only right that we single out our enlisted personnel, because they have seasoned experience and technological skills required in our new mission areas.
Fiscal Year 1999 found the 123rd Logistics Squadron from Louisville, Kentucky, in the limelight.
Specifically, two of its enlisted members were honored in Washington, D.C., out of the four people named as the Air Guard's outstanding airmen and first sergeant for 1999.
Technical Sergeant Christopher Mix, the noncommissioned officer of the year, and Master Sergeant Timothy Atwell, the first sergeant of the year, belong to the logistics squadron that is part of the 123rd Airlift Wing.
In addition, Staff Sergeant Edward Moore from the State of Washington is the year's top airman; and Master Sergeant Lisa Ezzell from Nevada is the nation's premier Air Guard Senior NCO.
I salute all of these NCOs for their accomplishments over the years and for their continued exemplary military service.
Year of the Family
The third year of my tenure is dedicated to "The Year of the Family."
The Year of the Family 2000 is an ongoing effort to focus extensively on family readiness and support efforts which directly impact military recruiting, retention and readiness capabilities.
This will be a yearlong effort with monthly themes to focus on national, state, and unit level efforts.
We are building the synergy needed to operate at our full potential both in the home and on the job.
With ever-expanding worldwide commitments, we recognize a strong connection between mission accomplishment and family readiness.
There is an increasing need for viable and sustainable family support programs in the ANG.
We need to support our force on a full-time basis; as well as surge to meet the needs of our traditional force--especially in the pre-deployment, deployment and post deployment phases.
We are currently exploring other viable initiatives including contracting services to support our surge capability for deployment cycles.
As the Air National Guard continues to increase in tempo comparable with the active forces, we are going to require a Total Force response to provide support for Air National Guard families.
Although the Air National Guard does not have a dedicated family program position, we have recently modified the Wing Chief of Staff positions to include responsibility for oversight of Family Readiness and Support Programs -- in addition to their other duties associated with Employer Support, Diversity and continuing staff functions.
Mr. Chairman, the Air National Guard has experienced a dramatic rise in family and employer support needs in response to increasing AEF participation, which is higher than anytime since the end of the Cold War.
The last decade has witnessed a 1000 percent increase in manday utilization by deployed members of the Total Force.
As we are scheduled to meet more forward-deployed contingency taskings, we must be prepared to extend appropriate services, support, and benefits to our members.
Congressional support is paramount, or we may soon reach a point where the demands on traditional Guard and Reserve members affect volunteerism.
This would further complicate readiness issues and concerns.
Since the Reserve Components have become more than a "39 days per year" resource, it is imperative that we have programs in place to provide essential services and benefits.
We are seeking "seamless benefits" for a "seamless Total Force."
As you are all well aware, the Air Force tempo level is one of the primary quality of life factors affecting unit readiness and retention.
As the Air Force continues to turn more deployment taskings over to the Guard and Reserve, we must also look at the impact this increased tempo has on the civilian employers and dispersed family members of these citizen-airmen.
Consequently, the Air National Guard supports a variety of options, including possible tax incentives to these employers who permit Guard and Reserve member participation.
We must continue to strive for long-term solutions that will benefit the Reserve Components, employers and active forces.
Computer Training
The Air National Guard continues to expand training access to its members with the emerging technologies of Distance Learning and Advanced Distributed Learning.
Nearly all Air Guard units now have satellite downlinks to the Air National Guard Warrior Network, along with fiber-optic capability and multimedia computers for training.
The Air Guard has joined with the Army National Guard to create an electronic classroom.
This partnership will save millions of dollars by avoiding duplication of training systems.
It will also give Guard members immediate access to training courses.
Another major focus during Fiscal Year 1999 was the ongoing review of ancillary training courses conducted by a joint team of experts from the active Air Force, Air Guard, and Air Force Reserve.
Outdated courses will be updated and streamlined or eliminated.
These changes will give members more time to perform their primary skills while meeting their ancillary training requirements.
Members' Accessibility
We believe members serving on active duty for more than 180 days should not count against the end strength of the active forces.
This proposed change would increase the length of time members can serve in an active duty status and provide for greater continuity in the use of Reserve Components to support CINC and tempo requirements.
This initiative is currently included in the Fiscal Year 2001 Omnibus Legislation.
Anthrax
Education and training are vital to dispel negative information about the anthrax program.
As of the end of 1999, few Air National Guard personnel are separating solely because of anthrax vaccination concerns.
Most of our units are scheduled to receive the vaccine in Fiscal Year 2001 and beyond.
It is imperative that these members are given accurate information to enable them to make an informed and educated personal decision.
When we enter Phase II of the inoculations, the education programs at the state, wing and unit level will increase.
Presently, no units have cited losses of aircrew members as having a negative impact on readiness rates.
When airmen are presented information early, the statistics indicate that the vast majority chose to comply with this important force protection program.
Financial Health of the Air National Guard
The Air National Guard's Fiscal Year 1999 Operation and Maintenance funding was minimally adequate to support our people, bases and mission.
A most daunting funding challenge facing the Air National Guard in Fiscal Year 2001 and 2002 involves our efforts to reshape the force structure.
The Defense Planning Guidance has directed that the Guard evolve from a Cold War-era "train and respond" force into a modern "shape and respond" force.
In other words, the Guard is a force involved in shaping the global military environment and augmenting the active force.
These changes in force structure are necessary but costly.
While the Fiscal Year 2001 funding is more than Fiscal Year 2000, the ANG actually realized negative real growth.
Increased funding accommodates price increases and increased payroll costs.
Our most significant financial challenge will always be to achieve balance.
In the Guard we must continue to carefully allocate limited funding among the readiness, modernization and people programs.
The task of maintaining aging weapon systems is using more of the Guard's available spare parts and depot maintenance resources.
Furthermore, without additional resources for infrastructure, the Guard's massive real property maintenance backlog (projected to be $940 million by the end of Fiscal Year 2001) will continue to escalate; and deteriorating facilities will erode quality of life.
Each of these areas will ultimately affect mission readiness and highlight the need for additional funds.
Maintenance
The Air Force gets critical work done during deployments by tasking highly experienced Air Guard men and women -- like those in the 175^th Maintenance Squadron in Baltimore, Maryland.
While deployed to Kuwait, the 175^th completely refurbished over 20 pieces of broken aircraft generation equipment, which had been deemed "unfixable."
They fixed it all in less than 30 days.
The Air National Guard continues to strongly advocate the procurement of the latest materials handling equipment (MHE), to include the Tunner Loader, the next generation small loader.
This equipment is critical in the replacement of our aging and worn-out MHE.
In addition, the equipment is needed to ensure our ground transportation personnel are fully qualified to repair and maintain the latest MHE in the Air Force inventory.
Our personnel must have access to the same equipment as the Air Force to ensure familiarity and to fully integrate with our active duty counterparts as a "Total Force."
The Air National Guard continues to support USCENTAF efforts to repair over 550 War Reserve Material (WRM) vehicles in Southwest Asia.
Since October 1998, over 200 Air National Guard personnel have deployed to Qatar to undertake this repair effort.
Air National Guard personnel are entirely responsible for all vehicle repair operations on-site and were the only US military personnel to continuously work at the airbase until late last year.
To date, our personnel have returned over 330 vehicles back to mission-capable status and have identified 90 vehicles for disposition.
In addition, our vehicle maintenance personnel have supported other sites in-country and have assisted in the movement of WRM vehicles via sealift in support of Exercise BRIGHT STAR.
So far, the Air National Guard efforts have saved USCENTAF more than $16 million in vehicle replacement costs.
Major Equipment Acquisition and Modernization
The readiness levels of the Air National Guard depend on modern equipment availability.
Adequate funding levels for Guard and Reserve equipment are becoming increasingly critical.
Reserve components are being called on to perform a greater share of day-to-day missions, as well as to relieve the high operational tempo for active duty forces.
Compatible and interoperable equipment is essential to reduce logistics costs and to enable active and Reserve units to train and fight together.
The equipment readiness goal is to ensure the Reserve components have compatible equipment to enable mission accomplishment side-by-side with active forces and coalition partners.
The Air National Guard used about 93 percent of its Fiscal Year 1999 National Guard and Reserve Equipment Appropriation funds to purchase three C-130J cargo aircraft.
Equipment funds were also used to purchase various combat upgrades to the F-16, F-15, A-10 and C-130 aircraft.
Equipment Modernization
The Air National Guard unit at Kingsley Field, Oregon, the 173^rd Fighter Wing, continued its conversion from F-16s to F-15s to become an F-15 Formal Training Unit.
All F-15 aircraft thus far have come from other Guard units.
The ANG unit in San Juan, Puerto Rico, continued its conversion from F-16s to C-130Es.
These C-130s are available due to other ongoing ANG conversions.
The unit at Baltimore, Maryland, continued its conversion from C-130Es to eight new C-130J aircraft.
They received two new aircraft in 1999, with the remainder to be delivered in Fiscal Year 2000.
In addition, in Fiscal Year 2000, the Air National Guard unit in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, will receive the first two EC-130Js, replacing aging EC-130Es.
Six Air National Guard F-16 squadrons began or continued converting from North American Air Defense Command (NORAD) air defense alert missions to become general purpose (air-to-ground) fighter squadrons, as directed by the 1997 Quadrennial Defense Review.
These units are in Fargo, North Dakota; Duluth, Minnesota; Atlantic City, New Jersey; Houston, Texas; Great Falls, Montana; and Burlington, Vermont.
Each unit is being equipped with electronic counter-measures pods received from active duty excess.
The McEntire Air National Guard Base, South Carolina, unit is converting to the High Speed Anti-Radiation Missile targeting system pods to further increase their general-purpose fighter capability.
Two Air National Guard F-16 units, in Richmond, Virginia, and Selfridge Air National Guard Base, Michigan, have begun converting to Tactical Aerial Reconnaissance Systems, a reconnaissance capability unique to the ANG.
Eventually five Air National Guard F-16 units will have this combat capability.
Des Moines, Iowa, has become the third F-16 unit to add medium altitude navigation and targeting infrared for night pods, but program mission and test equipment shortages still exist.
Modernization of the entire KC-135R air refueling fleet continues.
All KC-135 aircraft will receive glass cockpits allowing reduced flight crew manning and adding flight safety improvements which include traffic alerting and ground proximity warning systems.
Air National Guard C-141s at Nashville, Tennessee, and Jackson, Mississippi, along with C-5s at Stewart Air National Guard Base, New York, have also begun converting to the enhanced glass cockpits.
An Air National Guard Intelligence Squadron in Reno, Nevada, has begun receiving new digital ground station equipment for communicating near real-time theater reconnaissance imagery.
One Command and Control Squadron was established in Cheyenne, Wyoming, and is using equipment from the active Air Force.
Eight Air Support Operations Squadrons are being established in Air National Guard units in Washington, North Carolina, Illinois, Louisiana, Idaho, New York, Georgia, and Mississippi.
The goal remains to obtain full mission compatibility with the active Air Force.
Future of the Air National Guard
In closing, Mr. Chairman, we in the Air National Guard are proud to serve this great nation as citizen-airmen.
Building the strongest possible Air National Guard is our most important objective.
Our people, readiness, modernization and infrastructure programs supported through your Congressional actions are necessary to help maintain the Air National Guard as the best reserve force in the new millennium.
Mr. Chairman, we count on your support to meet mission requirements and readiness needs of the Air National Guard.
We are confident that the men and women of the Air National Guard will meet any and all challenges.
I thank you for allowing me this opportunity to give you the Air National Guard posture.
