[geagle.gif] Roll Call Editorial June 8, 1998 [geagle.gif]
A costly record of chronic underpayment to taxpayers by the oil industry from production on public lands has become one of the most volatile issues in public resource policy with profound implications for legislation pending before the Congress.
Oil companies are notorious for not paying oil royalties, noted Fadel Gheit, an energy analyst with the research firm Fahnestock 
The record would seem to bear out his observation.
The issue of public subsidization of the oil and gas industries has long been a contentious issue in the Congress.
Today, we spend between $15 billion and $35 billion annually in subsidies to the fossil fuel industries: tax breaks, below-market royalty rates for heavy crude, incentives for deep-water development and productions from stripper wells.
Growing attention is now being paid to the investigation of the Minerals Management Service (MMS) into allegations that the public, including Indian tribes, are being shortchanged to the tune of hundreds of millions of dollars by companies operating leases on public lands.
The Project on Government Oversight, a nonpartisan, non-government organization that has tracked this issue for several years, estimates that the actual nationwide underpayment is close to $2 billion.
MMS and the Bureau of Land Management manage most of the nation's abundant oil and natural gas resources on millions of acres of public land onshore and on the Outer Continental Shelf.
These agencies lease the rights to explore and develop oil and gas to private companies which, in turn, must pay the federal government for the lease, rentals until production commences, and royalties on subsequent production from the lease.
These royalties are set by law as a percentage of the value of production and represent risk sharing between the government and the oil producer.
If the well does not produce, the oil producer pays no royalty.
Federal royalty payments are currently based on a percentage of the gross value of the extracted crude oil or natural gas.
The standard royalty rates for oil and gas are 12 percent for onshore and 16 2/3 percent for offshore production, among the most favorable treatment in the world.
In 1997, more than $4.2 billion in oil and gas royalties were paid by oil and gas producers for production from the nation's petroleum resources on public lands.
In the first quarter of 1998, $979 million was paid in royalties.
Royalties Supposed to Aid Schools
The largest portion of mineral leasing revenues (royalties, bid payments and other rents) goes to the U.S. Treasury to help offset the national deficit $3.9 billion in 1997 or 76 percent of all royalty and other leasing revenues.
Generally, mineral-producing states other than Alaska receive 50 percent of revenues collected within their boundaries; Alaska receives 90 percent.
Seven states (Alabama, Alaska, California, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas) also receive a share of revenues generated from oil and gas leases on federal lands within 3 miles of their state lands.
In 1997, the state share of onshore and offshore royalties totaled $352 million that goes primarily to public school systems in those states.
Funds from the federal share support the Bureau of Reclamation, the Historic Preservation Fund, and especially the Land and Water Conservation Fund which purchases lands for inclusion in the national parks and other public land holdings.
Indian tribes receive 100 percent of the revenues collected on their lands.
As a result of the federal government's leniency in allowing oil and gas producers latitude in structuring their financial reporting to suit themselves, oil companies have engaged in persistent undervaluation of the crude oil and natural gas they extract from the public lands.
For decades, oil purchasers have used a system of "posted" prices to inform oil producers of the amount they would pay for crude oil in a given field.
However, the posted price can differ from 7 cents to $2 per barrel from the daily prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange, where commodities traders have set market prices for crude oil since 1983.
Other changes in the oil industry have raised additional concerns about the accuracy of relying on posted prices.
Reports of Underpayments
Reports of widespread underpayments and undervalued posted prices first arose in 1975, when the State of California and the City of Long Beach sued seven major oil companies operating in California.
Officials alleged that the companies conspired to keep posted oil prices low in order to pay lower royalties.
During 1994, crude oil production in California, the nation's fourth-largest oil-producing state, totaled about 345 million barrels of oil, largely from federal lands.
In 1991, six of the companies involved (ARCO, Shell, Chevron, Mobil, Texaco, and Unocal) reached settlements with Long Beach and California, totaling $345 million.
Since then, other states have brought similar litigation against the oil industry and have negotiated similar settlements.
Following the 1991 settlement in California, the Department of the Interior began to investigate the potential of underpayments relating to federal leases.
With the assistance of the State of California, officials were able to prove that oil companies had undervalued federal crude oil by as much as $856 million in California alone between 1978 and 1993.
Since 100 percent of the oil and gas royalty revenues paid to California go to public schools, the companies understatement of the value of the crude oil or natural gas shortchange our children and their education.
The federal government subsequently announced that it would attempt to collect approximately $440 million for California leases alone -- reducing the $856 million figure due to global settlements between the oil companies and the DOI, payments-in-kind, and other factors.
The Government Oversight and Reform Committee concluded in 1996 that it is easy for oil companies to hide the true value of the crude oil in complicated contracts with separate charges for transportation.
During the congressional investigation, a noted petroleum expert recommended that the appropriate market gauge for fair market value for crude oil in California would be the Alaska North Slope (ANS) spot market price, while outside of California there are other, more useful market benchmarks such as the price on the New York Mercantile Exchange (NYMEX), Cushing, and St. James.
Industry Stymies Royalty Improvements
Government Reform and Oversight government management, information and technology Chairman Steve Horn (R-Calif) and Rep. Carolyn Maloney (D-NY), the ranking member, urged that the Department of the Interior use a market price to set fair market value and assure that taxpayers receive an accurate amount of funds from oil and gas production.
In response to these recommendations, the Interior Department proposed a new system to compute the amount of royalties due taxpayers on widely published prices, such as the ANS or NYMEX.
After two and a half years in development, including fourteen public meetings, and five Federal Register notices, the Interior Department was set to publish the final rule this month with an effective date of Oct. 1.
But the industry used Congressional influence to delay the rule.
Without notice or warning, Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-Texas) successfully attached a provision to the fiscal 1998 emergency spending bill in conference committee that prevents the Interior Department from implementing the final rule.
The inability to publish the rule will cost taxpayers $66 million a year.
Representative.
Carolyn Maloney and I, along with and Sens. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif) and Richard Durbin (D-Ill), introduced legislation to rescind the Hutchison rider preventing Interior from modifying royalty rates to assure a fair return to the public.
Royalty Owners Move Against Oil Companies
In February of this year, the United States joined litigation brought by the states of Texas, Louisiana, and Alabama, and several private citizens, alleging gross underpayment of royalties by 14 major oil companies under the False Claims Act.
The litigation was initially brought by private citizens including the former president of the Independent Petroleum Association of America in federal court in Lufkin, Texas -- asserting that the companies knowingly undervalued oil extracted from public and Indian lands.
Estimates of the value of the underpayments range from $500 million to $2 billion, and taxpayers will recover three times as much as our losses, plus civil penalties, if the courts find the companies purposefully underpaid.
On May 27, the Wall Street Journal reported that the Justice Department had reached a settlement agreement in principle with Mobil on the allegations.
The US is expected to intervene in lawsuits against the other eight companies being sued by the private parties.
Over the last six years, nine states have taken on oil companies and won settlements.
Several Native American tribes, in little publicized cases, have also won settlements.
The Lufkin, TX lawsuit is the biggest of its kind against the oil industry in history -- is dismissed by most oil companies as "meritless," but the decision of the Jutice Department to become involved has clearly raised the profile of this major case.
Basing their allegations on internal company records secured under subpoena and prior settlements, the plaintiffs assert underpayment by at least seven methods.
Attorneys associated with the case believe a settlement of $2 billion to $5 billion is possible because of penalties and potentially treble damages.
Industry Seeks Quick Fix
Despite these serious assertions of underpayment, the oil and gas industry wants additional support from Congress.
The industry is promoting an initiative (H.R. 3434) to radically change the way the federal government collects royalties by implementing a royalty-in-kind (RIK) system that would allow the producer to give a portion of the oil or gas over to the government for sale in lieu of royalty collection.
H.R. 3334, which was drafted by more than a dozen oil and gas trade associations, would mandate the RIK system even in areas where it would not work, and would shift many costs from the oil industry to the taxpayer.
According to the chief deputy state comptroller of California, the industry proposal appears to be designed to lock in the very practices industry has used in the past to avoid paying full fair market value for production.
Moreover, the Interior Department has concluded that H.R. 3334 would cost the American taxpayer as much as $367 million annually.
The Taxpayers for Common Sense, the States of Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Alaska and California, and the Jicarilla-Apache Tribe all agree it is a bad idea.
Maloney and I have also have introduced legislation, H.R. 3932, to require oil and gas producers to base their royalty payments on either the New York Mercantile Exchange market price or the Alaska North Slope market price to assure that underpayments do not continue and that taxpayers are fairly compensated.
The costs of producing crude oil and natural gas from federal lands are a responsibility of the oil industry, which has both a moral and a legal obligation to pay what it owes rather than cheat the American taxpayer and our schoolchildren.
The federal government provides more tax benefits and other subsidies to the oil industry than virtually any other industry.
Surely, it is not too much to ask the industry profiting from our public resources to pay the royalties based on realistic pricing on the oil and gas they extract from our public lands.
__________________________________________________________________
Return to Resources Democrats Home Page
Return to Miller Home Page
