Main Site Navigation Header Relevant Agencies * Public Safety * EQAC * Park Authority * County Library Today in Fairfax - Calendars, News, and Current Issues on this subject and more! Deer Management in Fairfax County you are here: homepage 
For many, the sight of a deer is exciting.
For others, whose yards, gardens or automobiles have been significantly damaged by deer, the experience is often one of concern and frustration.
The purpose of this site is to provide residents with information about deer, deer overpopulation, and deer management in Fairfax County.
Information about what Fairfax County is doing to address deer population issues, what residents can do, and what resources are available for support and further study has been provided.
* Problems * Policy * Current Activities * Criteria and Methods * Controlling Deer Populations * What Residents can do to help * Preventing Vehicle Collisions * Frequently Asked Questions * County's Pilot Archery Program * Managed Hunts * Deer Management Report (.pdf format, 140kb) * Additional Info * Contacting us
Problems Associated with the Countys Current Deer Population top of page
Odocoileus Virginianus, better known as white-tailed deer, is perhaps the Countys most beautiful and graceful species of wildlife.
Its habitat includes the Countys woodlands and open spaces, and its traditional food source consists of the young branches and tops of trees and small plants, grasses and fruit such as acorns and berries.
Even though much of the County has lost its rural appearance, Fairfax has many more deer now then it did during the early 1900s.
Many experts say this increase in deer population is due to a number of factors including: deers ability to adapt to urban environments, their high reproductive rate, the absence of predators, the restriction of hunting in populated areas, and increased nutrition from ornamental plants and fertilized lawns.
The facts show that the overabundance of deer is aggravating a number of problems that have significant costs for our entire community.
These problems include * Road Safety - During 1998, 4,000 - 5,000 deer-vehicle collisions occurred in the County resulting in serious injury to motorists, the deaths of over a thousand deer, and property damage averaging $1,982 per vehicle.
Two motorists have been killed as a result of collisions with deer and many others have been hurt and hospitalized.
Since the implementation of deer reduction activities in 1998, deer-vehicle collisions have been steadily declining.
* Wildlife Habitat Destruction - By overbrowsing the Countys forests and stream valleys, deer are destroying their natural habitat as well as the habitat of birds, amphibians, and micro-organisms that are necessary to sustain our natural environment.
By destroying native vegetation, deer allow introduced (invasive) species of plants to dominate already devastated habitats in the parks.
If left unchecked, long term damage to the Countys plant and wildlife diversity can be expected.
* Forest Regeneration - A healthy forest in the Piedmont section of Virginia should have an understory of trees and shrubs of diverse ages, sizes, and variety.
An overabundance of deer clears wooded areas of the indigenous plant life essential to our forest ecosystem.
Plants most vulnerable include young oaks, maples, and popular trees among others.
* Ornamental Plant Damage - While deer eat many types of plants that are native to our area, they also appreciate non-native vegetation found in residential areas and parks.
Azaleas, hostas, and daylilies are favorites of deer.
Along with the frustration caused by this type of loss, the cost of this damage can be estimated at over a million dollars a year.
* Deer Health - With intense competition for food and space, deer are more susceptible to weight loss, starvation, parasites, and epizootic hemorrhagic disease.
This was the case in the fall of 1999 when 53 deer succumbed to epizootic hemorrhagic disease (53 were found, many more were not) in the southeastern portion of the County.
Too many deer living too close together reduce the overall health of the Countys deer population.
* Human Disease - An overabundance of deer subjects County residents to a greater risk for Lyme disease.
More deer in more areas of the County increase the chance that deer ticks infected with the disease bacteria will come in contact with people.
While Lyme disease is often easily treatable if caught in time, it can cause serious complications if early symptoms are overlooked.
* Devaluation of Deer - Deer are one of the Countys most treasured natural resources.
In some areas of the County, however, an overabundance of deer has caused residents to view deer as pests.
By implementing an on-going deer management program and reducing the pest aspects of their presence, the County hopes to help all residents enjoy the beauty of deer and live with them safely.
Deer Management Policy and Pilot Initiatives top of page
On December 8, 1997, the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors adopted the Fairfax County Integrated Deer Management Plan to begin addressing problems associated with the overabundance of deer in areas of the County.
In accordance with this plan, County staff conducted a series of pilot programs during 1997 and 1998 in order to test and improve methods for reducing the deer population on public lands.
In 1999, County Executive Robert ONeill, Jr. appointed a committee made up of County citizens and local experts in deer management techniques to evaluate the Countys plan for deer management and to make additional recommendations to the Board of Supervisors and staff.
This Committee endorsed the Countys deer management plan, recommended the continued use of deer reduction techniques, and strongly supported community education activities to help residents better understand the safety and environmental issues associated with deer overabundance
Current Deer Management Activities Underway top of page
The County continues to pursue implementing a range of initiatives to manage the Countys deer population.
These include: * Gathering data from citizens regarding deer sightings and damage from deer * Monitoring trends in herd size * Monitoring the health of selected herds of deer * Roadside reflectors have been installed to help reduce collisions between deer and vehicles * Conducting seminars and workshops on a range of topics related to deer * Using police sharpshooters and managed hunts to reduce the number of deer in areas where an overabundance of deer has effected human safety and environmental health
The locations authorized by the Board of Supervisors for deer reduction include thirteen Fairfax County Park Authority locations (those with asterisk below) and seven Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority locations.
four parks will be monitored to determine the need for future deer reduction activities.
Deer Reduction Locations Monitoring Locations
1.
Difficult Run Stream 2.
Fox Mill* 3.
Riverbend Park* 4.
Bull Run 5.
Huntley Meadows Park* 6.
Upper Potomac 7.
Bull Run/Occoquan Watershed 8.
Meadowlark Gardens 9.
Scotts Run* 10.
Colvin Run Stream Valley* 11.
Lake Fairfax* 12.
Sully* 13.
Ellanor C. Lawrence Park*
Cub Run Stream Valley*
Burke Lake Park*
Lake Accotink*
Wakefield Park*
Occoquan Regional Park
Hemlock Overlook
Pohick Bay
Criteria for Selecting Deer Management Locations and Methods top of page
Areas have been targeted for deer reduction based upon the following criteria: 1.
High incidence of deer/vehicle collisions 2.
Severe damage to the ecology as evidenced by habitat surveys and/or by a visible browsline 3.
Persistent and measurable damage to a community 4.
Poor or deteriorating health of deer due to overpopulation and/or loss of habitat
Methods used to reduce the Countys deer population are selected based upon the following considerations: 1.
Public/participant safety (proximity to residential/commercial areas, considerations of terrain/geography; protection provided to participants) 2.
Effectiveness (ability of a particular technique to produce the desired management goal; ability of a technique to solve an identified problem) 3.
Economy (paid staff/contractor time, ability to use volunteer assistance, physical resources including supplies and capital equipment) 4.
Operational conflicts (seasonal laws, other priorities of agencies/designated personnel that effect timing, opportunity to avoid conflict with people or events) 5.
Ineffectiveness of other solutions
Non-lethal Means for controlling Deer Populations top of page
Immunocontraception is a method for reducing deer herd size by preventing conception.
This method consists of injecting female deer with a protein or hormone released through darts or biobullets.
Currently, two doses must be administered during the first breeding season followed by a booster every year.
At the time of the first dose, deer must be trapped and tagged in order to identify them for follow-up injections.
Because this method requires yearly injections, its practical use at this time is limited to confined herds that can be appropriately controlled and monitored.
In addition, federal approvals (FDA) and licensing must be obtained, and state policy and regulations must be developed before this method can be used non-experimentally on deer that are not confined, such as those found in the County.
The County may consider this method as part of an integrated deer management plan pending the results of further study and modifications, and an indication of cost effectiveness.
Relocating the County's deer population to another area within or out of the County is not an option.
Not only does relocation cause significant stress upon deer, deaths associated with relocation are numerous.
In addition, State regulations prevent the relocating of deer.
What Residents and Community Groups Can Do to Help top of page
An effective, County-wide deer management program requires managing deer on private as well as public property.
For this reason, concerned individuals, community groups, homeowner associations, and businesses are encouraged to consider what they can do to address problems associated with deer overabundance:
* pay attention to deer damage in their neighborhoods and parks * deer proofing their property * sponsor citizen education activities * participate in deer management surveys * report significant problems * encourage others not to feed deer * allow safe and humane hunting activities * keep informed about the problem * volunteer to assist with research and monitoring activities
In order to help reduce lawn and garden damage, residents should consult with local nurseries about plant varieties not favored by deer.
Some of these include:
* Common Boxwoods * Colorado Blue Spruce * Red Osier Dogwoods * Scots Pine * Common lilac * Ornamental grasses * Tarragon and wormwood * Virginia bluebells * Forget-me-not * Carnations * Daffodils * Lily of the valley
Managed Hunts Sponsored by the County top of page
Managed hunts are being conducted by Fairfax County to reduce the white-tailed deer herds in selected parks within the County.
County herds have grown too large for these areas and pose a continuing threat to the habitat through overbrowsing.
Much of the forest understory, essential to many species of birds and other mammals, has been destroyed.
This damage has long-term effects on the forest and bio-diversity.
Managed hunts are part of Fairfax County's integrated deer management plan to address the problems of overbrowsing, disease and public safety, particularly in the interest of reducing deer-vehicle crashes.
Deer-vehicle collisions hit an all time high in 1996 but have steadily decreased since 1998 when deer management activities were implemented.
Hunt Dates: PRESENTLY THERE ARE NO MANAGED HUNTS PLANNED.
Wildlife Biologist, Earl Hodinett is in the process of collecting census data on Fairfax County's deer population to determine if managed hunts are needed.
Hunt Times: All participants are to meet at the site designated in the confirmation letter at 5:30 a.m. for a safety briefing.
Hunting hours will be from one-half hour before sunrise until 1:00 p.m. Hunt Locations: Huntley Meadows Park 3701 Lockheed Blvd Alexandria, VA 22306
Rules: 1.
Hunters will be selected by lottery with the number of hunters selected being based upon the number of acres in a particular hunting block.
The number will be based upon a ratio of one hunter per 20 acres.
2.
All hunters selected in the lottery will be required to successfully qualify with their firearm prior to being eligible for the hunt.
HUNTERS, WHO HAVE PREVIOUSLY QUALIFIED FOR MASON NECK NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE HUNTS or FAIRFAX COUNTY HUNTS may submit that qualification for these hunts, these qualifications are good for three years.
(Qualification must have been with #1 or larger buckshot to be considered valid.)
Hunters needing firearms qualification may qualify during specific operating hours at either the Izaak Walton League on Mount Olive Road in Centreville, Virginia (703) 631-4495, or at the Bull Run Shooting Center on Bull Run Drive in Centreville, Virginia (703) 830-2344.
A range fee may be charged by these shooting ranges.
This fee is determined and retained by each range.
Contact these ranges directly for further information on hours and fees.
3.
Mobility impaired hunters are encouraged to apply.
Special areas have been designated for exclusive use by hunters confined to a wheelchair.
Hunters selected for this category may bring a non-hunting party with them for assistance.
Elevated platforms will be provided for these hunters.
4.
Applicants for the hunts must be at least 18 years old and possess a valid Virginia hunting license and big game license.
In addition, hunters must provide proof that they have successfully completed a hunter safety course.
A LIST OF SCHEDULED HUNTER SAFETY COURSES IS AVAILABLE BY CONTACTING THE VIRGINIA DEPARTMENT OF GAME 
5.
Anterless white-tailed deer are the only animals permitted to be taken during the hunt.
6.
Hunters and aides must wear on their head, chest and back a minimum of 400 square inches of solid blaze orange material while in the hunt area.
7.
Only 20 gauge or larger shotguns will be permitted for the hunt.
Ammunition must be #1 or larger buckshot; slugs are not allowed.
8.
Hunting is only allowed in designed hunt areas which will be indicated on a map provided with the confirmation letters sent to successful applicants.
Hunters are not allowed to go outside these areas which will be marked by signs and/or survey tape.
9.
Hunters must hunt from elevated treestands.
Hunters are responsible for bringing their own portable treestand.
Hunters must also bring a safety harness.
Screw-in steps, large nails or other devices which cause damage to trees will not be permitted.
10.
Two deer may be taken by each hunter.
Hunters will not have to use their own big game tags since these hunts are operated under a special permit.
ONLY ANTERLESS DEER MAY BE TAKEN.
Hunters must make a reasonable attempt to retrieve wounded deer and must report any injured deer that is not recovered or wanders out of the designated hunting area.
11.
All deer harvested must be taken to the park checking station where the deer will be weighed, aged and tagged.
Hunters will be responsible for transporting deer to designated trails or roads for assistance and transportation to the check station.
How to Apply: Hunters may apply as an individual or as a group with up to four other hunters on the same entry.
Group entries are encouraged.
All hunters on a group entry must meet the requirements outlined above.
Each group hunter must provide the required application information on a separate 3-inch by 5-inch card labeled with the word group in the upper right corner.
Hunters applying as a group will be drawn as a group or will fail to be drawn as a group.
Stanby hunters will be drawn separately.
APPLICANTS MUST PROVIDE A COPY OF THEIR HUNTER SAFETY COURSE CERTIFICATION AND THEIR SHOTGUN QUALIFICATION CARD WITH THEIR APPLICATION CARD.
Failure to do so will disqualify the hunter from the lottery.
1.
Using a 3-inch by 5-inch index card, print or type the following information: + Full Name + Address + Telephone Number (including area code) + Date of Birth (Must be 18 years of age) + 2001-2002 Hunting License Number ALL APPLICANTS MUST PROVIDE A COPY OF THEIR HUNTER SAFETY COURSE CERTIFICATION AND THEIR SHOTGUN QUALIFICATION CARD WITH THEIR APPLICATION CARD.
Failure to do so will disqualify the hunter from the lottery.
2.
A NON-REFUNDABLE application of $10.00 must be included by EACH applicant.
This fee should be in the form of a check or money order made payable to FAIRFAX COUNTY.
3.
Mail to: Division of Animal Control 4500 West Ox Road Fairfax, VA 22030 Attention: Managed Hunts 4.
Applications will be accepted until the close of business on December 13, 2002.
5.
Only successful applicants will be notified 6.
Only one entry per hunter will be allowed.
Duplicate names and addresses will be disqualified.
For information about the managed deer hunts, call (703) 449-7393.
Additional Resources for Information and Animal Control Assistance top of page
Fairfax County Park Authority 12055 Government Center Parkway Fairfax, Virginia 22035 (703) 324-8700 Northern Virginia Regional Park Authority 5400 Ox Road Fairfax, Virginia 22039 (703) 352-5900 Fairfax County Library Animal Control dispatch center - (703) 830-3310 County Executive Office, for general questions or concerns about deer management - (703) 324-2531
Top of Page Search Entire Site ______________________ submit advanced search and site map Footer Site Menu
Web Privacy Policy ©Copyright 2003, Fairfax County, Virginia Last Modified: Wednesday, October 29, 2003
