Senate Armed Services Committee Approves Durbin/Levin Measure to Stop Resale of Armor Piercing Bullets to Civilians May 10, 2000 [brblgrv.gif] WASHINGTON Sens. Carl Levin, D-Mich., and Dick Durbin, D-Ill., today hailed Senate Armed Services Committee approval of an amendment which would outlaw the resale of military surplus armor piercing ammunition, including .50 caliber ammunition, to civilians.
The Senators argued that this extremely lethal ammunition, which is powerful enough to pierce an armored tank or helicopter, has no legitimate civilian use.
Included in the Senate Armed Services Committee Authorization Bill for FY 2001, the amendment requires the Department of Defense to ensure that military surplus armor-piercing ammunition is not sold or transferred to anyone except foreign militaries or law enforcement or other government agencies.
The amendment is similar in text to Senate bill S.1532, authored by Durbin, which the Senators introduced in August, 1999.
Last year, Congress approved legislation which instituted a one-year restriction on the civilian sale of military surplus armor piercing ammunition; the amendment approved by the Committee this week would put that temporary restriction into permanent law.
Before the one-year restriction was enacted, under the Conventional Demilitarization Program, a contractor working with the Department of Defense was paid $1 per ton to take possession of its excess armor-piercing ammunition, which it was free to refurbish and resell to the general public.
"The Department of Defense should not be a party to making this extraordinarily destructive ammunition available to the general public," said Levin, the senior Democrat on the Armed Services Committee.
"Once available on the market, this extremely powerful ammunition is subject to virtually no restriction, making it easier for someone to purchase armor piercing ammunition capable of piercing a tank, than it is to buy a handgun.
These loose restrictions make armor piercing ammunition highly popular among terrorists, drug traffickers and violent criminals.
We need to curtail public access to this ammunition, which has no place on our streets."
"People may not know that .50 caliber rifles and ammunition can rip through bullet-proof glass, armor-plated limousines, tanks, helicopters or aircraft from more than a mile away with deadly accuracy," said Durbin, who serves on the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense.
Durbin continued, "These weapons and ammunition are an appropriate and necessary weapon for the U.S. armed forces and some important law enforcement uses, but otherwise, they are useful only for assassins, terrorists, drug cartels and doomsday cults.
In fact, since 1992, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms has initiated 28 gun traces involving .50 caliber semiautomatic rifles.
It is no coincidence that many of these traces led to terrorists, outlaw motorcycle gangs, international and domestic drug traffickers and violent criminals."
An investigation by the General Accounting Office (GAO) found that armor piercing .50 caliber ammunition is "among the most destructive and powerful ammunition available in the United States," and the "widespread availability" of the bullets "poses a threat to public safety."
In the year ending in March, 1999, more than 113,000 rounds of armor piercing .50 caliber ammunition were sold in the United States.
The bill to prohibit the resale of military surplus armor piercing ammunition was supported by the Police Foundation, the International Association of Chiefs of Police, the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association and the International Brotherhood of Police Officers.
-30-
