Horn icon.
This link bypasses navigation taking you directly to the contents of this page.
Inquiry Question
Historical Context
Map
Readings
Images
Activities
Table of Contents
Run for Your Lives! The Johnstown Flood of 1889-- Supplementary Resources
By looking at Run for Your Lives! The Johnstown Flood of 1889, students determine how environmental management, technology, and the actions of 19th-century industrialists contributed to a disaster in Pennsylvania that shocked the nation.
Those interested in learning more will find that the Internet offers a variety of interesting materials.
Johnstown Flood National Memorial Visit the Johnstown Flood National Memorial Web pages to learn more about the park or the story of the flood.
Included on the site are details about the dam, eye witness accounts of the disaster, information on other U.S. disasters, and much more.
History of the Johnstown Flood The History of the Johnstown Flood is a book published in 1889 detailing the calamity.
This site, sponsored by the Railfan Network, provides portions of the book in their on-line virtual library collection.
The Johnstown Flood Museum The Johnstown Flood Museum Web pages offers extensive photographs and a detailed history of the incident.
Flood City: Johnstown, Pennsylvania ThinkQuest Junior sponsors a Web page on Johnstown that details its three floods, Cambria Iron Works, the incline plane, and Grandview Cemetery.
Johnstown Historic Information The Johnstown Pennsylvania Information Source Online [http://www.johnstownpa.com/history.html] offers a great compilation of writings on different aspects of Johnstown history.
Included is information about how the town came into existance, its railroad age, the flood, news on the flood from different sources, and much more.
The Johnstown Inclined Plane For a brief history and photographs of the railway, visit the Johnstown Inclined Plane Web page [http://www.inclinedplane.com/].
U.S. Geological Survey The U.S. Geological Survey provides a Web page detailing significant floods in the United States during the 20th Century.
Included on the site is information on details such as flood measurements, why floods occur, which areas are most likely to flood, flood facts, and more.
For Further Reading Students and educators wishing to learn more about the Johnstown Flood may want to read the following: David G. McCullogh, The Johnstown Flood (1968); Richard O'Connor, Johnstown: The Day the Dam Broke (1957).
Back to the Beginning
Comments or Questions Privacy 
