[crhdr107-2nd.jpg] Senate Floor Speech Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison April 30, 2002 -- Page: S3530 ANDEAN TRADE PREFERENCE ACT MRS. HUTCHISON.
Mr. President, I rise to talk about the trade promotion authority legislation that is before the Senate.
America has the most productive, creative workforce in the world.
Our industries are diverse.
Our products are second to none.
Now we must expand our reach to bring more of these goods and services to the global marketplace by passing trade promotion authority legislation.
Trade promotion authority had been used since President Ford's administration to implement trade agreements until it lapsed in 1994.
The President has not had this trade promotion authority since 1994.
If America is going to increase trade opportunities around the world, Congress needs to pass this legislation so the President has the ability to negotiate trade agreements with the knowledge that, while Congress retains its right to approve or reject a treaty, it will not try to amend or delay it.
Without this legislation, foreign governments may not be willing to sit at the negotiation table with the United States, knowing that they may put all of this time into a negotiation that would then be delayed or changed by Congress.
Ninety-six percent of the world's consumers live outside of the United States, representing a vast potential market for American exports.
Unfortunately, other countries are moving forward in promoting trade while we are standing on the sidelines.
While we delay, other countries are entering into agreements that exclude us.
Our competitors in Europe, Asia, and Latin America have sealed more than 130 free trade compacts.
Yet we are party to only three--Jordan, Israel, and NAFTA with Mexico and Canada.
Again, there are 130 free trade agreements in the world and the United States is a party to only 3 of those.
A lack of free trade agreements puts American exporters at a significant disadvantage.
For example, a $180,000 tractor made in America and shipped to Chile incurs about $15,000 in tariffs and duties upon arrival.
That same tractor would face only $3,700 in tariffs if it were made in Brazil, and there would be none if it were made in Canada.
American businesses, farmers, and ranchers are the best, but they should not have to compete with this kind of disparity.
Our inability to negotiate agreements with foreign countries is hurting U.S. industry and limiting economic growth.
The TPA offers the United States a chance to reclaim momentum in the global economy by adding foreign markets and expanding our opportunity for American producers and workers.
For 60 years, Presidents and members of both parties in Congress have worked together to open markets around the world.
Now, as we launch the next round of global trade negotiations, close cooperation is critical.
In Texas, we have experienced the benefits of free trade as a result of NAFTA.
Since the agreement was implemented in January 1994, Texas exports have grown much faster than the overall U.S. exports of goods.
Texas merchandise exports in 2000 went to more than 200 foreign markets, totaling $69 billion--an increase of more than 22 percent since 1997.
On the agricultural front, Texas ranks third among the 50 States in exports, with an estimated $3.3 billion in sales in foreign markets in 2000.
We are leading exporters of beef, poultry, feed grain, and wheat.
NAFTA has helped us secure the No. 1 cotton exporting State status.
Since the agreement took effect, we have increased cotton exports to Mexico from 558,000 bales to 1.5 million bales in 2000.
Some people fear that trade will hurt the United States because they believe we will end up lowering barriers more than our trading partners.
This is a legitimate question, but the fact is that the United States is already generally very low in barriers compared to our trading partners.
For example, the average U.S. tariff on machinery imports is 1.2 percent, while foreign tariffs on U.S.-made machinery in countries such as Indonesia, India, Argentina, and Brazil are 30 times higher.
By negotiating trade agreements, such as Free Trade Area of the Americas, the benefits we will receive by lowering those high barriers to our goods and services far outweigh the effect of lowering our very small tariffs.
Another fear is the extent to which lowering barriers to the U.S. market will cause job losses as companies move manufacturing overseas.
This could happen, but we do have superior quality and work ethic--that is undeniable.
Beyond that, however, we must consider the extent to which we are already losing jobs to overseas plants because of the high barriers to our goods.
Some countries try to attract manufacturing jobs by raising barriers to imports.
This forces companies that would otherwise have production facilities in the United States and then export their products to build plants in these foreign countries so they get around the tariffs.
For example, Mars, Inc., the candy and pet food manufacturer, has their largest production facility in Waco, TX.
They and other U.S. confectionary makers face an average of 25 percent in tariffs on confectionary candy exports and candy products to the European Union, and they have a 55-percent tariff on these goods to India.
But the United States has virtually no tariffs on confectionary products.
The employees of domestic candy makers would be much more secure if the President were able to negotiate a trade agreement that lowered these barriers overseas so they were not penalized for having U.S.-based manufacturing.
In addition to trade promotion authority, we will be debating related trade bills over the next few weeks.
The Andean Trade Preference Act, which is the base bill we are debating today, seeks to help our counternarcotics efforts by providing people of the Andean region--South America--with economic opportunity other than drug trade.
This bill can help U.S. develop overseas markets.
If the beneficiary countries are able to use their exports to the United States to develop a healthier economy, it will create market opportunities for U.S. exporters.
The Andean Trade Preference Act has been successful in this respect.
Since it went into effect in 1991, the four Andean countries have experienced $3 billion in new output and $1.7 billion in new exports.
This has led to the creation of 140,000 legitimate jobs in this region, providing employment alternatives to people who might otherwise get involved in the drug trade.
Similarly, by extending the General System of Preferences, which provides duty-free status to certain items from developing countries, we can help to develop healthier economies that will inevitably demand U.S. products.
The other bill we are addressing during this debate is Trade Adjustment Assistance.
This is a good program that would help those who lose their jobs because of trade.
But we must also make sure this is not a program that is going to be so expensive and a program that discriminates among certain unemployed workers versus other unemployed workers versus employed workers.
I think we might be taking a big chance with that part of the bill--not being as fully vetted and researched as the two parts that are trade promotion and Andean preference.
These are two trade promotion acts that will have direct benefits to the workers and the people of America.
It will also help the consumers of America get the lowest prices for goods that are imported without those artificial barriers.
So in this time of increased tension in many parts of the world, American leadership on trade is more important than ever.
Giving President Bush a strong hand to negotiate, helping other countries to use the benefits of trade to develop legitimate businesses and economic growth are what we are addressing in the Senate with this trade package.
Passing this legislation will ensure the continued growth of our economy and make sure that we are exporting our greatest ideals to the world--freedom, free enterprise, and democracy.
We must give the President this trade promotion authority so we will not be left behind.
If America is only a party to 3 trade out of 130, you know that other relationships are forming that keep America out.
