Probation Home Page InfoLink Index Table of Contents Cadets Witness Civil War Battle By Susan Greer "...but one of them would make war rather than let the nation survive, and the other would accept war rather than let it perish, and the war came."
- Abraham Lincoln, second inaugural address, March 4, 1865.
And 140 years later, the reenactment came to Fresno.
The September 17, 1862 Battle of Antietam was recently staged at Fresno's Kearney Park and several of the Elkhorn Boot Camp's cadets were invited to volunteer a "setup-cleanup detail" for the event.
Two of the cadets spoke of their experience.
Robert S., age 17, said that he really enjoyed the opportunity to watch the dawn to 5 p.m. Civil War battle being re-staged.
"More soldiers were killed in that battle than in all other wars of our country," he said.
Over 23,000 were killed, wounded or missing on that September day.
Robert confessed that he had not been particularly interested in history prior to the event.
It aroused his interest and he obtained two books from the library on the civil war and its impact on history.
"President Lincoln freed the slaves because of that battle," he shared.
Nicholas P., age 18, reported that he was shocked that the two sides lined up and marched at each other, rather than hiding and attacking from a protected area.
"It was not like the fighting style today."
He learned that the soldiers boots had wooden soles with horseshoe heels to make them last longer - the average life span of a pair of boots was 99 to 101 days.
Both cadets remarked about the uniforms of wool rather than cotton.
"It kept the soldiers warmer, even when it was wet.
It was better than cotton," they said.
The cadets learned that the saying, "bite the bullet" came from the Civil War because of the type of ammunition that was used.
It was done in two stages.
The soldier would put the bag containing the cap and gunpowder in his teeth to open it, then pour it into the barrel of his musket - thus the saying - bite the bullet! They said the soldier could shoot only two bullets per minute and their muskets weighed ten pounds each.
TAC Officer Adam Balto, one of the supervisors of the cadets on the work/learn outing, observed the extensive historical exposure the cadets gained.
"It was amazing to see the actors staying in character throughout the weekend event - which incidentally, is the country's largest staging of the battle.
We cleaned up lots and lots of trash - and after the horses of the equine brigade," he stated.
"It was a tremendous learning experience for our young cadets," he stated proudly.
A total of 48 Elkhorn Correctional Facility cadets participated in the community service activity.
Cadets were involved in the setup, as well as clean up - both during and after the reenactment, all the while gaining a new perspective of our nation's history.
[page_19.jpg] [page_110.jpg]
[page_111.jpg] [page_112.jpg]
[LINK]-[USEMAP:button-back.gif]
