The U.S. Consulate General, Mumbai, India
U.S. Embassy NEW DELHI Consulates CHENNAI o CALCUTTA Contact Us o Privacy Notice
Home Page AIRC Profile Hours of operation Holidays Enrollment Individual Institutional Services Reference Services Online searches Mail Loan Book Loan Photocopying Internet Access Security Collections OPAC Periodicals CD-ROM Online databases Video Cassettes Publications Article Alert Book Alert SPAN Electronic Journal Research 
Religious Freedom Human Rights Practices Narcotics Control Strategy Military Expenditures Battling International Bribery Commercial Guides
Book Alert April/May 2003 International Affairs
Axelrod, Alan America's Wars Alan Axelrod J. Wiley, ©2002.
550 p. 355 AXE Most Americans believe that they can count on two hands the number of wars their country has witnessed.
But historians know differently.
The author of more than 50 books, Axelrod has written a comprehensive guide to the wars that took place in North America or involved the United States.
Beginning with colonial wars fought before 1754 and ending with the Kosovo crisis of three years ago, the author presents a summary of each conflict.
The American Revolution, Civil War, and World War II merit the longest entries, with sidebars featuring portions of letters, diaries, and orders written by soldiers.
ISBN 0471327972: $40.00 ND (Adapted from Library Journal, ©2002) Combating Transnational Crime: Concepts, Activities, and Responses edited by Phil Williams, Dimitri Vlassis Frank Cass, 2001.
390 p. 364.1 COM Twenty contributions from international academics and crime-prevention professionals discuss transnational organized crime.
Topics include, for example, globalization and transnational crime, organized crime and ethnic minorities, crime in cyberspace, trafficking and sexual exploitation of women and children, money laundering in Italy, and drafting the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
The papers were first delivered at a conference organized by the International Scientific and Professional Advisory Council to the UN, held in Courmayer, Italy in 1998.
ISBN 0714651567: $62.50; ISBN 071468175X (pbk.) ND (Adapted from Book News, Inc., ©2001) Druks, Herbert The Uncertain Alliance: The U.S. and Israel from Kennedy to the Peace Process Herbert Druks Greenwood Press, 2001.
294 p. 327.7305694 DRU In the follow-up to his previous work, Druks details the diplomatic relationship between the United States and Israel over the past three decades.
Druks is often deeply critical of U.S. policy towards Israel, correctly recognizing that Israel is only one interest in the scheme of wider U.S. geopolitical goals.
However, he is rarely critical of any action of the Israeli state, arguing that the United States has often catered to the interests of Arab terrorists at the risk of Israeli destruction.
He further claims that Israel has done been willing to "pay any price and bear any burden" in order to gain peace, but seems to view peace as impossible because of the very nature of the Arab states.
An example of the skewed nature of his treatment is his description of the second Intifada in which he attributes the entirety of the violence in Israeli/Palestinian relations to Palestinian "terrorists."
ISBN 0313314241: $73.95 M/ND (Adapted from Book News Inc., ©2001) Economist With a Public Purpose: Essays in Honour of John Kenneth Galbraith edited by Michael Keane Routledge, 2001.
274 p. 330 GAL In this work, Galbraith's arguments are discussed by a group of economists in regards to current controversies and problems.
Topics covered range from globalization and the role of the state to redistributive economic policies.
The result is a collection that pays tribute to one of the most prominent, and yet still contemporarily relevant, economists of the 20th century.
ISBN 0415212928: $100.00 ND Eisendrath, Craig R.
The Phantom Defense: America's Pursuit of the Star Wars Illusion Craig Eisendrath, Melvin A. Goodman and Gerald E. Marsh Praeger, ©2001.
190 p. 358.174 EIS The authors present a sound indictment of the missile defense plans of the Bush administration.
The thesis of this compressed, not overly technical book is that effective defense against incoming ballistic missiles is impossible given the current state of technology.
Countermeasures (camouflaging the real warhead, decoys) against a defensive system can be devised by an attacking state at low cost, so the defensive system cannot reliably distinguish real from sham targets.
The authors see no point in pouring $100 billion or more into a system so fraught with technical difficulty and so vulnerable to unsophisticated countermeasures.
If national missile defense is the "phantom" of the book's title, then why has it been pursued so intensively by the right wing of American politics? For the authors, the answer lies in the alliance of defense contractors, who have benefited from the enormous sums spent on Star Wars initiatives since the Reagan years, with politicians on the right, who batten on campaign contributions from those contractors.
The authors trace how pressure to portray missile defense as feasible has led to exaggeration of threats, rigged tests and suppression of inconvenient data.
SBN 027597183X: $24.95 C/ND (Adapted from Publisher's Weekly, ©2002) Fredriksen, John C. America's Military Adversaries: From Colonial Times to the Present by John C. Fredriksen ABC-CLIO, ©2001.
621 p. REF 355 FRE This book chronicles the lives and dubious accomplishments of over 200 leading and lesser-known enemies - men and women who fought, plotted, spied on, and in some instances defeated U.S. forces.
Present are Indian warriors, German and Japanese fighter pilots, Confederate bushwhackers, Spanish admirals, and a host of femmes fatales.
These biographies guide readers through numerous frontier wars, colonial conflicts, the American Revolution, the War of 1812, the Mexican and Civil wars, and the Philippine and Boxer insurrections, along with the major wars of the twentieth century.
This work is well-illustrated, with quick-reference research aids arranged by occupation and conflict.
ISBN 1576076032: $85.00; ISBN 1576076040 (For use only in the AIRC) ND Graham, Thomas Disarmament Sketches: Three Decades of Arms Control and International Law Thomas Graham, Jr.
University of Washington Press, ©2002.
362 p. 327.174 GRA Thomas Graham Jr. played a role in the negotiation of every major international arms control and non-proliferation agreement signed by the United States during the past thirty years.
As a U.S. government lawyer and diplomat, he helped to shape, negotiate, and secure U.S. ratification of such cornerstones of international security as SALT, START, and the ABM, INF, and CFE treaties as well as conventions prohibiting biological and chemical weapons.
Graham's memoir offers a history of the key negotiations, which have substantially reduced the threat of nuclear war.
He recounts his bureaucratic battles over arms control in six administrations, navigating between the White House, Congress, cabinet secretaries, and agencies with overlapping responsibilities and often competing interests.
It offers abundant primary source material for historians, international lawyers, and arms control specialists.
Disarmament Sketches also charts the rise and fall of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the only U.S. government agency with primary responsibility for arms control policy, and lays out an agenda for continuing progress in reducing weapons stockpiles around the globe.
ISBN 0295982128: $35.00 ND Jacquard, Roland In the Name of Osama bin Laden: Global Terrorism 
293 p. 958.1046 BIN International terrorism expert Roland Jacquard presents a dramatic portrait of the world's most wanted terrorist and his extensive brotherhood - the network of people who operate "in his name."
Published originally in France the very week of September 11, as events in the United States shook the world, the book has become an international bestseller.
Jacquard details how bin Laden became an international emblem of fundamentalist, pan-Islamic, anti-U.S. fervor and the leader of a brotherhood so passionate that devotees who have never met him will act autonomously in his name.
The author explains the global character of bin Laden's organization, elaborating the extent of his sphere of influence in Europe and Asia.
Jacquard reveals the construction of bin Laden's networks - including a profile of his inner circle - and their collaboration with overlapping webs of banking, drug trafficking, religious, and terrorist organizations.
He considers the brotherhood's access to biological, chemical, and nuclear weapons and warns that, with or without bin Laden, this global terrorist force will remain a threat.
Now in English, this edition has been substantially updated in light of recent world events and expanded to include previously unpublished materials, featuring a new introduction and afterward.
New documents include an April 2001 interview by the author with bin Laden; a September 24 proclamation by bin Laden to Muslims in Pakistan; and a key page from Dr. Ayman al-Zawahiri's book justifying eternal jihad, which was smuggled out of Afghanistan in October 2001.
ISBN 0822329913 (pbk.): $18.95; ISBN 0822329778 M/ND Realizing Human Rights: Moving from Inspiration to Impact Samantha Power and Graham Allison, editors St. Martin's Press, 2000.
370 p. 341.481 REA This book brings together leading activists, policy-makers and critics to reflect upon fifty years of attempts to improve respect for human rights.
Authors include President Jimmy Carter, who helped inject human rights concerns into U.S. policy; Wei Jingsheng, who struggled to do so in China; Louis Henkin, the modern father of international law, and Richard Goldstone, the former chief prosecutor for the Yugoslav and Rwandan war crimes tribunals.
A half-century since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the time is right to assess how policies and actions effect the realization of human rights and to point to new directions and challenges that lie ahead.
Provides valuable insights for those interested in human rights concerns.
ISBN 0312234945: $35.00 CH/M Saideman, Stephen M.
The Ties that Divide: Ethnic Politics, Foreign Policy, and International Conflict Stephen M. Saideman Columbia University Press, ©2001.
276 p. 327 SAI Ethnic conflicts have created crises within NATO and between NATO and Russia, produced massive flows of refugees, destabilized neighboring countries, and increased the risk of nuclear war between Pakistan and India.
Interventions have cost the United States, the United Nations, and other actors billions of dollars.
While scholars and policymakers have devoted considerable attention to this issue, the question of why states take sides in other countries ethnic conflicts has largely been ignored.
Most attention has been directed at debating the value of particular techniques to manage ethnic conflict, including partition, prevention, mediation, intervention, and the like.
However, as the Kosovo dispute demonstrated, one of the biggest obstacles to resolving ethnic conflicts is getting the outside actors to cooperate.
This book addresses this question.
Saideman argues that domestic political competition compels countries to support the side of an ethnic conflict with which constituents share ethnicities.
He applies this argument to the Congo Crisis, the Nigerian Civil War, and Yugoslavia´s civil wars.
He then applies quantitative analyses to ethnic conflicts in the 1990s.
Finally, he discusses recent events in Kosovo and whether the findings of these case studies apply more broadly.
ISBN 0231122284: $51.50; ISBN 0231122292 (pbk.)
C __________________________________________________________________
Book Alert Page Next: Law
Top
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
