February 16, 2000 Q. Representative Petri, we have a lot to discuss, but let's go to George Washington's birthday first, since it's coming up so soon.
You've cosponsored legislation regarding the official holiday, and perhaps you could discuss it.
The issue here is pretty simple.
George Washington's birthday has been a federal holiday since February 22nd, 1879.
Beginning with the Monday holiday law passed in 1968, which guaranteed a three-day holiday, the observance of George Washington's birthday was switched to the third Monday in February.
This year, the holiday falls on Monday, February 21st.
Now, moving the holiday in order to create a three day weekend has robbed it of some of its meaning by putting an emphasis on leisure and shopping.
Further, in 1971, due to the closeness of the Washington and Lincoln birthdays, then-President Nixon issued a proclamation declaring the holiday that year to be "Presidents Day."
No action by any subsequent president or congress changed the federal law, which still declares the holiday to be Washington's Birthday.
But, somehow, the term "Presidents Day" has lingered on.
In response, I am supporting legislation to help restore Washington's Birthday to its rightful place by requiring the federal government its entities and agencies to refer to the holiday by its proper legal name Washington's Birthday.
Now, I don't mean this as any disrespect to President Lincoln, or to any other President.
But, rather than have a diluted "Presidents Day," I think we should take the opportunity to remind every American citizen that George Washington was the indispensable leader most responsible for the establishment of the United States.
He led the Continental Army and held it together over the seven years of the Revolutionary War.
He could have tried to become a Napoleon or a military dictator, but instead he resigned his commission at the end of the war and returned to private life.
He served as President of the Constitutional Convention.
After two successful terms as President, he retired once more, voluntarily surrendering the powers of office.
George Washington earned the loyalty, trust, respect and devotion of his fellow countrymen, and he still deserves to be remembered today.
Q.
Now, on February 15th Wisconsin's Hmong community held a rally outside your Fond du Lac office.
Could you comment on it?
The Hmong and other Laotian refugees in Wisconsin and elsewhere are absolutely right to be concerned about reports of human rights abuses, war crimes and ethnic cleansing being carried out in Laos today by that country's communist government, with the assistance of the Vietnamese regime in Hanoi.
The Vietnam War and the Cold War may be over, but we have to recognize that the brutal history of the communist experiment continues in some of the world's most poverty-stricken and oppressed backwaters.
The Hmong people of Wisconsin and elsewhere have a just cause, and I intend to help them however I can.
Q. Representative Petri, on February 10th, by a vote of 268 to 158, the House voted to reduce the so-called "marriage tax," or "marriage penalty," by approving a 10-year, $182 billion income tax cut for married couples.
First of all, what, exactly, is the marriage tax?
Currently, 21 million families with two working spouses find that they have to pay an average of $1,400 extra in taxes simply because couples have gotten married instead of just living together.
In Wisconsin, close to 550,000 couples pay extra taxes because of marriage.
And in the 6th Congressional District, about 62,500 couples have to pay extra.
A substantial majority in the House has decided that this doesn't make any sense that we ought to support marriage rather than punish it.
So, we've decided to do something about it.
Q. Okay, so, what are the details?
First: Currently, every unmarried non-itemizing taxpayer gets to start his or her income tax form by taking the standard deduction.
But when two such individuals get married, they find that the standard deduction for two married people is only 84% of that enjoyed by two singles.
The House's plan would immediately raise the couple's deduction to 100% of that received by two singles.
And, as with the standard deduction, income tax rates are currently unfair to married couples.
For example, two individuals each of whom is taxed at 15%, often find that after they get married, some of their joint income has become taxable at the 28% rate.
Sound unfair? The majority in the House thinks so too, which is why our plan would phase in a fairer rate.
So, once again, marriage is the bedrock of society, and it should be obvious that we should eliminate tax laws which punish couples for making this basic moral and legal commitment to each other and to the families that they will raise.
Q.
Now, 48 Democrats joined with every Republican in favor of reform, but 158 voted against it.
What were some of the arguments against the proposal?
The first argument against the bill was that it's just a tax cut for the rich.
As a percentage of taxes actually paid, however, our bill is designed to provide the most relief for those with middle-class incomes.
Another objection was that our plan would provide "marriage bonuses" for some families which, having only one wage earner, do not currently pay a marriage tax penalty.
But, in today's America, the vast majority of one-earner families are in that position because one parent has sacrificed additional income in order to take care of children.
A study by the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office has concluded that marriage bonuses would occur most often among married couples with incomes less than $20,000.
I think Congress should be proud to aid these stay-at-home moms and their families.
Another charge is that our tax cut will threaten Social Security.
Now, these days that argument is made against every conceivable tax cut, despite our current budget surpluses.
But, in fact, even with limited tax cuts, we are reserving for Social Security beneficiaries every single penny currently coming into the Social Security system.
Also, we are on track toward paying off the entire federal public debt over 15 years.
So, we can afford appropriate tax cuts.
Q.
Well, speaking of Social Security, the House is scheduled to vote in March to repeal the Social Security Earnings Limit.
Could you discuss this?
Retirement should be a choice, an option.
We shouldn't push people into retirement if they want or need to continue working.
But Social Security recipients aged 65 through 69 lose $1 of the benefits they have earned for every $3 they make in wages above the so-called earnings limit.
In other words, for every $3 you make above $17,000, you lose $1.
And that's on top of having to pay Social Security and income taxes.
You end up with a ridiculously high tax rate.
Now, I think people who have paid into Social Security for 30,40, or 50 years deserve their full benefits, even if they want or need to continue working.
But today, the Social Security earnings limit penalizes 800,000 seniors in the workforce by taking part or all of their Social Security benefits.
In March the House is scheduled to respond by voting to repeal the earnings limit.
The American Association of Retired People supports this initiative, the Senate is likely to go along, and after some initial resistance, President Clinton just recently announced that he will sign our bill when it gets to his desk.
So, this is all good news for seniors, and for those who hope to become seniors someday.
[Squealing pig sounds] That means it's time for your Porker Award, Representative Petri.
What do you have this week?
More "Big Dig" money down the rat hole.
Back in the early 1980s I protested when the late House Speaker, Thomas P. ("Tip") O'Neill, used his political muscle to get a gold plated highway and tunnel project approved for his Boston, Massachusetts district.
I charged that the project, informally known as the "Big Dig," would be fabulously expensive, and would suck away tremendous amounts of money needed for highway projects located in every one of the 50 states.
Now underway, Boston's Central Artery/Tunnel Project is, as the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority notes, the largest, most complex and technologically challenging highway project ever attempted in American history.
The project has gone through a series of scandals and budget adjustments.
Most recently, earlier this month, the Chairman of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority revealed that the latest cost overruns have raised the price of the Big Dig by $1.4 billion, boosting it to a current estimated cost of $12.2 billion.
In real dollar terms, this makes the Big Dig more costly than the building of the Panama Canal and the Alaska Pipeline.
Happily, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is helping to pay the cost of the Big Dig, but I have to believe that if Congress had looked at the real cost of the project, Boston would have been told instead to restore its current bridges over the Boston Harbor at less than 1/10th of the cost.
So, for choosing the most expensive option for getting cars across the Boston Harbor, the Congress of the early 1980s is the proud winner of my latest coveted Porker Award
.
Blueline Return to: Radio Show Page | Rep. Petri's Home Page
