Testimony of Daniel Callahan Hearing on Human Cloning of the Subcommittee on Crime Committee of the Judiciary June 7, 2001 I am Daniel Callahan, Director of the International Program of The Hastings Center, Garrison, N.Y., a research center devoted to biomedical and environmental ethics.
I pleased to take part in this hearing.
It focuses on a topic of great important for the human future and the proper use of scientific research as it moves toward that future.
Research on human cloning would chart not only a new direction for biomedical research but also, in its implications, a new direction for the procreation of human life.
I oppose such research, for reasons I will shortly present, but the main purpose of my testimony will be to discuss proposals to ban such research, at both the federal and the private levels.
I want to combine the topics of the ethics of human cloning and the ethics of controlling the research for one simple reason: if research on human cloning is a bad direction in which to go, what can be done about that? What is the appropriate connection, with the issue of human cloning, between ethics and the law? The connection is particularly important in this instance because, so far as I can determine, the federal government has never before tried to use the police power of the state to ban a particular line of biomedical research.
While there have been a variety of moral objections voiced against human cloning, the one that has most persuaded me is the two-fold argument that: (a) children have a right to their own genetic identity, an identify which, if not interfered with, will be unlike any other person's identify; and that (b) parents ought not to manufacture children to their specifications or to serve their needs, even understandable needs.
Our moral and political tradition has always understood each of us to be individuals in our own right, to be accorded respect precisely because of our unique individuality.
Human cloning would jeopardize that identity.
It is true, as many scientists have noted, that a cloned human being would not, even genetically, be exactly like the person from whom he or she was cloned.
It is also true that the different environmental and social context of the clone would lead to a person with many different traits and even personality.
But twin studies have suggested that at least 50% of their personal traits are similar; and the simple fact that we would have the same appearance as the source of the clone is not something to be lightly dismissed.
Common sense, moreover, suggests that there would be no point in cloning a person unless that person shared many of the traits of the genetic originator.
The fact that genetically identical twins occur in nature does not, by itself, prove that it is acceptable to manufacture them.
The very first question to be asked about human cloning is whether it would benefit the clone.
That question is, surprisingly, hardly addressed at all by those favorable to cloning.
The best that can be said is that some cloned children might not be alive at all but for the fact that its parents would or could only procreate in a way that would produce a clone.
By far the greater emphasis of proponents has been a claim that the idea of reproductive rights can extend to cloning a child, and that once such a right is recognized--satisfying the desires of the parent--then there is little more of moral interest to be said.
There is, in short, little apparent concern for what was not long ago called "responsible parenthood."
That important concept has been pushed aside by the seemingly unlimited notion of reproductive rights, not only the right to have or not have a child, but to have a child with the traits, any traits, of one's own choosing and procreated in any manner.
Yet responsible parenthood is still an important concept, one that needs to be reinvigorated.
To be sure, people have always had children to satisfy their own needs and interests: to carry on family lines, to care for them in old age, to provide helpers on the farm, to provide parents with the pleasure of having and raising children.
But there has always been a powerful, and parallel, tradition that children are demeaned in their meaning and personhood if they are not loved and respected and reared for their own good and not that of the parents.
There is surely something of a paradox here in observing why people have children--for their own sake and that of the child at one and the same time--but the final desired outcome had been less mixed in its ideals.
That outcome is simply that the child must grow into an adult who is his or her own person, shaped by, educated by, cherished by his or her parents, but not made in the image of, or according to the plan of, the parents.
Jokes are often made about pushy parents, and sometimes children thank parents for moving them in one direction rather than another; but for children who have been forced to live up to some predetermined parental notion of what the child must be or do there can be, and often has been, great tragedy.
To say each of us ought, in the end, to be our own person is to say it all.
That cloning does not deprive someone entirely of his identity is beside the point.
It badly compromises it, and that is grounds enough for condemnation.
There is, however, a long-standing and important difference between ethics and law.
The former is meant to shape our individual virtues and principles, and to provide a foundation for making distinctions between right and wrong, good and bad.
The latter may and often does embody our ethical values, but its purpose is primarily to establish those rules and prohibitions necessary for a society to function well, in reasonable peace and harmony.
Not every ethical principle or belief is appropriate for law, and not every law embodies moral principles (though law should never be incompatible with them).
So, even if we can come to some agreement that research on human cloning is wrong-headed, and morally wrong, does that mean that we should ban it? We could, after all, leave matters as they now stand, with a prohibition against federal grants to support such research, with most professional and public opinion hostile to it, and with little apparent interest in the private sector, which apparently sees no great profit in it.
Would not that be enough to stop it from ever happening?
Probably not.
Not only is there a minority body of scientific and lay opinion that human cloning is worth pursuit, but also some well-publicized instances of individuals and groups who have told us they will do the research necessary to produce a clone.
They should be taken seriously.
If they succeed, or others who come later do, then those of us--and our children and our children's children--will have to live with the result: a radical change in the procreation of children, a change that offers a minor promise of some therapeutic benefit and a major promise of social harm.
But, even so, is that a good enough reason to enact a federal ban? A ban would be a most drastic response, unprecedented at the level of the combined basic and applied research that would be needed to create a human clone.
That should be enough to give pause to anyone who appreciates the great contribution that a free science can make to our health and welfare.
It is easy to imagine many scientists, legislators, and lay people agreeing that research on cloning to be morally wrong, like with most harmful consequences--and yet fearing the precedent for research restrictions that could be even worse in its consequences.
Moreover, is not the dilemma made all the worse when it is proposed, as is the case with one bill before the House of Representatives, to ban not just direct research into human cloning--called "reproductive cloning"-- but also a ban on embryo cloning as well for research purposes, which might best be called "cloning for research."
Such a proposed ban lays a heavy burden of proof on its proponents: to show that the harms to be averted are serious threats to the public interest; that dangerous precedents for the future of science would not be established; and that the loss to scientific research, of opportunities for knowledge foregone, would not be unacceptably high.
I believe that burden can be discharged.
First, human cloning would change the nature of procreation and parenthood in a radical way and, in the process, change its social as well as individual meaning.
There is good reason to believe such a change would be harmful and no good reason to believe such a change would produce any important benefit for procreation or, as often alleged, for the relief of infertility.
As for the precedents that might be set, there has always been a recognition that scientific freedom is not an absolute value.
The international covenants requiring informed consent for clinical research, for instance, draw a sharp line against the use of human being as research subjects against their will--however great might be the research or medical benefits of doing so.
Few seem to reject the idea that it would be wrong to put children at risk to make human cloning work.
The physical safety of child-to-be who is part of human cloning research is taken to be a value overriding that of scientific knowledge or benefits to parental infertility.
Scientists with no particular interest in human cloning might, however, worry about the research opportunities that would be lost if legislation banned cloning for research as firmly as it banned cloning for reproduction.
A strong reason for doing such research is to assist in stem cell investigations, which would be particularly helped if immunological incompatibility and tissue rejection problems can be overcome.
Cloning could help solve that problem.
Two points can be made in response.
One of them is that it would be almost pointless to ban research on human cloning without banning research-cloning as well; the former would provide the necessary knowledge to do the latter, and would make it all the harder to have any kind of oversight over what would be done with the knowledge.
The second point is that, as with much of genetic and biomedical research, there is rarely anything such as a one-and-only way to gain knowledge, and this is as true of stem cell research and its potential clinical applications as it is of most other research.
There is no reason in principle to say that, much less any way to show, that other approaches to stem cell research will and must fail--just as there is no reason in principle to assume that research-oriented human cloning is the only way to deal with the immunological compatibility problem.
This is not to deny there could be some scientific loss.
Progress might come more slowly and with more difficulty with a ban in place; but even there the best one can say is "might" because there is no necessary correlation between methods that will at any historical moment appeal to scientists and those that will, in the long run, prove most successful.
If there are no exact precedents for a ban on research of this kind, it is worth noting that the National Bioethics Advisory Commission called for such a ban on reproductive cloning research ( though it also asked for a sunset-clause and Congressional Review after 3-5 years).
France and Germany have enacted a ban on that kind of research as well.
A ban on cloning for research purposes goes a step further, but it is the only logical way to help insure that research on reproductive cloning does not have other research off of which too easily to feed.
It should be self-evident, finally, that a ban can be revoked, that science can change, that what seems methodologically valid at the moment can give way to methods even better in the future.
Too much of the current research drive is fueled by a singleminded passion to eradicate disease, often likened to a war.
The worst possible analogy for biomedical research is that of warfare.
Illness, death, and suffering are terrible human threats, but to approach them as if nothing less than all-out battle, with no holds barred, will demonstrate our moral seriousness is a profound mistake.
Health is a great and vital human good, but not the only such good.
The point of a ban on research for human cloning is to make certain that some time-tested, critical means of human procreation and human individuality are protected.
They are as important part of our American and Western heritage as freedom of scientific inquiry--a freedom that has well coexisted for some years with ethical limitations and has managed to flourish in the face of (and sometimes because of) those limitations.
Daniel Callahan, Director, International Program, The Hastings Center, 21 Malcolm Gordon Road, Garrison, N.Y. 10524-5555.
Phone: 845-424-4040; e-mail: Callahan@thehastingscenter.org.
