[topleft.gif] [trmenu_sprtr.gif]
Staff Directory Search our site.
Frequently Asked Questions Feedback Site Map Partners Contact us [topleftlogo.gif] Welcome to the USDA Forest Service INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS [parrot.jpg]
China [USEMAP:asia_map_1a.gif] [USEMAP:asia_map_1b.gif]
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top
[arw_rnd_r1a_hi.gif] Overview China is the third largest country in the world--with a population of over 1 billion citizens.
China also has over 160 million hectares of forestland and over 800 nature reserves.
Therefore making forestry development of great importance to the government--focusing on afforestation and territory greening.
In addition, China is one of the world's five largest wood producing countries--with two-thirds of its production being burned as fuel.
The climate and geography of China make it a unique place for biodiversity.
Therefore, it is recognized as one of the great "megadiversity" countries in the world--home to first-class protected animals and plants such as the Giant Panda, Hair-crest deer, White-lip deer, China fir, Chinese cypress gingko, and Alder.
China's temperature ranges from tropical to subartic, thus, the mountains, deserts, plains, and deltas provide a variety of habitats for plants and animals.
While natural resources of China are remarkable, the people of China have led the world in arts and sciences for thousands of years--although the last century has been fraught with famines, political controversy, and military defeat.
What is a "Megadiversity" country?
A "megadiversity" country is one that is home to one tenth of the total number of species in the world.
Threats to the Forests China faces increasing threats from population growth, which include deforestation, air and water pollution, the steady fall of the water table, and acid rain.
Scientist estimate that one-fifth of agricultural land has been lost since 1949 as a result of soil erosion and economic development.
Only 14 percent of China's land area remains in forest and woodland, while 43 percent is permanent pasture and 10 percent is arable land.
However, timber harvesting has ceased in the wake of 1999's logging ban, and China has expanded the number of panda reserves throughout the country, from a dozen in 1990 to 33 today.
Why Does the USDA Forest Service Work in China? As a major exporter of a wide variety of products and because of ecological similarities, China and the United States have the potential to share unwanted species.
Therefore, by working with China we can solve mutual invasive species problems.
From beech bark scale to Asian longhorned beetles--fungi, insects and invasive plants can have severe impacts on ornamental as well as economically valuable tree shrub species in the United States and in China.
Over the past years, the USDA Forest Service has been working on several research projects in China.
The USDA Forest Service Forest Health Technology Team and International Programs have been working with scientists at the Chinese Academy of Forestry and the Animal Plant Health Inspection Service to identify biological control of the Asian longhorned beetle.
The group has also been working with Nankai University in China to examine sites in China for Beech Bark Scale.
The objective of this effort is to determine if the native home range of this scale may be Asia, rather than Europe, and if so, to determine if natural enemies exist that might safely be imported to the US to suppress the pest.
The Forest Health Technology Team, supported by International Programs also initiated a cooperative effort with the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences in Beijing to survey for natural enemies of mile-a-minute weed and kudzu.
Surveys in China continue for pathogens, and host range testing of promising isolates are being initiated.
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top
[hr.gif]
[arw_rnd_r1a_hi.gif] Forest Health/Invasive Species
A) Asian Longhorned Beetle The Asian Longhorned Beetle (Anoplophora glabripennis) is a serious and widespread pest, which has threatened both weakened and healthy trees in China, particularly in poplar plantations.
107 species of the Beetle injure poplar, maple and willow trees, and more than ten Beetle species cause large-scale economic harm.
Not only is the Asian Longhorned Beetle capable of surviving across a wide range of climatic conditions-conditions similar to those in North America, but it also has the potential to attack a wide variety of hosts.
Although the Asian Longhorned Beetle is native to China, Japan and the Malaysian Peninsula, it has been discovered in the United States and now poses a dangerous threat to our forests-especially hardwood forest ecosystems.
Very little is known about the Asian Longhorned Beetle infestation outside of China.
Therefore, most of the biological information that is currently being used in the United States comes from unpublished reports and personal communications with scientists in China.
How Did We Get Where We Are Today? In August of 1996, the Asian Longhorned Beetle was discovered in Brooklyn, New York and thereafter in other cities in New York and in Chicago, Illinois.
Estimates show that the Beetle has been in the area for 10 years but had gone undiscovered.
Scientists are unable to determine conclusively the means by which the Beetle entered the United States.
However, the most likely scenario is that it infested the poplar timber used in large shipping crates from China.
Since the discovery of the New York infestation, shipments from China containing infested crating materials, have been intercepted at United States ports.
In each case, not only the crate but also the packing materials and pallets were infested.
Why Do We Care About the Asian Longhorned Beetle? In the eastern US, there are 279 million acres of hardwood forest-a vast area that represents about 75% of the forested land in the region.
Although the Asian Longhorned Beetle has not yet been found in these vast hardwood forests, it could cause great damage.
The Beetle attacks not only stressed or aging trees but healthy trees of all ages.
The Asian Longhorned Beetle is quickly becoming a devastating pest of tree resources in urban and residential neighborhoods in the United States; especially since estimates show that 30% of urban and suburban trees are maple, a favored host.
Besides damaging trees, the Asian Longhorned Beetle threatens forest products, maple syrup, nursery, and tourist industries-collectively valued at $41 billion.
This amount does not include the non-market value of urban trees.
Consequently, it is important to remove and destroy infested trees and to control further infestation.
It is estimated that the current Beetle infestation in New York and Illinois alone will require a large amount of resources to monitor, eradicate and recover over the next five to ten years.
Already, the State of New York has removed approximately 5,200 trees, while Chicago has removed approximately 1,500 trees.
Program costs are approaching $20 million.
Little Known Facts...
The Cycle of Life The Asian Longhorned Beetle-measuring 2.5 to 3.2 cm (1 -1.5 inches) long-has a shiny, coal-black frame with white spots.
Its black and white antennae are longer than its body.
In China this beetle has been known to produce one or two generations in a year, but it can take up to two years to complete a life cycle.
The Asian Longhorned Beetle has four life stages: egg, larva, pupa, and adult.
Adult beetles emerge from infested materials in the summer, during which time they mate, reproduce, and lay eggs.
Adults either stay on the tree, from where they emerge, or disperse over short distances to new hosts where they may initially feed on the foliage or bark.
Female beetles lay their eggs by chewing a small hole in the bark of the tree and then laying a single egg in the site.
Each female is capable of laying 30 to 70 eggs, which hatch in 10-15 days.
Then, the larvae bore into the inner bark of the tree.
The first three larval instars feed within the inner bark, and then late in the third instar, the larva moves into the woody part of the tree where it will feed.
In the wood the larva completes its last instar and then pupates.
The adult beetles emerge from the tree the following summer by boring a hole out from the pupal site and the cycle begins again.
Hosts at Risk In China, the Asian Longhorned Beetle infests primarily willow, elm and poplar-causing severe damage throughout China.
In the United States the beetle has been found to infest a wide range of hosts.
These include: -Boxelder -Norway maple -Sycamore maple -Silver maple -Sugar maple -Horsechestnut -Chinese elm -White mulberry -Hybrid poplar -Black poplar -Lombardy poplar -Black locust -Weeping willow -Corkscrew willow
For more information, visit the Forest Health website or contact:
Dr. Richard Reardon USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Technology Enterprise Team 180 Canfield Street Morgantown, WV 26505 Tel: 1-304-285-1566 E-mail: rreardon@fs.fed.us
The Role of the USDA Forest Service Since the Asian Longhorned Beetle has affected both the United States and China, the two nations have developed programs to address this issue.
Although their methods may differ, both countries work together to develop necessary technology to control this pest.
In China, limited mechanical and insecticidal controls are used only on young individual trees.
While in the United States, the current eradication program relies on the removal and destruction of all infested host material.
The whole tree is removed; all material is chipped and burned; and stumps are then removed by grinding.
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is developing the domestic programs-which include research, development and technology transfer efforts-to detect, survey and eradicate Beetle infestations.
The USDA Forest Service (Forest Health Technology Team, International Programs) and USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service and the Chinese Academy of Forestry are involved in developing the pest control technology.
In 1998 and 1999, over 1000 trees in Gansu and Hubei Provinces in China were treated to evaluate the efficacy of systemic insecticides against adult (bark- and foliage- feeding) and immature Asian Longhorned Beetle.
Researchers recorded the efficacy and the data, which measures residue persistence, for various insecticides, treatment methodologies and treatment timings.
Additional studies were conducted to assess the effectiveness of bark sprays (application of non-systemic insecticides to surface of twigs and leaves) for control of adult beetles.
The most promising results came from using imidacloprid injected into the trees using the Mauget Injection System (imicide) and as Merit through soil injection.
Topical applications proved successful; even though they were tested in a greenhouse rather than a natural setting.
In 2000 and 2001, the insecticide evaluations have continued in China.
In the United States, using the successful Mauget model, approximately 11,400 uninfested trees in Chicago were treated with imicide.
In 2001, 12,800 trees will be injected in the New York area and 30,000 in the Chicago area in an effort to keep the beetles from spreading locally.
The immediate success of these efforts is critical in managing the Asian Longhorned Beetle and associated species in China and eradicating the infestations in the United States.
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top B) Beech Bark Disease American beech (Fagus grandifolia Ekrh) is a major component of the northern hardwood forests of New England.
A valuable timber tree used for furniture parts, turning stock, fuel-wood, and pulp, it also serves as home to various wildlife species.
This tree, however, is vulnerable to the Beech Bark Disease, a disease that infects both American and European beeches in natural and ornamental settings.
In North America, Beech Bark Disease begins when the beech scale insect (Cryptococcus fagisuga Lindinger) alters the bark of the American beech.
Several fungi (Nectria coccinea) then follow and kill the tree.
Research has found that controlling the Nectria, rather than the factors and agents that affect the beech scale insect, offers less potential for controlling the disease.
How Did We Get Where We Are Today? The earliest record of the beech scale in Europe is 1840 in the United Kingdom and Germany.
Records show that Asian beech arrived in Europe between 1880-1911.
American beech was moved to Europe as early as 1766, and it appears likely that other introductions of Asian species may have occurred in the early part of the 19th century.
Around 1890 the beech scale insect arrived in North America along with European beech trees that were placed in a botanical garden near Halifax, Nova Scotia.
The first record of the scale in the United States comes from the Arnold Arboretum in Boston, Massachusetts, in 1929.
Evidence suggests the presence of the scale in that area ten years before.
Following its establishment in North America, an epidemic of Beech Bark Disease spread to the South and West-killing a majority of beech trees in its wake.
Although a small percentage of the trees are genetically immune, beech populations do not shift towards resistant genotypes.
The Disease kills the above ground stems of susceptible trees, but the beech resprouts, and this regrowth becomes vulnerable to the disease-leading to repeated cycles of growth and death.
Consequently, the beech trees do not reach maturity and do not provide mast levels typical of mature trees.
By 1940, Beach Bark Disease had destroyed most of the mature beech stands in Nova Scotia.
The beech scale has steadily spread to the natural forests of Canada and United States.
Presently, the beech scale is found throughout New England, New York, much of Pennsylvania, northeastern Ohio, northeastern West Virginia, northeastern Virginia, and on the Great Smokey Mountains National Park.
The Beech Bark Disease is now in the Southern Appalachians and threatens the Great Smokey Mountain National Park.
It is very important to prevent Beech Bark Disease from spreading further.
Unfortunately, the only way to prevent such losses is by cutting and removing infested trees.
Why Do We Care About the Beech Bark Diseases? Although the Beech scale is known to affect European beeches (F. sylvatica) in Central and Western Europe, the damage to these trees is less severe than damage to American beeches.
Losses, however, may be significant in some areas.
Since natural enemies (e.g., predatory coccinellids) of the scale are still unrecorded in Europe and North America, the insect itself may perhaps not be native to Europe but may have invaded the Continent at an earlier time.
Therefore, it is necessary to survey various Asiatic species of beech to determine if this insect might be present as a low density native species in China or other parts of Asia.
Little Known Facts...
The Cycle of Life The Beech scale produces one generation per year, and males are unknown even in heavy infestations.
In late spring and summer, eggs are laid in ovisacs.
And by late summer or early fall, the first-instar crawlers appear and settle in cracks on the trunk or large branches of the host.
Subsequently, the crawlers produce a woolly secretion that encloses the body.
In the spring, the crawlers molt to second instar.
Adult females are present in the spring and most of the summer.
Warning Signs The first sign of infestation is the appearance of white woolly dots on the bark.
On heavily infested trees, the trunks and lower sides of branches may be completely whitened.
Subsequently, the bark is killed and turns brown.
The death and shrinkage of groups of cells within feeding areas cause ruptures in the bark-through which the Nectria fungus gains entry.
It penetrates the cambium and sapwood, killing tissues and interfering with the conduction and storage processes of the tree.
The fungus is entirely dependent upon the scale for its incidence and spread.
Scale populations alone have little impact on the health of the tree but in conjunction with Nectria, moderate to heavy scale populations kill trees.
Tree death does not usually occur until two to five years after infestation.
For more information, visit the Forest Health website or contact:
Dr. Richard Reardon USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Technology Enterprise Team 180 Canfield Street Morgantown, WV 26505 Tel: 1-304-285-1566 E-mail: rreardon@fs.fed.us
The Role of the USDA Forest Service In 1998, the USDA Forest Service (Forest Health Technology Team and International Programs) initiated a project on biological control of beech scale to determine: a) whether the native home range of this scale is Asia, rather than Europe and b) the existence of any natural enemies that might safely be imported into the United States.
Of the 13 species of beech in the world, one occurs in North America, one in Europe and 11 in eastern Asia (three in Japan, one in Taiwan and seven in China).
Hence, Asia is most likely the region of origin of the tree genus and a likely place to look for the pest and its natural enemies.
Activities for the first year included: 1) Determining from historical records which species of Asian beech were introduced to Europe and when; 2) Determining when beech scale was first observed in Europe and how this related to introduction dates of Asian beeches; 3) Checking insect collections in Britain, Russia, China, Japan and Taiwan for specimens that match beech scale specimens from North America; 4) Contacting Chinese, Japanese, and Taiwanese botanists specializing in beech and entomologists specializing in scale insects, and 5) Identifying initial survey areas with low density populations of beech scale.
Following this effort to obtain information about beech and beech scale, the Agency concluded that: * The genus Fagus has its area of origin in Asia, in the area of China, Japan and Taiwan; * The genus Cryptococcus contains too few members to be certain of its area of origin by reference to distributions of other species, and * There are no records of beech scale from Asia except for the Asiatic portion of Turkey and in Iran, where the insect occurs and poses a threat.
Activities in the second year focused on: 1) Examining scale specimens deposited in Chinese museums, and 2) Conducting surveys of beeches for scales in at least 19 sites distributed over China.
To accomplish these activities in China, the USDA Forest Service worked with Nankai University in China.
The project examined four species of trees from 19 sites; however, no scale insects in the genus Cryptococcus were found.
Moreover, eight institutional insect collections in six provinces were visited and 3,761 specimens of scales associated with species of Fagaceae were checked.
None were in the genus Cryptococcus.
Activities in the third year focused on Japan--to examine museum collections and two common beech species (F. japanica and F. cremata) for beech scale.
To accomplish these activities in Japan, the USDA Forest Service worked with the Kanazawa University.
Both species of beech were surveyed but no scale insects were found.
This year, through an agreement with the University of Massachusetts, the USDA Forest Service will focus on comparing DNA from the scales in the genus Cryptococcus (beech scale and its relatives)-to identify species most closely related to C. fagisuga.
This will assist in recognizing the likely native home of this scale.
The USDA Forest Service continues to look for natural enemies of beech scale.
Once suitable natural enemies are discovered, the Agency plans to release suitable species in the United States and evaluate their impact on the scale and on the incidence of Beech Bark Disease.
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top C) Kudzu How Did We Get Where We Are Today? Kudzu was introduced into the United States as an ornamental plant in 1876, at the Philadelphia Centennial Exposition.
At first it was popular to plant kudzu near the porch of southern homes to enjoy its luxuriant shade and sweet grape-scented blossoms.
Later it was planted as a forage crop.
Many studies examined the optimum timing of mowing-to maximize nutritional value and minimize damage to the kudzu.
In the 1930's and 1940's, Kudzu was promoted as a means to control erosion.
Under a government landowner assistance program, over 84 million seedlings were produced and planted across the southern United States.
One recent estimate places kudzu acreage at 7 million acres, stretching from Illinois to Connecticut and from Oklahoma to Florida.
At the edges of this range, kudzu is not yet much of a problem, but it is still spreading.
Where kudzu has long been established, landowners deeply resent its intrusion into yards, fields, forests, public lands and right-of-ways.
Why Do We Care About Kudzu? In 1998 the USDA Forest Service surveyed landowners in the south who have kudzu problems and found that they were dissatisfied with available control methods.
Utility companies spend about $1.5 million/yr to prevent kudzu from creeping up power poles, and shorting out transformers.
Forest landowners cannot afford to pay $350-500/acre to apply herbicides to kill kudzu when their annualized yield averages $100/acre.
Moreover, the most effective herbicides are not selective and cannot be used near waterways.
More selective herbicides are available, but these cost more.
And unless a landowner owns the entire kudzu "patch", all efforts to control it are in vain.
The Role of the USDA Forest Service For the past two years, the USDA Forest Service has searched systematically for biological control agents for kudzu.
Researchers observed over 50 different insect species feeding on kudzu.
Although some insect species are non-specific, a number of potential biocontrol agents have been identified, including stem and root boring beetles as well as leaf feeding insects-making sure that these insects do not harm other plants.
The Agency will conduct preliminary host testing in China for one year before bringing potential biocontrol agents into quarantine facilities in the U.S. Subsequently, the project requires funding for at least two more years of study before releasing the insects.
For more info contact: Dr. Kerry Britton USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station 320 Green Street Athens, GA 30602-2044 Tel: 1-706-559-4286 E-mail: kbritton01@fs.fed.us
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top D) Mile-a-Minute Weed
How Did We Get Where We Are Today? In 1890, Mile-a-Minute Weed (P. perfoliatum), originally from East Asia, was collected from the ballast of a ship near Portland, Oregon and contained at the Gray Herbarium at Harvard University.
This was the first record of the weed in North America.
Then in 1937, another specimen was isolated from the Meliosa seed from Nanjing, China at the USDA Plant Industry Station.
But the Station eradicated this specimen.
Infestation problems began, however, in 1938, when Mile-a-Minute Weed was introduced into a nursery in Stewartstown, Pennsylvania.
Instead of eradicating the Weed, the nursery owner-interested in its beauty (especially during times when it bore fruit)-allowed the Weed to survive into the next year.
The consequences were disastrous-the plant rapidly took over the nursery.
Prior to 1980, Mile-a-Minute Weed infested only five counties in Pennsylvania and northern parts of central Maryland.
Today, Mile-a-Minute Weed is established in nine states (Connecticut, Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Virginia, and West Virginia) as well as the District of Columbia.
Mile-a-Minute Weed infestations in each of the states are expanding rapidly.
Fifteen additional states have climates favorable for the propagation of Mile-a-Minute Weed, making them vulnerable for future infestations.
Why Do We Care About Mile-a-Minute Weed? In the eastern United States, Mile-a-Minute Weed quickly out-competes native species due to its rapid growth rate and climbing nature.
It can grow to over twenty feet-climbing over and smothering existing trees and shrubs-or rapidly in areas where herbicides have killed other weeds.
Since this weed also thrives in full sunlight and tolerates shady areas, it is a particular threat to forest regeneration.
In commercial forest areas, where Mile-a-Minute Weed has affected regeneration stands, the costs incurred for site preparation, weed management and labor to replant seedlings range from about $50-$100/acre.
In addition, Mile-a-Minute Weed also infests recreational and residential areas where the dense, prickly thickets are especially bothersome to people and their pets.
Mile-a-Minute Weed is a pest of nurseries, orchards, forest clear-cuts, roadsides, drainage ditches and rights-of-way.
Little Known Facts...
The Cycle of Life The life cycle of Mile-a-Minute Weed varies, sometimes listed as an annual and other times as a perennial.
Here in North America, it behaves more like an annual.
Mile-a-Minute Weed seeds germinate in early to mid-March to April.
Then, flowering begins in June or early July and continues through the rest of the growing season.
Between early August and the time the first frost appears, the Weed produces fruits.
Its seeds-often dispersed by water, small mammals, birds, and human activities-can remain viable in the soil for over four years.
The Worldly Weed Mile-a-Minute Weed has a wide distribution in eastern Asia, including: Japan, China, Korea, India, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Siberia, the Philippines, the Malay Peninsula, the Indochina Peninsula, Nepal, and Turkey.
In this region, Mile-a-Minute Weed is both harmful to agriculture (especially in Japan and less-intensively managed agricultural areas in China) and beneficial, since it is used as herbal medicine or an edible wild fruit.
For more information, visit the Forest Health website or contact:
Dr. Richard Reardon USDA Forest Service, Forest Health Technology Enterprise Team 180 Canfield Street Morgantown, WV 26505 Tel: 1-304-285-1566 E-mail: rreardon@fs.fed.us
The Role of the USDA Forest Service In an effort to manage this weed, the USDA Forest Service initiated a cooperative effort in 1996 with State Departments of Agriculture/Forestry-in Delaware, Pennsylvania, Maryland, and Virginia-to establish permanent plots within Mile-a-Minute Weed's infestations and to look for its native natural enemies.
Then in 1998, the USDA Forest Service (Forest Health Technology Team and International Programs) and the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences in Beijing, China expanded this search to China.
Over 100 insect species-natural enemies associated with Mile-a-Minute Weed-were found in China.
Most of the insects collected fed on the pest's leaves; however, stem-borers, gall-makers, flower- and fruit-feeders were also discovered.
Insects that attack the roots have not yet been found.
China has since conducted many host range tests, using promising species of natural enemies.
Consequently, several of these species are contained in a quarantine facility (under the USDA Agricultural Research Service) in Newark, Delaware.
China In China, many host range tests have been conducted using promising species of natural enemies that have resulted in several species being shipped to the USDA Agricultural Research Service quarantine facility in Newark, Delaware.
Surveys for natural enemies as well as host range tests of promising species continue in China.
Of the several species of natural enemies shipped to the United States and evaluated in quarantine, the weevil Homorosoma chinensis Wagner appears the most promising.
A petition for its release is being prepared.
In addition, researchers have recovered approximately 250 fungal isolates symptomatic Mile-a-Minute plants collected in the eastern United States and in China.
For those recovered from China, pathogenicity-screening tests have been conducted in a quarantine greenhouse facility (in cooperation with the United States Department of Agriculture, Agriculture Research Service, Foreign Disease Weed Sciences Research Unit in Frederick, Maryland).
Results have shown that two isolates have caused either systemic symptoms or whole plant mortality.
Surveys for pathogens continue in China.
Additionally, Chinese counterparts have initiated host range testing of promising isolates.
The outlook for biological control of Mile-a-Minute Weed using insects and pathogens looks promising as efforts continue in China.
Japan will soon initiate its own efforts.
Related Publications: International Programs News, Issue #3, September 1999: Invasive Species
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top
[hr.gif]
[arw_rnd_r1a_hi.gif] Watershed Management Validation of a GIS-based Soil Erosion and Sediment Transport Model
Why We Care About Soil Erosion and Sediment Transport Models? Maintaining good water quality is an important consideration in forest logging and road construction in the United States.
Models have previously been used to predict how much soil erosion occurs due to alternative management practices.
However, those models did not predict where in the watershed soil erosion occurs, only how much soil erosion occurs across the whole watershed.
Also, these models did not predict how eroded soil moves across the watershed.
This is important because if eroded soil (i.e. sediment) travels into a stream, water quality will be negatively affected.
Because of this, it was necessary to create a new model, which was able to predict where soil erosion occurs within a watershed, and how the sediment moves across the watershed.
Before any model can be delivered to federal, state, and private land managers, it would need to be fully tested on various environmental conditions using measured data.
However, such data are not readily available in the southern United States, where soil erosion problems are relatively minor compared to other parts of the country.
By contrast China has extensive data, which details its serious soil erosion and water pollution problems-due to population pressures and recent economic development.
In the past decade, various soil conservation agencies and universities have conducted extensive watershed-scale research throughout the country, especially in the Yangtze River Basin and the Yellow River Basin.
Those data sets are extremely valuable to validate existing mathematical models.
The Role of the USDA Forest Service This situation led to a collaborative effort by the USDA Forest Service, the Southern Global Change Program, and the Beijing Forestry University.
The collaboration focuses on validating a GIS-based soil erosion and sediment transport model.
As a result of this project, this model, GIS Assessment of Transport of Eroded Sediment Model (GATES), was created and the results of the model are displayed using GIS as maps.
The model is designed to use existing data and to be operated by forest rangers and other land managers.
Users need little computer training and will be able to develop alternate management practices, which minimize the amount of sediment that moves into a stream.
To test the GATES model, researchers chose the Quxi Watershed, which is located in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River Basis.
In this area climate and soil conditions are similar to those in the southern United States.
Basic information such as land-use or land-cover, soils, and socioeconomics are available at this site.
Recently, a physically based, research-oriented model, ANSWERS (US EPA, 1988), was tested for this watershed under a collaboration agreement between the Southern Global Change Program, USDA Forest Service and Beijing Forestry University.
The accuracy of the GATES model will be tested against the simulation by this physically based model as well as measured data.
Proposed Activities In 2001, more small watersheds from different climatic and geographic zones (southern and northern China) will be selected to test the GATES model.
Graduate students will continue to be trained and the transfer of the modeling technology in soil and water conservation will also continue.
Research findings will be presented in the 12th International Soil Conservation Organization Conference that will be held in Beijing May 2002.
This research is intended to result in peer-reviewed publications detailing the validation procedures and results both in English and in Chinese.
In addition the validated soil erosion and sediment transport model will be distributed to land managers for use in minimizing sediment impacts on stream water quality in the United States.
Related Tools 
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top
[hr.gif]
[arw_rnd_r1a_hi.gif] Relevant Websites * GATES * Quixi Watershed * ANSWERS * Southern Global Change Program * Beijing Forestry University
[arw_rnd_up1.gif] Back to top
North America | Latin America 
Home | About Us | What's New? | Technical Cooperation | Policy | DASP | Around The Globe | Program Topics | Newsletter | International Seminars | Learning Zone | Cooperate With Us | NAFC Staff Directory | Search | FAQ | Feedback | Site Map | Partners | Contact Us Forest Service | USDA
Copyright© 2000 USDA Forest Service International Programs Legal Information and Disclaimer Webmaster
