Watershed Management Monitoring Plan I. Introduction
This document supplements the description of the monitoring and research needs for the CALFED Watershed Program addressed in the main report under Section V. [H].
The CMARP Watershed workteam addressed the following Watershed Program information needs: 1.
Provide information on watersheds as they relate to trends and processes in the Bay-Delta, including assessment of cumulative effects of changes in landuse and management practices on those processes and changes due to CALFED actions, 2.
Fill needs in watersheds for evaluating effectiveness of particular practices in achieving desired results, detecting and evaluating cumulative effects and trends, and for information exchange locally and regionally in a way that facilitates adaptive management for local watershed health and development of community-based institutions for watershed stewardship.
These needs are discussed relative to monitoring elements identified for flow and sediment regimes, vegetation, habitats, water quality, economic, and community/education issues.
Objectives
This monitoring plan addresses the following Watershed Program objectives: * Describe the basic biophysical functions and processes of a watershed, including the linkages from upper watersheds to lower watersheds to the Bay-Delta.
* Identify the watershed functions and processes that are relevant to the CALFED goals and objectives * Describe how land use and other human activities affect and are affected by watershed functions and processes * Illustrate benefits that accrue from watershed plans and projects designed to favorably affect the CALFED goals and objectives * Provide monitoring assistance to aid watershed organizations.
Also addressed are the Ecosystem restoration objective: To rehabilitate the capacity of the Bay-Delta estuary and its watershed to support, with minimal ongoing human intervention, natural aquatic and associated terrestrial biotic communities, in ways that favor native members of those communities, and the following
Water quality objective: To improve water quality for environmental, agricultural, drinking water, industrial, and recreational beneficial uses of water.
Monitoring Themes A. Flow regime Objectives + Provide flow measurements to support analyses of issues involving status and trend related to water supply, habitats, and geomorphic processes.
+ Detect impacts from landuse and management actions on flow regime.
+ Measure the effectiveness of program actions on flow regime.
Problem statement Flow regime is integrally linked to sediment regime, channel formation, floodplain and flood processes, Central Valley water temperatures, groundwater and surface water interactions, nutrient and Bay-Delta foodweb processes, and water quality.
Stream flow supports aquatic, riparian, and wetland habitats and their native biota.
Additionally, stream flow diversions and water impoundments provide water to support human communities and their associated cultural, agricultural, recreational, and commercial activities.
Central Valley reservoirs manage seasonal variability by capturing winter floods and spring snowmelt to meet demands for summer and fall diversions and instream flows.
In general, operation of dams has resulted in reduced winter and spring flows and increased summer and fall flows.
Alterations in natural flow quantity, quality, and frequency of extreme (i.e., minimum and maximum) flow events has had far-reaching ecological effects.
Restoration or simulation of more natural streamflow patterns is necessary to sustain critical ecological processes, habitats and species.
Thus, knowledge about the quality and quantity of the inflows from the contributory watersheds is essential for ecosystem management of the Bay-Delta estuary.
Factors affecting flow regimes, and ultimately inflow to the Bay-Delta, include precipitation, overland flow, and water-supply management.
Most of the flow resulting from rainfall or snowmelt occurs from December through June with much of the total flow volume occurring during relatively short periods.
Landuse trends and management actions in the contributory watersheds affect flow regimes primarily by influencing runoff; however, detection of effects is scale dependent.
Conversely, actions that have negligible effects downstream may be critical for habitat upstream.
Conceptual model for flow regime (Italicized words refer to key elements in the following diagrams and in the proposed monitoring program.)
Stream flows that contribute to the San Francisco Bay-Delta estuary are highly variable, both seasonally and inter-annually.
A Mediterranean climate produces annual patterns of wet and dry seasons with longer periods of extreme drought and extreme wet.
Source water for streamflow originates as precipitation.
Precipitation, the amount relative to intensity and duration, form (i.e., Rain or snowfall), and spatial and temporal variation, as influenced by climate, is a key factor affecting flow regime and the incidence of extreme flow events.
Seasonal variation results from rain events and snowmelt.
Most rain occurs during the "wet" season from November through June while snowmelt extends from late spring into the summer and fall at high elevations.
Factors influencing snowpack include climate, vegetation characteristics, forest cover and spatial pattern.
Differences in the amount and duration of runoff reflect variation in precipitation and watershed characteristics, including geologic and geomorphic features and landforms.
Water from snowmelt and rain is first stored in soil, which reflects soil infiltration capacity.
It is either removed through evapotranspiration, or entered as streamflow through runoff or groundwater inflow.
Landuse, as it reflects the degree of urbanization and vegetation characteristics, directly influences soil infiltration capacity and therefore, runoff.
Landuse affects vegetation characteristics directly or indirectly through fire, which can also affect evapotranspiration.
Unimpaired streamflow is reduced by water withdrawals or impoundments.
These are major stressors to natural streamflows and Bay-Delta outflow.
Groundwater also can be diverted by water withdrawals.
Streamflow is affected by wetland storage and streambank storage.
Riparian vegetation affects streambank storage and thus, indirectly, evapotranspiration.
B. Sediment regime Objectives + Provide measurements to support analyses of issues involving status and trend related to water quality, habitat quality, and geomorphic processes.
+ Detect impacts from landuse and management actions on sediment regime.
+ Measure the effectiveness of program actions on sediment regime.
Problem statement Sediment regimes are important determinates of aquatic and riparian habitat suitability in all parts of the Bay-Delta system and a serve in part as indicators of watershed health.
Additionally, suspended sediments affect water quality and nutrient and contaminant transport.
The generation, mobilization, delivery, and transport of sediments through watersheds is complex.
Identification of changes in relative contributions of sediment among watersheds and assessment of sediment sources, especially as they relate to changes in landuse and land cover within watersheds, are key issues.
Concerns center around the effects of landuse and management practices relative to alterations in watersheds and geomorphic processes which are manifested downstream as decreases in beneficial uses of water and adverse effects on native biological resources.
In addition to direct effects on riverine and riparian habitats, modification of vegetation can increase sediment yields through increased erosion and mass movements of soil.
Both natural processes, such as wildfires and floods, and human-induced changes in landuse and land cover, affect the dynamics of generation, deposition and mobilization of sediment within the fluvial system, primarily through vegetation modification.
In addition to reductions in reservoir storage capacity, interception of sediments affects the channel geomorphic processes in the Bay-Delta ecosystem by altering the amount, distribution, particle size, and timing of sediment delivered to the Bay-Delta.
Conceptual model for sediment regime Sediment regimes are broadly shaped by the physical landscape--geology and landforms and climate.
Climate and geology together determine the nature and rate of weathering (breakdown of rock into fragments that can be transported).
Climate determines the nature and magnitude of wind and water energy available for delivery of material to and transport through the fluvial system.
Geology and landforms largely determine the kind and initial fragment size distribution of materials forming sediments, and the shape and stability of slopes.
These in turn shape background rates of mass wasting (e.g. landslides and slumping) and surface erosion.
Some weathered material is transported in solution.
Climate and geology together are major determinates of upland vegetation characteristics, which, by influencing erosion rates, further affect delivery of material to the fluvial system and, ultimately, to the Bay-Delta ecosystem.
These are background elements against which evaluation of trends and patterns occurs.
As sediment particles make their way through the fluvial system, particles are repeatedly mobilized as suspended sediment and bedload and deposited as floodplain, bank, and channel deposits.
Rates of movement and balance between mobilization and deposition of particles of different size classes depends largely on flow regime, especially frequency and magnitude of extreme flows, and sediment supply to the system.
Riparian vegetation characteristics affect erosive resistance of deposits and water velocity, thereby affecting both mobilization and deposition rates.
Impoundments, by removing all but the smallest suspended sediments and altering flow regimes (especially incidence and magnitude of flood events), have major effects on downstream sediment dynamics.
Similarly, diversions affect sediment regimes by reducing total flow.
Effects of landuse and management on sediment regimes can be considered in terms of effects on sediment delivery to the fluvial system, and effects on sediment transport within the fluvial system.
Sediment delivery
Activities that affect soil stability and erosive resistance affect rates of landslides and surface erosion, the major mechanisms of sediment delivery to streams.
Roads and roadbuilding, including roadbuilding associated with urbanization and logging, and agriculture, especially conversion of slopes to cropland, have major direct impacts on soil stability and erosive resistance.
Mining is another activity in this class.
Logging practices, livestock grazing, and agricultural practices (including crop type) also affect soil erosive resistance via impacts on upland vegetation structure.
Wildfire also affects sediment delivery via impacts on upland vegetation.
Sediment transport Activities that affect bank and channel stability and erosive resistance affect dynamics of deposition and mobilization of sediment within the fluvial system.
Again, roads and roadbuilding have major effects, as does mining, especially gravel mining.
Logging and livestock grazing can have both direct physical impacts on bank stability and indirect impacts through alteration of riparian vegetation.
Activities that affect flow regime (See flow regime model for more detail), especially those that affect incidence and magnitude of flood flows, affect dynamics of sediment transport.
Impoundments and diversions have major direct impacts.
Activities that affect vegetation structure can affect runoff and infiltration rates, and consequently affect flow regime.
Urbanization also affects runoff rates and flood incidence, and is a major factor in sediment dynamics of some watersheds.
Habitats
Objectives * Provide information suitable for evaluating progress toward CALFED objectives toward restoring spatial extent and improving connectivity of habitats.
* Facilitate analysis of potential direct and indirect effects watershed management actions have on rates of habitat loss and degradation.
* Provide information suitable for assessing the function of existing and restored habitat to support viable populations of the full complement of species native to the ecosystem, with particular attention to species identified as at risk by the Conservation Strategy group.
* Provide information that elucidates linkages between habitat conditions, spatial trends and management actions and maintenance of viable populations/assemblages of species.
Problem statement
Given the extent of habitat reduction and fragmentation, human disturbance, and disruption of ecological processes, many native species--not just those currently recognized as rare--face a high probability of loss in at least part of their range.
Additionally, both increases in factors contributing to localized extinction (e.g., agricultural conversion, urbanization, exotic species, disruption of flow regime) and decreases in opportunities for recolonization of previously occupied habitats due to fragmentation and habitat loss, are predicted to cause a continuing decline in biodiversity at local scales.
Monitoring and associated research should address the need to test specific hypotheses about habitat relationships and species response that form the basis of these general predictions.
It should also support comprehensive analysis of trends in distribution and diversity across broad species groups for proactive identification of trends and threats not currently recognized.
A wide range of actions undertaken by CALFED or in response to CALFED decisions has ramifications for habitat maintenance and degradation.
The monitoring program should provide a basis for analyzing and predicting these indirect effects and trade-offs, and not focus exclusively on direct actions of the Ecosystem Restoration Program or CALFED.
A monitoring program meeting these objectives will describe and track changes in distribution of habitats, and distribution of species within those habitats (Level I monitoring).
Species occurrence data will be linked to data on habitat characteristics in terms relevant to habitat quality considerations for the species group in question as well as habitat attributes affected by management or restoration actions.
Multi-species and or species inventory approaches provide the background layer of information relating habitat extent to habitat function (see also discussion in CALFED Ecosystem Restoration Program Indicators Group document).
These provide the primary means of detecting trends in species distributions and diversity at landscape scales and qualitative evaluation of hypotheses and projections concerning effects of management actions.
We envision this broad habitat quality/habitat occupance monitoring to employ a network of sampling sites representing each of the CALFED habitat types in each of the subregions, supplemented by existing networks of established monitoring sites and additional sites selected as examples of relatively intact natural communities.
Agricultural lands, urban areas, and other developed lands that are not recognized in the ERP habitat list, provide significant habitat values for some native species groups and play an important role in population dynamics of exotic species.
These areas, appropriately classified, should be included in both habitat distribution and habitat quality/habitat occupance monitoring.
Focused monitoring of population dynamics and behavior of particular species and species groups forms a second important component of this monitoring program (Level II monitoring).
Detection of species response to contrasting habitat conditions or particular management actions requires focused sampling design and study methods.
Likewise, detection of trends in population and distribution of rare species and evaluation of progress toward sensitive species protection and restoration goals requires focused monitoring methods.
This document primarily addresses Level I monitoring.
Level II monitoring is addressed separately for individual species groups.
Historic data on species distributions and spatial extent of habitats is highly pertinent to interpreting trends and refining restoration objectives.
Gathering and integrating this information will be a central part of the monitoring program.
Similarly, remaining examples of intact natural communities have high value in refining objectives and success criteria for habitat reconstruction and restoration actions.
Documenting, monitoring, and ensuring continued maintenance of high-quality natural areas will also be a central element of the program.
The primary use of habitat and species monitoring data is analysis of biodiversity issues--the species and species groups are of direct interest.
A second use of monitoring data on broad species groups is as indicators of specific environmental conditions that are difficult to measure directly.
For example, species composition of benthic invertebrate communities may be a sensitive indicator of contaminant loadings relevant to drinking water quality or as indicators of general ecosystem integrity or health.
We anticipate that the multi-species component of the monitoring program proposed here will provide a basis for ecosystem integrity indicators.
We expect other workteams to identify needs for specialized bioindicator monitoring elements, and will then coordinate those needs with the biodiversity-oriented monitoring proposed here (e.g., Benthic macroinvertebrate communities workteam).
Conceptual model
Habitats are shaped by hydrologic and geomorphic process interacting with plant succession within limits posed by physiographic and historical setting.
The ability of habitats to support viable populations of native species depends on maintenance of environmental conditions within ranges that meet requirements for survival and reproduction of the organisms in question.
Limits and requirements vary among species; co-occurring species may vary widely in sensitivity and response to particular levels and kinds of environmental change.
Ecological processes and disturbance regimes are important factors in habitat maintenance and life histories of most species.
Vegetation composition and structure, composition and structure of organic detritis including woody debris, landform and substrate characteristics including channel morphology, and hydrologic regimes are important elements that define habitats and habitat quality across many species groups.
Natural disturbance regimes, including flooding and fire, are also defining elements of habitat for many species groups.
Over time, maintenance of species presence and diversity depends on the balance between localized extinction and recolonization rates related to the size of local populations and connectivity with habitats supporting other populations.
Consequently, patch size and spatial distribution of occupied patches are important elements along with habitat conditions within patches.
As with other habitat attributes, species groups vary widely in sensitivity and response to particular changes in patch size and configuration.
Habitat characteristics are strongly affected by past and present land and water management practices.
In particular, dams, diversions, and vegetation modification due to agriculture, urbanization, logging and grazing have affected flow and sediment regimes and successional processes which are central to maintenance of suitable habitat conditions for species native to this ecosystem.
Levee construction, channelization, and conversion of marsh and forest to agricultural land have drastically altered system productivity and transport of organic material between terrestrial, wetland, and aquatic habitats.
Human actions have greatly accelerated the introduction of exotic species to the system, creating problems of competition and displacement for native species.
Species removals due to human action (e.g., losses of pollinators, large carnivores and herbivores) also have disrupted conditions for the remaining native species.
Human actions also have changed disturbance regimes and introduced new stresses such as toxic contaminants that affect the ability of remaining habitats to support viable populations of native species.
For migratory species, habitat loss in central California has ramifications elsewhere; similarly, habitat loss elsewhere has effects on populations here.
Human activities in the landscape are not simply external stresses.
Past and present landuse is an integral element in ecological relationships within this system.
Cultural and economic values associated with landscapes and species, as well as tradeoffs between landuse and habitat restoration, are integral to CALFED's habitat objectives.
These should be addressed in monitoring such that evaluation of these benefits, tradeoffs, and implications can be analyzed in conjunction with progress toward restoration goals.
Vegetation Physical Structure
Objectives * Provide information on vegetation physical characteristics to support analyses of issues and trends related to hydrologic and geomorphic process and habitat extent and quality, and to elucidate relationships between land management actions and trends and changes in these system elements.
Problem statement
Vegetation has an important role in watershed ecological processes.
Vegetation characteristics are part of the background against which trends over time and contrasts between different geographic areas must be evaluated.
Vegetation alteration, especially urbanization and conversion of forest, wetlands and grasslands to agricultural fields, has had far reaching consequences for the fluvial system.
Hydrologic modification also has had major effects on vegetation.
We analyze vegetation functional relationships in the following five areas: 1.
Delivery of water and sediment to the fluvial system 2.
Geomorphic process within the fluvial system 3.
Primary production and fluxes of carbon and nutrients among atmospheric, terrestrial, and aquatic systems 4.
Water quality 5.
Habitat physical structure.
Conceptual model for vegetation physical structure
1.
Delivery of water and sediment to the fluvial system Gross patterns of vegetation structure influence runoff/infiltration ratios, evapotranspiration and interception rates, and slope stability and erosive resistance of upland soils (see flow regime and sediment regime models).
Consequently, modification of upland vegetation can have profound effects on sediment regimes and timing of flow (with lesser effects on total flow).
Management of upland vegetation is a major element in watershed improvement strategies.
Description of land cover by broad classes of tree and shrub canopy cover, agricultural and urban landuse, and area in roads are needed as background for interpreting comparisons among watersheds in runoff and sediment yield characteristics.
Urbanization, agricultural conversion, and road construction, are the primarily causes of modification of vegetation affecting flow and sediment regimes.
Tracking these changes over time is a central element in monitoring at all scales.
Logging and catastrophic wildfire cause changes in vegetation that temporarily affect runoff/infiltration ratios and surface erosion.
However, the most pronounced effect of logging and wildfire on sediment delivery is via increased incidence of landslides.
The magnitude of these effects is strongly influenced by slope, geology, and weather events.
Logging and wildfire deserve attention at larger scales in terms of risk assessment and selection of sites appropriate for different kinds of watershed improvement actions.
For trend monitoring, logging and wildfire figure more prominently in interpreting changes at smaller scales (i.e., wildfire has major impacts on areas immediately downstream, but effects further downstream are unlikely to be detectable against other, larger sources of variation and change).
Changes in runoff regime associated with more subtle vegetation change can affect channel incision and period of saturation in swales and meadows, and incidence of no-flow events in small streams.
Even though these changes have negligible effects on flow and sediment regimes downstream, such changes can have major consequences for species dependent on these environments, and can add up to significant effects on habitat availability and quality at larger scales.
Logging (including effects on rate of snowmelt) and grazing effects on upland vegetative cover are of concern in this respect.
2.
Geomorphic process within the fluvial system Vegetation has major effects on dynamics of deposition and erosion of sediment, rate of channel migration, and channel morphology via its influence on stability, erosive resistance and roughness of banks and floodplains.
Riparian vegetation is, in turn, sensitive to alterations in the fluvial system.
Changes in flow and flooding regimes, groundwater dynamics, sediment regimes, and channel processes due to upstream manipulations have major consequences for structure and successional processes in downstream riparian vegetation.
Input of woody debris from riparian vegetation has effects on channel morphology.
Mobilization of bank deposits due to loss of riparian vegetation contributes more to increased sediment loads than modification of upland vegetation.
Consequently management and restoration of riparian vegetation is a central component of watershed improvement actions.
In uplands, gross patterns of land cover for broad vegetation classes provide an adequate basis for analysis.
However, more detail on vegetation structure and pattern is needed for detecting and understanding changes in riparian vegetation because of its significance in channel geomorphic processes at all but the largest scale.
The distribution of tree sizes influences woody debris composition, with trees functioning differently from shrubs in affecting bank stability and roughness.
Deep rooted perennial sedges and rushes function differently from annual grasses and herbs.
Submerged and emergent aquatic vegetation are important in these dynamics.
Vegetation modification associated with roads, agricultural conversion, and urbanization is a central issue at the largest scales, but impacts to riparian vegetation from logging, grazing, mining, and flow diversions also are concerns.
Monitoring should track changes in vegetation structure (e.g., cover in tree, shrub, and herbaceous strata) in riparian zones, as well as the number of breaks in vegetative cover per unit distance along channels.
In forested areas, changes in size and density of trees near channels should also be monitored.
Changes in road density, agriculture, and urbanization should be tracked as for uplands.
For near channel areas, we also need to monitor changes in levels of grazing, logging and mining impacts.
Spatial pattern of size/age classes in trees and shrubs is also needed to track significant change in riparian vegetation in response to hydrologic modification and restoration of channel geomorphic process.
3.
Primary production and fluxes of carbon and nutrients among atmospheric, terrestrial, and aquatic systems Upland, riparian and aquatic vegetation provide the main energy source for the rest of the terrestrial and aquatic biota.
Consequently, human actions that affect vegetation productivity and delivery of detritus to the aquatic system have far reaching effects on community structure.
Alteration of the size and dynamics of carbon pools represented by vegetation and organic detritus also has implications for carbon exchange with the atmosphere.
(Carbon dynamics within the aquatic ecosystem of the Bay-Delta are addressed elsewhere.
See Appendix XXX).
Wetlands have very high rates of organic carbon fixation, a portion of which accumulates as peat and soil organic matter.
Draining of wetlands in the Central Valley for agriculture and subsequent oxidation of peat and decline in soil organic matter have converted what was once a major carbon sink into a major source of atmospheric carbon, a change that is significant on a regional scale.
Additionally, loss of valley wetlands and riparian forests to agriculture and loss of contact between river and floodplain due to levee construction, have greatly reduced the contribution of vascular plant detritus from local sources to the aquatic food web of the Delta.
Beyond the Central Valley, loss of wetlands and seasonally wet environments and alteration of riparian vegetation have had effects on productivity and detritus regimes that affect biotic community structure and composition at local scales.
Channel incision due to upland vegetation loss, destruction of wetlands for agriculture and urban use, and modification of riparian vegetation due to logging and grazing are major causes of change.
Monitoring in this area has two objectives: 1) tracking progress toward restoration of ecosystem process as it relates to gross carbon cycle relationships, and 2) tracking changes in plant productivity and detritus regime as they affect habitat suitability and community structure for terrestrial and aquatic organisms.
The first objective would be primarily addressed at larger scales.
Tracking changes in vegetation cover and landuse (as stated in sections 1 and 2 above), with additional resolution on area and vegetation structure of wetlands, should provide adequate information to estimate trends based on models.
Model development is an area that is currently receiving research attention.
The second objective would be addressed primarily at smaller scales in conjunction with habitat monitoring.
Details on structure and composition of riparian, floodplain, emergent, and aquatic vegetation, and estimates of detritus amounts, seasonal regimes, and movements are relevant to understanding implications of vegetation modification for community structure.
Specific implications for alterations in carbon fixation and storage rates in relation to greenhouse considerations are a complex matter, given the different roles and activity of methane (produced in anaerobic decomposition in flooded soils) and carbon dioxide (produced in aerobic decomposition of soil organic matter in drained soils).
Nevertheless, the overall magnitude of changes that occurred due to loss of Central Valley wetlands is large.
The potential for restoration actions to have significant effects may also be large, and this is likely to be a factor in future decision-making.
This is a matter for research attention.
4.
Water quality As mentioned in sediment considerations, upland and riparian vegetation affect the amount of fine sediment reaching streams and likewise affect transport sediment-borne pollutants.
Floodplain and wetland vegetation has a role in trapping these sediments and pollutants.
Issues related to agricultural land use and cultivation practices, and movement of organic compounds in drainage water, are addressed by other work groups (see Appendix XXX).
Sediment movement related to vegetation is treated in section 1 above.
Temperature is an attribute of water quality as it relates to aquatic habitat suitability.
It is affected by shading from riparian vegetation.
At local scales, vegetation modification associated with logging, roads, channel maintenance and agriculture have significant effects on water temperature.
Tracking the proportion of channel shaded and changes in this quantity over time are important elements of monitoring watershed condition at these scales.
At larger scales, effects such as relative contribution of groundwater and surface sources to total flow, reservoir releases, contribution of snowmelt, and regional weather regime have major effects on water temperature that may obscure effects of riparian vegetation modification.
Tracking change in the level of shading is probably not a major issue at this scale.
Changes in bank vegetation related to sediment dynamics are of concern at large scales--monitoring directed at tracking those trends and effects probably provides adequate information on trends in water temperature related to change in shading.
5.
Habitat physical structure Vegetation shapes important habitat attributes for all organisms, including plants.
These attributes include: temperature, insolation, humidity, thermal and hiding cover, physical support, and nutrients.
Horizontal cover and vertical structure by physiognomic category are powerful descriptors of habitat values for many organisms as well as good indicators of primary production and detritus regimes.
In forest and woodland types, tree density, size class distribution, and mortality are important attributes for a number of species groups.
Horizontal structural heterogeneity is important to many species groups, and should not be overlooked in characterization of agricultural and urbanized habitats.
Water quality
Problem statement
An overall goal of the CAFFED Program is maintenance and enhancement of water quality to support drinking water and other beneficial uses of water, including agricultural, environmental, industrial, and recreational uses.
Water quality can be an indicator of watershed health.
Causes of degradation of groundwater and surface waters affecting the beneficial uses dependent on the aquatic resources in the watershed may be natural or anthropogenic in origin.
Additionally, current conditions may be linked to historical water quality characteristics of the watershed.
Potential causes of impairment are numerous and include, point and non-point sources of pollution, bioaccumulation of toxics, landscape modification, and changes in flow and sediment regimes.
Factors influencing sediment production are especially important to water quality considerations.
Threats to biodiversity not only arise from contaminants of concern but also from alterations in critical water quality parameters (e.g., temperature) affecting species and habitats.
For example, modification or loss of riparian vegetation that reduces channel shading can result in increased water temperatures that are incompatible with salmon survival and reproduction.
Water quality monitoring, although essential to the Watershed Program's Monitoring Plan and mentioned previously within this document, is addressed almost entirely within the Water Quality Program monitoring plan, with additional coverage within the Ecosystem Restoration Program.
Specifically, the Sacramento River Basin Monitoring plan and San Joaquin River Basin Monitoring plan (see Appendices XXX) from the Water Quality workteams and the Benthic Macroinvertebrate Communities Monitoring, Research and Assessment Components within the ERP provide the framework for the water quality component of the monitoring for the Watershed Program.
The Sacramento River Basin document builds upon monitoring plans developed for the Sacramento River Watershed Program and the Benthic Macroinvertebrate bioassessment monitoring plan integrates California Stream Bioassessment Procedures developed from EPA as a biological integrity indicator for water quality management and watershed condition evaluation.
Recommendations from the Contaminants Monitoring in the Bay-Delta workteam include monitoring at the confluences of the major watersheds and mudflats and to the extent that the issues identified relate to the tributary watersheds, spatial expansion for the proposed monitoring is necessary.
Economic regime
Problem Statement
People in upper watersheds are concerned that while they bear the responsibility for managing water quality, flow regime, and yield, they benefit little from the sale of water and hydroelectric power to non-local users.
Non-local users and brokers benefit from efforts by local communities to improve watersheds, but do not necessarily assist in carrying out those improvements nor share the costs of landuse changes.
In addition, long distance water diversions, power generation, and associated reservoirs, although providing localized economic benefits, cause loss of habitat values and environmental quality that in turn affect local community well-being.
Local changes in demography and patterns of economic activity, as well as changes in land management practices, affect watershed health and function.
Downstream environmental and economic costs are not necessarily accounted for in landuse decisions, partly due to lack of information on nature and magnitude of effects.
Conceptual Model
Water flows from uplands, where landuse practices and management actions affect sediment and contaminant load, flow regime, and yield.
Streamflow is reduced by diversions for local use, sometimes involving impoundments, as well as by groundwater pumping.
Some water returns to the stream as urban discharge, agricultural runoff, and augmented groundwater discharge.
Streamflow is further reduced by long distance diversions, mostly accomplished with large impoundments.
Reduction of streamflow and modification of flow regime associated with both kinds of diversions and hydropower generation affect habitat quality and geomorphic process, and large dams obstruct movement of fish and other aquatic organisms.
Local diversions provide water for local agriculture, domestic use, and industry, contributing to local jobs and livelihoods.
Long distance diversions and hydroelectric facilities provide water and power mostly for non-local use, and revenue exchanges are mostly between non-local buyers and sellers.
Long distance diversions and hydroelectric power plants provide local jobs in construction and management of infrastructure, and reservoirs can provide basis for local jobs in tourism associated with fishing and water sports.
On the other hand, habitat changes associated with dams and diversions, especially big dams, often have adverse effects on local environmental quality and can adversely affect other types of recreation and tourism.
Flooding valleys destroys historic settlements and transportation routes, and disrupts current cultural values associated with these landscapes.
Sediment yield affects storage capacity of both small and large impoundments, consequently landuse practices that affect sediment yield affect the economics of both local and long distance diversions and power generation.
Landuse trends, especially urbanization and road construction, affect timing and magnitude of water yields as well as water quality, affecting the economic value of water for downstream uses.
Agricultural and grazing management practices have substantial effects on water quality, affecting value of water to downstream sellers and cost of treatment for non-local uses.
Changes in management practices and landuse that reduce sediment loads, reduce water pollution, and improve flow regimes and yields provide economic benefits to all users, with the bulk of those benefits going to non-local sellers and buyers.
Different kinds of land use contribute differently to these watershed effects, consequently different sectors of local communities will contribute and be affected differently by watershed improvement actions.
Community/education
Problem Statement
Communites will be expected to support and implement watershed activities to make CALFED's Watershed management program successful.
Significant resources will be devoted to community actions under the watershed program, and information is needed to evaluate success in accomplishing intended objectives.
To help other communities successfully implement Watershed Program activities, the experiences, successes, and failures, of particular actions should be identified, analyzed for program enhancement, and shared.
Scientifically monitoring community effectiveness provides information needed to identify, strengthen and encourage successful actions, as well as identify failing community processes.
Successful long-term solutions to watershed management problems will be the responsibility of Communites and the landowners and managers within each community.
Watershed improvement actions affect and are affected by knowledge, values, social structures and institutions, and have consequences for individual and community well-being.
Evaluation of these relationships is of interest to Watershed Program participants.
Conceptual models and specific monitoring elements will be developed in a collaborative process with program participants.
III.
Monitoring elements
1.
Geology and landforms
This is an extremely important determinate of system behavior at all scales.
Detailed geologic and topographic data are needed in forms that can be summarized on a watershed basis at all scales.
This forms a static data set over most of the landscape, which is important for interpretation of spatial comparisons.
However, modification of floodplain landforms by agriculture, roadbuilding, urbanization, and channel and levee construction are significant for sediment processes.
High resolution data on floodplain topography should be maintained as time series.
Geologic and landform data feed interpretation of soil infiltration capacity, erosive resistance, and slope stability; all are important in understanding surface water, groundwater, and sediment dynamics.
Existing data are adequate for the most part (except for flood plain detail) but accessibility for characterization of watersheds at various scales is a problem.
Access to GIS (geographical information systems) is needed.
Items: Geologic mapping Topographic mapping
2.
Climate
As another extremely important determinate of system behavior, climate requires both assembly of existing records to form long-term baselines and current monitoring.
Summarized long-term records are an essentially static dataset needed for classification, modeling, and spatial comparisons.
Temporal and spatial detail from long-term records has the additional role of providing baseline data on trends and patterns of variation central to many modeling and analysis issues.
See Weather below for more detail.
Data availability varies and existing data are in forms that are fairly accessible and well georeferenced.
Items: Precipitation regime Temperature regime Wind regime Snowmelt regime Storm, snowmelt and extreme event frequency
3.
Weathering
Weathering is a background process important for stratification of sample watersheds and interpretation of spatial and temporal comparisons of sediment and solute regimes.
It changes slowly in response to long-term climate trends, and thus can be treated as a static data set describing background rates of formation of transportable materials and size/shape/type of materials available to the system.
While probably based on estimates rather than direct measurements (derived as a function of geology and climate), mechanisms need to be in place to create these estimates at various scales and to make them available for analyses.
Identification of areas that produce solutes of concern (e.g., selenium, mercury) and estimation of background rates against which increased/decreases due to management can be evaluated is also a priority.
Items: Sediment production background rates Solute production background rates
4.
Upland Vegetation
General patterns of upland vegetation are important determinates of runoff/infiltration ratios, evapotranspiration, and rates of erosion and mass wasting as well as being an important variable in carbon dynamics and habitat relationships.
Landuse and land management actions affect fluvial processes in large part via effects on upland vegetation.
Thus, upland vegetation characteristics form elements of adaptive management and effectiveness monitoring at project-level scales as well.
(see landuse below)
For monitoring objectives related to fluvial processes at basin and subbasin scales, data on the extent of cover by broad physiognomic category (e.g., forest, shrubland, and grassland) and spatial distribution characteristics with respect to slope, aspect and geologic substrate are needed in forms that can be summarized on a watershed basis.
Data of this kind also serve purposes for assessment of issues relative to regional-scale carbon dynamics.
In contrast to other 'background' elements above, upland vegetation patterns are quite dynamic and repeat measures at 3-5 year intervals are needed at large scales.
At larger scales, urbanization and agricultural conversion are the types of human actions that have detectable effects on the fluvial system, but at smaller scales, more subtle attributes of land management have significant and detectable effects.
Vegetation modification related to livestock grazing, fire, and forest management practices have impacts on flow regimes that may be insignificant downstream.
For example, alterations in runoff/infiltration ratios that slightly prolong flow late in the season may make the critical difference in survival of fish (and non-survival of frogs) in small streams even though the volume of water involved is negligible relative to the total annual discharge of the stream.
The greatest need for detailed information on upland vegetation relates to habitats.
Horizontal cover and vertical structure by physiognomic category are powerful descriptors of habitat values for many organisms, providing good indicators of energy availability (primary production and detritus regime), shading, humidity modification, and cover values.
In forest and woodland types, tree density, size class distribution, and mortality are also important habitat attributes.
Horizontal structural heterogeneity is important to many species groups, and forms an important element in vegetation monitoring, including in agricultural and urbanized habitats.
Recommendation: Upland vegetation cover and spatial distribution data for broad community or physiognomic categories should be made available for summary by watershed at various scales to meet a variety of analysis needs.
These data should be summarized and reported for watersheds at basin and subbasin scales as part of a general monitoring program.
Data are collected by remote sensing, and should be coordinated with tracking of changes in landuse and spatial distribution of habitats.
The CDF/FS Change Detection Project has integrated GIS mapping of land cover in suitable categories at a suitable resolution for addressing questions related to sediment and flow regimes.
Change analysis is at 5-year intervals, with the intention of continuing the program indefinitely.
The UC Santa Barbara GAP project has recently produced a California coverage for vegetation using Holland classification with about 20,000 polygons.
This may be a suitable classification and level of resolution for baseline assessments of vegetation characteristics related to carbon cycle and habitat patterns at large and intermediate scales.
Given the importance of agricultural land use (crop type, cultivation and chemical application practice, irrigation and groundwater pumping practice, etc.) additional levels of detail will probably be needed for agricultural lands.
Remotely sensed data on wildfire, timber harvest, and road construction would be a valuable addition for mid-scale trend analyses related to fluvial process.
Measurement of detailed vegetation structural attributes will be carried out in conjunction with monitoring habitat quality in a network of sites representing the range of community types present at a basin scale, and in the course of species inventory and population estimation.
See Habitats and Biotic Community sections below.
Items (see also Habitats): Cover by physiognomic category Cover by Community type Forest cover spatial pattern and canopy density
5.
Riparian Vegetation
Riparian vegetation is a major element affecting sediment dynamics within the fluvial system.
Increased in sediment yields due to modification of bank vegetation are of major concern, as are influences of bank and floodplain vegetation on channel morphology, channel migration, and related habitat values.
Relatively detailed information is needed on structure of vegetation in riparian zones, banks and floodplains.
At larger scales, vegetation cover at channel margins by broad physiognomic class answers needs for tracking of vegetation changes relevant to gross channel process and shading effects on stream temperature.
For issues related to carbon dynamics and habitat function at all scales, and for higher resolution on issues related to channel morphology, information is needed to provide more detail on vegetation vertical structure and horizontal patch characteristics.
Tree density and size distribution is important information for estimating woody debris contributions and other aspects of detritus regime; It is also an important element in habitat quality for a number of species groups, especially birds and mammals.
See comments in previous section and in Habitats below.
Human actions have major effects on fluvial processes via impacts to riparian vegetation.
Consequently, these form a focus of research and project effectiveness monitoring at fine scales.
This is and will continue to be an area with a high level of monitoring activity at small scales.
There will be a high demand for coordinating information, developing improved and (perhaps) somewhat standardized methods appropriate for analyzing relationships among riparian vegetation, fluvial process and habitat values.
Recommendation: Apply effort to obtaining high resolution interpretation of remotely sensed imagery for riparian corridors.
Some type of on the ground sampling may be needed to relate remotely sensed data to vegetation structural characteristics adequate for monitoring important relationships at larger scales.
At smaller scales and for effectiveness monitoring and research, on the ground measurements will be needed, designed as appropriate.
Items (see also Habitats): Community type Vegetation vertical structure Vegetation horizontal cover by physiognomic category, patchiness Tree size distribution, population dynamics
6.
Landuse
Although weather, landforms, and other background variables dominate characteristics of fluvial processes, landuse affects these processes in critical ways.
On a regional scale, broad patterns of urbanization, agriculture, and road density have significant effects on flow and sediment regimes.
Effects of land use trends and evaluation of cumulative effectiveness of management policies on flow regime are evaluated at the basin and subbasin scales.
Hypotheses on the effects of specific land use practices (e.g., logging on flow regimes) are probably best addressed at a smaller scale (e.g., 1000-1500 acres), where experimental design, reference sites and baseline data may be available.
We recommend enhancement of existing Long Term Monitoring Sites and adding new such sites, since lack of baseline data at sufficient resolution is a major impediment to research on relationships between management practices and fluvial processes.
See Stressors section below for additional comments.
Inputs of toxics and contaminants are an aspect of landuse that is of major concern and needs to be developed further in conjunction with Contaminants workteam.
Remotely sensed data available in conjunction with general vegetation analysis is adequate for larger scale analyses related to urbanization and agricultural conversion.
Data on roads are available from remotely sensed data and county records, but additional work will be needed to make these available in forms that can be readily used in watershed analyses.
Items: Urbanization Agriculture and agricultural conversion Roads and roadbuilding Livestock Grazing Logging Wildfire/fire suppression Mining Impoundments Water Use Practices Agricultural Practices Harvesting of wild and introduced species Recreational landuse Watershed Improvement practice Point sources and distribution of sediments and contaminants
7.
Weather
Data on precipitation amounts and form and snowpack dynamics are needed at high temporal and spatial resolution.
Very high temporal resolution is needed on extreme rainfall and snowmelt events because these extreme events often dominate sediment regimes and geomorphic process, and substantially influence vegetation and population dynamics of many species groups.
Data on wind and temperature regimes at intermediate temporal and spatial scales are important in characterizing weathering regimes and vegetation dynamics, and are important components of evapotranspiration models.
Long baselines, and linkage to flow regime data at matched scales, are needed for detection and interpretation of trends in sediment regimes.
Most landuse research and effectiveness monitoring will be done at small scales, so it is critical to identify where appropriate baseline data exist, and create additional experimental watersheds with fine scale monitoring.
Increases in network coverage of gauging stations for both precipitation and stream flow will be necessary.
Existing monitoring networks are inadequate, and decline in these networks must be reversed.
Detail on extreme weather events is needed.
Existing data are relatively accessible.
Items: Precipitation Temperature Wind Snowmelt Storm event detail
8.
Water yield
Although timing and relative distribution of precipitation among surface runoff, groundwater, and evapotranspiration is largely a function of landscape attributes--geology and soil characteristics, regional vegetation, and climate--modification of soil infiltration capacity and vegetation have effects on water yield that are of concern.
At large scales, water yields are estimated based on landscape parameters previously mentioned: geology and landforms, precipitation, and vegetation cover.
Soil infiltration capacity and evapotranspiration are additional elements in water yields, both of which are affected by landuse.
Urbanization, roads, and agriculture have substantial effects on water yield via effects on soil infiltration capacity and, to a lesser extent, evapotranspiration rates.
Groundwater pumping and irrigation have effects on water yield dynamics that are of concern with respect to streamflow and habitat quality.
Relationships between vegetation management and water yield has been an area of research interest in the past, with results suggesting that the value of the small increases in water yields obtained by vegetation removal are generally offset by increased sediment yield and habitat damage.
Water yields are estimated from streamflows and groundwater dynamics, both addressed elsewhere (see Appendix XXX).
The additional parameters involved in water yield that might be considered for monitoring are runoff/infiltration ratios and transpiration rates, as well as the land use changes and management practices that may affect these rates.
We expect these will be addressed primarily in research and project level monitoring, and do not recommend including them in a general monitoring program.
Water yields and effects of management on water yields can be adequately estimated from other parameters.
Items: Runoff, measured as streamflow Infiltration, measured as groundwater and/or calculated Evapotranspiration, calculated from weather and vegetation
9.
Streamflow
This is one of the central response variables of interest to the CALFED system, as well as an important determinate of other system properties.
Summary monitoring data on total discharge, peak flows, and minimum flows, are needed at all scales across the entire San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary Watershed.
Long term characterization of flow regime, surface and ground water relationships, and flooding regimes are essential background layers needed for many types of analysis at all scales.
Temporal detail on streamflow, especially during extreme flow events, is needed for analysis of sediment transport and geomorphic processes issues.
Longer term flow attributes have important effects on vegetation structure and successional process.
We need additional expert consultation to articulate issues related to groundwater/streamflow relationships.
Information on flow modification--impoundment, reservoir release, diversion, irrigation and canal leakage, etc.--are needed in forms that allow coordination with data on ambient conditions.
Duration of flow in streams, duration of saturation in seasonal wetlands, and timing, duration and depth of flooding have important direct effects on habitat suitability and demographic processes for many species groups.
Flow variables are likewise important determinates of aquatic habitat conditions (temperature, dissolved oxygen, etc.).
These are measured in detail in conjunction with monitoring of habitat quality, species inventories, and species population monitoring.
See Habitat and Biotic Communities below.
Recommendations: Stations for flow monitoring and accompanying precipitation gages are probably adequate below the major dams.
At a subregion or Basin scale, monitoring of flow is inadequate due to closure of gauging stations in response to funding reductions.
This is especially relevant for streams above dams and on free flowing tributaries.
We need more information on availability of data on groundwater discharge/recharge in relation to streamflow.
Effectiveness monitoring at the project-level scale also will require flow measurements.
Items: Streamflow Groundwater discharge and recharge Wetland storage Streambank storage Flooding regime Water temperature
10.
Sediment Yield
Rates of sediment delivery from uplands to the fluvial system are dominated by regional rate of weathering, precipitation patterns (incidence of events producing overland flow, landslides), and vegetation patterns as they affect soil and slope stability.
At the basin scale, broad patterns of landuse, especially activities that produce unvegetated, disturbed soil on sloping terrain, can significantly affect sediment delivery (i.e., roads, urbanization, agriculture).
Localized areas characterized by intense erosion or mass movements can disproportionately contribute to sediment delivery.
This applies to both background rates due to particular geologic situations and localized disturbance due to human activities.
Fine sediments are of particular concern both directly as they affect water quality and indirectly via attached contaminants.
Fine sediments are also of concern as they affect habitat quality for aquatic organisms.
Monitoring of fine sediments in relation to these issues is addressed in Water Quality and Habitat treatments (see Appendix XXX).
Lack of coarse sediment below reservoirs is another management concern, and artificial inputs of gravel have been undertaken.
This presents specialized monitoring questions not addressed here.
A major area of concern related to sediment yield from uplands is maintenance of storage capacity in impoundments.
Impacts due to stability of bank and floodplain deposits probably contributes more to reservoir filling than changes in sediment delivery to the fluvial system.
Nonetheless, this is an issue of concern in watershed management, and needs to be addressed in monitoring and research at various scales.
Recommendation: The problem to be addressed in monitoring of sediment yield is distinguishing effects due to management against the background yield and variation.
We expect that this is best addressed by monitoring and research at small scales, with extrapolation to larger scales based on landscape parameters and landuse/management trends.
Since point sources of sediment delivery such as road construction and mining are extremely important at small and intermediate scales, these also need to be addressed in monitoring.
Mass wasting (e.g. landslides) is an important element in the sediment delivery regime in some watersheds.
There are important research and monitoring questions related to impact of loss of forest cover on rates of mass wasting.
This is a complex phenomenon involving landscape attributes, stochastic events (weather, fire), as well as complex management attributes (logging, roads, fire) and needs separate attention.
11.
Sediment Transport a.
Suspended Sediment and Bedload Suspended sediment is an important water quality element.
It is also important as a habitat variable, measured in conjunction with habitat monitoring and research and small scales.
Total sediment loads are important in channel geomorphic process and reservoir capacity.
b. Solute Load A major water quality and habitat issue, solute load is influenced by landscape attributes, agriculture, and water management practices.
c. Floodplain, Bank, and Channel Deposits Dynamics of bank and floodplain deposits, (net accretion/erosion) are responsive to changes in flow regime and vegetation via effects on both erosive resistance of deposits and roughness/velocity.
Mobilization of bank and floodplain deposits is a major issue in maintenance of reservoir storage capacity and water quality.
Mobilization of deposits downstream of impoundments is also a critical issue.
Rate of channel migration and changes in channel morphology, largely functions of sediment deposition dynamics, are major issues in habitat maintenance for aquatic and terrestrial species.
Other issues related to deposition dynamics include channel incision and consequent effects on hydrology of meadows and swales, consequences due in part to altered runoff regimes from uplands due to logging, grazing, and roads.
d. Impounded Sediment This is of direct interest as it affects storage capacity of reservoirs and sediment supply/dynamics in riparian systems below dams.
Recommendations: Suspended sediments are widely measured in connection with existing water quality and habitat quality monitoring.
Coarse sediments are generally measured indirectly via dynamics of bank and channel deposits or estimated from hydrodynamic models.
Gross characterization of channel and floodplain form, heterogeneity, and particle size distribution form part of habitat quality monitoring and mapping, with additional details monitored for particular species groups in conjunction with population studies and inventories.
Sediment deposition and mobilization dynamics related to reservoir storage capacity and downstream habitat effects have been identified as major CALFED issues.
Monitoring elements have been identified by other programs.
the issue for the Watershed program is to ensure that monitoring occurs at scales appropriate for trend, effectiveness, and cumulative effects analysis at smaller scales.
Existing monitoring is not adequate to address this pivotal, multifaceted issue, especially at scales suitable for providing adaptive management feedback for watershed management.
Project-scale monitoring and research are needed to evaluate impact of various activities including livestock grazing, agriculture, and logging on bank and floodplain deposits.
Cumulative effects of roads and other disturbances need to be monitored at intermediate scales.
Issues related to downstream effects of impoundments should be addressed with focused monitoring and research.
This is a central monitoring theme that needs additional attention.
Items: Suspended sediment Bedload Solute load Sediment deposition/mobilization dynamics Bank deposits Floodplain deposits Channel deposits Impoundment deposits Channel incision in meadows, swales Channel morphology Channel migration
12.
Carbon Dynamics
Tracking progress toward restoration of ecosystem process as it relates to gross carbon cycle relationships would be primarily addressed at larger scales.
Tracking changes in vegetation cover and landuse described in other sections, with additional resolution on area and vegetation structure of wetlands, should provide a basis for estimating primary production.
Information on peat and organic matter decomposition rates, especially changes in rates associated with different cultivation and irrigation practices, is also needed.
Development of adequate models for estimating decomposition rates may be a research need.
Tracking changes in plant productivity and detritus regime as they affect habitat suitability and community structure for terrestrial and aquatic organisms would be addressed primarily at smaller scales in conjunction with habitat monitoring.
Details on structure and composition of riparian, floodplain, emergent, and aquatic vegetation, and estimates of detritus amounts, seasonal regimes, and movements are needed.
Woody debris has additional roles in channel geomorphic process, and litter of various size classes has a role in runoff/infiltration ratios and sediment yield from uplands to the fluvial system.
Monitoring of these relationships would be primarily at the project scale and in conjunction with research.
Items: Detritus Woody debris Carbon pools and dynamics Carbon fixation Vegetation productivity Biomass live vegetation Detritus: terrestrial, soil, aquatic, wetland Detritus composition Detritus transport Oxidation of peat Oxidation of soil organic matter Trophic structure of terrestrial and aquatic communities Aerial extent of wetlands and seasonally wet environments
13.
Habitat spatial extent and configuration
Monitoring spatial extent of habitats is a major component of a monitoring program because habitat loss is a major cause of declines in biodiversity and threats to species and habitat restoration is the central element in reversing these declines.
We recommend mapping habitats (CALFED classification or modification thereof developed in conjunction with Conservation Strategy), and using these to perform basic analysis of area, patch size, configuration attributes, based on aerial photography and other remotely sensed data.
Images and mapping exist, but need review and possibly reinterpretation to correspond with our habitat classification.
Historic habitat configurations are highly pertinent to understanding current conditions and trends and to refining restoration objectives, so effort should be put to assembling available historic information in forms suitable for parallel spatial analysis.
Since different species groups respond to different habitat attributes, additional landscape characteristics should be classified and mapped; these include, channel form, flooding depth and hydroperiod, vegetation structural diversity, successional age in channel migration zones, crop type and cultivation practice, pesticide and pollutant loading, road density, urban settlement and urban vegetation attributes.
We see these as separate layers to be used as relevant in particular analyses, not necessarily as subdivisions of the primary classification of habitats.
These additional layers help address the problem that some species groups respond to habitat patches smaller than can be accommodated by feasible minimum mapping unit standards.
For example, 'Density of uncultivated field margins' could be a layer to superimpose on 'landcover by habitat and crop type' for assessment of change in habitat availability for small mammals and herptofauna.
Data exist to support development of these data layers (mostly aerial photography), but it will require considerable effort to develop classification and mapping.
Priorities need to be established by specialists working with particular species groups.
14.
Biotic communities
Habitat occupance establishes the link between restoration of habitat extent/quality and biodiversity maintenance goals: loss of species drives our concern about habitat loss, and maintenance and reestablishment of species is the primary criterion of success in habitat restoration.
We anticipate establishing a monitoring network of sampling locations, using habitat type maps as a basis for identification of candidate sites.
A sample set would then be randomly selected within criteria for allocating sampling effort among types and subregions.
Sites should be large enough to provide meaningful representation of the complement of species present in the habitat as represented in the contiguous local vicinity--on the order of several hectares.
We anticipate including additional sites that have long-term records or represent good examples of relatively intact communities in the network as well.
Long term records at existing monitoring locations are extremely valuable, as is the momentum of programs that are already in place.
Data from good intact habitat remnants has the added benefit of helping shape goals for restoration at other sites.
Richness of data from a network that combines both new sites, pre-existing sites, and exceptionally intact sites justifies departing from a uniform design and strictly standardized methods for the this effort.
Inventories of native and exotic species at the network of sites for the species groups identified by the Indicators Group and the Conservation Strategy are the primary focus this part of a monitoring program.
Standardized-effort inventories are appropriate for most species groups (e.g., plants, birds, insects, and fish), although particular methods vary and would be carried out separately by specialists.
For some groups (e.g., mammals, amphibians), survey methods differ widely for individual species.
For these groups, it may be necessary to select indicator species or species groups.
The network of sites should complement additional focused monitoring conducted for species included in the Conservation Strategy and monitoring to assess effects of particular management actions of environmental conditions.
Detection and monitoring of exotic species in early stages of invasion deserves additional attention.
Measurement of habitat attributes relevant to interpretation of presence/absence and population trends would be coordinated with species inventories (see discussion of Habitat Quality below).
Historical occurrence data are important for interpreting trends, and an effort will be made to draw together existing species monitoring and occurrence data in readily accessible, georeferenced formats.
15.
Population Dynamics and Distribution of Species
Detecting and understanding processes underlying trends in species distributions, and meeting objectives for monitoring rare species, requires information on status of populations in relation to distribution and quality of habitats.
Presence/absence and gross abundance data collected in monitoring of the network of sites will a base layer of information for tracking changes in distribution and population status for non-rare species and species groups.
Additional population and demographic studies and monitoring are needed to meet needs for rare species, species of special concern, and species groups for which there are important questions regarding habitat relationships or response to management.
16.
Habitat Quality
These attributes are used in analysis and explanation of trends in species distributions and populations at given locations, including relationship between management and restoration actions and species or community response.
Also, in order to make extrapolations of species occurrence, population, and inventory data to the larger landscape, it is necessary to have fine-scale information on relationships between species occurrence and habitat characteristics.
Most of the attributes here have been addressed elsewhere as elements of fluvial process.
At larger scales of analysis, monitoring for other objectives serves purposes of analyzing broad trends in availability and quality of habitats.
Items: Vegetation horizontal cover and vertical structure by physiognomic category Tree density, size class distribution, and mortality Vegetation species composition Abundance of debris and detritus in a range of size classes Channel and floodplain form Particle size distribution and heterogeneity Flow regime Turbidity Water temperature Ground water relationships Timing, duration and depth of flooding Additional habitat attributes relevant to particular species groups will be identified and monitored in conjunction with species inventories and focused studies.
Many vegetation structural attributes can be evaluated from aerial photographs.
Aerial photo interpretations will be supplemented with on the ground measurement of vegetation structure carried out in conjunction with species inventories.
Suitable aerial photography exists.
Channel and floodplain characteristics and some hydrologic attributes can be effectively measured in conjunction with on-the-ground species monitoring; others are derived from aerial photographs and flow data measured offsite.
17.
Human community values Items: Social and economic values related to: Agricultural practices Water use practices Habitat extent and species diversity Harvest of wild species Habitation, urbanization Flood and wildfire hazard Recreation Community involvement in watershed management
IV.
Research
Applied research on watershed restoration practices is a high priority, along with structured monitoring of restoration project effectiveness.
Research at small scales on implications of alternative agricultural, forestry, and road construction practices on flow and sediment dynamics is needed for interpretation of system trends and program effectiveness at larger scales.
Development of baseline data resources and GIS tools for analysis of physical, biotic and cultural characteristics of landscapes is essential for analysis of trends and management effects.
Restoration and further development of precipitation, streamgage, and snowpack monitoring networks is needed to provide data at appropriate scales for effectiveness and cumulative effects monitoring.
Development and integration of this information into useful, multipurpose, web-accessible libraries is a technological challenge and constitutes a research need.
V. Indicators
As a first step toward development of indicators, assessment and further refinement of the landscape and ecosystem-level indicators developed by the Indicators Group within the ERP is recommended.
These indicators, attached below, address the state of the environment relative to hydrology, geomorphology, habitats, biological communities, and energetics and nutrient cycling.
The approach recommended includes consideration and identification of indicators for Pressure, State, Response and Effects Model in addition to consideration of the scale issues (previously identified) relative to the stated goals and objectives of the Watershed Program.
Suggested indicators (Developed by Ecosystem Restoration Program's Indicator Group)
1.
Hydrologic A. Flows
1.
Minimum flow 2.
Seasonal shifts in stream level 3.
Water level (depth) 4.
Variance measures 5.
Precipitation:flow by Basin 6.
Sacramento River:San Joaquin river flow
B. Floods 1.
Minimum inundated floodplain area, at 2 and 10 years 2.
Mean frequency of overbank flows 3.
Mean, median, and variance in flood duration
C. Groundwater 1.
Water-table depth 2.
Soil moisture levels, laterally from banks 3.
Temperature stratification in deeper pools 4.
Subsurface flow rates and extent 5.
Infiltration rate 6.
Surface area of vernal pools
2.
Geomorphic-spatial A. Dynamic Channels
1.
Bedload movement 2.
Particle size and distribution 3.
Natural pool:riffle 4.
Seeps, springs, seasonal wetlands, and off-channel pools
E. Sediment supply-delivery-movement processes 1.
Net change in unconsolidated sediment (depth/time) 2.
Coarse sediment delivery as a proportion of natural 3.
Lateral exchange between river and floodplain.
D. Patterns 1.
Index of habitat diversity and extent compared to year (x) 2.
Habitat distribution pattern
3.
Natural habitats A. Habitat mosaic-connectivity
1.
Spatial extent and distribution of patches of all habitat types 2.
Presence and distribution of species requiring multiple habitats 3.
Presence and distribution of resident and anadromous native fish 4.
Number of continuous river miles allowing passage of anadromous 5.
Number of unnatural barriers to migration of aquatic species
F. Landscape patterns 1.
Index of habitat diversity and spatial extent relative to year (x) 2.
Index of habitat configuration 3.
Number of insufficiently represented habitats
D. Connectivity 1.
Index of habitat connectivity or proximity 2.
Number of unnatural barriers to migration of aquatic species 3.
Distance between avian breeding and foraging habitats 4.
Numbers of biological corridors 5.
Number of barriers to water flow, and sediment and nutrient transport 6.
Number of species exhibiting range extensions
G. Water quality 1.
Toxicity of water and sediments a.
Water and sediment concentration b. Tissue concentration c. Bioassays d. Biomarkers e. Loading 6.
Dissolved oxygen 7.
Turbidity 8.
Temperature 9.
Total Dissolved solids 10.
Nutrients (N, P, C) 11.
Fish and Wildlife health 12.
Number of water quality violations/year at selected sites
M. Toxic contaminants 1.
Load reduction of selected contaminants 2.
Contaminant index based on concentration in sediment and taxa
C. Instream habitat complexity 1.
Pool:riffle:run 2.
Presence of large woody debris 3.
Shaded riverine habitat
4.
Biological community A. Diversity and composition of riparian insect assemblages B. Distribution, diversity, and composition of benthic invertebrate assemblages C. Distribution and diversity of resident birds and neotropical migrants D. Distribution and diversity of native plant associations E. Distribution and diversity of native mammals F. Distribution, diversity and trophic structure of native fishes G. Survival rates of outmigrating salmon H. Trophic structure of fish assemblages I. Fish and wildlife health J. Self-sustaining anadromous fish populations: distribution, movement, and/or viability--fitness, selected species and/or cumulative index K. Distribution and diversity of self-sustaining bird populations: Population viability--fitness; selected species and/or cumulative index L. Exotic Species 1.
Rate of invasion 2.
Abundance, spatial extent, and distribution of selected species 3.
Number of species and abundance relative to native species 4.
Percent biomass of exotics in select taxa 5.
Number of exotic species eradicated or under control M. Listed-rare species Index: 1.
Number of listed species relative to year (x) 2.
Number of delisted species:newly listed species 3.
Population trends of selected species
5.
Energetics/nutrient cycling
Natural nutrient loading-- A. Nutrients from salmon carcasses B. Organic input from livestock C. Natural:anthropogenic nitrate sources
VI. Links
Monitoring for the Watershed Program has linkages to the Water Quality teams, Water Management teams (i.e., Water Transfer, Water Use Efficiency and Storage and Conveyance) and the Ecosystem Restoration Program teams (Fluvial Geomorphology, Benthic Macroinvertebrates, System Productivity, Resident Fishes, Salmonids, Shallow Water Habitat) relative to restoration of ecosystem processes, species and habitats.
Watershed Management Monitoring Workteam
Beth Cook
UC Davis/ICE
Ann Dennis
USGS-BRD
Richard Harris
UC Berkeley, 164 Mulford Hall, Berkeley CA 94720-3114
Dale Hoffman-Floerke
San Joaquin River Management Program, Department of Water Resources, 3251 'S' Street, Sacramento CA 95816
Dianne Holcomb
Natural Resources Conservation Service
John Lowrie
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Pat Manley
USFS-R5
Mary Madison
UC Davis/ICE
Carolyn Marn
USGS-BRD
Tom Makowski
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Portland, Oregon
Jeff Mount
Department of Geology, UC Davis, Davis CA 95616
Jim Quinn
UC Davis/ICE
Janine Stenback
Resources Agency, 1416 Ninth St., Sacramento CA 95814
Bill Stewart
California Department of Forestry, 1920 20th St. Sacramento CA
Julie Tupper
USDA Forest Service, 650 Capitol Mall, Sacramento, CA 95814
Dan Williams
Department of Biology, California State University, Stanislaus, Turlock CA 95382
