Back to Home U.S. Senator Patty Murray - Washington State
Skip to Page Content
Home About Patty Contact Patty Services News Legislation En Español Issues [Select an Issue.....]
Go
Women's Issues
Murray's Work
Child Care
On February 6, 2003, Senator Murray spoke to the the National Business and Professional Women Policy Conference about the "Work-Life Balance." and child care.
Read her remarks.
"Every parent wants his or her child to succeed.
Unfortunately, for many of Washington State's working parents - particularly those with infants or who work night shifts - childcare is either too expensive or not accessible.
We must make critical investments on the state and federal level to ensure that no child is left behind."
- Sen. Patty Murray
Budget shortfalls in Washington state have resulted in cuts in eligibility for many low-income families seeking quality childcare for their children, which could affect as many as 13,000 families.
The state has also been forced to increase family co-payments and eliminate funding for quality programs.
This year, Congress is updating both the Child Care Development Block Grant (CCDBG) and the Head Start/Early Head Start program.
Senator Murray will work actively on these authorizations to improve the quality of child care and help more kids access Head Start.
Senator Murray believes that high quality early education efforts can help all kids start school ready to succeed.
Murray opposes moving Head Start to the Department of Education and supports increased funding for this critical and successful program.
In addition, Senator Murray will continue her work on the Early Care and Education Act, which she helped write and introduce in 2002.
More on Education
..................................................
Domestic Violence
Throughout her service in the United States Senate, Senator Murray has stood with victims of domestic violence and their advocates.
She has helped provide federal support for efforts in communities throughout our state and country.
Senator Murray has focused on passing legislation, increasing funding, and raising awareness.
More on Domestic Violence
..................................................
Equal Pay for Equal Work
Sen. Murray reintroduced the Fair Pay Act in 2001 which she cosponsored in 1996 to help end the wage gap for women.
The reintroduction of this bill took place on 'Equal Pay Day,' the day on which women catch up to their male colleagues in pay from the year before, and highlighting the fact that women must work for 15 months to make what men earn in 12.
"Women have made great strides in America.
We have the right to vote.
We have the ability to travel in space.
We have the privilege of holding high elected office.
But we still make only 76 cents for every dollar paid to men,"
"As a mother and a grandmother, I want my children to live in a country where my daughter can earn just as much as my son."
"This wage disparity is a life-long problem for women, because it follows them into retirement.
Women are twice as likely to live in poverty over age 65.
Women are more dependent upon Social Security for a greater percentage of their retirement income.
And because of lower lifetime wages, many women are unable to contribute to private pensions or retirement savings."
- Sen. Patty Murray
..................................................
Title IX - Equal Opportunities in Athletics
Since 1972, Title IX has opened the doors to athletics, education and success for millions of young women across America.
For thirty years the program has increased participation under Republican and Democratic administrations alike, because Title IX is not about politics - it is about helping young women realize their dreams.
On January 30, 2003, the Bush Administration's advisory commission on Title IX voted to accept several recommendations that could reverse the progress made during the last thirty years.
From 1971 to 2002, the number of girls participating in high school sports increased from 294,000 to 2.8 million, and the number of women in college sports has increased five-fold.
Senator Murray and her colleagues released a bipartisan letter to President Bush urging him to keep in place current Title IX athletics policies.
Donna de Varona and Julie Foudy, both Olympic Gold Medalists and members of the Commission, issued a Minority Report that addresses the continuing discrimination against female athletes and the need for strong enforcement of Title IX policies, as well as the serious deficiencies in the Commission's process and report.
Geena Davis, an award-winning actress and nationally-ranked archer announced her support for a nationwide public education campaign to "Save Title IX."
On Febuary 26, 2003 Sen. Murray joined a bipartisan group of Senators, athletes and women's sports activists at a press conference supporting existing Title IX policies and the campaign to "Save Title IX." Read her remarks.
..................................................
An Advocate for Women's Health Care
As a leader in the U.S. Senate on women's health care, Patty Murray has worked to build awareness and increase funding to address the medical needs of women.
Murray's own life experience as an educator, a working mother of two children, and as a caregiver for her parents have given her a unique perspective on the challenges women face in obtaining medical care.
In her years in the Senate, Murray has fought to ensure women have access to the care they need, to increase screening and treatment options for breast cancer, and to boost funding for medical research.
Murray is also an outspoken advocate for women's reproductive rights.
Whether working in committee, meeting with doctors and patients, visiting hospitals and shelters in Washington state, or speaking on the Senate floor, Patty Murray is working to ensure that all women and families have access to affordable, high quality medical care.
In 1999, Senator Murray was honored as a "Leader in Women's Health" by the Women Legislators' Lobby and Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories.
In addition, the American Psychological Association honored Murray for her "Distinguished Contribution to Women's Health."
Ensuring Women's Access to Medical Care
Currently, many insurance and HMO plans require women to see a primary care physician before they are able to see an obstetrician or gynecologist.
Sen. Murray has fought for legislation to ensure women have direct access to an OB/GYN for all health care needs by: * Voting for the Patients' Bill of Rights (S.6)(2000) * Voting for the Norwood- Dingell Bipartisan Consensus Managed Care Improvement Act (H.R. 2990)(1999) * Offering a "direct access" amendment to the Labor-HHS bill for Fiscal Year 2000.
To ensure women have access to medical care, Sen. Murray has worked to improve funding for critical programs including: Community Access Programs, Title X Family Planning, Ryan White Care Act Programs, and Medicare and Medicaid.
Senator Murray has also worked to address women's health needs by cosponsoring legislation including: * The Assured Access to Mammography Act of 2003 * The Consumer Involvement in Breast Cancer Research Act * The Providing Annual Pap Tests to Save Women's Lives Act of 2003 * The Breast Cancer and Environmental Research Act * The Uterine Fibroids Research and Education Act * The Women's Health Act of 2002
Expanding Health Care for Low-Income women
Medicaid is the joint federal/state health care program for low income Americans.
In 1995 and 1996, Senator Murray successfully fought attempts to radically alter the program in ways that would have threatened the health care safety net for millions of women and children.
In 1997, Murray successfully offered legislation to ensure hospitals can continue to provide care for low income and uninsured patients.
This year (2003), Murray is fighting the Administration's plans to block grant Medicaid and is coming to the aid of states and those members of the population that need it most.
Senator Murray is a proud cosponsor of S. 138, a bill to temporarily increase the Federal Medical Assistance Percentage (FMAP) for the Medicaid program.
Providing temporary additional federal funding to states for Medicaid would allow the states to insure the coverage of those members of the population that need it the most.
In addition, Senator Murray has worked to increase funding for breast cancer screening and treatment for women on Medicaid.
As a member of the Appropriations Committee, Murray helped increase funding for screening and early diagnosis.
To ensure treatment for low-income women, Murray helped secure passage of the "Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Act of 2000," which provides immediate health care support to low-income women who are diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer.
Promoting Equity in Health Care Research
For years, medical research and clinical trials have excluded women.
For example, one famous early medical study on breast cancer examined hundreds of men- but no women.
This bias has made it harder for scientists to address the unique medical needs of women.
Senator Murray has worked to ensure equity in today's medical research.
* In 1993, as a member of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Senator Murray worked to establish a new office at the National Institutes of Health to ensure that federally-funded research addresses the needs of women.
More recently, Murray cosponsored S. 946, the Women's Health Office Act of 2001, to establish an Office on Women's Health within the Department of Health and Human Services.
* Senator Murray also helped to increase the focus on women's health at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) by funding new programs on arthritis, diabetes, and cardivasular disease, the number on killer of women in America.
* In 1998, Murray worked with the administrator of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to encourage pharmacutical companies to include women in advanced clinical trials of new, life-saving drugs.
Fighting Breast Cancer By Increasing Funding for Screening, Treatment and Research
Senator Murray has been working in the Senate to direct funding and national attention to the fight against breast cancer.
Examples of Sen. Murray's work include:
Increasing Funding for Screening: * Since 1994, Murray has successfully increased funding for breast and cervical cancer screening program for uninsured, low-income women by about $100 million.
* Between 1991 and 2002, more than 1.75 million women were screened nationally.
* Between 1994 and 2002, more than 40,000 women were screened in Washington state alone.
Increasing Funding for Treatment: * Senator Murray worked hard to pass S. 664, The Breast and Cervical Cancer Treatment Act of 2000.
As an original cosponsor to this bill, Murray helped secure $200 million in the Medicaid program to expand treatment benefits for low-income women diagnosed with breast cancer.
Increasing Funding for Research * In 1999, Sen. Murray wrote and offered an amendment to provide for a minimum hospital stay for mastectomies and lymph node dissections performed for the treatment of breast cancer.
* In 1998, Murray cosponsored successful legislation that requires health plans to provide coverage for reconstructive surgery following mastectomies and coverage for secondary consultations.
* In the 107th Congress, Murray attempted to pass a bill to expand research on the relationship between environmental factors and the development of breast cancer.
The Breast Cancer and Environmental Research Act would have created centers of excellence designed to study the issue.
Helping New Mothers
As a newly-elected Senator in 1993, Murray led the effort in the U.S. Senate to pass the Family Medical and Leave Act.
This historic legislation set minimum national standards to allow parents to take off of work to care for a newborn or sick family member.
Now, in the 108th Congress, Murray is an original cosponsor of the Family and Medical Leave Expansion Act, which expands on the original legislation.
In 1996, Murray successfully fought to prohibit the practice of "drive-thru" deliveries in which women were automatically kicked out of the hospital shortly after giving birth.
Safe Motherhood
In the 107th Congress, Murray cosponsored the Women's Health Act of 2002.
We know that pregnancy, under even the best of circumstances, can be a physically traumatic experience with unforseen and life threatening complications.
This bill aimed to ensure a safe pregnancy for all women in the United States by reducing the rate of maternal morbidity and mortality and eliminating racial and ethnic disparities in maternal health outcomes.
This bill also would examine the impact of pregnancy on the short and long term health of women and expand knowledge about the safety and dosing of drugs to treat pregnant women with chronic conditions and women who become sick during pregnancy.
In addition, this bill would expand public health prevention, education and outreach, and develop improved and more accurate data collection related to maternal morbidity and mortality.
Investing in Women's Health
Senator Murray was the original co-sponsor of the Women's Health Equity Act of 1996, a package of 39 legislative initiatives that address women's health research, testing and education.
The bill also addressed eating disorders, fetal alcohol syndrome, and longer hospital stays after child-birth.
Boosting our Investment In Health Research
As a member of the Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education Appropriations Subcommittee, Senator Murray has been working hard to increase funding for biomedical research through the NIH.
In 1998, Murray joined several colleagues in setting a goal to double the funding for the National Institute of Health within five years.
This incredible goal was finally met, with funding for NIH increasing for the Fiscal Year 2003 by over $3.7 billion, bringing the total funding for NIH to over $27 billion.
Reproductive Health
Fighting Attempts to Weaken Roe v. Wade * Senator Murray has a lifetime 100% pro-choice voting record with the National Abortion Rights Action League.
* Murray has worked to reduce the threat of violence at women's reproductive health clinics and to prosecute those who attempt to physically harass and intimidate women patients.
In 1993, Murray cosponsored the Freedom of Access to Clinic Entrances Act, which supported a federal statute that seeks to reduce clinic violence.
* In 1999's historic 51-49 vote, Senator Murray helped secure passage of an amendment which put the U.S. Senate on record in support of the Roe vs Wade decision.
* In 2000, Senator Murray signed an amicus brief urging the United States Supreme Court to overturn the State of Nebraksa's law restricting access to abortion.
Fortunately, the Court rejected the Nebraska restrictions 5-4.
* Rather than support legislation that outlaws safe, legal abortions, Murray introduced four amendments to the so-called Partial Birth Abortion Ban Act that would reduce the number of abortions by promoting measures aimed at prevention.
The measures would prohibit insurance plans from denying women access to affordable contraceptives, authorize funding for emergency contraception education and would require hospitals to have emergency contraceptives available to victims of sexual assault.
It would also expand the State Children's Health Insurance by providing women who "fall through the cracks" with the requisite prenatal care.
Protecting the Rights of Women who Serve in the Military
Senator Murray is working to ensure that women have access to safe, affordable health care, including legal reproductive health services.
Since 1995, Murray has been working to allow military women access to abortion-related services at U.S. military facilities overseas at their own expense.Insurance Coverage of Contraceptives
Senator Murray co-sponsored the Equity in Prescription Insurance and Contraceptive Coverage Act (1997), which would help eliminate insurance discrimination against women.
Currently, some insurance company policies impede women's access to basic health care and accounts for the fact that women pay 68 percent more in out-of-pocket health care costs than men.
Raising Awareness About Emergency Contraceptives
In 2002, Senator Murray wrote and introduced legislation to reduce the number of abortions by raising awareness of emergency contraceptives.
Emergency contraception is a concentrated dose of ordinary birth control pills that can prevent pregnancy.
Unfortunately for millions of American women, emergency contraception is also a well-kept secret.
Less than 12% of women are even aware of the availability of FDA-approved, safe and effective emergency contraceptives, which can prevent unintended pregnancies, if taken with 72 hours.
Murray's bill is The Emergency Contraception Education Act."
The bill would establish a public education and awareness program to provide women with information on the availability of safe and effective emergency contraceptives.
The five year education plan would cost $10 million annually.
..................................................
Meeting the Unique Retirement Needs of Women
Senator Murray recognizes that women face special challenges in retirement.
In general, women live longer than men and are more likely to live with a chronic medical condition.
Unfortunately, women have less access to pensions, leave the workforce for an average of 11 years to care for their families, and make less money than men do.
That's why Senator Murray has fought for Social Security and Medicare protections for women by: * Working to adjust survivors' benefits so widows can receive 75% of their spouses' benefit, * Working to provide a family caregiver credit so women aren't penalized for leaving the workforce to raise a family, * In 1997, Senator Murray led the effort in the Senate Budget Committee to expand preventative benefits under Medicare for mammography, colorectal screening, and bone mass measurements.
* and Working to keep Social Security progressive to keep older women out of poverty.
Women's Reform Checklist
In 1999, Senator Murray and her Democratic women Senate colleagues developed a checklist of questions to ask of any proposed reform to Social Security.
This checklist, which ensures women will not be hurt by Social Security reforms, includes the following questions: * Will changes to Social Security eliminate Social Security's inflation protection? * Will women be penalized financially for living longer than men do? * Can women can count on secure, lifetime benefits? * Will Social Security continue to protect disabled workers, spouses and children? * Will any reforms to Social Security push more seniors into poverty?
Women Have Different Retirement Needs Than Men: * Women live longer * Women are more likely to have a chronic medical condition.
* Women have less access to pensions.
* Women make less money than men.
* Women spend fewer years in the workforce.
Home | Privacy Policy | Site Map | FAQ | About this Site Search _______________ Go
About...
Women's Issues
* The Challenge * Murray's Work * News Releases
Related Pages: Domestic Violence Education
