US National Archives and Records Administration ...ready access to essential evidence...
Publications Attention users of screen reader software.
There are 4 possible starting points on this page, please select where you want to start using this page from the following choices: Start at the NARA Website Quick-links Skip the NARA Website Quick-links and start from the main navigation choices Skip the Quick-links and the Main Navigation choices and go to the Section-Specific Navigation choices Skip all navigation choices on this page and go directly to the content.
The NARA Website quick-links below provide a way to immediately navigate to frequently accessed areas of NARA's Website.
Where is Hot Topics / What's New Where is The Constitution Where is The Declaration of Independence Where is The Bill of Rights Where is Genealogy Where is Veterans' Service Records Where is Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Where is Access to Archival Databases (AAD) Where is eVetRecs Where is Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Where is Archives Library Info.
Center (ALIC) Where is Calendar of Events Where is FAQs Where is FOIA Reading Room Where is Information Security Oversight Office Where is Interagency Working Group (IWG) Where is Locations and Hours (Facilities) Where is Media Desk Where is Organization Chart Where is Preservation Where is Prologue Magazine Where is Publications How do I Use this Site How do I Order Copies How do I Contact NARA How do I Visit NARA How do I Apply for a Job How do I Volunteer at NARA How do I Research Online How do I Find a Public Law How do I Apply for a Grant How do I Find Records Management Training Attention users of screen reader software.
The NARA Website quick-links above are repeated verbatim in a HTML form below.
The form below is designed for traditional web browsers.
Select this link to skip past the form.
[ Where Is...? / How Do I...?..........]
GO! December 26, 2003
Welcome About Us Research Room Records Management Records Center Program Federal Register NHPRC and Other Grants Exhibit Hall Digital Classroom Records of Congress Presidential Libraries Search Site Index The National Archives Experience Our Documents - A National Initiative on American history, civics, and service Support the National Archives FirstGov: Your First Click to the U.S. Government Print-Friendly Version [clear_pixel.gif] Sections skip section navigation menu 1 skip to content Main Section Publications Main Page Main Section About NARA Publications Main Section Publications Sub Section Free Publications Sub Section Fee Publications Sub Section Catalogs of Publications 
[The Genealogy Page]
Table of Contents * General Information Includes: Introduction to Census Schedules Catalog Arrangement Microfilm Problems Census Indexes The Soundex Coding System Abbreviations and Terms Used in Soundex Cards Enumeration District Descriptions and Maps Other Schedules Research Hints Useful Publications Census Availability and Access Select Bibliography Regional Records Services Facilities
* 1790-1840 Census Schedules
1790 Census Schedules 1800 Census Schedules 1810 Census Schedules 1820 Census Schedules 1830 Census Schedules 1840 Census Schedules
* 1850 Census Schedules
* 1860 Census Schedules
* 1870 Census Schedules
* 1880 Soundex
* 1880 Census Schedules
* 1890 Census Schedules Includes: Index to the 1890 Census Special Schedules Enumerating Union Veterans and Widows of Veterans of the Civil War
National Archives Trust Fund Board National Archives and Records Administration Washington, DC 1997
Top of Page
Privacy and Use Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us NARA Home Page NARA Address: 700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20408, Telephone: 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272
[nojavascript
