[banner.gif] [USEMAP:flags.gif]
It is a pleasure to be here.
I want to thank the NPRC and its President Manny Mirabal for putting this conference together and for the opportunity to address you today [names special guests] Introduction A little over a year ago, I was elected by the people of Puerto Rico to be their new Resident Commissioner in Washington.
I went to Washington with great challenges and with a broad agenda.
I went to Washington to achieve fair treatment in education for our children; to secure the welfare benefits to which our citizens are entitled; to bring peace for Vieques; to obtain the necessary economic tools to promote job-creation and economic development in Puerto Rico; and to establish a new working relationship with the Puerto Rican community living in the mainland.
In short, I did not go to Washington to promote an ideological agenda or to work for the benefit of a particular political group; I went there to obtain results on areas that affect the life of every Puerto Rican, regardless where they live.
I must say that I have not been alone in my efforts.
I was very lucky to find an effective ally and a good friend in Manny Mirabal.
I recall, that in January 2001, a few days after my arrival in Washington, NPRC celebrated their Fiesta de los Reyes Magos in my honor.
This small gesture meant a lot to me.
It signified their willingness to work with the Commonwealth goverment and to promote the change that Puerto Rico wanted in Washington.
It was the beginning of a sincere friendship and a fruitful working relationship.
I want to thank Manny for his relentless work on issues that affect Puerto Rico.
I also want to thank my great friend and a key player in our operation in Washington: PRFAAs director, Mari Carmen Aponte.
I believe for the first time in many, many years, the National Puerto Rican Coalition, PRFAA and the office of the Resident Commissioner, are working together for the benefit of our people.
The change in Washington is evident and the results are evident too.
During my campaign, I pledged to promote consensus and work with everyone that was willing to help Puerto Rico.
And I found that many people wanted to help.
I immediately found out that I could count on my Puerto Rican colleagues: Luis Guitierrez, Nydia Velazquez, and Jose Serrano.
All of them.
For the first time in years the Puerto Rican caucus was working as a team.
I have also received the support of many members of Congress, including all the members of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus Today I want use this opportunity to propose to NPRC a common agenda for Puerto Ricansfor those on the Island and those in the mainland.
The Puerto Rican community in the US has always been there for Puerto Rico when we have needed them: for natural disasters, for Vieques, to defend 936, and for many other issues that affect Puerto Rico.
This relationship must be two ways and you should know that you can count on Puerto Rico too.
We already have results on this agenda.
First we must work for the best education of our children.
On education I must say that I am extremely satisfied with our results.
In my 1st year as Resident Commissioner, and for the first time in the history of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, Puerto Rico was finally fairly treated under the Education Bill.
My argument was simple but powerful: if President Bush claimed that the bill would leave no child behind then the children of Puerto Rico should not be left behind.
Under the new bill signed into law by President Bush Puerto Rico is treated like any other US jurisdiction after a phase-in period of five years.
This means that Title I funds for Puerto Rico will double after 5 years; an increase of over $540 million for the education of our children.
A lot of people worked very hard to get this amendment.
My office, PRFAAS staff, Governor Calderons office, and many others.
But I want to underscore the role that NPRC played throughout the whole process.
Manny and his team have worked on the issue for years.
Their lobbying efforts and their support was important in this victory for Puerto Rico.
I think this is the best example of the great things we can achieve when we work together and when the only thing in our mind is the well being of the people of Puerto Rico.
We also must work to create jobs and the Economic Development.
By 2000 Puerto Rico had lost over 16 thousand jobs in the manufacturing since 1996, and the trend continued during 2000 and 2001.
As of today, we have lost over 20 jobs in the manufacturing sector alone.
It does not take an expert to understand that the elimination of our main tools for job-creation: section 936 and 30A was a mistake.
In 2001, I introduced, together with congressmen Crane and Rangel, HR 2550, to amend section 956 of the Internal Revenue Code.
This amendment would allow US companies with operations abroad to incorporate their subsidiaries in Puerto Rico as CFS, and receive considerable tax exemptions as they repatriate their income to the US mainland.
This amendment would create jobs for capable workers in Puerto Rico, workers that are US citizens and that contribute to the US economy.
This jobs would otherwise go to Malaysia, Singapore, Ireland, etc.
The 956 amendment is about jobs and is about economic benefits for Puerto Rico and for the United States.
We are glad that we have bipartisan support for the measurethat has over 45 co-sponsors in the House.
In the Senate a parallel bill was introduced by John Breaux and Orin Hatch and various key Senators have expressed their intention to support our proposal.
As we return to Washington after the Easter recess, we will intensify our efforts to push for the approval of this measure and to get our economy back on its feet.
Puerto Ricans are hard working peoplewe just need the jobs and the opportunity to contribute to the US economy.
In order to get this done we need your strong and active support.
I know we have it.
Congress must know it too.
I know that Ramon Cantero will have a chance to further explain the Commonwealths economic plan later today.
Another are we must keep working is Vieques.
This was another great challenge that we faced last year and still face.
And again, we were not alone.
We began a process of educating Washington on the issue.
Vieques was not a political or military issue, but a human rights and health issue.
We were able to make it a national issue with the support of millions of Hispanics in the United States.
Thanks to our efforts the President made the decision that the Navy had to leave.
Even after September 11, the President has kept his word and we trust him.
Without such commitment, no law would be able to protect the people of Vieques, like some people have argued.
It was our moral and political strength that convinced the President that to stop the bombing was the right thing to do.
Today the most important thing is to remain together.
Lets not allow them to divide us now.
Our strength is our moral strength and our unity.
The Vieques issue is not yet resolved, but we are getting closer to a final solution thanks to the hard work of honest people in Washington and in Puerto Rico.
Soon we will celebrate together because peace for Vieques will be a reality.
Our position remains the same: there should be no more bombing in Vieques.
We must work to make sure that our families have good nutrition, health and the welfare benefit they need to get back on their feet.
We made great strives on other areas as well.
As you know the Nutritional Assistance Program (PAN) --that is considered as part of the Farm Bill will be reauthorize this year.
In the House version of the bill we managed to extend the PAN program for Puerto Rico over the next 10 years with a projected total increase of $440 millionas adjusted by the cost of living.
Now that the House and the Senate are in conference, I am confident that funding for Puerto Rican families is safe.
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico has the goal of reducing dependency on welfare and providing jobs and opportunities for all citizens who are willing and able to work.
However, this process cannot happen overnight.
In the current economic situation we need a good welfare support system to protect our families and promote a reasonable transition from welfare to work.
This year Congress began the process of reauthorization of the Welfare act.
My goal is to make sure that Puerto Rican families get what they need to be able to stand on their feet.
We will continue working with NPRC to make sure Puerto Rico gets its fair share in the welfare reauthorization.
Finally we must work to strengthen the Puerto Rican Community in the mainland and its political impact in our democracy.
Puerto Rican on the Island and those in the mainland share strong ties.
It is our duty as leaders to strengthen those ties and to make sure that the relationship is two ways.
As Resident Commissioner of Puerto Rico I will continue to do everything in my power to promote Puerto Ricans and Hispanics running for office in the US.
Working together we elected Eddie Perez in Hartford and we almost elected a Puerto Rican mayor in New York.
This is just the beginning.
In order to promote the participation of our community in the democratic process, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is developing an huge voter registration program throughout the nation.
Governor Calderon has entrusted Maricarmen Aponte with this great project that will make history.
The Commonwealth has recognized that there are over 600,000 unregistered Puerto Ricans on the mainland in geographically diverse areas, including New York, Florida, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Delaware, Connecticut, New Jersey, Rhode Island and Ohio.
Our goal is to register at least 250,000 Puerto Rican voter by November 2004.
This is an important project that will enhance the capacity of our community to influence politics at local and national levels.
Like I said, you have been there for Puerto Rico many times.
Now Puerto Rico will be there with you in our effort to empower our community.
This is our common agenda.
Lets work together and I am sure we will accomplish great things for Puerto Rico.
Thank you very much.
[back_index.gif] [to_top.gif]
126 Cannon HOB Washington, DC 20515-5401 Phone:(202) 225-2615 Fax: (202) 225-2154 - Anibal@mail.house.gov
