[DAIT121.gif] Notes 6/12/03 Attending: Rich Sandeen, Kathy Kerkvliet, Gary Smith, Brian Humphrey, Linda Hughes, Sanjay Rughani, Malinda Bjaaland, Gay Dubigk, Bob Scott, Donna Zimmer, Kathy Haven, Barbara Urbach, Mike Riber , Martha Williams, Consuelo Guandique, Sharry Wade , Tammy O'Neal, Shawn Brookshier, Alex Kosmides, Jim O'Brien, Pam Church, Bruce Alexander, Mel Monkelis Facilitators: Rich Sandeen, Kathy Kerkvliet, Gary Smith, Brian Humphrey Scribe: Bonnie Clark Agenda: 1.
Welcome 2.
DAIT Future 3.
NWDC Board Report 4.
College Customer Flow Workgroup 5.
Products 
Partnership Coordinator Reports 7.
Other 8.
Feedback 9.
Next Meeting
ACTION SUMMARY
ACTION: Facilitators- work with IT Staff to create a DAIT online conversation string on Inside WorkSource NW for `between-meeting' updates.
ACTION: Coordinators- post Leadership Team notes on Inside WorkSource Northwest.
CONCLUSION: The DAIT will use it's combined package of performance data to do assessment to find out how we are doing against the system outcomes we have identified.
We will adjust the mission to get the work done, building action plans and partnership integration.
ACTION: DAIT Facilitators- reformat the DAIT Mission and use system assessment to direct our future work.
ACTION: Facilitators- draft desired results from OQOP training on Mystery Shopper data and e-mail to DAIT members.
1.
Welcome
This is the first DAIT meeting held in the newly certified "WorkSource Skagit" Congratulations!
2.
DAIT Future
The Northwest Partnership is chartered by the Workforce Development Board as the operational mechanism to ensure the Strategic Goals are reached.
Current Team Configurations:
CUT's and CQI Teams - own and work with a key process
DAIT - develop/improve/implement NW Partnership products and processes
Leaders - funding issues (eliminate barriers for DAIT)
Work - task specific, time limited projects
The NW Partnership combined the two Design Teams, with the intention of: 1.)
Eliminating duplication of work (across counties) and 2.)
Adding an implementation and accountability function.
The rate of change throughout the workforce development system has steadily accelerated.
The Leadership Team has had almost a 100% turnover since its inception.
The Leadership Team is working to catch new members up on 10+ yrs of history, refresh energy, educate, and create advocacy for our shared vision of integration through partnership.
DAIT facilitators receive feedback from DAIT Members that the perceived value of meetings has diminished.
Team members want to get in and work rather than information sharing.
We've also struggled with reporting and using data effectively.
To be timely, more work is happening in other places.
Sub teams are working hard to support our goals.
The infrastructure for a fully functioning system was built here and has taken off and become more self-sufficient.
It is time to re-examine the Design 
There is no question that the work being produced in our Partnership remains of the highest quality and value.
The NW Partnership and its products are widely recognized as superior and leading edge.
The many successes we have achieved together results from building a regional infrastructure of:
§ Teams, agreements, processes, products, and communication strategies
§ A cross-organizational culture dedicated to the pursuit of quality and customer outcomes (CQI Team, Baldrige quality criteria)
§ Strong leadership (risk taking and visioning required for integrated service delivery)
§ Investment in human resource development (high skilled/high functioning team members, Professional Competencies, Regional Training Team)
The NW Workforce Development System is built around a set of common integrators (quality standards, skill standards, performance outcomes, assessment, staff skills 
The partners came together to build a highly effective system around the common goals of each partner.
The focus on our common integrators has allowed us to achieve:
§ Enhanced efficiencies and economies of scale
§ Process alignments and realignments
§ Customer and market focus rather than inward program focus
§ Improved customer outcomes
Facilitators came up with 3 options for a next step for the Design 
#1 Dissolve DAIT All together
#2 Reformat the mission of the DAIT
Change team role from design work to a communication role
#3 Conduct System Assessment
Conduct a thorough system assessment (outcomes, indicators, how to measure, set goals)
Discussion Points:
Option #1: Dissolution
§ Some members felt the role of the DAIT in relation to empowerment from Leaders is not clear.
§ It was clarified that Partner representatives at this table have been given the authority to represent their organization by Leaders.
§ The DAIT was designed to be cross-functional.
We have the perspectives of leaders and line staff.
We are empowered to make changes.
If a decision requires resources, the Leadership team would need to find a way to commit those.
The DAIT comes up with ideas and plans and the Leadership Team eliminates barriers.
Leadership can come up with ideas as well.
§ Anyone sitting at the DAIT is expected to lead.
You represent your organization.
The presence at this table of direct service staff is to inform the team of system needs and produce ideas.
Members take a proactive role in the design of the Partnership.
§ With the infrequency of DAIT meetings a lot of work is produced elsewhere in the Partnership.
Meetings turn into information sharing sessions instead of design and implementation work.
§ Members requested to be informed prior to meetings of issues on the table to feel more comfortable representing their organization in decisions.
§ DAIT discussions provide an important opportunity for Partners to educate, express opinions and share their organizational perspective.
Members raise issues, brainstorm/problem solve, reach consensus, support ideas, and bring back information to their agency.
§ Rather than dissolution of the DAIT, the meetings should be higher functioning.
§ Issues should be presented electronically in advance of meetings so members can be better prepared for the times together
ACTION: Facilitators- work with IT Staff to create a DAIT online conversation string on Inside WorkSource NW for `between-meeting' updates.
§ Leadership Team notes are not currently posted to Inside WorkSource Northwest.
No DAIT proposals have gone to the Leadership Team and been rejected.
ACTION: Coordinators- post Leadership Team notes on Inside WorkSource Northwest.
§ It is essential for the DAIT to be a safe place for members to express their honest opinions.
§ Elements of this team's role have been adopted into other teams and places in the system.
The DAIT needs to take a look at the other team's and groups to see where and what work is happening.
§ Sub Teams have not always been good about bringing work back to this team.
Are the products/processes being done between meetings by our other teams what we wanted/intended? Is the work happening elsewhere in alignment with our system integrators and goals? We lack in oversight and tracking.
§ CQI data and Re-certification assessments done by Center Use Teams is all data that will be valuable in figuring out next step.
§ Team functionality may be diminished by the perception that work is top down.
§ Team needs better, more constant communication.
Survey for issues prior to meetings so that everyone can be prepared via electronic communication tools.
§ Workforce Investment Act reauthorization is underway.
Partners have shared outcomes that should be the focus.
The goals in the strategic plan need to be worked on at this level.
§ The team needs direction.
DAIT needs to be reenergized and embrace the connections and communication in this team.
Reassessment is necessary.
Decision: The Design 
Option #2: Reformatting the Mission of the DAIT
The DAIT has evolved from a team dedicated to doing design work during meetings to one functioning more as a communication vehicle to learn about and comment upon work being accomplished through a variety of other Partnership venues.
This option is to alter our expectations of the DAIT to more closely align with our current functioning as an information sharing body.
The pros to this option include:
§ Retaining the accountability function of the team to ensure we are implementing product 
§ We would be able to spot the gaps between full and partial implementation and between outputs (products/process) and outcomes (results/performance)
The cons include:
§ Accepting that other elements of our Partnership will continue to do the "design" work
§ Shifting the "what do we need to design?" conversation to Leadership or some other partnership entity
Option #3: Organization Assessment
§ Performing an intensive system assessment puts the DAIT back an active role in the Workforce Development System.
Designate sub teams to do the initial assessment work, look at products/processes, this strategy would give us information on current status, bring us together with a common goal
§ Cons - require hard work, investment of resources (funds, time, energy, staff), and will lead to additional change
§ We've been struggling to figure out how to get system performance data to this table.
§ The CQI Team has been struggling with how to collect data and then how to present data in a useable format.
§ Funding dollars are based on performance and customer satisfaction data.
This affects all partner programs.
§ Locally we have had a good handle on what the system deficiencies are and creating products and processes to correct.
DAIT needs to be on top of customer data so that we can stay ahead of the game and not have surprises from the top down.
We need to gather data, make sense of it, and create action plans.
Big Picture Discussion - System Outcomes, how do we know if we are achieving them? Are teams on the right track?
Places to start in comprehensive system assessment:
§ Some outcomes are `top down' - Workforce Development Council charters the Partnership and sets the strategic goals and strategies for NW WA .
Charge to local Workforce Development Council is to figure out local plans in alignment with the Governor's goals.
§ Strategic Goals (identify indicators and measurements)
§ Achieve integration
§ Staff competencies around customer satisfaction and performance measures
§ Common Federal performance measures (Entered employment, retention of employment, Earnings Gain, ROI = cost efficiency)
§ Mystery shopper reports (customer satisfaction in WorkSource Centers)
§ System integrators
§ Align system expectations for each partner
§ Common understanding of Partner roles
§ Relation and good communication with Leadership team - empowerment
§ Don't wait for Leaders - our agency's have already bought in to the common performance measures.
We are accountable to educate/inform our Leaders and our staff.
§ Achieving Integration (reduce redundancy, need assessment of this)
§ Customer Satisfaction (perception of our service)
§ Business Services 
§ Communication - notes may be posted to the Internet but people have a lot of reasons why they are still not informed.
§ Design issue a group of individuals worked on a project to near completion before other people raised the flags that they had not been informed or viewed the product.
Benefits of an integrated system:
§ The consortium helps each partner achieve goals, serves customers, get money through shared resources that would not independently reach
§ Honest request for partners to assist in reaching specific funding opportunities
§ Performance equals the ability for each agency to continue to stay in business.
§ Demonstrate integrated partnership to validate each partner's individual position (concerns about privatization)
§ Documentation of work and improvements
Design 
§ Achieve Integration (system integrators)
§ Customer Satisfaction/ Performance
§ Common performance measures across system (Entered employment, Retention of employment, Earnings gain, Return on Investment)
§ Accountability to each other and the system
Reinventing
§ Designate a time on every agenda where we can brainstorm creative/innovative ideas and/or issue resolution.
§ Have an electronic conversation string on DAIT issues available on Inside WorkSource Northwest.
ACTION: DAIT Facilitators- reformat the DAIT Mission and use system assessment to direct our future work.
Partnership data collection:
§ Customer satisfaction
§ Comment cards
§ Exit interviews
§ Focus groups
§ Workforce Investment Act program satisfaction survey
§ Mystery shopper
The Management Group receives and reviews the mystery shopper results first.
Decisions are yet to be made about how to use that data.
The ES Office of Quality and Organizational Performance will meet with the Management Group 
Management Group includes top administrators from WDC 
Data Management Plan
OQOP will then present to DAIT regarding system satisfaction measures and plan/protocols for action.
Region wide training on data will be conducted by OQOP.
This is a mutually valuable activity and lays groundwork for DAIT's performance management role.
All partners are being mystery shopped- in Center's and individually.
It is under consideration to contract additional Northwest mystery shopper visits for a more complete set of data.
DAIT Work- Mystery Shoppers:
Shape work to be conducted by OQOP - clarify outcomes desired
Receive report from OQOP
Receive training on data collection 
Create action plan as necessary
A summary of the most recent mystery shopper report is available online.
Issues identified by Mystery Shoppers are universal issues throughout the Partnership.
This project is in line with our common objective to increase customer satisfaction.
Everyone will be involved.
DAIT Learning Objective - how to identify trends in data to know what needs to be reacted to and to what degree.
See results when we meet next in September.
CONCLUSION: The DAIT will use it's combined package of performance data to do assessment to find out how we are doing against the system outcomes we have identified.
We will adjust the mission to get the work done, building action plans and partnership integration.
3.
NWDC Board Report
Workforce Investment Act reauthorization is now moving through House Committee.
WA Workforce Association has been aggressive in requesting more money to be able to serve clients better.
All Partners in the State signed a letter to Congress and worked with two other states to have more control on how the reauthorization looks.
Senator Cantwell has been supportive of our efforts and champions workforce preparation nationally.
The new Chair of the State's Workforce Board is expected to be a positive impact.
Exciting news from Skagit - Partners have been working with an architect to plan the new co-located WorkSource Skagit.
It should move forward quickly.
The WDB is strategizing around funding streams.
Budget cuts make business tight.
WDC continues to pursue additional grants and funding to expand and improve services.
Work Ahead
WA State updated their strategic plan and asked local WDC's to align work.
The draft of the Northwest revised strategic plan is available for review and comment at http://www.nwboard.org/ .
Skills Gap Project Update
Current Work/Accomplishments:
Healthcare
§ The Northwest Alliance for Health Care Skills is beginning its third year.
§ Healthcare grants were received to 1.)
Increase the number of Registered Nurses in the local area (high skill/high wage occupation) and 2.)
Increase training capacity and frequency of training availability at Community 
§ A Radiological Technician program is now available at BTC and is part of a multi-college consortium.
§ 18 ESL Students are graduating today and will begin their Nursing career training.
§ 5 Nursing Assistants were hired straight out of class.
Boat Building
§ Received grant to work with Northern Marine to develop skill standards training on safety and operation for incumbent workers (on-the-job training)
§ Doing a vacancy survey with employers in the Healthcare, manufacturing, construction, and IT fields to identify employer needs.
Manufacturing and Information Technology
§ Completed a cross section of employers we want to talk to and have been going through the unions to research needs and figure out training needs
Dislocated Workers
§ WDC is meeting with labor and colleges to determine the best strategy to accommodate the potential Intalco layoff of 600+.
4.
College Customer Flow Workgroup
GROUP CHARTER
To produce a plan for Leadership with recommendations to ensure students receive appropriate career assessment, planning, and funding with those completing training being placed in high demand high wage jobs.
The plan will address:
· the needs of business for qualified workers are addressed in a systemic manner
The plan will include recommendations:
· for how to transition participants effectively and efficiently from the WorkSource system (Workforce Investment Act)
TEAM MEMBERS
Gay Dubigk, Alex Kosmides, Linda Woiwood, Linda Hughes, Mike Riber, Tammy O'Neal, Mel Monkelis, Brian Humphrey, Kit Vonnegut(scribe), Sanjay Rughani, Gary Smith (facilitator) and Lori Strumpf (facilitator)
GROUP VISION
The initial vision is for a regional approach to serving WIA funded students that focuses on business needs and is built on an industry sector approach to service design and delivery.
GROUP PROCESS
The group process was to:
· Examine the current (as is) state and identify opportunities for improvement
· Utilize the work of the Regional Dislocated Worker Team to identify how the connections between the WorkSource system to college training might work better.
· Keep in mind the concept of responding to business needs by using an industry sector approach
· Create a set of recommended strategies for all students funded through the WorkSource system (Workforce Investment Act)
· Examine the approaches developed in light of how they assist all students gain access to high skill, high demand areas
· Identify the staff knowledge and abilities (core competencies) that will be required to maximize the potential of the new process flow and set of strategies
· Identify types of services required, e.g., guidance counseling for students, student retention, job search, services to businesses.
· Identify how to connect and integrate current services and funding streams
GROUP IMPACT POINTS * Ensure that we are training in the identified Demand Sectors * Staff interaction - career goals * Career assessment/educational planning * Bigger role of Workforce Development Council than just `financial aid' * Exit of student from college
GROUP 1
Mike and Brian
Task: Ensure that we are training in the identified Demand Sectors
To better serve our student participants, the business community, and meet program outcomes for Workforce Development Council and Employment Security.
The work informs which training programs are funded through Workforce Development Council, which `in-demand' training programs were not currently offered by the technical colleges.
Researched labor market information including entry level wages in the local area to ensure that performance outcomes around wage.
Funding agencies wanted to have a larger role than that of a financial aid service.
Local employers were queried to see if training programs and applicants were meeting their need for skilled workers.
GROUP 2
Linda W, Linda H, Mel, Kit and Brian
Task: Career, Education and Financial Planning
To provide a consistent approach to educational and financial planning with customers.
Ensure that potential students have financial backup plans.
Spend time up front with customers to conduct self assessment, labor market research, and create plans to get them through a training program that will be right for them.
Students make their own decisions about what they want to do for a career.
Measure results of these strategies through customer feedback.
A checklist has been developed and will be provided to each student at the outset to ensure that they have their questions answered and know what their next step is.
Implementation Plan:
New products and processes will be introduced to all staff that touches Dislocated Workers.
Training on their use will be provided for Partners.
In future, the checklist and other products may be downloaded from Inside WorkSource Northwest and printed off in color.
A PowerPoint training module will also be available online for ongoing staff training and reference.
GROUP 3
Gay, Tammy, Mike, David and Sanjay
Task: Exit from Schools
To better facilitate the process of students completing a training program and transitioning to employment.
It is intended that customers clearly perceive the assistance they have received from the system upon placement.
Outcome: Businesses have their need for qualified employees met, Participants gain employment in a timely manner, and Employment 
Career counseling, placement services, and a centrally located career center are important to student placement rates.
Bellingham Technical College , Skagit Valley College , and Whatcom Community College were surveyed to devise a plan for better providing career center services for students.
An Intensive Job Search Club (structured curriculum including industry specific job hunting strategies) was developed and will be held on site at each of the Colleges.
WorkSource Staff are currently conducting these sessions at WorkSource Whatcom and BTC several days a week.
Leadership will make larger decisions around resources.
5.
Products 
Follow up on ACTIONS from last meeting:
§ Due to the delay in distribution of the last set of notes; work around Partnership Products 
§ Team descriptions will be attached to notes.
6.
Partnership Coordinator Reports
The WorkSource Re-certification process is underway at WorkSource Whatcom.
On 2 year rotation, each of the three WorkSource Centers undergoes this intensive process.
It has value in keeping Center's focused on quality service.
However, it is extremely time consuming and with all the Center Use Team's involved in the same process at a different phase, redundancy of work abounds.
Design Question:
Is there a better way, as a workforce development system, to combine efforts on the Re-Certification process? How does this become a system conversation vs. one conducted independently at each Center?
§ Northwest Workforce Development system has consistent skill standards and a Regional DAIT.
The amount of time and resources invested in the current method is incentive enough to combine efforts.
§ Variations between the Centers are not as large as occasionally perceived.
§ Centers are assessed individually for certification.
§ Better communication of certification data is needed among the WorkSource Centers.
Each Center has strengths which should be shared with the others.
§ There is definite value in the self evaluation phase of the application process and it should remain localized.
§ The DAIT can use re-certification reports from each Center as a data source in its system assessment.
§ The DAIT is open to requests from Center Use Team's for ideas and assistance
§ Ongoing assessment should be integrated into daily work vs. a last minute rush to present well.
§ Question: How do we make sure all certification applications are completed with the same level of quality?
§ Idea - cross train an assistant to take over some of the tedious, paperwork preparation.
§ DAIT should look at results from each Center to identify and correct system trends.
DAIT will take a proactive approach.
§ Annual assessments occur by the WorkSource Center Use Teams using the Par5tnership approved Center Certification Self Evaluation and Certification and areas for improvement.
Continuous quality improvement plans for each center are developed by each Center Use Team.
Centers evaluate against the WDC Board approved Center Certification Self Evaluation and Certification Application.
Center Use Teams are responsible to bring Centers the quality standards identified in the certification application.
Summary
§ Partners agree WorkSource Certification data should be brought to the DAIT table.
The DAIT will identify systems issues and develop a quality improvement/action plan as needed.
§ Further conversation about Partnership Teams currently in place and their charges at the next DAIT meeting
Business Contacts/Update
Work is progressing to ensure staff is using the business screens in SKIES.
Training on this portion of SKIES will be held soon.
7.
Other
§ The CQI Team is not consistently staffed by all agencies.
Partnership Teams need to receive the commitment of human resources to sufficiently support team functions for continued efficiency.
8.
Facilitator Feedback
§ Facilitators expressed too much of their own insecurities at outset.
§ Appreciated facilitation - seemed like an energetic conversation
§ Some concrete ideas were put forward, putting things on the internet in advance of meetings is an excellent idea
§ Enjoyed discussion, gives me hope that the team is a worthwhile expenditure of time.
Like the reinvestment piece.
Discussion was lively and interesting.
When people are waiting to make a comment there needs to be monitoring for people jumping in with comments.
Makes me lose train of thought or other issues piled up.
§ Liked the meeting.
Lots of interesting things going on within each agency.
The end of the meeting was valuable.
DAIT role is bringing the Partnership to look at Partnership performance and come to problem resolution.
Have not seen that for the last few meetings.
Got bogged down with Leadership conversations.
Need to be proactive and find something to do or you will be told.
Leadership is looking over the mountain to see where we are going and staff figures out how to climb it.
Didn't feel that as a group that we are asking "can we make it work".
Get the feeling that we are always talking about the great work that we did.
I wanted to know what we are going to do.
When we get a lively conversation and people start backing up for who is next, begin to make a list of who is next.
Try not to put words in people's mouth.
Understand that you are trying to summarize.
Lots of great info.
What are we going to do with it?
§ For the amount of what we tried to do this AM it was good facilitation.
Learned some things today.
Hadn't realized that I had felt passive about attending.
Like the idea of advance preparation for meetings.
There were some huge question marks raised today that may not be resolved and will surface soon (problem with assessment, data, and statistics - when and where it comes in).
We need a systems statistician.
Don't see any of us who has the breadth of viewpoint to analyze the entire system's worth of data and interpret it for the rest of us.
Bring up Business Services stuff more - it's an addendum rather than a focus.
More work to do - glad we are not dissolving.
§ All did very well as facilitators.
Tough job.
Thoughtful in preparation and coordinating conversation.
Think there are times when there needs to be some spontaneity.
Took a huge risk this morning with the conversation - had to think on your feet.
Did an excellent job of letting it go and then pulling it back together and laying foundation for how to move ahead in future.
Group struggling for sense of identity.
At the core of what we do here are our relationships.
We are focusing too much on process and outcomes and not enough on relationships.
Look forward to future evolution of team.
§ This morning's session was chaotic and not structured enough.
People were not able to get called on quick enough.
Points for raising hands today.
Not everything was said that should/could have been.
§ Chaos was expected by beginning with a question - "where do we go from here?" I was very interested in conversation.
Facilitators - I wouldn't want your job.
Monitoring order of people waiting to speak.
No talking over others.
Participants should step up and say "wait - I was next".
§ Thought you did really well.
Not sure of questions coming out today.
Group is ready again to understand team roles/dynamics.
Given the whole thing - did well.
9.
Next Meeting
September 11, 2003 WorkSource-Skagit, Room 103 8:30-4:30
