Table of Decisions Previous Decision Next Decision Quick List of Decisions __________________________________________________________________ [ v13 p351 ] 13:351(60)CA The decision of the Authority follows: __________________________________________________________________ 13 FLRA No. 60
UNITED STATES MARSHALS SERVICE Respondent
and
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO, INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF MARSHALS SERVICE LOCALS Charging Party
Case No. 3-CA-2800
DECISION AND ORDER
The Administrative Law Judge issued the attached Decision in the above-entitled proceeding finding that the Respondent had engaged in certain unfair labor practices alleged in the complaint, and recommending that it be ordered to cease and desist therefrom and take certain affirmative action.
Exceptions to the Judge's Decision were filed by the Respondent.
Pursuant to section 2423.29 of the Authority's Rules and Regulations and section 7118 of the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (the Statute), the Authority has reviewed the rulings of the Judge made at the hearing and finds that no prejudicial error was committed.
The rulings are hereby affirmed.
Upon consideration of the Judge's Decision and the entire record, the Authority hereby adopts the Judge's findings, conclusions, and Recommended Order.
/1A/
ORDER
Pursuant to section 2423.29 of the Federal Labor Relations Authority's Rules and Regulations and section 7118 of the Statute, it is hereby ordered that the United States Marshals Service shall:
1.
Cease and desist from:
(a) Failing or refusing to comply with the January 11, 1980 final award of Arbitrator William H. Coburn issued pursuant to the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
(b) In any like or related manner failing or refusing to comply with any provision of the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
2.
Take the following affirmative action in order to effectuate the purposes and policies of the Statute:
(a) Comply with the January 11, 1980 final award of Arbitrator William H. Coburn issued pursuant to the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
(b) Post at its facilities copies of the attached Notice on forms to be furnished by the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
Upon receipt of such forms, they shall be signed by the Director, United States Marshals Service, or his designee, and shall be posted and maintained by him for 60 consecutive days thereafter, in conspicuous places, including all bulletin boards and other places where notices to employees are customarily posted.
Reasonable steps shall be taken to insure that such Notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
(c) Pursuant to section 2423.30 of the Authority's Rules and Regulations, notify the Regional Director, Region III, Federal Labor Relations Authority, in writing, within 30 days from the date of this Order, as to what steps have been taken to comply herewith.
Issued, Washington, D.C., November 3, 1983
Barbara J. Mahone, Chairman Ronald W. Haughton, Member Henry B. Frazier III, Member FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES
PURSUANT TO A DECISION AND ORDER OF THE FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY AND IN ORDER TO EFFECTUATE THE POLICIES OF CHAPTER 71 OF TITLE 5 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE FEDERAL SERVICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS WE HEREBY NOTIFY OUR EMPLOYEES THAT
WE WILL NOT fail or refuse to comply with the January 11, 1980 final award of Arbitrator William H. Coburn issued pursuant to the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner fail or refuse to comply with any provision of the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner interfere with, restrain, or coerce employees in the exercise of any right under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
WE WILL comply with the January 11, 1980 final award of Arbitrator William H. Coburn issued pursuant to the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
(Activity)
Dated: . . .
By: (Signature) (Title) This Notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive days from the date of posting, and must not be altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
If employees have any questions concerning this Notice or compliance with its provisions, they may communicate directly with the Regional Director, Federal Labor Relations Authority, Region III, whose address is: 1111 18th Street, Room 700, P.O. Box 33758, Washington, D.C. 20033-0758 and whose telephone number is: (202) 653-8507.
-------------------- ALJ$ DECISION FOLLOWS --------------------
Case No. 3-CA-2800
William C. Owen, Esq.
For the Respondent
Richard Robinson, Esq.
For the Charging Party
Erick Genser, Esq.
For the General Counsel
Before: SALVATORE J. ARRIGO Administrative Law Judge
DECISION
Statement of the Case
This is a proceeding under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute, Chapter 71 of Title 5 of the U.S. Code, 5 U.S.C. 7101, et seq. (herein referred to as the Statute).
Upon an unfair labor practice charge filed by the American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, International Council of Marshals Service Locals (herein referred to as the Union), on August 19, 1981 against the United States Marshals Service (herein referred to as Respondent), the General Counsel of the Federal Labor Relations Authority (herein referred to as the Authority), by the Regional Director for Region 3, issued a Complaint and Notice of Hearing on November 23, 1981.
The Complaint alleged that Respondent violated section 7116(a)(1) and (8) of the Statute /1/ by failing and refusing to implement an arbitrator's award which had been sustained by the Authority.
Respondent acknowledges that it did not implement the award but denies that its conduct violated the Statute.
A hearing on the Complaint was conducted on January 4, 1982 at which time all parties were represented by counsel and afforded full opportunity to adduce evidence, call, examine and cross-examine witnesses and argue orally.
The parties presented the case by submitting a joint stipulation of facts and other documents.
Oral argument was received and Respondent also filed a brief.
Based upon my evaluation of the entire record in this matter I make the following:
Findings of Fact
1.
At all times relevant hereto the Union has been the exclusive collective bargaining representative for various employees of Respondent including certain Deputy Marshals.
2.
In the Fall of 1978 the Union filed a grievance under the parties' collective bargaining agreement relative to Respondent's scheduling additional tours of duties affecting a number of Deputies represented by the Union.
/2/
3.
The matter proceeded to be heard by an arbitrator on July 31 and October 11, 1979.
/3/
4.
Arbitrator William H. Coburn issued his Opinion and Award (the award) on January 11, 1980 finding, inter alia, that Respondent's conduct regarding the establishment of the additional tours of duty was a violation of the parties' collective bargaining agreement.
The award provided that Respondent return the Deputies to their regularly scheduled tour of duty and cease and desist from changing tours of duty in violation of the agreement.
5.
On February 8, 1980 the U.S. Department of Justice, acting on behalf of Respondent, filed timely exceptions to the arbitrator's award with the Authority.
6.
On April 29, 1981, the Authority issued its decision in this matter concluding no basis existed for finding the arbitrator's award deficient and, accordingly, sustained the arbitrator's award.
American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, International Council of U.S. Marshals Service Locals and The Department of Justice, U.S. Marshals Service, 5 FLRA No. 66 (1981).
7.
By letter dated May 26, 1981 the Union requested Respondent implement the arbitrator's award.
8.
Respondent filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit a petition for review of the Authority's decision in 5 FLRA No. 66.
/4/
9.
On June 24, 1981 Respondent informed the Union that it was declining to implement the award on the grounds that an appeal of the Authority's decision in 5 FLRA No. 66 had been taken to the Ninth Circuit.
10.
Subsequent to the filing of the unfair labor practice charge in this matter on August 19, 1981 alleging Respondent unlawfully refused to implement the arbitrator's award and the issuance of the Complaint on November 23, 1981, Respondent, on December 23, 1981, filed a motion to dismiss the Complaint with the Regional Director of the Authority's Region 3.
11.
In its motion to dismiss the Complaint Respondent contends: (a) that the only means available to the Authority to enforce compliance with its decision in 5 FLRA No. 66 is a petition to an appropriate U.S. Court of Appeals pursuant to section 7123(b) of the Statute, /5/ and; (b) the Complaint does not, on its face, state an unfair labor practice.
12.
On December 28, 1981 the Regional Director for Region 3 referred Respondent's motion to dismiss to the Chief Administration Law Judge and the matter is now before the undersigned for ruling thereon.
Discussion and Conclusions
Respondent basically contends that the Authority's decision in 5 FLRA No. 66 sustaining the arbitrator's award is an "order of the Authority" within the meaning of section 7123(b) of the Statute and, in the circumstances herein, the Authority is "constrained" to directly seek enforcement by petitioning an appellate court without recourse to the Statute's unfair labor practice procedures.
Respondent acknowledges that the unfair labor practice procedures would be an appropriate vehicle to litigate the matter if, assuming the legality of Authority's decision sustaining the award, /6/ the case involved a question of whether its compliance was sufficient rather than, as herein, a situation where a total refusal to comply exists.
I reject Respondent's contentions.
Neither the express language of Statute nor the implementing regulations suggest that the Authority is obliged to directly seek court enforcement of an order sustaining an arbitrator's award rather than proceed on an unfair labor practice charge to seek compliance with its order, regardless of whether a total or partial failure to comply exists.
Nor do any cases litigated under the Statute indicate that the Authority is so constrained.
While none of the parties to this proceeding have cited any Authority case which has directly treated the specific question at issue herein, the Authority has previously addressed requests that it seeks court enforcement of arbitration awards.
In one such case, Headquarters, U.S. Army Communications Command, et al., Fort Huachuca, Arizona and American Federation of Government Employees Local 1662, 2 FLRA 786 (1980), the union requested the enforcement of an arbitrator's award to which no exception to the Authority was filed.
The Authority denied the request because there was no "order of the Authority" to be enforced under section 7123(b) of the Statute.
The Authority further noted that the parties "were primarily disputing whether the activity has complied with the arbitrator's award," although it appears from the summary of facts set forth in the decision that the dispute actually involved whether the activity's conduct amounted to full or only partial compliance with the award.
The Authority concluded in Fort Huachuca that "ready means (were) available for resolving this type of dispute" and suggested that:
" . . . where appropriate, the unfair labor practice procedures under section 7116 of the Statute may be used when there is a dispute concerning an alleged failure of a party to abide by a final and binding arbitration award.
(Footnote).
Indeed, the foregoing proceedings are particularly equipped to resolve compliance disputes such as here involved since those disputes frequently require credibility and other factual determinations dependent upon the taking of testimony in such hearings."
/7/
It is arguable that the exhortation in Fort Huachuca to use unfair labor practice procedures in cases where compliance with a final order of the Authority is in dispute is limited to situations where the alleged failure to abide by an award is a partial failure and not a complete refusal as in the case herein.
However, a subsequent case, Department of the Air Force, Air Force Logistics Command and American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, 4 FLRA No. 96 (1980), indicates that the Authority intended no such limiting implications in Fort Huachuca.
Air Force Logistics Command involved a situation where the union sought to have the Authority seek court enforcement of an award of an arbitration panel whose actions were authorized by the Federal Service Impasses Panel.
The arbitration panel issued an interest arbitration award and, for reasons unimportant herein, the agency asserted it was not a part of the proceedings and failed to abide by the arbitration award.
The Authority, citing Fort Huachuca, found that since the arbitration award of the panel had not been before the Authority it was not an "order of the Authority" which may be enforced under section 7123(b) of the Statute.
More important to the case herein, however, is that the Authority also noted it had stated in Fort Huachuca:
" . . . where appropriate, the unfair labor practice procedures under section 7116 of the Statute may be used when there is a dispute concerning an alleged failure of a party to abide by a final and binding arbitration award . . .
"
Thus, although Air Force Logistics Command, as the case herein, involved a complete refusal to comply with an arbitration award, the Authority saw fit to note the availability of unfair labor practice procedures nonetheless.
Accordingly, I find a compelling suggestion by the Authority in the above cases that the General Counsel is not precluded in the matter herein from utilizing the unfair labor practice procedures of the Statute to redress Respondent's total failure to comply with the arbitrator's award sustained by the Authority.
Respondent also contends that the Authority is precluded by section 7116(d) of the Statute from issuing a complaint in this case.
Section 7116(d) provides, in relevant part, that:
" . . . issues which can properly be raised under an appeals procedure may, in the discretion of the aggrieved party, be raised under the grievance procedure or as an unfair labor practice under this section, but not under both procedures."
Respondent reasons that since the underlying issue of the negotiability of scheduling additional tours of duty arose in the context of a grievance and proceeded to arbitration, recourse to unfair labor practice proceedings is not available thereafter.
I reject this contention.
At issue herein is not how to process the "underlying issue" to final resolution by the Authority but rather, what procedure is available to obtain enforcement of a final order of the Authority.
Moreover, the Authority in Fort Huachuca and Air Force Logistics Command, supra, has indicated that the unfair labor practice procedures are indeed available in these situations, as explained above.
I also reject Respondent's contention that the Authority must utilize the enforcement proceedings under section 7123(b) since the agency has timely exercised its right to appeal the Authority's decision and order of 5 FLRA No. 66 on the grounds that it "involves an unfair labor practice" within the meaning of section 7123(a)(1) of the Statute.
/8/ While Respondent has instituted an action for judicial review claiming that the arbitrator's award which the Authority sustained in 5 FLRA No. 66 involved an unfair labor practice, the Solicitor of the Authority, on behalf of the Authority, has taken the position before the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit that the matter does not involve an unfair labor practice within the meaning of section 7123(a)(1) of the Statute and therefore, the Court lacks subject matter jurisdiction.
Thus, the Authority, through its Solicitor, has already rejected Respondent's claim that the arbitration award "involves an unfair labor practice" and I am obligated to abide by decisions of the Authority.
Accordingly, since the Authority, through the Solicitor, has indicated it rejects Respondent's position that the award "involves an unfair labor practice" I reject Respondent's arguments in this regard.
Respondent argues next that the Complaint does not, in its face, state an unfair labor practice.
The Complaint alleges a failure and refusal to implement the arbitrator's award of January 10, 1980 and that such conduct violates section 7116(a)(1) and (8) of the Statute.
The Authority in Fort Huachuca and Air Force Logistics Command, supra, stated that section 7116 of the Statute may be used to resolve a dispute involving a failure to comply with an arbitrator's award thereby indicating that an allegation of a failure to comply with an arbitrator's award sufficiently sets forth a course of action under section 7116 of the Statute.
Further, section 7121 of the Statute mandates that collective bargaining agreements provide for grievance procedures which include binding arbitration for unresolved grievances.
/9/ The provisions of section 7122 of the Statute assure that the arbitrator's award will culminate in a final and binding status.
/10/ Thus, the Statute provides rather elaborate procedures to assure a peaceful final and binding resolution of disputes.
To hold that one may abrogate with impunity the clear obligation which follow from this statutory design would be ludicrous indeed, especially where the Statute itself in Section 7116(a)(8) specifically declares failure or refusal to comply with any provision of the Statute to be an unfair labor practice.
Accordingly, I concluded that the Complaint adequately states a cause of action and Respondent's failure and refusal to comply with the arbitration award as sustained by the Authority violated section 7116(a)(1) and (8) of the Statute.
/11/
Having found and concluded that Respondent has violated section 7116(a)(1) and (8) of the Statute /12/ and having rejected Respondent's arguments with regard thereto, /13/ I recommend the Authority issue the following:
ORDER
Pursuant to section 2423.20 of the Federal Labor Relations Authority's regulations and section 7118 of the Statute, it is hereby ordered that the United States Marshals Service shall:
1.
Cease and desist from:
(a) Failing and refusing to implement the January 11, 1980 award rendered by arbitrator William H. Coburn.
(b) In any like or related manner interfering with, restraining, or coercing employees in the exercise of their rights assured by the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
2.
Take the following affirmative action in order to effectuate the purposes and policies of the Statute:
(a) Implement the January 11, 1980 award rendered by arbitrator William H. Coburn.
(b) Post at all of its facilities where employees represented by the American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, International Council of Marshals Service Locals, the employees' exclusive representative, are located, copies of the attached Notice marked "Appendix", on forms to be furnished by the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
Upon receipt of such forms they shall be signed by the Director, United States Marshals Service, and shall be posted and maintained by him for 60 consecutive days thereafter, in conspicuous places, including bulletin boards and all other places where notices to employees are customarily posted.
The Director shall take reasonable steps to insure that such notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other materials.
(c) Pursuant to Section 2423.30 of the Federal Labor Relations Authority's Rules and Regulations, notify the Regional Director of Region 3, Federal Labor Relations Authority, 1111 18th Street, NW., Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20036, in writing within 30 days from the date of the Order as to what steps have been taken to comply herewith.
SALVATORE J. ARRIGO Administrative Law Judge
Dated: June 23, 1982
Washington, D.C.
APPENDIX
PURSUANT TO A DECISION AND ORDER OF THE FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY AND IN ORDER TO EFFECTUATE THE POLICIES OF CHAPTER 71 OF TITLE 5 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE FEDERAL SERVICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS WE HEREBY NOTIFY OUR EMPLOYEES THAT:
WE WILL NOT refuse to implement the January 11, 1980 award of arbitrator William H. Coburn.
WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner interfere with, restrain, or coerce our employees in the exercise of their rights assured by the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute.
WE WILL implement the January 11, 1980 award rendered by arbitrator William H. Coburn.
(Agency or Activity)
Dated: . . .
By: (Signature) This Notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive days from the date of posting and must not be altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
If employees have any questions concerning this Notice or compliance with any of its provisions, they may communicate directly with the Regional Director, Federal Labor Relations Authority, Region 3, 1111 18th Street, N.W., Suite 700, Washington, D.C. 20036 and whose telephone number is (202) 653-8452.
--------------- FOOTNOTES$ ---------------
/1A/ On June 24, 1981, the Respondent filed a petition with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit seeking a review of the Authority's decision sustaining the arbitrator's award in American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, International Council of Marshals Service Locals and the Department of Justice, U.S. Marshals Service, 5 FLRA No. 66 (1981).
The Authority's decision involved the same arbitration award, the compliance with which is the subject of the unfair labor practice complaint herein.
Respondent's appeal of the Authority's decision was one basis for its defense in failing to comply with the arbitrator's award.
In its dismissal of the appeal for lack of jurisdiction, which was issued subsequent to the Judge's recommended decision herein, the Court adopted the Authority's position that where arbitration has been selected as the mechanism by which to settle a dispute subject to resolution through either arbitration or unfair labor practice procedures, and the Authority reviews exceptions to an arbitrator's award, the Court of Appeals has no jurisdiction to review the Authority's determination unless an unfair labor practice is either an explicit or necessary ground for the final order issued by the Authority.
In so finding, the Court rejected the Respondent's contention that the Authority's decision in 5 FLRA No. 66 involved unfair labor practice matters.
United States Marshals Service and the Department of Justice v. Federal Labor Relations Authority, 708 F.2d 1417 (9th Cir. 1983).
/1/ Section 7116 of the Statute provides, in relevant part:
"(a) For the purpose of this chapter, it shall be an unfair labor practice for an agency -
"(1) to interfere with, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise by the employee of any right under this chapter;
* * * *
"(8) to otherwise fail or refuse to comply with any provision of this chapter."
/2/ Joint Exhibit No. 1.
/3/ The collective bargaining agreement provided for binding arbitration.
/4/ On March 30, 1982, the Authority, through its Solicitor, filed with the Ninth Circuit a motion to dismiss Respondent's petition for review and a memorandum in support thereof.
The issues have now been briefed by the parties and oral argument before the Ninth Circuit is scheduled for sometime after August 13, 1982.
/5/ Section 7123(b) of the Statute provides:
"(b) The Authority may petition any appropriate United States court of appeals for the enforcement of any order of the Authority and for appropriate temporary relief or restraining order."
/6/ The legality of the Authority's decision is 5 FLRA No. 66 is not litigable in this forum.
/7/ The footnote in the cited portion of Fort Huachuca provided: "Judicial review and enforcement of orders issued by the Authority in such proceedings may then be sought under section 7123(a) and (b) of the Statute."
/8/ Section 7123(a)(1) of the Statute provides:
"(a) Any person aggrieved by any final order of the Authority other than an order under -
(1) section 7122 of this title (involving an award by an arbitrator), unless the order involves an unfair labor practice under section 7118 of this title . . . may . . . institute an action for judicial review of the Authority's order . . .
"
/9/ Section 7121 provides, in relevant part:
"(a)(1) . . . any collective bargaining agreement shall provide procedures for the settlement of grievances, including questions of arbitrability (and) the procedures shall be the exclusive procedures for resolving grievances which fall within its coverage . . .
"(b) Any negotiated grievance procedure referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall - . . .
"(3) include procedures that -
"(C) provide that any grievance not satisfactorily settled under the negotiated grievance procedure shall be subject to binding arbitration which may be invoked by either the exclusive representative or the agency."
/10/ Section 7122 provides, in relevant part:
"(a) Either party to arbitration under this chapter may file with the Authority an exception to any arbitrator's award pursuant to the arbitration . . .
If upon review the Authority finds that the award is deficient -
"(1) because it is contrary to any law, rule, or regulations; or
"(2) on other grounds similar to those applied by Federal courts in private sector labor-management relations;
the Authority may take such action and make such recommendations concerning the award as it considers necessary, consistent with applicable laws, rules, or regulations.
"(b) If no exception to an arbitrator's award is filed under subsection (a) of this section during the 30-day period beginning on the date of such award, the award shall be final and binding.
An agency shall take the actions required by an arbitrator's final award . . .
"
/11/ Cf. Division of Military and Naval Affairs, State of New York, Albany, New York, 8 FLRA 158 (1982), at 172 and 173, which deals with an activity's analogous refusal to comply with a decision and order of the Federal Service Impasses Panel.
/12/ Respondent's motion to dismiss is therefore denied.
/13/ Additional arguments raised by Counsel for Respondent have been considered and rejected for reasons set forth in my treatment of Respondent's other arguments, above.
__________________________________________________________________
Table of Decisions Previous Decision Next Decision Quick List of Decisions
