Skip Past Navigation biography district issues photo gallery press constituent services legislation links contact US Congressman John Sweeney banner image FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE January 3, 2001 CONTACT: Brad Card (Sweeney) (202) 225-5614 Jim Phillips (Boehlert) (202) 225-3665 Dana Johnson (McHugh) (202) 225-4611 SWEENEY INTRODUCES ACID RAIN LEGISLATION NY's Acid Rain Team Urges Swift Action in 107th Congress WASHINGTON, DC - Congressman John E. Sweeney (R/C Halfmoon) introduced important legislation that would help reduce acid rain and its devastating effects to the environment and public health.
Congressman Sweeney was joined by original co-sponsors, Congressman Sherwood Boehlert (R-New Hartford), and Congressman John McHugh (R-Pierrepont Manor), when the bill was introduced.
This bill will help control acid rain by cutting emissions of nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide, and mercury from power plants.
The trio, who call themselves "New York's acid rain team," introduced the bill on the first day of the 107th Congress to demonstrate their continued commitment to the issue
.
Although similar legislation was not enacted in the last session of Congress, the legislators believe they can build momentum for the Acid Rain Control Act this year based on data the Clinton Administration reluctantly released late last year.
The EPA had kept secret a favorable cost-benefit analysis the agency had written about acid rain control legislation.
The report was only released after the House Government Reform Committee issued a subpoena to obtain the document.
"I am proud to be the original sponsor of the Acid Rain Control Act, and I am delighted to have Congressmen Boehlert and McHugh as original cosponsors in this effort.
I am also pleased that I was able to get the assistance of the House leadership to secure the H.R. 25 bill number designation.
I think it signals what a high priority this bill should be for the 107th Congress," said Rep. Sweeney.
"Our lakes are a way of life in the Adirondacks and this is a very personal issue for me.
We have a wide body of evidence to show that the acid rain situation is worsening, especially in the Adirondacks.
We cannot afford to be complacent.
This legislation will help reverse years of neglect and will benefit generations to come."
Rep. Boehlert said, "We are introducing this bill on the very first day of the new Congress -- just as we did two years ago -- to signal our continuing commitment to this important issue.
Scientific research has left no doubt that we must further reduce the emissions from Midwestern utilities if our lakes and forests are to recover from the devastating impact of acid rain.
This bill will require those reductions."
Rep. McHugh said, "Our nation's acid rain policies have failed to end the continuing damage to sensitive ecosystems and population centers downwind from the smokestacks.
This legislation contains the stricter emissions standards necessary to control acid rain once and for all.
This bill will make a difference and we have data to back it up.
We will be urging the House Leadership to schedule a hearing as soon as possible to get this bill moving."
H.R. 25, the Acid Rain Control Act, has the strong backing of the Adirondack Council.
This year's bill is based on an earlier version of acid rain control legislation sponsored by the Sweeney-Boehlert-McHugh team.
However, the new Acid Rain Control Act includes a provision to codify a recent announcement by EPA that it intends to regulate mercury as directed in last year's bill.
## 30 ##
Site Map | Search | Home
