Home 
Criteria for including reactors are: 1) participation in the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission's certification or pre-certification programs or 2) inclusion under the international Generation IV International Forum (GIF) program for longer-term reactor development.
The U.S. Department of Energy is among the sponsors of the GIF program.
While no detailed technical description of particular reactor designs is included, such descriptions and schematics are available elsewhere and, when practical, are hyperlinked in the text.
Reactor vendors who put forward new designs anticipate that their designs will meet commercial market needs including an affordable, competitive construction cost and the usually low operating costs of commercial nuclear reactors.
Such views are not assessed, though a section does identify public discussion of efforts by the nuclear industry and the U.S. government to improve the industry's competitive position.^1
Existing Reactor Designs and Design Categories
There are now 104 fully licensed nuclear power reactors in the United States though only 103 are now operational.^2 Because each of these reactors is fully licensed and meets national safety standards, a potential builder might replicate any of these designs for future construction.
This is less likely, however, because existing, operable reactors in the United States were licensed during or before the 1970s.
Technology has progressed and any future construction should incorporate more advanced designs that better meet today's commercial criteria.
There are four possible exceptions to the preceding statement.
Four reactors in the United States were partially built and still possess valid construction licenses.
These reactors are WNP-1 (Washington State), Watt's Bar 2 (Tennessee), and Bellefonte 1 and 2 (Atlanta).
Moreover, these four construction licenses have recently been extended to approximately the end of the present decade.
Construction on each unit was halted over a decade and a half ago.
Builders of these units, subject to the rules of their licenses, have the right to resume construction on their reactors, units that were designed during the 1970s or earlier.
Whether the construction will resume and whether former designs will be continued remains to be determined.
All existing commercial nuclear reactors in the United States fall into two broad categories, pressurized water reactor (PWR) and boiling water reactor (BWR).
Because both types of reactors are cooled and moderated^3 with ordinary "light" water, the two designs are often grouped collectively as light water reactors (LWR).
LWRs generate power through steam turbines similar to those used for most power generated by burning coal or fuel oil.
Light water reactors have so far proven to be the most commercially popular reactor design worldwide though there are notable exceptions.^4 There are several available websites that discuss existing reactors in the United States.
These include http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/nuclear/page/nuc_reactors/reactsum.html.
Information on international operating reactors is available at http://www.iaea.org/programmes/a2.
PWRs use nuclear-fission to heat water under pressure within the reactor.
This water is then sent to a heat exchanger (called a "steam generator" in PWRs) where steam is produced to drive an electric generator
.
The water used as a coolant in the reactor and the water used to provide steam to the electric turbines exists in separate closed loops that involve no discharges to the environment.
Westinghouse, Babcock and Wilcox, and Combustion Engineering designed the units operating in the U.S.
After these reactors were built, Westinghouse and Combustion Engineering nuclear assets were combined with British Nuclear Fuels Limited to form Westinghouse BNFL.
The French-German firm Framatome ANP has acquired many of Babcock and Wilcox's nuclear technology rights, though portions of the original Babcock and Wilcox firm still exist and also possess some technology rights as well.
Other major makers of PWR reactors including Framatome ANP and the Russian Atomstroyexport have not yet sold their reactors in the U.S.
A schematic diagram of a PWR can be found at http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/nuclear/page/nuc_reactors/pwr.html.
BWRs allow heat from the reactor core to boil the coolant water directly into the steam (i.e. no heat transfer) that is used to generate electricity.
General Electric built all boiling water reactors now operational in the United States.
Framatome ANP and Westinghouse BNFL have each designed BWRs though these have not yet been sold in the United States.
A schematic diagram of a BWR can be found at http://www.eia.doe.gov/cneaf/nuclear/page/nuc_reactors/bwr.html.
Although no LWR projects have been initiated in the United States since the 1970s, the overall performance record of the existing fleet has been reasonably successful.
Some 111 LWRs have entered service in the U.S. since 1969.^5 Only seven of those since 1969 have been permanently shut down.
The average annual capacity factor for nuclear reactors in the United States was over 90 percent in 2002.
Average operating costs, as reported by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, are slightly lower for LWRs than for operating coal-fired plants and considerably below operating costs for gas-fired plants.^6
There have been attempts to operate additional classes of reactors in the United States, though most examples were prototypes and were not commercial successes.
Perhaps the most famous example was the Fort Saint Vrain reactor that operated between 1974 and 1989.
It was a high temperature gas-cooled reactor or HTGR.
Other HTGRs operated elsewhere notably in Germany.
HTGRs, of which there are many sub-categories, continue to stimulate interest with small prototypes now operating in China and Japan and additional HTGR designs promoted by firms in South Africa, the United States, the Netherlands, and France.
HTGRs use a gas- recently helium has been preferred- to generate electricity.
In some cases the turbine is run directly by the gas, in other cases steam or alternative hot gases are produced in a heat exchanger to generate the power.
HTGRs are distinguished from other gas-cooled reactors by the higher temperatures attained within the reactor.
Such higher temperatures might permit the reactor to be used as an industrial heat source in addition to generating electricity.
Advocates of HTGR designs hold that HTGR's have high safety, low costs, and an ability to supply power to smaller markets .
Commercial reactor designs that operate outside of the United States include fast breeder reactors (FBRs), pressurized heavy water reactors (PHWRs), and gas-cooled reactors (GCRs).
FBRs have received only very limited market support, though "commercial" units operate in Russia and France, and prototypes exist in other areas, notably Japan and India.
"Breeder" or "fast" reactors have advantages because U-235 is the only naturally occurring uranium isotope that is directly suitable for commercial energy production.
U-235 is only 0.7 percent of natural uranium.^7 Most of natural uranium is the U-238 isotope that is not directly usable as a reactor fuel.
During the course of any reactor operation a portion of the U-238 in the fuel is converted to plutonium, primarily the useful Pu-239 isotope, which provides much of the energy used in nuclear power production.
The bulk of the U-238 content in an LWR is not converted to plutonium and the unconverted U-238 does not contribute significantly to power generation.
A breeder reactor converts more U-238 to usable fuels than the reactor consumes, though any unused fuel would have to be "reprocessed" before some of the plutonium and the remaining U-238 would again be usable.
FBRs have, so far, proven to be more expensive to build and operate than LWRs.
It is not yet clear whether this is due to the fact that most FBRs have been prototypes or if this reflects underlying costs.
The plutonium content of the reprocessed fuel also raises concerns over weapons proliferation.
Many early FBR designs were prone to system failures, though same, notably the BN-600 unit in Russia, have operated over extended periods.
Proponents of advanced reactor designs believe that some commercial FBR designs could be deployed prior to most other advanced, but untested commercial designs.^8 PHWRs have been promoted primarily in Canada and India, with additional commercial operating units in several other nations including South Korea, China, Romania, and Argentina.
Canadian designed PHWRs are often called "CANDU" reactors.^9 Siemens, ABB, and Indian firms have also built commercial PHWR reactors.
Commercial heavy water reactors now in operation use heavy water as moderators and coolants.
No successful effort has been made to license PHWRs in the United States.
PHWRs have proven to be popular in several countries because they usually use less expensive natural (not enriched) uranium fuels and can be built and operated at competitive costs.
PHWRs have often been preferred by nations wishing to develop an indigenous fuel cycle without expensive enrichment facilities.
Proliferation issues related to the continuous process of refueling PHWRs have raised some concerns.^10
The term gas-cooled reactor (GCR) can be used ambiguously .
HTGRs, for example, are clearly a subset of GCRs that operate at higher temperatures.
As used here, GCRs are "Magnox" reactors designed and built in the United Kingdom since the 1950s and the derivative, advanced gas-cooled reactor (ACR), also operated in the United Kingdom.
Similar reactors have been built in France, Sweden, and Japan.
No traditional GCR design has operated commercially in the United States.
Existing GCR designs have not been commercially successful outside of the United Kingdom.
Commercial GCRs^11 in the United Kingdom have operated longer than commercial reactors anywhere else in the world.
Like the PHWRs, the original GCR designs use natural uranium fuels, though newer designs use slightly enriched fuels and are not confined to uranium.
^12
Other potential designs for commercial reactors abound.
They have not been widely considered in recent history in the United States.
There is some experience with additional concepts elsewhere.
New Designs
1.
Certified Designs
Following statutory requirements, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has set up a process by which reactor designs might be certified prior to any actual construction plans.
The certification process seeks to reduce site development time by resolving common design issues prior to construction.
Design certification is an optional process and may occur simultaneously with site licensing.
Certification Process for New Reactors in the United States, Design, Type and Present State Reactor Design Lead Vender(s) Design Category Status at NRC System 80+ Westinghouse BNFL PWR Certified ABWR GE, Toshiba, Hitachi BWR Certified AP600 Westinghouse BNFL PWR Certified AP1000 Westinghouse BNFL PWR Certification ESBWR GE BWR Pre-certification SWR-1000 Framatome ANP BWR Pre-certification ACR-700 AECL PHWR/PWR hybrid Pre-certification PBMR Eskom HTGR Pre-certification GT-MHR General Atomic HTGR Pre-certification IRIS Westinghouse BNFL PWR Pre-certification EPR Framatome ANP PWR No application decision ACR-1000 AECL PHWR No application decision Note: Reactor names are defined in the text.
Any new reactor built in the United States over the next decade or so would probably use designs either recently certified by the NRC or that will be certified by the NRC in the near future.
The re-creation of older designs is popular overseas and cannot be ruled out in the United States.
Presently there are three certified new reactor designs in the United States: the System 80+, the Advanced Boiling Water Reactors (ABWR), and the AP600.
These designs are sometimes called Advanced Light Water Reactors (ALWR) because they incorporate more advanced safety concepts than the reactors previously offered by vendors.
System 80+ (Westinghouse BNFL): The System 80+ reactor is a PWR that was designed by Combustion Engineering and by its successor owners ABB and Westinghouse BNFL.
The NRC has certified the System 80+ for the U.S. market, at Westinghouse BNFL no longer actively promotes the design for domestic sale.
The System 80+ has provided the basis for the APR1400 that has been developed in Korea for future deployment.
Information on the System 80+ reactor can be found on http://www.nei.org/index.asp?catnum=3
ABWR (General Electric, Toshiba, Hitachi): Of the three NRC- certified ALWR designs only the ABWR has been deployed.
Two ABWRs are operating in Japan, and four are under construction, two each in Taiwan and Japan.
While the ABWR design is usually associated in the United States with General Electric, the two units now being built in Japan are products of Toshiba and Hitachi.
General Electric, Toshiba, and Hitachi have shown an interest in building ABWRs in the U.S.
There are many variations in ABWR design with the most frequently mentioned capacities in the 1250-1500 MWe range.
Smaller and larger designs exist depending on vendor.
Vendors now claim costs for the ABWR that have attracted some customer interest.
Information on the ABWR can be found at http://www.nei.org/doc.asp?docid=110, http://www.nuc.berkeley.edu/designs/abwr/abwr.html, and http://www.gepower.com/dhtml/corporate/en_us/assets/nuclear/prod/ab wr_power_plant.jsp/.
AP600 (Westinghouse BNFL): The AP600 is a PWR designed by Westinghouse BNFL and certified by the NRC.
The AP600, while based on previous reactor designs, has innovative passive safety features that permit a greatly simplified reactor design.
The AP600 has been bid overseas but has never been built.
Westinghouse has recently de-emphasized the AP600 in favor of the larger, though potentially less expensive AP1000 design.
Information on the AP600 can be found at http://www.ap600.westinghouse.com/ and at http://www.nei.org/index.asp?catnum=3
The initial ALWR reactors as a group have been praised for their improvements in reactor safety and simplicity, but construction costs on a per kilowatt of capacity basis might be a barrier to commercial success in the U.S.
The ABWR design however has many variations and continues to be promoted in the U.S. by several vendors.
2.
Undergoing Certification
Only one reactor design is presently undergoing certification with the NRC, although this situation could change shortly as additional designs move from "pre-certification" to actual "certification".
The process of certification can take several years, and depends heavily on what design is proposed and supported by potential vendors and buyers.
AP1000 (Westinghouse BNFL): Quite often when a reactor is named, its name includes digits such as the "1000" in the AP1000.
This usually indicates the initial electricity generating capacity of the design, in this case 1000 MWe.
Seldom do do the digits mean the present capacity of the design.
The most recent AP1000 now has 1117 MWe capacity.
The AP1000 is an enlargement of the initial AP600, designed to increase the reactor's target output by over 80 percent without significantly increasing the total cost of building the reactor.
Operating costs are anticipated to be less than the AP600.
While Westinghouse BNFL owns rights to several other designs, the AP1000 is the principal product that the company now promotes in the United States.
The AP1000 is a PWR with innovative, passive safety features and a much simplified design that is intended to cut the material and construction costs of the plant.
Information on the AP1000 can be found at http://www.ap1000.westinghouse.com/ and at http://www.nei.org/doc.asp?docid=770.
Information related to NRC certification for the AP1000 can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/ap1000.ht ml.
3.
Undergoing Pre-Certification
While pre-certification is a technical concept within the NRC regulatory environment, the process can mean many things to potential reactor manufacturers.
Concepts such as the ESBWR, the SWR-1000, and the ACR-700 appear to be much further along toward potential deployment than, say, the IRIS and GT-MHR designs.^13 Pre-certification, however, represents a vendor's intention to proceed toward commercialization in the U.S. and perhaps globally.
Pre-certification is a less expensive stage of the overall certification process, because actual certification procedures are much more complex.
ESBWR (General Electric): The ESBWR^14 is a new simplified BWR design being promoted by General Electric.
It constitutes an evolution and merging of several earlier design ideas including the ABWR and some other designs that are no longer being actively pursued by GE.
The intent of the new design, which includes new passive safety features, is to cut construction and operating costs significantly from the ABWR design.
GE is investing heavily in the ESBWR though the design might not be available for deployment for several years.
Information related to certification of the ESBWR can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/esbwr.htm l.
Siedewasser Reaktor (SWR-1000) (Framatome ANP): The SWR-1000 is a Framatome ANP design for an advanced BWR. Framatome ANP was created through the merger of the French nuclear vendor Framatome and the nuclear power assets of the German firm Siemens.
The SWR-1000 was originally designed by Siemens and has been bid for a proposed reactor in Finland.
Framatome ANP has also recently begun SWR-1000 pre-certification with the NRC.
Literature on the design emphasizes the reactor's passive safety features.
Information on the SWR1000 can be found on http://www.de.framatome-anp.com/anp/e/foa/anp/products/s112.htm.
Information related to certification of the SWR-1000 can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/swr-1000. html.
ACR-700 (Atomic Energy of Canada Limited): AECL's "Advanced CANDU Reactor" ACR-700^15 has been developed over a lengthy period of time and is considered an evolution from AECL's internationally successful CANDU line of PHWRs.
CANDU reactors have been more of a commercial success than any other line of power reactors other than the LWRs.
One of the innovations in the ACR-700, compared to earlier CANDU designs, is that heavy water is used only as a moderator in the reactor.
Light water is used as the coolant.
Earlier CANDU designs used heavy water both as a moderator and as a coolant.
This change makes it debatable whether the ACR-700 is a PHWR, a PWR, or a hybrid between the two designs.
This AECL has aggressively marketed the ACR-700 offering low prices, short construction periods, and favorable financial terms.
As is the case for most non-LWR reactors, most U.S. utilities, nuclear engineers, and regulators have only limited working familiarity with the design.
Information on the ACR-700 can be found on http://www.aecltechnologies.com/Content/ACR/default.htm and http://www.aecl.ca/index.asp.
Information related to certification of the ACR-700 can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/acr-700.h tml.
Pebble-bed Modular Reactor (PBMR) (Eskom): The PBMR, which uses helium for heat transfer, is part of the HTGR family of reactors and thus a product of a lengthy history of research, notably in Germany, but has been promoted by the South African utility Eskom.
Eskom continues to partner in the design with BNFL and formerly included the U.S. utility Exelon among its investors.
Exelon later pulled out of the project, primarily because it felt that reactor development was not part of its main business activities.
This led to delays in the NRC certification process.
Recently Eskom has received approval to build a prototype PBMR in South Africa.
Certification procedures in the U.S. were never abandoned although the process has slowed.
At around 165 MWe the PBMR is one of the smallest reactors now being proposed for the market.
This is considered a marketing advantage because new small units require less capital investments than larger new units.
Small size has been viewed as a regulatory disadvantage because most licensing regulations (at least formerly) required separate licenses for each unit at a site.
If each PBMR module at a site were licensed separately, more regulatory activity would be required.
Fuels used in the PBMR would be more highly enriched uranium than is presently used in LWR designs.
Details regarding the PBMR design can be found on http://www.pbmr.com/.
Information related to certification of the PBMR can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/pbmr.html .
Gas-turbine Modular Helium Reactor (GT-MHR) (General Atomic): The GT-MHR is an HTGR design that has been developed primarily under the lead of the U.S. firm, General Atomics.
The most advanced plans for GT-MHR development relate to building reactors in Russia to assist in the "burn up" of surplus plutonium supplies.
Parallel plans for commercial power reactors would use uranium based-fuels enriched to as high as 19.9 percent U-235 content.
This would keep the fuel below the 20 percent enrichment level that defines highly enriched uranium.
In initial designs, the conversion of the energy in the heated helium coolant to electricity would be directly in a gas turbine.
There has been concern regarding untested aspects of this technology as it applies to the GT-MHR.
This has led some potential sponsors to propose less risky heat transfer mechanisms to generate electricity.
The U.S. utility, Entergy, has participated in GT-MHR development and has used the name "Freedom Reactor" for the design.
Because coolant temperatures arising from HTGR reactors are much higher than from LWRs the design is viewed as a potential commercial heat source.
There has been particular attention to the design's potential in a non-polluting method to produce hydrogen.
Information on the GT-MHR can be found on http://www.ga.com/gtmhr/.
Information related to certification of the GT-MHR can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/gt-mhr.ht ml.
International Reactor Innovative 
The reactor would be smaller than most operating PWRs and would be much simplified.
The IRIS reactor includes features designs that are intended to avoid loss of coolant accidents.
Research has continued for some time on the design and pre-certification is in process.
The IRIS is viewed as not ready for development during the present decade, but may show potential during the next decade.
IRIS has a targeted 2015 completion date.
Information on the IRIS can be found on http://www.nei.org/index.asp?catnum=3
Information related to certification of the IRIS can be found at http://www.nrc.gov/reactors/new-licensing/license-reviews/iris.html .
4.
Anticipated for Possible Pre-Certification
Two designs, the European Pressurized Water Reactor (EPR) and the ACR-1000, have not been submitted for pre-certification in the United States.
Because of the attention that the designs are now receiving, they are described below.
EPR (Framatome ANP): Framatome ANP has not decided if it will market its EPR in the United States.
The EPR is a rather conventional PWR unit though components have been simplified and considerable emphasis is put on reactor safety.
The design was bid on a project in Finland during 2003.
Additionally, the French utility Electricite de France (EdF) has proposed building an EPR at Penly in France.
The French government is now determining whether to build this prototype.
Nuclear power already constitutes over 75 percent of France's power supply; therefore building a new reactor in France might lead to decommissioning an existing reactor to make room in the market for the base load power provided by an EPR.
Not building a prototype might affect the eventual long-term marketability of the EPR.
The proposed size of the reactor would be around 1500 MWe though earlier designs were as large as 1750 MWe.
ACR-1000 (Atomic Energy of Canada Limited): While AECL is promoting its ACR-700 design, an ACR-1000 is being designed as well.
If the scale economies attributed by Westinghouse BNFL to its AP series and to GE's ABWR are valid, one might anticipate parallel, cost-lowering results for the ACR series.
Advertised costs for the ACR-700 are already as low as any design proposed for the near term.
Promised construction times of three years would set modern records for larger reactors.
Information on the ACR-1000 can be found on http://www.aecl.ca/index.asp.
5.
Generation IV Concepts
The U.S. Department of Energy participates in the Generation IV International Forum (GIF), an association of ten nations that seek to develop a new generation of commercial nuclear reactor designs before 2030.
Criteria for inclusion of a reactor design for consideration by the GIF group include: 1.
Sustainable energy (extended fuel availability, positive environmental impact) 2.
Competitive energy (low costs, short construction times) 3.
Safe and reliable systems (inherent safety features, public confidence in nuclear energy safety) 4.
Proliferation resistance (does not add unduly to unsecured nuclear material) and physical protection; (secure from terrorist attacks)
During 2002, GIF members agreed to concentrate their efforts and funds on six concept designs that they seek to become commercially viable between 2015 and 2025.
There is thus some leeway between the 2030 target for the GIF program and the targets for individual concepts.
Individual GIF participant nations are free to pursue any technology they chose, therefore not all concepts are goals for the United States.
The GIF group, along with the U.S. Department of Energy's Nuclear Energy Research Advisory Committee (NERAC), has published "A Technological Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems" (December 2002) which summarizes plans and designs for Generation IV projects.
This is accessible through http://www.nuclear.gov/ and describes each design in some detail including reactor schematics.
Each design is evolutionary; thus while the following descriptions involve comparisons, these analogies should be interpreted with caution.
Gas-cooled Fast Reactor (GFR): The GFR uses helium coolant directly to a gas turbine generator to produce electricity.
This parallels PBMR and original GT-MHR designs.
The primary difference from these designs is that the GFR would be a "fast", or breeder reactor.
One favored aspect of the design is that it would minimize the production of many undesirable spent fuel waste streams.
The reference design size is targeted to be 288 MWe with a deployment target date of 2025.
In addition to producing electricity the design might be used as a process heat source in the production of hydrogen.
Lead-cooled Fast Reactor (LFR): So far, most breeder reactors have used molten metal technologies for their coolants.
Many FBRs have used molten sodium, a metal with which there is considerable experience but which has sometimes been difficult to handle.The LFR uses molten lead or a lead-bismuth alloy as its coolant.
One design favored in the Generation IV would result in long periods between refuelings, 15-20 years.
Similar designs have been investigated in Russia.
Target ranges for the reactor would be 50-150 MWe.
That would be rather small by historic nuclear standards, but might meet localized market needs.
Designs as large as 1200 MWe have been suggested.
Initial targeted deployment would be in 2025.
Proposed designs would favor electricity production though proponents consider the production of process heat at LFR units as possible.
One design in this family of reactors is described on http://www.coe.berkeley.edu/labnotes/1002/reactor.html.
Molten Salt Reactor (MSR): The MSR involves a circulating liquid of sodium, zirconium, and uranium fluorides as a reactor fuel.
The MSR has been presented as providing a comparatively thorough fuel burn, safe operation, and proliferation resistance.
The initial reference design would be 1000 MWe with a deployment target date of 2025.
The design could use a wide variety of fuel cycles.
Temperatures for electricity production would not be as hot as for some other advanced reactors but some process heat potential exists.
Versions of the MSR have been around for some time but never were implemented for commercial uses.
During 2003, the MSR was removed from the Gen IV program because it was seen as too distant into the future for inclusion within the Gen IV schedule.
Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (SFR): Sodium-cooled fast reactors have been the most popular design for breeder reactors.
Designs have been proposed under the "Technological Roadmap" ranging from 150 to 1700 MWe. Molten metal technology is no longer "new" but several early SFR prototypes had difficulty obtaining sustained operation.
The BN-600 in Russia has been regarded as highly reliable.
Design supporters believe that the SFR promises superior fuel management characteristics.
The target deployment date of 2015 reflects the considerable research that the design has already received.
Earlier prototypes have already been built in France, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Russia, and the United States since as early as 1951.
Initial deployment would probably focus on electricity due to comparatively low "outlet temperatures" for the design.
Sodium cooled reactors are discussed at http://www.nuc.berkeley.edu/~gav/almr/01.intro.html.
Supercritical-water-cooled Reactor (SCWR): The SCWR design is to be the next step in LWR development and has been proposed with alternatives that evolve from the BWR and PWR. SCWRs would operate at higher temperatures and thermal efficiencies than present LWRs.
The reference plant would be 1700 MWe, above the upper end of present LWR designs.
The deployment target date is 2025.
Most research on the design has been in Japan.
Designers intend the SCWR to be much less expensive to build than today's LWR units though some of the economies appear to be shared by units now undergoing certification.
Operating cost savings are also anticipated.
Very-high-temperature Reactor (VHTR): The VHTR is an evolution from the HTGR family of reactors but would operate at even higher temperatures than designs now undergoing pre-certification.
In contrast with the GFR, the VHTR would not be a breeder reactor, thus it would produce less potentially usable fuel than it consumes.
In addition to generating electricity, the design would provide process heat that could be used in industrial activities including hydrogen production and desalinization.
Electricity generation targets have not yet been set.
Deployment is targeted for 2020, earlier than all but one Generation IV design.
This reflects earlier experience with parallel designs.
Electricity generation would involve a heat exchanger rather than direct processing through a turbine.
A VHTR is discussed at http://www.nuc.berkeley.edu/designs/mhtgr/mhtgr.html.
Each GIF project involves new or untested concepts in reactor design.
It would be surprising if every design concept met the program's initial targets.
The research involved in the program has the potential to contribute to the understanding of alternative types of commercial nuclear power and process heat even if individual projects do not meet expectations.
6.
Outlook
Efficiency Issues
A primary source of doubt regarding the potential of nuclear power, at least in the U.S., has been whether the recent technology has been too expensive to compete in the commercial marketplace.
There have been relatively few orders for new nuclear power plants during the last two decades, not just in the United States and Canada, but also in Western Europe (outside of France).
Interest in new nuclear power units has recently focused on Asia and to a lesser extent in Eastern Europe.
Reactor vendors have not ignored the message that their product has recently involved high construction costs and long construction periods.
Vendors are attempting to position their product with promises of lower prices, shorter construction times, and specified financial arrangements.
Most competitors are now offering fixed and historically low prices for their designs, though such prices are often confined to those parts of construction that the vendors actually control, the "nuclear island" that they designed.
Concerns regarding construction costs for new nuclear power plants contrast sharply with the comparatively low cost of operating commercial reactor designs.
Overall operating costs for nuclear power plants, as reported by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC), have been roughly the same as and more recently slightly less than operating costs for coal-fired plants for about two decades.
Such operating costs are considerably below the costs of operating a gas-fired generation unit.
Moreover, the fuel cost component of operating a nuclear power plant is particularly low.
This operating cost advantage has given existing nuclear power units a favored position in the provision of base load electric power.
Nuclear plant designers hope to take advantage of such low operating costs in positioning their new designs.
Estimates of the capital and operating cost of new power generation units can be found on Figure 70 and Table 8 of the Annual Energy Outlook.
The following publications summarize efforts and procedures to make new nuclear power plants commercially attractive.
1.
"Strategies for competitive nuclear power plants (TECDOC-1123)" International Atomic Energy Agency (November 1999), website: http://www.iaea.org/worldatom .
2.
"A Roadmap to Deploy New Nuclear Power Plants in the United States by 2010," United States Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology and its Nuclear Energy Research Advisory Committee Subcommittee on Generation IV Technology Planning (October 31, 2001), website: http://www.nuclear.gov/ 3.
Scully Capital, "Final Draft, Business Case for Nuclear Power Plants, Bringing Public and Private Resources Together for Nuclear Energy" (July 2002) (available through United States Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology, website: http://www.nuclear.gov/ 4.
"A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems (GIF-002-00)" U.S. DOE Nuclear Energy Research Advisory Committee and Generation IV International Forum (December 2002), website: http://www.nuclear.gov/
Summary and Potential
There are early signs that the nature of the nuclear reactor market might be changing.
Finland is presently evaluating bids for a "fifth nuclear reactor".
Four bids were received from three vendors: General Electric (ABWR), Framatome ANP (SWR-1000 and EPR), and Atomstroyexport (VVER-1000).
This is one of the few recent cases of truly competitive international bidding for new reactor construction.
There is no guarantee that the reactor will actually be built until an order is issued and contracts are signed.
More recently Bulgaria has discussed building a new nuclear reactor at Belene.
Belene was originally to be a Russian-designed VVER-1000 unit using equipment already owned by and located in Bulgaria.
More recently, competitive submissions from several vendors for alternative, newer designs have been considered.
It is unclear if the original design plan for Belene will move forward or if new designs will be slated.
The United States is funding a program called Nuclear Power 2010 that seeks to build at least two nuclear power reactors by 2010.
Supporting this has been proposed Federal energy legislation.
Meeting the 2010 target would be a challenging task and the proposed legislation is still being debated .
^ 1A large number of reactor designs have been excluded from the discussion.
These include reactors promoted overseas by nations such as Russia, India, Argentina, Korea, Canada, and China, as well as numerous smaller or even portable reactors that are being examined worldwide, including in the United States.
Also excluded is the International Atomic Energy Agency's International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel Programs (INPRO) that covers territory similar to the GIF program in addition to other promising designs.
GIF designs have been more heavily promoted within the United States.
^ 2The one that is not operational, Brown's Ferry 1, has been shut down since 1985, but has not given up its operating license.
The plant's owner-operator, the Tennessee Valley Authority, intends to restart the reactor in 2007.
^3The terms "cooled" and "moderated" are important because they define reactor categories.
Cooling in a reactor refers to the process and medium by which heat is transferred from the reactor core to the steam supply cycle of the nuclear power plant.
"Moderating" is a concept unique to nuclear power.
A moderator controls the rate of the nuclear power reaction and thus the amount of heat that is generated.
In a light water reactor ordinary water serves both functions.
Light water contains the same isotopes of hydrogen and oxygen as naturally occurring water.
Heavy water contains a different, heavier isotope of hydrogen known as deuterium.
Beyond the point that these conditions define reactor types, this will not matter in the discussion of existing reactors.
It does matter for the group that will be discussed under "Generation 4" reactors.
^4Exceptions include Canada, the United Kingdom, India, and part of Russia's industry.
^5 Prior to 1969, some smaller commercial reactors were placed in service.
All have been retired.
^6 This is based on Utility Data Institute/Resource Data Internationl Compilations of FERC Form 1 data.
^7The discussion here does not directly address "enrichment" the process by which the U-235 content of nuclear fuel is increased.
^8This latter statement is based on "A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems".
^9Canada has an interesting and unique nuclear power history which is covered by the book, Atomic Energy of Canada Limited, Canada Enters the Nuclear Age. ^10Inspectors of nuclear power plants have a preference for plants such as the LWRs that are refueled in batches rather than the continuous fueling of PHWRs.
Batch refueling is more easily monitored and occurs at intervals of one to two years.
^11 Not the ACRs. ^12 Most designs of PHWRs also use natural uranium fuels.
However, variations in fuel type are possible at any PHWR with plutonium and thorium fuel content subject to particular interest and experimentation.
^13 This sentence is a good example of the acronyms that overwhelm the nuclear steam supply system (NSSS) industry.
Several of these acronyms no longer have any meaning in "words" while others have only limited actual meaning.
They are defined below when possible.
^14 The term ESBWR has sometimes been identified with "European Simplified Boiling Water Reactor".
GE publicly denies that the initials have any meaning.
^15 ACR is usually read to mean "Advanced CANDU Reactor".
Contact: Ron Hagen: ronald.hagen@eia.doe.gov (202) 287-1917
