Image of white star linking to Federal Citizen Information Center's Main Page SITE SEARCH: __________ [go.gif]-Submit Topics Cars -- Buying, Selling, Car Maintenance, Insurance Computers -- Buying, Getting On-line Education -- School Loans, Planning for College, Alternative Ways to Earn a Degree Employment -- Tips on finding a job, Occupation information, Workplace rights, Pensions Family-- Federal Programs -- Social Security, Medicare, Veteran's Benefits, Buying Government Property Food -- Nutrition for better health, Safe food handling and preparation Health -- Drugs and Health Aids, Dieting and Nutrition, Medical Problems Housing -- Financing and Sales, Home Maintenance Money -- Credit, Saving, Investing, Retirement Planning, Protecting your money Small Business -- Starting a Business, Small Business Administration, Patents and Copyrights Travel -- Foreign Travel Requirements, National Parks, Travel Advice, Flying rights and advice And more...
-- Having trouble finding something? Check here or go to our search!
Resources Consumer Action Website -- Tips, advice, listings of what to do and who to call with a consumer problem Image of a button linking to the National Contact Center Image of a button linking to FirstGov for Kids Recalls -- Federal and Private Sector Recalls on Products Scams and Frauds -- A listing of the latest scams and recalls announced by Federal Agencies and Consumer Groups
Image of FirstGov.gov logo linking to the U.S. Government's Official Web Portal.
White House logo
FCIC Home Page In The News Page Press Room Page FAQ Page Shop Site Links Page Fun Stuff About Us Page Contact Us Home 
Stopping Unsolicited Mail, Telemarketing and E-Mail
Annoyed by having your mailbox filled with unsolicited mail and credit card offers? Had it with dinnertime telemarketing calls? Tired of having what seems like hundreds of junk messages in your inbox every time you check your e-mail? Unfortunately, there's no sure-fire way to totally eliminate the unsolicited mailings, calls, and e-mails you receive, but the Federal Citizen Information Center (FCIC) has assembled some tips that can help you cut down on the junk.
Learn more about:
Learn more about: * Mail and Telephone Preference Services * "Pre-Approved" Credit Card Offers * Unsolicited E-Mail * Other Resources * E-mail This Information to A Friend * Other Topics in The Consumer Focus Archive
Top space Image of a man yelling into a phone
Mail and Telephone Preference Services
The Direct Marketing Association (DMA) offers the Mail and Telephone Preference Services, which allow you to reduce the amount of direct mail marketing and telemarketing you receive from many national companies for five years.
When you register with these services, your name will be put on a "delete" file that is updated four times a year-in January, April, July and October -- and made available to direct-mail and telephone marketers.
Two to three months after your name is entered into the quarterly file, you should notice a decrease in the number of solicitations you receive.
However, your registration will not stop mailings or calls from organizations not registered with the DMA's Mail and Telephone Preference Services.
To have your name deleted from many direct mail or telemarketing lists, write your own letter or use the sample letter and mail it to the following addresses:
For direct mail marketing: Direct Marketing Association; Mail Preference Service; PO Box 9008; Farmingdale, NY 11735-9008.
For telemarketing: Direct Marketing Association; Telephone Preference Service; PO Box 9014; Farmingdale, NY 11735-9014.
You may also go directly to the Direct Marketing Association Consumer Assistance website.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Telemarketing Sales Rule (TSR) requires certain disclosures and prohibits misrepresentations.
It gives you the power to stop unwanted telemarketing calls and gives state law enforcement officers the authority to prosecute fraudulent telemarketers who operate across state lines.
The TSR covers most types of telemarketing calls to consumers, including calls to pitch goods, services, "sweepstakes," and prize promotion and investment opportunities.
* It's illegal for a telemarketer to call you if you've asked not to be called.
If they call back, hang up and report them to your State Attorney General.
* Calling times are restricted to the hours between 8 a.m. and 9 p.m. * Telemarketers must tell you it's a sales call and who's doing the selling before they make their pitch.
If it's a prize promotion, they must tell you that no purchase or payment is necessary to enter or win.
If you're asked to pay for a prize, hang up.
Free is free.
* It's illegal for telemarketers to misrepresent any information, including facts about their goods or services, earnings potential, profitability, risk or liquidity of an investment, or the nature of a prize in a prize-promotion scheme.
* Telemarketers must tell you the total cost of the products or services offered and any restrictions on getting or using them, or that a sale is final or non-refundable, before you pay.
In a prize promotion, they must tell you the odds of winning, that no purchase or payment is necessary to win, and any restrictions or conditions of receiving the prize.
* It's illegal for a telemarketer to withdraw money from your checking account without your express, verifiable authorization.
* Telemarketers cannot lie to get you to pay, no matter what method of payment you use.
* You do not have to pay for credit repair, recovery room, or advance-fee loan/credit services until these services have been delivered.
The FTC is proposing to amend the TSR.
The FTC's proposal includes creating a national "do not call" registry.
Under the FTC's proposal, it would be illegal for telemarketers to call consumers who place their phone number on the national registry.
If the FTC decides to adopt the proposal and implement a national "do not call" registry, it will be months before it takes effect.
Top space Image of credit cards
"Pre-Approved" Credit Offers
Do you get lots of offers for a "pre-approved" credit card from financial institutions you've not heard of or done business with and wonder how they got your address? Credit bureaus can release your information only to people with a legitimate business need.
In addition, lenders and insurers may use in your credit file as a basis for sending you unsolicited offers.
You have the right to "opt-out" of receiving these offers.
The credit bureaus offer a toll-free number that enables you to "opt-out" of having pre-approved credit offers sent to you for two years.
Call 1-888-5-OPTOUT (that's 1-888-567-8688) for more information.
This line is for "prescreened" or "pre-approved" credit card offers only.
In addition, you can notify the three major credit bureaus that you do not want personal information about you shared for promotional purposes -- an important step toward eliminating unsolicited mail.
Write your own letter or use the sample letter to limit the amount of information the credit bureaus will share about you.
Send your letter to each of the three major credit bureaus:
Equifax, Inc., Options, PO Box 740123, Atlanta, GA 30374-0123
Experian, Consumer Opt-Out, 701 Experian Parkway, Allen, TX 75012
Trans Union, Marketing List Opt-Out, PO Box, 97328, Jackson, MS 39288-74328
Top space Image of a computer with e-mail
Unsolicited E-Mail
Unsolicited commercial e-mail, usually called "spam," is considered an annoyance by many consumers.
Some consumers have fallen prey to the bogus offers frequently touted in these e-mails.
Typically, an e-mail spammer buys a list of e-mail addresses from a list broker, who compiles it by "harvesting" addresses from the Internet.
If your e-mail address appears in a newsgroup posting, on a website, in a chat room, or in an online service's membership directory, it may find its way onto these lists.
The marketer then uses special software that can send hundreds of thousands of e-mail messages to the addresses at the click of a mouse.
There are several steps you can take to help reduce the amount of unsolicited e-mail you receive.
The DMA offers an E-Mail Preference Service to help you reduce unsolicited commercial e-mails.
To "opt-out" of receiving unsolicited commercial e-mail, use the DMA's online form.
Your request will remain effective for one year.
In addition, you should: 1.
Try to keep your e-mail address private by not using it in newsgroup postings, in chat rooms, etc. 2.
If you use newsgroups and chat rooms with some frequency, you might consider establishing two e-mail addresses.
Establish one for personal messages from family and friends; the other for newsgroups and chatrooms.
3. Use an e-mail filter.
Check your e-mail account to see if it provides a tool to filter out potential spam or a way to channel spam into a bulk e-mail folder.
You might want to consider these options when you're choosing which internet service provider to use.
Stay tuned for more information on your privacy and steps you can take if you run into problems.
Top space
Other Resources
This is just a brief overview.
For more information on unsolicited mail, telemarketing calls, and e-mail, check out these resources from FCIC and on the World Wide Web: Publications available for ordering from FCIC: * ID Theft: When Bad Things Happen to Your Good Name * Pretexting: Your Personal Information Revealed * Privacy Choices for Your Personal Financial Information
* Publications available for ordering from the Money Page
Websites*: * FCIC Privacy Resources * Federal Trade Commission * Federal Reserve Board * Direct Marketing Association * National Consumers League -- STOP Calling Me!
* Names of resources and organizations included in this online article are provided as examples only, and their inclusion does not mean that they are endorsed by the Federal Citizen Information Center or any other Government agency.
Also, if a particular resource or organization is not mentioned, this does not mean or imply that it is unsatisfactory.
*If you click on these links, you are leaving FCIC's website.
Please bookmark us before you leave so you can return easily.
FCIC is not responsible for the content of these websites.
Top space
Enjoy this month's Focus? Share this information with a friend and spread the word! Enter recipient's e-mail address: _________________________ [BUTTON Input] (not implemented)_____________
We will not retain or use this information for any other purpose.
Top space
For more information on other popular consumer issues check out FCIC's Consumer Focus Archive.
Top Site Map - Text Version - Privacy Policy - Security Statement
This service is provided by the Federal Citizen Information Center of the U.S.
General Services Administration.
If you have a comment or question, e-mail us. gsa logo
