Washington Secretary of State ____________________ spacer Search spacer State Flag Menu State Flag Home [spacer.gif] State Flag [spacer.gif]
Display with the U.S. and Other Flags
When the Washington State flag is displayed within the state of Washington, it should occupy the position of honor (to the flag's own right, or the observer's left) after the U.S. flag and the flag of any other nation, and before the flags of other states, Washington counties and city, municipalities, and public or private organizations.
The positions of honor in a display of flags are: 1.
U.S. flag in the position of highest honor (the observer's extreme left or the highest point in a grouping of flags).
2.
The flag or flags of other nations ranked in alphabetical order.
3.
The Washington State flag.
4.
The flags of other states, ranked in an order determined by the respective state's date of ratification of the U.S. Constitution or date of admission to the Union.
In national events or ceremonies honoring the nation or the U.S. flag, the Washington State flag may occupy the 42nd position among the flags of the states in recognition of its rank as the 42nd state to ratify the U.S. Constitution.
5.
The flag of Washington counties with the host county in the position of honor to the left (the observer's right) of the Washington State flag, followed by the other county flags ranked in an order determined by the county's date of creation.
The order of county flags can be found in clicking here.
6.
The flags of Washington State municipalities, and the flags or pennants of public and private agencies, institutions, and societies ranked in an order determined at the discretion of the organizers or sponsors of the particular event.
US 
The Washington State flag should be approximately the same size as, but never larger than, the U.S. flag.
US 
The U.S. flag should be flown from the position of honor on the flag's own right, or from the flagpole on the left as normally viewed by the observer.
The Washington State flag should be flown from the second position of honor, or from the flagpole on the right as normally viewed by the observer.
When a Washington State facility is located in another state, the flag of the host state may be flown on an adjacent staff of equal height.
The Washington State flag and the flag of the host state should be of approximately the same size, and the Washington State flag should be flown in the position of honor (to the flag's own right, or to the observer's left) after the U.S. flag.
When the Washington State flag is flown with the U.S. flag and the flag of another state at such a facility, the proper order from the observer's left is the U.S. flag, the Washington State flag, and the flag of the host state.
US 
The Washington State flag displayed from a staff either on a speaker's platform or on the main floor of a public auditorium should be placed in the second position of honor to the left (the observer's right) of the U.S. flag.
Both the U.S. and the Washington State flags may be to the speaker's right (the observer's left), or the Washington State flag (but not the U.S. flag) may be to the speaker's left (observer's right).
US 
The Washington State flag takes the next place of honor (on the observer's extreme left).
When displayed with the Washington State flag from crossed staffs, the U.S. flag should be on the flag's own right (the observer's left) and its staff should be in front of the staff of the Washington State flag.
When carried in a procession with the Washington State flag and other flags, the U.S. flag should be on the marching right (the observer's left) with the Washington State flag taking the next position of honor (to the observer's right).
The U.S. flag can also be carried in front of and at the center of a line of flags in a procession, in which case the Washington State flag should take the next position of honor on the marching right (the observer's left) of the line.
When the U.S. and Washington State flags are flown from a cross staff, the U.S. flag flies from the peak and the Washington State flag occupies the position on the right end of the cross staff (the observer's left).
Additional Information on Display US Flags
Address Confidentiality | Apostilles | Archives | Charitable Trusts 
spacer Washington Secretary of State 520 Union Avenue SE, PO BOX 40220, OLYMPIA WA 98504-0220 (360) 902-4151 State Seal
