ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH CENTERS Release Date: January 22, 1999 RFA: AG-99-003 P.T.
National Institute on Aging
Letter of Intent Receipt Date: March 1, 1999 Application Receipt Date: May 19, 1999
PURPOSE
The National Institute on Aging (NIA) invites applications from qualified institutions for support of Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRCs).
These are designed to support and conduct research on Alzheimer's disease (AD), and to serve as shared research resources that will facilitate research in AD and related disorders and distinguish them from the process of normal brain aging.
Alzheimer's disease may presently affect as many as 4 million older people in th e United States.
Although it is occasionally identified in patients in their forties and fifties, it is most frequently associated with advancing age.
It doubles in prevalence with every five years past the age of 65; thus, extending life by ten years quadruples the probability of the disease.
Alzheimer's diseas e is the most frequent cause of institutionalization for long-term care.
It destroys the active, productive life of its victims and devastates their familie s financially and emotionally.
In 1993, it was estimated that the United States spent as much as 100 billion dollars/year for the direct and indirect costs of care for patients with Alzheimer's disease.
With the rapidly increasing percentage of the population over the age of 65, the number of persons with AD will increase proportionately, as will the toll it takes.
Both the Executive and Legislative Branches of the Federal Government have expressed concern about the enormity of the problem posed by this disease.
Congressional concern about Alzheimer's disease has focused on funding for research on the causes and treatment of the disease, and on the cost of care.
In 1984, Congress directed the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and in particular the National Institute on Aging (NIA), to foster further research related to Alzheimer's disease.
The NIA Alzheimer's Disease Centers (ADCs) program is authorized by the Public Health Service Act, Section 445, and include s fourteen Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers (ADRCs) and thirteen Alzheimer's Disease Core Centers (ADCCs).
Centers are expected to provide an environment and core resources which will enhance ongoing research by bringing together biomedical, behavioral, and clinical science investigators to study the etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of AD, and to improve health care delivery.
Centers will also foster the development of new lines of research and provide a suitable environment for fellows and junior faculty to acquire research skills and experience in interdisciplinary AD research.
The Centers provide investigators and research groups with well characterized patients and control subjects, famil y information, and tissue and biological specimens for use in research projects.
Each Center should develop in accordance with local talents, interests, and resources, but should also be responsive to national needs related to Alzheimer' s disease.
Centers should be willing to work together with other Alzheimer research groups in collaborative research activities and cooperate with other Federal, State, and Local agency-supported Alzheimer's disease programs in furthering mutual goals.
Potential applicants are encouraged to utilize the strengths of their particular institutions in preparing an application that will cover the spectrum of required activities.
While types of activities that shoul d be included are indicated in these guidelines, specific approaches to accomplish them are left to the applicant.
HEALTHY PEOPLE 2000
The Public Health Service (PHS) is committed to achieving the health promotion and disease prevention objectives of "Healthy People 2000," a PHS-led national activity for setting priority areas.
This Request for Applications (RFA), Alzheimer's Disease Research Centers, is related to the priority area of Chronic Disabling Conditions.
Potential applicants may obtain a copy of "Healthy People 2000" (Full Report: Stock No. 017-001-00474-0 or Summary Report: Stock No. 017- 001-00473-1) through the Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office , Washington, DC 20402-9325 (telephone 202-512-1800).
ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
Applications may be submitted by domestic for-profit and non-profit organizations, public and private, such as universities, colleges, hospitals, laboratories, units of State or Local governments, and eligible agencies of the Federal government.
Applications from racial/ethnic minority individuals, women , and persons with disabilities are encouraged.
At the time of award, the applicant institution cannot have another Alzheimer's Disease Center funded by the NIA.
Institutions eligible for Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Grants (P50s) are those at which there are (1) at least five principal investigators with any PHS agency research grant or comparable peer reviewed research project (including those funded by State governments or private foundations) related to neurodegenerative diseases or aging of the nervous system, each with at least tw o years of committed support remaining at the time of application or (2) one or more program project (P01) grant(s) related to neurodegenerative diseases or aging of the nervous system, which also have at least two years of committed support remaining.
If P01 grant(s) exist, the work supported by the existing P0 1 should be different from that proposed in the ADRC and any overlap of the P01 cores with the P50 cores will be examined and adjustments made before funding.
MECHANISM OF SUPPORT
The support mechanism for this program will be the NIH Center Grant (P50).
Investigators should request five years of support.
The anticipated award date is April 1, 2000.
FUNDS AVAILABLE
The NIA intends to commit approximately $9,000,000 to fund five new and/or competing renewal ADRC grants in Fiscal Year 2000.
The specific number will depend upon the merit of the applications received and the funds available.
The award of grants pursuant to this RFA is contingent upon the availability of fund s for this purpose.
Only applications of sufficiently high merit will be funded.
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
ADCs are required to include administrative, clinical, neuropathological, and information transfer cores.
Other cores can be proposed.
ADRC applications wil l include, in addition, at least 3 full research projects (equivalent to small R01 grants).
The number of research projects funded and their duration will depend upon scientific quality and availability of funds.
At least two pilot research projects will be funded per year.
The ADCs will provide well-characterized patients, patient and family information, and tissue and other biological sample s from persons with AD and from age-matched control subjects for research projects .
As research into the causes of AD begins to address preclinical stages, Centers should begin to address the clinical and neuropathological changes that distinguish the initial stages of AD from normal aging.
Research activities tha t use core resources can be supported by both the ADRC itself and by NIH and other Federal agency mechanisms for the funding of investigator-initiated applications in addition to non-federal funding sources.
The ADRCs provide a mechanism for integrating, coordinating, fostering and developing the interdisciplinary cooperation of a group of established investigators conducting programs of research on Alzheimer's disease and related dementing disorders of older people.
They provide financial, intellectual, patient and tissue resources to support cooperative interactions between a group of projects that have been reviewed and supported on an individual basis, as wel l as for the development of new research projects.
A prime objective of the Cente r Grant is to provide an environment that will strengthen research, increase productivity, and generate new ideas through formal interdisciplinary collaborative efforts.
The central focus may be clinical research, basic research or a combination.
The Center Grant may involve ancillary supportive activities such as longitudina l studies and prolonged patient care necessary to support the primary research effort.
The spectrum of activities should comprise a multi-disciplinary approac h to the problem of Alzheimer's disease.
The ADCs have played and will continue to play a major role in Alzheimer's disease research by providing an infrastructure and core resources around which institutions can build innovative research programs.
Centers may be asked to perform collaborative studies on particular research topics or to serve as a regional or national resource for special purpose research.
The ADCs provide a unique opportunity for multi disciplinary/multi Center studies.
These will be facilitated by linkage to the new Alzheimer's Disease Data Coordinating Center to be funded in 1999.
This ADC network could be used, for example, to standardize clinical and pathological diagnostic procedures, to pool patient information more effectively and to study unique aspects and subtypes of this very complex and heterogeneous disease process.
The NIA encourages ADCs to participate in cooperative studies involvin g many or all of the Centers, as well as studies with other separately funded longitudinal research projects.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
An Alzheimer's Disease Research Center will be an identifiable organizational unit formed by a single institution or a consortium of cooperating institutions.
Therefore, lines of authority must be clearly specified.
The existence of a bas e of ongoing high quality research in Alzheimer's disease, other related neurodegenerative disorders or aging of the nervous system is a prerequisite for establishing or continuing to fund an ADRC.
Each applicant institution will name an ADRC Director (P.I.) who will be the key figure in the administration, management and coordination of the ADRC grant.
Th e Director will be responsible for the organization and operation of the ADRC.
Th e Director should be a scientific leader experienced in the field of Alzheimer's disease research and must be able to coordinate, integrate, and provide guidance in the establishment of programs in Alzheimer's disease research and allied areas.
A significant time commitment (at least 10%) must be made by the Director.
An Associate Director may be named who will be involved in the administrative and scientific efforts of the Center.
Applicants must commit to cooperate fully and to share data concerning patients, control subjects and specimen resources with the NIA -sponsored Alzheimer's Disease Data Coordinating Center (ADDCC) where data from all AD Centers will be centrally collected.
The Steering Committee of the ADDCC in conjunction with the ADC Directors will set policies that allow the individual Centers to conduct research on patients, control subjects and specimen resources collected by that Center while also sharing common data sets with the ADDCC.
The required elements for an ADRC include cores, research projects and pilot research projects.
The required cores are administrative, clinical, neuropathological, and education and information transfer cores.
Additional cores may be proposed and justified as required to advance the local research effort.
Applicants must demonstrate a data management capacity either by creating a data core or by having a clearly defined data management section in the administrative or clinical core.
In either case, data management should als o include biostatistical consulting to the scientific staff associated with the ADC.
Specific instructions for preparing overall progress reports (competing renewal applications), progress reports and plans for individual cores and research projects, and a list of review criteria are detailed later in this RFA.
CORES
A core is a shared central laboratory or clinical research facility, service, or resource.
Each core is directed by a faculty investigator with substantial expertise related to the core.
Facilities may be proposed that will enhance productivity or in other ways benefit a group of investigators to accomplish the stated goals.
Two important and related considerations are (1) the degree to which currently funded investigators within or outside the Center will use and will benefit from core resources and (2) the degree to which the resources will promote new and/or expanded AD research efforts locally, regionally or nationally.
Applicants should document and describe briefly the projects, both existing and planned, whether funded by the Center or not, that will depend upon resources provided by the cores (clinical and neuropathology cores, in particular).
The required ADRC cores support resources that allow or provide for the following: the acquisition of subjects for research; the evaluation, monitoring of clinical course, and treatment of patients; the design and support of researc h protocols; the neuropathological diagnosis of the disease; documentation of the cognitive, behavioral and social aspects of Alzheimer's disease; data collection , storage and biostatistical analysis capacity; and training and outreach programs related to Alzheimer's disease.
Consequently, each application should demonstrate the presence of, or propose, methods to accomplish the above tasks.
Within these parameters, it is expected that individual Centers may develop one or more cores with unique strengths while other cores within the Center may perform more routine functions.
REQUIRED CORES
Administrative Core
Effective development of Center programs requires interaction among the Director , the principal investigators of the cores, the principal investigators of researc h projects using the cores, other researchers at the applicant institution, appropriate institutional administrative personnel, the staff of the awarding agency, and the members of the community in which the Center is located.
The ADRC should recognize that it is part of a large network of ADCs and be prepared to work cooperatively with the other Centers and the Alzheimer's Disease Data Coordinating Center.
The success of the ADRC is dependent upon the involvement of scientific and professional personnel from a variety of disciplines and subspecialties who interrelate in order to facilitate the acquisition of new knowledge.
An executive committee (composed of core and project leaders and the administrator) will be established to assist the Director in making the scientific and administrative decisions relating to the Center.
In addition to coordination of the ADRC, the Director, with the advice of his or her executive committee, will be responsible for allocation and monitoring of ADRC funds and the identificatio n and selection of key personnel.
The executive committee should be encouraged to seek outside advice and consultation, both from within the institution and from other institutions, in its monitoring and development of the scientific content and direction of the program.
In addition to the executive committee, it will be necessary to establish an ad hoc review committee advisory to the ADRC Director.
The committee should includ e scientists from both within and outside the ADRC with expertise relevant to the programs and scientific interests of the ADRC.
The responsibility of this group will be to review the applications for pilot studies and to make recommendations to the ADRC Director.
An external advisory committee to the ADRC, consisting of scientists from outsid e of the institution or consortium, will also be established.
Unless already appointed, external advisory committee members should not be recruited until the NIH review process is complete.
This committee will be used to evaluate the programs of the ADRC, research progress, the effectiveness of communications within the ADRC, and any other activities for which outside expertise is require d or desirable.
The committee should meet annually and prepare a report including recommendations to assist the ADRC.
A member of the NIA extramural program staf f should be invited to attend each meeting as an observer.
A copy of the advisory committee report should be routinely sent to the extramural program staff member .
The administrative requirements of the ADRC will necessitate the assistance of an administrator with business management expertise.
It is important that such an individual be identified and directly involved with the fiscal and administrative aspects of the ADRC application and grant.
The administrator should be a member of the executive committee.
While budget formulation and planning will undoubtedly begin with the Director in collaboration with the scientific staff, the administrator must be involved in the process and provide consultation in matters of fiscal administration.
The administrator should atten d the annual ADC Administrators' meeting.
It is expected that the ADRC administrative structure will facilitate the following:
1) coordination and integration of ADRC components and activities;
2) Planning and review of utilization of funds, including funds for pilot studies;
3) support and advice for the ADRC Director in his/her oversight of the activities of the Center;
4) interaction with the scientific and lay communities to develop relevant goals for the ADRC within the immediate environment of the Center;
5) interaction with other Centers and the Data Coordinating Center to develop trans-ADC research projects
6) timely and routine transmissions of the complete ADRC data set to the ADDCC.
In order to assure active collaboration with other Centers, the ADRC Director an d other staff should attend semi-annual meetings of the ADC Directors and other ad hoc meetings arranged by the ADCs or the NIA to share research findings and plan for cooperative research or to refine and standardize operating procedures among the Centers.
The ADRC application should include funds for travel of the Directo r and other key personnel 1) to the semiannual meetings of the Center Directors, 2) for at least 2 ad hoc meetings on special topics, 3) for visits of Center investigators to other ADCs for the exchange of scientific ideas, planning of multi Center research projects and to receive training in specialized techniques , 4) for the Administrator to attend the Administrators' meeting and 5) for core leaders to attend meetings with core leaders from other ADCs.
Clinical Core
The clinical core serves the functions of patient and control subject recruitment, evaluation, and diagnosis; patient registry; longitudinal follow up of patients and control subjects; acquisition of clinical and laboratory data including clinical data pertaining to the last several weeks of life; and data coordination and biostatistical analysis (if not included as a function of the administrative core or a separate data core).
A research database that maintain s confidentiality of all patient and control subject records should be established at the ADRC.
This will include data necessary for evaluation of differences among preclinical stages of AD, possible and probable AD, and normal aging.
The data must be shared with the Alzheimer's Disease Data Coordinating Center according to standardized protocols developed by the ADC Directors and the Steering Committee of the ADDCC.
A clinical core may perform a limited amount of developmental work, but should not directly fund research per se.
The developmental work allowable in a clinical core must be directly related to the function of the core.
It may be directed toward improving and expanding the cor e functions, e.g., improving existing diagnostic strategies, or developing additional methodologies, techniques or services.
Proposed developmental work should be described as completely as possible in the application.
Planning for patient and age-matched control subject recruitment should include sensitivity to research design and biostatistical analysis.
Describe the procedures for obtaining informed consent for research on cognitively impaired human subjects; attach samples of information given to patients and families and copies of all consent forms.
Particular attention should be paid to obtaining autopsy permission from patients and families and informed consent for current and futur e use of biological samples from patients.
While conducting clinical drug trials is one function of a clinical core, it should not be the major effort of the core.
The application should include a description of the types (with specific examples) of research projects and clinical trials that will use the core and what benefits will obtain to other research activities from the existence of the clinical core.
Efforts to recruit diverse population subgroups including minorities and women must be outlined.
One option is to set up Satellite Diagnostic and Treatment Clinics (SDTCs) designed to increase the heterogeneity of the research patient pool and to enhance the research capabilities of the ADC by extending the activities of the clinical core.
Existing Centers should retain any satellites already in existence unless there are compelling reasons to restructure these components.
New satellite clinics may be proposed as part of the clinical core.
The satellite clinics are not required to conduct research but serve as vehicles for the recruitment, diagnosis and management of AD patients and their families from rural and minority communities, who are then offered the opportunity to participate in research protocols, clinical drug trials and autopsy.
The inclusion of patients with different characteristics will assist investigators in providing answers to questions about AD diagnosis, treatment, and management strategies that are likely to be applicable to the broad U.S. population.
Additionally, a more diverse patient pool will facilitate investigations of the neuropathology and genetics of AD in minority groups as well as studies of care giving and family burden in rural and minority group cohorts.
Neuropathology Core
This core will provide post mortem diagnosis on cases and normal control subject s enrolled in the clinical core and on other well documented AD cases and controls .
Procedures and facilities should be described related to criteria for diagnosis, and the collection, storage, and distribution of brain tissue and other biological samples, including, but not limited to, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma.
Data gathering and storage activities should be coordinated with those of the Clinical Core.
To facilitate data sharing and cross Center comparisons of diagnosis, all Centers shall use the new neuropathological criteria recently developed by the NIA-Reagan Institute Working Group (Neurobiology of Aging, vol. 18, suppl 4, pp S1-S2 ,1997).
More detailed criteria for research purposes should also be described.
Pathology data and a catalog of all samples should be included in the data set transmitted to the ADDCC by mutually agreed upon protocols.
The Neuropathology Core may propose a limited amount of developmental work, but should not directly fund research per se.
The developmental work allowable must be directly related to the function of the core.
It may be directed toward improving and expanding the core functions, e.g., improving existing, or developing additional methodologies, techniques or services.
Proposed developmental work should be described in the application.
Neuropathology core leaders from all of the ADCs should plan to meet yearly to share ideas and discuss technical aspects of tissue sampling, development of standardized tissue processing for diverse research protocols, cataloging and data management, and banking and distribution of tissues and biological samples.
The procedure for prioritizing the use of tissues and other biological samples should be discussed along with a description of the research projects that will use material from this core.
Provisions for obtaining informed consent and protecting the privacy of research subjects must be detailed.
A procedure to provide blinded samples to investigators should be described.
Details for collecting specimens, recording information about clinical status of patients just preceding and at time of death, and procedures for storage and distribution of all human biological samples to investigators both within and outside the Center should be provided.
A mechanism to evaluate requests for samples and prioritize their use should be detailed.
Education and Information Transfer Core
This core will support both the development of professional staff to improve clinical and research skills related to Alzheimer's disease and outreach program s that will publicize the ADRC and educate families and other care givers.
The methods and techniques to be employed to disseminate information and the audienc e targeted to receive information should be defined including 1) approaches to training of professionals including possible reciprocal exchange programs betwee n Centers to provide access to different research environments and technologies ; 2) descriptions of seminar or lecture series, workshops and continuing education programs; and 3) cooperation with other organizations such as state and local agencies and the Alzheimer's Association.
Attention should be directed to issue s of cultural sensitivity and, where appropriate, the information should be structured so that it can effectively reach minority populations, including non- English-speaking people.
Clearly stated objectives and a systematic plan as to how these objectives will be met are required.
Specific assessment methodology is also required to evaluate the effectiveness of outreach programs.
Consideration should be given to cooperation with other ADCs and the NIA ADEAR Center when developing education programs that could be shared among the Centers .
OTHER CORES
The NIA, through the ADRC, will support additional cores that provide opportunities for scientific accomplishments beyond those attainable solely through support of the mandatory cores.
It is important to note that support should not be requested for cores that only replace or centralize resources supported on individual project grants.
In a Center grant application, it is not sufficient for the principal investigator merely to identify such centralized resources.
Rather, it must be demonstrated exactly how each core would augment or enhance the present capabilities of the investigators and make possible new activities.
There should be a thorough discussion of the project(s) that will use resources of additional cores.
RESEARCH PROJECTS
Applications will include a minimum of three and a maximum of six research projects.
The research projects should be requested for five years of funding and incorporate the latest techniques and propose studies that will advance our understanding of the basic and clinical underpinnings of Alzheimer's disease in areas such as etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, epidemiology, diagnosis, therapeutic interventions, patient management, and care giver issues.
The projects should be similar in quality to small R01 grants and subprojects of program project grants.
It would be desirable to propose at least one project that utilizes patients or patient material from the Center cores.
The ADRC should not be the primary source of research funding for the investigators associated with the Center.
ADRC - supported research should complement other funded research related to Alzheimer's disease taking place at the applicant institution.
PILOT STUDIES
A plan to support pilot studies for basic and clinical, biomedical, epidemiological, or behavioral research should be included and budgeted in the application.
The description of a plan to solicit, review and administer pilot grants should be included with the Administrative Core and a separate budget including the total request for pilots should be submitted.
Criteria for review of pilot studies should be developed and included in the application.
These funds may be used for new investigators, investigators from other fields willing to bring their research expertise to Alzheimer's disease, and investigators whos e proposed research would constitute feasibility testing.
This funding mechanism is intended to provide modest support that will allow an investigator the opportunity to develop preliminary data sufficient to provide the basis for an application for independent research support through conventional granting mechanisms.
Pilot studies are typically limited to a one-time nonrenewable award for one yea r of support.
If described and well justified, two years of support may be requested.
Any one investigator is eligible only once for pilot support, unless the additional proposed pilot study constitutes a real departure from his or her ongoing research.
Pilot study support is not intended for large undertakings of established investigators for which it would be appropriate to submit separate research grant applications.
Pilot funds are not intended to support or supplement ongoing-supported research of an investigator.
Since eligibility for pilot studies is difficult to define, some examples may be helpful:
1) A study proposed by an established investigator who has experience in areas other than AD research, and who wants to work in the Alzheimer's disease researc h field; or a study by an established investigator who wants to try a new hypothesis, method, or approach that is not an extension of ongoing research.
2) A study proposed by a new investigator, with an interest in research in Alzheimer's disease, before the study has developed to the point of being suitable to apply for individual grant support.
3) A preliminary study to determine the availability of sufficient subjects with specific characteristics, before undertaking a larger study.
Each pilot project is limited to no more than $30,000 direct costs each year.
If the pilot project is requested and justified for two years, the direct costs are limited to $30,000 per year.
No pilot applications should be submitted with the ADRC application but, instead , the number requested for each year (2 minimum, 4 maximum) and the plans for soliciting pilot proposals should be described.
A plan must also be presented within the administrative core for peer review of the pilot studies including th e structure and composition of the review panel.
Pilot proposals should be reviewed locally and those chosen for funding should be submitted to the NIA for approval in the annual noncompeting renewal application.
PROGRESS REPORTS
Overall Progress Report
For competing renewal applications, the overall progress report should include summaries of progress in achieving the major aims of the Center during the last funding period, including each core and funded research project and major publications.
If a project or optional core has terminated, include a final report with a summary of results and publications.
If a project or optional cor e is continuing, include a progress report in that component writeup.
Applicants should include tables detailing 1) Publications and grants (source, amount and title) resulting from each component funded by the ADRC and 2) Publications and grants (source amount and title) resulting from pilot projects.
The overall progress report should also include details of how the presence of the ADRC has brought new investigators into the field and has stimulated non-ADR C funded research in the last funding period.
It should describe how the presence of the Center has facilitated and improved Alzheimer research at the Institution and beyond.
In addition to text summaries, applicants should also include summary tables detailing:
1) ADRC and Non-ADRC funded grants and projects that use or have used major resources supplied by the ADRC, including principal investigator, source and tim e of funding, types and amount of resources (e.g., clinical or neuropathological diagnoses, numbers of patients, specimens etc) and any resulting publications.
2) Collaborations with other AD researchers, other Centers, cooperative studies, and with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies.
3) Clinical trial participation by patients enrolled in the Center including trial name, sponsor, number of patients, and dates.
4) Institutional, state and other private and public resources committed to the Center and its investigators.
Clinical Core Progress Report
For competing continuations the Clinical Core Progress report should include Clinical Core objectives and progress in meeting them, including information about satellites (if applicable).
Basic functions of the core should be summarized (using tables where appropriate) including numbers, race, gender, age of patients and controls recruited, diagnosis, percentage follow up and drop out rate, autopsy consent and rate, diagnostic confirmation by autopsy, and clinicopathological correlations.
Functions of Clinical Core in providing services (a) for ADC-funded and (b) non-ADC funded investigators should be clearly summarized.
These would include numbers and kinds of subjects recruited and participation in clinical trials and other ongoing clinical research projects, both local and national.
How has the clinical core contributed to AD research? Describe key findings and list publications resulting from use of cor e patients.
Any developmental work carried out by the core should be presented an d resulting publications listed.
Neuropathology Core Progress Report
For the neuropathology core, competing renewal applications should outline core objectives and progress in meeting them.
Basic functions of the core such as number of AD and control autopsies, post mortem intervals, tissue dissection and storage, diagnoses, and type and quantity of tissue provided to investigators both funded by the Center and by other means should be clearly summarized (using tables where appropriate).
Any developmental work carried out by the core shoul d be presented and resulting publications listed.
Education and Information Transfer Core Progress Report
Applications should include evidence for training activities that effectively impart knowledge to professionals and the lay public with the possibility of leading to improved health care for patients.
Include a table presenting the nature of training activities and the types of professionals trained - physician s (including medical students, residents, fellows), nurses, social workers etc.
Detail the history of cooperative ventures of the Center with state and local agencies such as the Alzheimer's Association and community groups in coordinatin g training and education programs.
Data Management and Statistics
Summarize progress and activities related to data collection, data management an d statistical consulting activities at the appropriate place in the core(s) where these services are located.
Include progress and interactions with the Data Coordinating Center.
List projects and publications in which data management an d statistical consulting played a role.
BUDGET CONSIDERATIONS
All ADRC proposals should request and provide justification for five years of support.
The total costs (direct + indirect) requested for new applications may not excee d $1.4 million for the first year.
Competing renewal applications, whose final budget year in the current funding period exceeds $2.0 million in total costs, may request a 3% increase.
Other competing renewal applications, whose final budget year in the current funding period is less than $2 million, may request an increase up to 10% over final year total costs, or 10% over an average of the final 3 years total costs, or $1.4 million, which ever is higher.
Direct cost requests for subsequent years may increase above the prior year direct cost awar d no more than 3%.
The direct costs are to be distributed approximately as follows: (This proposed distribution is intended only as a general guideline and proportions may vary if needed and justified.
If additional cores are proposed based on local needs, th e distribution may be adjusted accordingly.)
Administrative Core 7.5% Pilot Studies 7.5% Clinical Core 35% Neuropathology Core 10% Education and Information Transfer Core 5% Research Projects 35%
Where large items of equipment are requested, the application must document what is already available and provide clear justification in terms of use by core staff and how it relates to research projects dependent on the core.
General purpose equipment needs should be included and justified only after surveying th e availability of such items within the institution.
Research patient care costs (both inpatient and outpatient expenses) will be considered in the context of other existing institutional clinical resources.
Attempts should be made by the applicant institution to utilize existing clinica l facilities, such as General Clinical Research Centers and individually supported beds.
Costs relating to the clinical efforts of the ADRC may be funded through the ADRC, provided there is no overlap of funding.
Only those research patient costs directly related to ADRC activities may be charged to the ADRC.
Domestic and foreign travel of project personnel directly related to the core an d scientific activities of the ADRC is allowable.
Budgeting should include travel and lodging for 1) the semi-annual meetings of the Center Directors, 2) annual meetings of administrators, clinical core leaders, education core leaders, data managers, and neuropathology core leaders and, 3) representatives of the Center to attend ad hoc meetings called by the ADCs or the NIA to discuss research findings and plan cooperative projects, to promulgate data sharing, and to discuss standardization of procedures among the ADCs.
Requests and commitments for pilots in competing applications (new and renewal) will be budgeted as a separate line in the "composite" budget at $30,000 per pilot per year (without escalation).
They should not be included in the Administrative Core or elsewhere in the application.
A brief description of the first year pilot research and detailed pilot budgets for the first year of Cente r funding will be due shortly before the award of successful applications and future year pilots should be submitted with the annual noncompeting renewal applications.
Indirect costs will be provided in accordance with these budgets.
Pilot grants are allowed for consortium arrangements but direct cost should not exceed $30,000 with total consortium cost budgeted not to exceed $35,000 for eac h pilot including the facilities and administrative costs of the consortium institution.
No indirect costs will be provided to the grantee for pilot projects conducted by consortia.
If consortium arrangements are contemplated, the following information should be provided in the application:
1) A list of all proposed performance sites both at the applicant institution an d at the collaborating institutions
2) A separate, detailed budget for the initial and future years for each institution and, where appropriate, for each unit of activity at each institution.
3) A composite budget for all units of activity at each institution for each year, as well as a composite budget for the total proposed budget for each year.
4) An explanation of the programmatic, fiscal, and administrative arrangements made between the grantee institution and the collaborating institutions.
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES IN RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
It is the policy of the NIH that women and members of minority groups and their subpopulations must be included in all NIH supported biomedical and behavioral research projects involving human subjects, unless a clear and compelling rationale and justification is provided that inclusion is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects or the purpose of the research.
This policy results from the NIH Revitalization Act of 1993 (Section 492B of Public Law 103-43).
All investigators proposing research involving human subjects should read the "NIH Guidelines For Inclusion of Women and Minorities as Subjects in Clinical Research", which have been published in the Federal Register of March 28, 1994 (FR 59 14508-145131), and in the NIH GUIDE FOR GRANTS and CONTRACTS, Volume 23, No. 11, March 18, 1994.
INCLUSION OF CHILDREN AS PARTICIPANTS IN RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN SUBJECTS
It is the policy of NIH that children (i.e., individuals under the age of 21) must be included in all human subjects research, conducted or supported by the NIH, unless there are scientific and ethical reasons not to include them.
This policy applies to all initial (Type 1) applications submitted for receipt dates after October 1, 1998.
However, the scientific goals of this RFA are focused on aging.
In describing the plan to recruit human subjects, investigators may cite a focus on aging or on aging-related aspects of disease as the justification for why children will be excluded.
In this regard applicants may use Justification 1, the research topic to be studied is irrelevant to children, from the policy announcement.
LETTER OF INTENT
Prospective applicants are asked to submit, by March 1, 1999, a letter of intent that includes a brief description of the proposed Center, the name, address, and phone number of the Principal Investigator, the identities of other key personne l including leadership of the cores and research projects, and the number and titl e of this RFA.
A letter of intent is not an absolute requirement, is not binding, and does not enter into the review of subsequent applications.
The information that it contains is helpful in planning for the review of the applications.
It allows NIA staff to estimate the potential review workload and to avoid conflict s of interest in the selection of reviewers.
The letter of intent is to be sent to Dr. Creighton Phelps at the address listed under INQUIRIES.
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
The application must be prepared using instructions in this RFA and those in supplementary instructions for preparation of multi component applications (P50 Centers version), which may be obtained from the program staff listed under INQUIRIES.
Page Limitation: Applications may not exceed a total of 25 pages eac h for the overall progress report and parts a-d of each core and research project.
Prior to submission of the formal application, consultation with NIA program staff concerning the technical aspects of preparing the application is strongly encouraged.
The research grant application form PHS 398 (rev. 4/98) is to be used in applyin g for these grants.
These forms are available at most institutional offices of sponsored research and from the Division of Extramural Outreach and Information Resources, National Institutes of Health, 6701 Rockledge Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-7910, telephone (301) 435-0714, Email: grantsinfo@nih.gov and on the internet at http://grants.nih.gov/grants/forms.htm
The RFA label available in the PHS 398 must be affixed to the bottom of the face page of the application.
Failure to use this label could result in delayed processing of the application such that it may not reach the review committee in time for review.
In addition, enter the title: "ALZHEIMER'S DISEASE RESEARCH CENTER" and the RFA number on line 2 of the face page of the application form an d check the YES box.
Submit a signed original of the application, including the Checklist, and three signed, exact photocopies, in one package to:
CENTER FOR SCIENTIFIC REVIEW NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH 6701 ROCKLEDGE DRIVE, ROOM 1040 - MSC 7710 BETHESDA, MD 20892-7710 BETHESDA, MD 20817 (for express/courier service)
At the time of submission, two additional copies of the application must be sent to:
Dr. Mary Nekola Scientific Review Office National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Room 2C212, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 (ATTN: Alzheimer's Centers)
Complete applications must be received by May 19, 1999.
If an application is received after that date, it will be returned to the applicant without review.
REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS
Upon receipt, applications will be reviewed for completeness by the Center for Scientific Review (CSR) and responsiveness by NIA.
Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant without further consideration.
If NIA staff find that the application is not responsive (those that request amounts that exceed allowable limits or are not directed to the goals of this RFA) it will be returned without further consideration.
Each application must be thorough and complete.
Additional materials or revisions will not be accepted after the receipt date.
It is strongly recommended that Institutional Review Board (IRB) and, if appropriate, Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) approval be secured before the application is submitted.
Otherwise, it is the applicant's responsibility to ensure that these certifications are sent to the Scientific Review Office, NIA, within 60 days of the receipt date.
Applications failing to comply with this requirement will be returned without review.
There will be no further notifications on this issue.
Applications that are complete and responsive to the RFA will be evaluated for scientific and technical merit by an appropriate peer review group convened by the NIA.
As part of the initial merit review, a process may be used in which applications receive a written critique and under a process in which only those applications deemed to have the highest scientific merit, generally the top half of the applications under review, will be discussed, assigned a priority score, and receive a second level review by the National Advisory Council on Aging.
Applicants should clearly demonstrate the ways in which the ADRC will contribute to the growth of local research programs, support on-going projects, cooperate with other ADCs and the ADDCC in collaborative research, and attract both senior and new investigators to AD research.
Review Criteria
Listed below are the review criteria to be used in the evaluation of the ADRC applications; these criteria will be applied to competing continuations by evaluating progress and to new applications by evaluating preliminary organizational work, history of Alzheimer's disease research and plans for implementation of the new program.
The following review considerations will apply:
A. Center as a Whole:
1) For competitive renewal applications, impact of the Center on furthering Alzheimer's disease research locally and nationally during the last funding period (see details under Progress Report sections); for new applications, the potential for such impact.
2) Extent of "Centerness", i.e., does the Center as a whole serve a purpose greater than the sum of the individual components?
3) Extent of Center interactions with the Alzheimer community including cooperative interactions with local organizations and nationally with other ADCs and cooperative studies.
4) Unique contributions of the Center, including significance, innovation, scientific productivity, and recognition, (publications, new research grants, honors and awards).
5) For competitive renewal applications, quality of progress reports according to criteria specified in this RFA.
B. Cores:
1) For competing continuation applications, progress in meeting stated aims of cores in previous application, publications, and securing of other funding detailed separately for each core.
(Refer back to overall and core progress report sections)
2) How will the cores support research and educational activities of the ADRC an d what is the future anticipated use? The fit of each proposed core into the overall research program.
Will it enhance collaborative and/or interdisciplinar y research within the ADRC and the wider research community?
3) Plan for recruitment of women and minority patients and control subjects to the clinical core.
In competing continuation applications, has progress been made in increasing participation of diverse populations in ADRC activities? If ADRC had funds for satellite clinics, how effectively have they been used?
4) Would any proposed optional cores duplicate existing resources or services? If so, are the requested new resources justified? Do other grant funds already provide any of the requested capabilities?
C. Research:
1) For competing continuation applications, progress in meeting stated aims of projects in previous application, publications, and securing of other funding detailed separately for research and pilot projects.
2) The scientific relevance, significance, approach, innovation, quality of the investigators, and research environment for the Center as a whole and for each of the projects
3) The feasibility of the pilot grant program proposed in new applications and the success of pilots funded in the previous award period for competing continuations as judged by documentation of publications and further independent funding.
4) The experience and commitment of the investigators responsible for the individual research projects, their interrelationship with the other elements of the ADRC, and with other scientists at their own institution and elsewhere.
5) The expected role of the ADRC in increasing the quantity and quality of research in Alzheimer's disease within the applicant institution and with other ADCs and the Data Coordinating Center.
D. Data Management:
1) Are data management and support procedures developed sufficiently to allow ADRC investigators to access and utilize data.
Does the Center provide statistical design and support to ADRC investigators?
2) Is there a sound plan to manage and utilize clinical and neuropathological data.
Are adequate safeguards to protect patient confidentiality addressed? Ar e staffing, hardware and software adequate?
3) Statement of agreement to cooperate fully and share all core data with the Alzheimer's Disease Data Coordinating Center.
E. Program Administration:
1) The creative scientific and administrative leadership of the ADRC Director an d his/her staff, and their commitment to devote adequate time to the management of the ADRC program.
2) The proposed administrative organization including:
o Coordination of ongoing research and its use of the ADRC including procedures for allocating the resources of the ADRC in response to requests made by interna l and external investigators and documentation of resources used and resulting publications.
o Procedures for internal communication and cooperation among the investigators involved in the ADRC.
o Mechanisms for reviewing the use of, and administering, funds for pilot projects.
o Management capabilities that include fiscal administration, procurement, property and personnel management, planning, budgeting, etc.
o For competing continuation applications, composition of the advisory board.
Is it appropriate? Has it had regularly scheduled meetings? Are its responsibilities defined? How has the ADC benefitted from advisory board input?
3) The appropriateness of the ADRC budgets for the core resources and research projects.
F. Investigators:
1) The qualifications of the participants.
What are their academic credentials and their research records? What is the current funding of investigators associated with the ADRC?
2) Evidence of collaboration and interdisciplinary research among the investigators who will be associated with the ADRC.
G. Facilities:
1) Are facilities adequate? Are they reasonably contiguous or physically separated?
H. Institutional Commitment:
1) Evidence for institutional commitment to the program, including provision of funding, space, faculty positions for AD research and other essential ADRC functions, or commitments for construction or renovation.
2) The academic environment and resources, including equipment and facilities, and the potential for interaction with scientists from other departments and components.
AWARD CRITERIA
The anticipated date of award will be April 1, 2000.
Funding criteria will be scientific merit (based on the review criteria listed above), availability of funds, and programmatic priorities.
INQUIRIES
Requests for supplementary guidelines, letters of intent and inquiries regarding programmatic issues may be directed to:
Dr. Creighton H. Phelps Alzheimer's Disease Centers Program National Institute on Aging 7201 Wisconsin Avenue, Suite 3C307, MSC 9205 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-9350 FAX: (301) 496-1494 Email: phelpsc@exmur.nia.nih.gov
Direct inquiries regarding fiscal matters to:
Linda Whipp Grants Management Office National Institute on Aging Gateway Building, Room 2N-212 Bethesda, MD 20892-9205 Telephone: (301) 496-1472 FAX: (301) 402-3672 Email: whippl@exmur.nia.nih.gov
AUTHORITY AND REGULATIONS
This program is described in the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance No. 93.866.
Awards are made under authorization of the Public Health Service Act, Title IV, Part A (Public Law 78-410, as amended by Public Law 99-158, 42 USC 241 and 285) and administered under PHS grants policies and Federal Regulations 42 CFR 52 and 45 CFR Part 74.
This program is not subject to the intergovernmental review requirements of Executive Order 12372 or Health Systems Agency review.
The Public Health Service (PHS) strongly encourages all grant recipients to provide a smoke-free workplace and promote the non-use of all tobacco products.
In addition, Public Law 103-227, the Pro-Children Act of 1994, prohibits smoking in certain facilities (or in some cases, any portion of a facility) in which regular or routine education, library, day care, health care or early childhood development services are provided to children.
This is consistent with the PHS mission to protect and advance the physical and mental health of the American people.
__________________________________________________________________
Return to Volume Index
Return to NIH Guide Main Index __________________________________________________________________
H H S Department of Health and Human Services N I H National Institutes of Health (NIH) 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892
