Digital Imagery for Works of Art Harvard University Art Museums, Cambridge, Mass.
November 19-20, 2001
Reference Materials
Archives 
Art history resources
Artisteweb Overview
Association for Computers and the Humanities
Digital Imaging for Photographic Collections: Foundations for Technical Standards, by Franziska S. Frey and James M. Reilly,
Digital reconstruction of faded color photographs
Digital Resources for the Humanities
Direct Digital Imaging of Vincent van Gogh's Self-Portrait - A Personal View, by Roy S. Berns
DYABOLA-Database: a citation database that includes the original Getty Census of Art and Architecture known to the Renaissance
From CVR to CVRO: The Past, Present, and Future of Cultural Virtual Reality. pre-print of an article which will appear in the papers of VAST 2000, by Bernard Frischer.
(MS Word '95)
Mondrian: The Transatlantic Paintings
Multi-spectral Image Acquisition and Spectral Reconstruction using a Trichromatic Digital Camera System associated with absorption filters, by Francisco Imai
Museums in the USA/ICOM
Practical Digital Libraries, Morgan Kaufman, 1997, by Michael Lesk.
Project Aims to Make Cuneiform Collections Available to Researchers Worldwide, an article in the Chronicle of Higher Education about the work of Robert Englund.
Rock Art Bulletin
Scalable Vector Graphics homepage
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) 1.1 Specification, a W3C Recommendation
The Science of Digitizing Two-Dimensional Works of Art for Color-Accurate Image Archives - Concepts Through Practice, by Roy S. Berns
The Self-Replicating Omega Library, by Kevin Kelly Editor, Wired Magazine
SIMPLIcity content-based image retrieval project
"Student Evaluation of the Usefulness of Computer Images in Art History and Related Disciplines ."
For an example of the number of images necessary for anything approaching in-depth research, open "42 additional images of the screens."
Charles Rhyne.
Pre-print of a paper on the UCLA Cultural VR Lab's project to create a 3D model of the Colosseum.
It will appear in the papers of a conference held in September, 2000 at the Université de Caen, by Bernard Frischer.
(MS Word '95 zipped)
VAST2001, Virtual Reality, Archaeology, and Cultural Heritage 2001, An International Symposium, 28-30 November 2001, Glyfada, Nr Athens, Greece.
Walking with Vermeer: Issues include calibrated color management, thematic mapping of written texts for building of databases/automatic text markup, efficient 3D mapping of cityscapes.
11.14.01
