[grnms.jpeg] General Information research education Shades of Gray Jane Yarn Cruise Reports buoy data Sanctuary Advisory Council local news and other sites underwater pictures sanctuaries homepagehomepage Gray's Reef Banner Northern Right Curriculum Overview Breeching Right Whale Less than 300 northern right whales exist today.
Around the world, these endangered whales are known to consistently congregate in only 5 locations, namely the coasts of Georgia and Florida, Stellwagen Bank and Cape Cod Bay, the Great South Channel east of Cape Cod Bay, the Bay of Fundy, and the Scotian Shelf.
During the winter, pregnant females travel to the warm waters off the Georgia and Florida coasts-to the only known northern right whale calving area in the world-to give birth.
From Spring to Fall the whales congregate in the north-western Atlantic feeding and courting.
Gray's Reef and Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary are both located within the endangered whale's migration track.
As a result the two sanctuaries have taken a strong interest in the marine mammal and have teamed-up to increase public awareness and education efforts concerning the conservation of the northern right whale.
The education coordinators of both sanctuaries recently co-authored a curriculum guide and video entitled "The Northern Right Whale from Whaling to Watching."
Sarah V. Mitchell, of Gray's Reef National Marine Sanctuary, designed the handbook and wrote the text with Ann Smrcina of Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuary.
A fold-out poster, created by Will Hon, accompanies the handbook and depicts the migration route, size, and anatomy of the great whale.
The handbook, video, and poster explore the life history of the world's most endangered large whale and human's history with it from exploitation to conservation.
It provides an interesting and timely background on the northern right whale and incorporates activities for interested students and teachers.
Special emphasis is placed on 'hands-on' learning and application.
The module with books, video, and poster targets students grades six through eight, but the curriculum has been utilized by students of all ages (including the Georgia and Florida public schools, Florida CLAMS project, some Nova Scotia schools, ship captains/skippers, southeast coast guard pilots, and U.S. Navy seamen.)
According to Reed Bohne, Manager at GRNMS, collaborations and partnerships are an important means to 1.)
promote public understanding, 2.)
support protection efforts, and 3.)
participate in the conservation of endangered marine mammals.
"Marine protected areas such as Stellwagen Bank and Gray's Reef are vital for the protection of endangered marine species and the conservation of the rich biodiversity of our marine environment."
The handbook and poster were originally printed in 1996.
The video is a new addition to the education set and is now available for distribution.
For copies of the northern right whale video, book, and/or poster please leave us an email message at: GRNMS@ocean.nos.noaa.gov or call our office at 912-598-2345
NEW!!!!
Endangered whale video called: "The Northern Right Whale: from Whaling to Watching."
This video is the newest edition to the endangered northern right whale education curriculum developed by Gray's Reef and Stellwagen Bank National Marine Sanctuaries.
Together with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Film and Video Department, Gray's Reef and Stellwagen Bank compiled inspiring footage of whales feeding, mating, and calving.
These scenes are interspersed with informative interviews by prominent scientists and educators, detailed maps, and graphics-all providing an interesting and timely background on the northern right whale.
