Chapter 6 FLOODPLAIN ECOLOGY STATUS OF THE ENVIRONMENT Analysis of impacts of the flood of 1993 and resulting recommendations for integrated floodplain management must be placed in the context of how the naturally functioning ecosystem has been altered by hydrologic and hydraulic modifications and changes in land cover/land use.
Humans have used large rivers and their floodplains for settlement, agriculture and commerce from prehistoric to modern times.
The Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers, like nearly all large rivers of the world, are no longer undisturbed ecosystems.
Prehistoric geography of the Mississippi River basin provided a refuge for "ancient fishes" and resulted in high biodiversity for a number of animal groups.
The basin served as a primary center of diversity of North America's fish fauna.
It exhibits the highest diversity of freshwater fishes for any region of the world at comparable latitudes (Robison, 1986), comprising about 260 species in 13 families, or just over 43 percent of the approximately 600 freshwater species known from North America.
Ancient fishes such as jawless lampreys, sturgeons, gars, and two families with only one or two living representatives continue to survive in the basin.
The bowfin, historically found in off-channel habitats and tributaries to the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers, is the only living species in the family Amiidae.
For survival, it requires river backwaters and oxbows that have extensive growths of aquatic vegetation.
Draining of marshes, restriction of channels by dikes and dredging, agricultural use of bottomlands, and drought have eliminated most natural pools along the lower Missouri, middle Mississippi, and their tributaries.
Another example of ancient fishes in the basin is the paddlefish, which survives in the Mississippi and Missouri Rivers, and has only one living relative in China.
Paddlefish survival is jeopardized by pollution, alteration of natural flows on these rivers, and dams which obstruct reproductive migrations (Dillard and others, 1986).
The Mississippi River basin's mussel fauna is an important invertebrate group and also highly diverse.
Presently there are 37 living species in the upper Mississippi River.
This number contrasts with only about a dozen species of freshwater mussels in all of Europe (Sparks, 1993).
Most freshwater species in Europe were decimated during glacial periods.
In contrast, the north-south orientation of the Mississippi provided refugia for aquatic species during harsh climatic periods.
This orientation and the extension of the Missouri into the arid west make these rivers ideal migration corridors for waterbirds (ducks, geese, swans, herons and egrets), shorebirds (e.g., sandpipers), raptors (owls, hawks and eagles), and songbirds (warblers, finches, and other birds) (Sparks, 1993).
Over 50 percent of all wintering bald eagles counted in the conterminous 48 states during 1979-1982 were from these river basins (Millsap, 1986).
Forty percent of North America's waterfowl and shorebirds use the Mississippi flyway to move annually between their breeding grounds in the north and their wintering areas along the Gulf Coast or South America (Smith, 1994).
Floodplain forests of the Mississippi River support a rich diversity of terrestrial and wetland vertebrates.
Newling (1975) reported a total of 37 amphibian, 89 reptile, 322 bird, and 71 mammal species for the Mississippi and Illinois River floodplains.
Increased human intervention in natural river-floodplain processes has influenced the ecological balance of the upper Mississippi Basin's large rivers, reducing habitat availability for many species of native flora and fauna (Fremling and others 1989, Hesse and others 1989a, Sparks, 1992).
Conversely, construction of impoundments in the upper Mississippi River Basin has increased habitat for other species, including submerged and emergent aquatic plants (e.g., water milfoil, wild celery), lacustrine fishes (e.g., walleye, largemouth bass) and waterfowl (e.g., scaup, canvasbacks).
Human impacts on river hydrology, geomorphology, biodiversity, and ecological processes in the Upper Mississippi River Basin's floodplains have resulted in Federal and state listings of a number of species as rare, threatened, or endangered (table 6.1).
The large number of rare, threatened, and endangered species near the river corridors demonstrates the importance of the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers to the basin's wildlife (figure 6.1, SAST Database)^1.
It must be noted that biases exist in data collection as a result of uneven sampling.
However, these highly altered ecosystems no longer provide the range of aquatic habitats and riverine wetlands required by many of the species that are now in jeopardy (Smith, 1994).
__________________________________________________________________
^1.
The data layer plotted in figure 6.1 only shows threatened or endangered species on or near floodplains.
Upland threatened and endangered species are not shown.
Table 6.1 Numbers of rare, threatened, and endangered species endemic to rivers of Upper Mississippi River Basin.
State and Federal listings may overlap.
Taxonamic Group Missouri River^a Upper Mississippi River^b Illinois River^b State Listed or Candidate Federal Listed or Candidate State Listed or Candidate Federal Listed or Candidate State Listed or Candidate Federal Listed or Candidate Plants 7 7 164 11 43 8 Insects 0 6 14 1 6 3 Mussels 0 2 20 7 0 0 Fish 16 10 22 4 3 0 Amphibians 0 0 4 1 1 1 Reptiles 2 4 20 4 4 3 Birds 4 14 30 4 10 3 Mammals 3 3 12 4 2 1 TOTAL 32 46 286 36 69 19
^aWhitmore, S.B. and Keenlyne, D.G., 1990.
^bThe Natural Heritage Network and The Nature Conservancy, MRO (H. Watson, personal commun., 1994)
Upper Mississippi River The upper Mississippi River (source to the confluence with Missouri River) drains an area in excess of 150,000 square miles; 66 percent of the 1,106,854 acres in the upper Mississippi floodplain are used for crops and pasture land (Marler 1993).
These agricultural lands depend on an extensive levee system for protection against flooding.
Theiling (1994) reported that the upper floodplain reach (UMR navigation Pools 1-13) has the least disturbed floodplain habitat because of the presence of the Upper Mississippi River Fish and Wildlife Refuge.
From the Chippewa River in Wisconsin to the Rock River in Illinois, the Upper Mississippi River National Fish and Wildlife Refuge totals approximately 200,000 acres.
Downstream, the Mark Twain National Wildlife Refuge includes 28,000 acres which are directly managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Aquatic habitats, however, have been influenced by impoundment, sedimentation, and low-flow water regulation.
Compared to habitat on the upper portion of the upper Mississippi River, aquatic habitat on the lower floodplain reach (UMR navigation Pools 14-26) has been more affected by hydrologic perturbations, sedimentation, and conversion of floodplain habitats to agriculture.
This reach also has few public lands which are widely separated.
The middle Mississippi (confluence of Missouri River to confluence of Ohio River, also referred to as the open river) is unpooled, steep, lined along bendways with rock rip-rap, and greatly incised throughout its length.
The channel at St. Louis, Missouri, has downgraded by 12 ft and its width has constricted by half since 1837 (Simons and others 1974).
Less than 5 percent of the total aquatic area in this reach is currently off-channel habitat.
Aquatic plants are almost entirely absent in the middle Mississippi (Theiling 1994).
Water level elevations have increased through time on the upper Mississippi River at flood discharges, while at the same locations at low discharges, water level elevations have increased (Wlosinski, 1994).
Water surface elevations at 60,000 cfs at St. Louis dropped approximately 8 ft over the 133-year period of record.
However, water surface elevations at 780,000 cfs have risen about 9 ft over the same period.
The period of record for Chester and Thebes is far shorter than at St. Louis (about 55 years), but the same relationship is seen.
At Chester, water level elevations dropped approximately 1.5 ft during low discharges (60,000 cfs), while at high discharges (780,000 cfs) water level elevations have risen about 5 feet.
Water level elevations at Thebes have dropped approximately 5 ft at low discharges and risen 3.5 ft at high discharges.
Changes in the relationships between discharges and water level elevations are probably due to a number of factors.
Methods of obtaining discharge estimates have changed leading to questions concerning the accuracy of discharge estimates during flood periods before 1933.
Natural variation due to water temperature, vegetation, sediment load and conversion from forests to agricultural areas have changed the speed at which water travels through the system.
However, Simons and others (1974) and Belt (1975) implicated levees and channel training structures as two of the more important causes of these trends on the Mississippi River.
Conclusion: Preliminary evidence suggests levees and channel training structures have influenced water level elevations at both low and high discharges.
Recommendation 6.1: Test for possible cause and effect relationships between observed changes in water level at low and high discharges and factors such as river channel-floodplain modifications, measuring and estimating methods, and natural variation due to different water temperature, sediment loads, and changes in land cover.
Changes in biodiversity are reflected in changes in land use and land cover.
Pool 8, located at LaCrosse, Wisconsin, represents an area on the upper Mississippi River which is considered to be highly productive.
Between 1891 and 1989, open water increased 21 percent to 42 percent; aquatic vegetation increased from 2 percent to 20 percent; grasses/forbs decreased from 43 percent to 10 percent; woody terrestrial vegetation decreased from 48 percent to 17 percent; agriculture decreased from 5 percent to less than 1 percent; urban/developed increased from 2 percent to 10 percent; and sand/mud decreased from 2 percent to less than ½ percent (Yin and Nelson, 1994).
Nearly 80 percent of the island habitat in lower pool 8 was lost between 1939 and 1989 (Yin and Nelson, 1994).
The increase in open water and aquatic vegetation and decrease in island habitat is related to construction of Lock and Dam 8.
The reduction in woody terrestrial vegetation is also partially related to the navigation project.
Large tracts which would be inundated by the damming of the river were cleared of trees prior to flooding.
Figure 6.2 illustrates changes which have occurred between 1891 and 1989 for Pool 26 (St. Louis, Missouri area).
Over the 98-year period, water increased from 15,507 acres to 17,445 acres; marsh increased from 55 acres to over 1,000 acres; grasses/forbs decreased from over 5,000 acres to just under 2,000 acres; woody terrestrial vegetation decreased from 18,000 acres to just under 16,000 acres; sand/mud decreased from 2,300 acres to 200 acres; agriculture increased from 17,400 acres to 20,000 acres and urban/developed increased from 350 acres to 2,700 acres (Yin and Nelson, 1994).
Increases in open water and marsh and decreases in sand/mud are related to the construction of lock and dam 26 in the 1930's.
The St. Louis, Missouri, quadrangle provides a base for plotting important ecological information along the upper Mississippi River (figure 6.3), including mussel beds, heron rookeries, and bald eagle wintering sites.
These areas provide needed habitat and represent the few remaining areas which reflect the naturally functioning ecosystem in that stretch of the river.
Unlike Pool 26 which was created by the construction of the lock and dam, the open river of the middle Mississippi below lock and dam 27 is free flowing.
Figure 6.4 illustrates historic changes which have occurred for an open river reach at Cape Girardeau, Missouri.
Between 1891 and 1989, open water decreased from 16,800 to 12,100 acres; marsh increased from 0 acres to 15 acres; grasses/forbs decreased from 2,900 to 2,400 acres; woody terrestrial vegetation decreased from 21,700 to 13,500 acres; sand/mud decreased from 4,400 to 840 acres; agriculture increased from 23,000 to 38,700 acres; and urban/developed increased from 40 to 1,400 acres.
Lower Missouri River All 750 miles of the Missouri River below Sioux City, Iowa, have been channelized or stabilized for navigation and subsequent agricultural development of floodplain lands.
Dikes and revetments have narrowed the formerly braided channel and floodplain from an average width of five miles (Hesse, 1989a) to a single channel under 1,000 feet (Schmulbach and others, 1992).
Channel narrowing by construction of training structures and sediment reduction from impoundments have reduced river turbidity and caused bed degradation.
Nearly a fourfold decline in turbidity has been observed in the Missouri River at St. Louis since 1930 (Pflieger and Grace, 1987) and the river's elevation downstream from Gavins Point Dam has downcut 10.3 ft between 1929 and 1980 (Hesse and others, 1989a).
Reductions in turbidity has been associated with shifts in the composition of Missouri River fishes (Pflieger and Grace, 1987) and bed degradation has led to perching of tributary streams so that at low discharges, stream channels are drained, preventing fish access (Hesse and others, 1989a).
The increased gradient of perched tributaries also leads to the loss of infrastructure because of head cutting.
Important macro and microhabitats that once provided mid-channel sandbars, timbered islands, side channels, sloughs, and backwaters with a diversity of depths, velocities, and substrates, have been altered or eliminated (Hesse and others, 1989a,b; Hess, 1994; Galat and others, 1994).
Former riverine and floodplain wetlands with seasonal hydrologic connections to the Missouri River have been drained, filled, and converted to croplands.
Snag removal has reduced habitat diversity, increased the rate of downstream transport of particulate organic matter which played an important role in trophic dynamics of the system (Hesse, 1994), and has been associated with declines in benthic invertebrates (Mestl and Hesse, 1993) and the physiological condition of native sturgeons (Hesse, 1994).
Past and continuing construction of levees has further isolated remnant habitats.
In most places, remaining riparian habitat is confined to narrow strips riverward of levees (Marler, 1993).
Preliminary SAST analysis of historic land cover for the Marshall, Missouri, 1:100,000-scale quadrangle, indicates that approximately 76 percent of the 1879 floodplain examined (60 percent of the bluff-to-bluff floodplain was analyzed in the 1879 survey) was natural habitat, including forests, brush, willows, wetlands, sand islands-bars, and grasslands.
The categories brush, sand island-bar, and willows represent early successional stages related to periodic flooding.
Comparison of Missouri River channel geometry at Marshall, Missouri quadrangle (RM 242-325), between 1897 and 1972 (Figure 6.5) illustrates that 29 percent of the river surface area of this reach has been lost due to reductions in channel width, complexity, and sinuosity (Funk and Robinson, 1974).
Channelization during the 1900's has shortened the Missouri River channel from Sioux City, Iowa to St. Louis, Missouri by 127 miles; 552,000 acres (83 percent) of the channel and its erosion zone are gone as a result of rock dikes and earthen levees.
Changes in channel hydrology and morphology have resulted in loss of active channel habitats such as oxbows, side channels, and sand islands and bars.
Surface area of islands in the lower Missouri River from Rulo, Nebraska to St. Louis, Missouri was reduced by over 90 percent between 1879 and 1954 (Funk and Robinson, 1974) and sandbars by 97 percent (Hesse and others, 1988).
This habitat is critical for Federally listed least terns and piping plovers (Smith, 1994).
It is also important to native invertebrates and fishes.
Forty-six species, or two-thirds of the total lower Missouri fish fauna, use sand island-bar habitats (Grace, 1985).
Sand island and bar habitats are dynamic.
Recently deposited and exposed sandbars are rapidly colonized by willows and succeeded by cottonwood which dominate the canopy for up to 30 years (Bragg and Tatschl, 1977).
Ninety-five percent, or more than 1.8 million acres, of native vegetation has been replaced by row crop agriculture along the lower Missouri River.
In addition, over 1 million acres of tributary valley lands have been inundated by 75 Federal dams on 53 tributary steams.
In all, nearly 4.4 million acres of river channel, backwater, riparian wetland, timber and grassland have been altered (Hesse and others, 1988).
Little land is managed today for natural resource benefits along the lower Missouri River compared to the upper Mississippi River.
Approximately 15,000 acres are included in two National Wildlife Refuges: DeSoto and Squaw Creek.
Missouri administers about 23,000 acres of floodplain and 31 miles of Missouri and Mississippi River frontage as Conservation Areas (J. Robinson, 1990; T. Grace, Missouri Department of Conservation, personal commun., 1994).
An analysis relating river water elevations at high and low discharges over time, similar to that conducted by the National Biological Survey for the upper Mississippi, has been requested by the SAST for the lower Missouri River at Hermann, Waverly, and St. Joseph, Missouri.
Preliminary results indicate an increase in water level elevation at flood discharges over the period of record for all sites.
However, no relation between water level elevation over time at low discharges is evident at present (Wlosinski and Olson, 1994).
Hydraulic model simulations for the lower Missouri in the reach below Gavins Point (Latka and others, 1993) indicate that 98 percent of the channel in late summer and autumn was less than 3 feet deep during median flow conditions before regulation and 87 percent after regulation.
Velocity distributions also shifted under the regulated condition.
Velocities between 0.15 and 0.76 m/s occur less frequently under regulation, while velocities between 0.76 and 1.22 m/s occur more frequently.
These differences in depth and velocity frequencies resulted from training structures and flow regulation that occur in support of navigation along the lower Missouri River.
Such changes have altered microhabitats for native fish communities adapted to shallower depths and slower water velocities.
Recommendation 6.2: Expand depth and velocity hydraulic model simulations to the entire lower Missouri River and determine whether or not river flow regulation has also affected seasonal hydrographic, temperature, and turbidity patterns.
Illinois River Bellrose and others (1979), Sparks (1992), and Theiling (1994) summarized use of the Illinois River.
Aquatic and terrestrial habitats of the Illinois Valley have experienced a series of alterations to the system since 1900: first, permanent rise in water elevation from water diverted from Lake Michigan (Theiling 1994); second, the draining of more than half of the 161,878 ha (400,000 acre) floodplain through construction of levees and pumping stations; third, an upsurge in untreated urban and industrial effluent during the 1920's; fourth, creation of a 2.7 m (9 ft) channel and its attendant navigation dams in the 1930's; and fifth, an acceleration in sedimentation rates beginning in the 1940's.
Sparks (1992) summarized effects of these alterations on the Illinois River fishery.
He reported that in 1908, a 200-mile reach of the Illinois River produced 10 percent of the total U.S. harvest of freshwater fish--more than any other river in North America (excluding rivers with anadromous fish, such as the Columbia).
More than 2,000 commercial fishermen were employed on the river, and the commercial yield was 24 million pounds annually, or about 178 lbs/acre of permanent water.
By the 1950's the yield had dropped to 38 lbs/acre; since the 1970's the yield has been 4 lbs/acre, totaling only 0.32 percent of the total U.S. freshwater harvest.
Similar downward trends were recorded over the same period for other indicators of biological productivity: waterfowl and sport fish populations.
The declines are attributable to two major changes: diversion of Chicago's effluent from Lake Michigan to the river, and intensification of agriculture in the upland drainage and floodplain.
One national wildlife refuge on the Illinois River retains important native habitats that were once abundant on the river's floodplain.
Approximately 9,000 acres of the Illinois River floodplain are contained in the Illinois River National Wildlife and Fish Refuges (Marler, 1993).
FLOODING AND THE MAINTENANCE OF BIODIVERSITY The upper Mississippi, lower Missouri, and Illinois Rivers share attributes common to all large river-floodplain ecosystems.
The dynamic nature of floodplain rivers is critical for the maintenance of efficient energy processing, biodiversity, fish and wildlife production and migration pathways, transport of sediments and nutrients to support rich floodplain and estuary resources, and conveyance, storage and moderation of floods.
Fishes capitalize on highly productive floodplain environments for feeding, spawning, nurseries, and refuge from adverse river conditions.
Floodplain wetlands are considered the essential component responsible for the high fish production recorded in large, low gradient rivers (Welcomme, 1985).
Areas that flood annually also have the greatest production and species diversity of plants (Gosselink and others, 1981).
The idea that rivers and their floodplains are so intimately linked that they should be understood, managed, and restored as integral parts of a single system is the cornerstone of floodplain restoration and integrated floodplain management (National Research Council, 1992).
Periodic flooding is a characteristic hydrologic feature of large river-floodplain ecosystems.
Floods connect the river channel to its adjacent floodplain.
This idea is expressed as the "Flood Pulse Concept", whereby pulsing of river discharge is the major force responsible for maintaining the complex physical structure, rich biodiversity, and high plant and animal productivity associated with large floodplain rivers (Junk and others, 1989).
The flood of 1993 had an exceptional effect on the floodplain ecosystems.
Infrequent large flood disturbances are necessary to reset the dynamic functioning of rivers.
Some habitats, like patches of mature floodplain forest, are destroyed, while other habitats, like sand islands, are created.
Many individual animals succumb, but populations of others surge, such as annual plants and wetland spawning fishes.
For example, airborne surveys in autumn 1993 found that waterfowl were abnormally scarce on the floodplain.
The peak number of ducks was down 58 percent in the Illinois valley and 80 percent in the upper Mississippi valley (Havera in Tenenbaum, 1994).
See pages 6-12 and 6-13 for examples where the flood of 1993 enhanced fish and wildlife.
At Marshall, Missouri, Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) before (September 29, 1991) and after (October 4, 1993) the 1993 flood data acquired by the SAST indicate that approximately 173,150 acres (70,100 ha, or 63 percent) of the Missouri River floodplain was impacted.
About 6,400 acres (2600 ha) of pre-flood wetlands were affected by sand deposition.
However, the post-flood TM scene indicates that an additional 46,300 acres (18,750 ha) of water on the Missouri River floodplain (SAST database).
Conclusion: Analysis of a small area of the lower Missouri River impacted by the flood of 1993 indicates creation of a large new area of various wetland types.
Recommendation 6.3: Identify the types and analyze the distribution, acreage, and ecology of floodplain wetlands created, destroyed, or modified by the flood of 1993.
Newly created wetlands should be reexamined periodically by remote and ground surveys over the next decade to document their morphometric changes, longevity, and ecological value.
Recurrent smaller magnitude flood pulses are as important as the rare large flood event.
These more frequent pulses provide a predictable reconnection between the river and its floodplain, permit energy and nutrient exchange, and provide access to critical habitat.
Not only is periodic flooding important to a functioning river-floodplain ecosystem, but seasonal low water periods and periodic droughts are also essential to maintain the dynamic equilibrium of rivers in the Upper Mississippi Basin because different plant and animal communities benefit from the habitats and resources made available at these times.
Timing and duration of the flood pulse are critical to fishes which gain access to the floodplain for feeding and spawning.
Ideal conditions for spring spawning fishes occur during years in which the flood and temperature rise are coupled.
Figure 6.6 illustrates the coupling of temperature and flood pulse (Junk and others, 1989).
So important is the annual rise of temperature and discharge, that the amount by which fish yield per unit water area is increased by predictable flood pulse has been termed the "Flood-Pulse Advantage" (Bayley, 1991).
The lower Missouri River was reconnected to its floodplain for four months in spring and summer 1993.
Spring temperature rise was more strongly coupled with rising river stage during this period of reconnection than any rise observed over the preceding decade (Gelwicks, 1994).
[FIG_6_6.GIF]
Conclusion: Evidence thus far indicates that the magnitude and timing of the 1993 flood provided appropriate temperature and discharge cues for spawning river-floodplain fishes.
Recommendation 6.4: Further examine historic temperature and river stage records to evaluate the temperature-river stage coupling relationship for the Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers.
Timing and severity of changes in water levels are also important to floodplain productivity.
Prior to modification of the natural hydrograph, changes in water levels were fairly gradual and flooding lasted longer.
Now water level changes are more abrupt, with sharper increases and decreases, and floods last for shorter periods of time (Bayley, 1991).
These conditions are detrimental to floodplain productivity and the exchange of energy and nutrients between the floodplain and river channel (Hesse and others, 1988, 1989b).
Modification of the natural flood pulse on the lower Missouri River can be attributed to operation of mainstem reservoir releases to maintain adequate summer flows for navigation and other system purposes, such as flood control and water supply.
These minimum and full service target flows are provided for the originally projected twelve million tons of river transport per year (General Accounting Office, 1992).
The commercial portion of total navigation peaked in 1977 with shipments reaching about 3.3 million tons and has generally declined since then (USACEb, 1993).
Total tonnage actually transported averaged 6.7 million tons between 1984 and 1988.
Approximately 2.5 million tons (35 percent) of that amount was transport of commercial materials like farm products, chemicals, petroleum products, and metals that require navigation flows for movement.
About 0.33 million tons (5 percent) of waterways improvement materials (primarily rock) also required navigation flows for transport.
The remaining 3.8 million tons (57 percent) of materials transported on average during this period were mined sand and gravel; to a large extent, the transport is a riverbed to bank movement of 1 to 2 miles (USACEb, 1993).
Regardless of the total tonage shipped, a minimun flow is necessary if any shipping is to occur.
If a flow regime conductive to aquatic habitat restoration is to be reinstated while flows for navigation are maintained, these flow regimes must be coordinated.
Sampling since the flood of 1993 illustrates how quickly fish and wildlife responded to reconnection of the river and its floodplain.
Peterson (1994) provided evidence which suggests that the flood may have affected fish distribution and relative abundance in the lower Mississippi River.
For example, high numbers of young-of-the-year white bass (844/net day) and black crappie (6,500/net day) were captured in fyke nets.
In one 24-hour set, 8,600 mostly young-of-the-year fish, weighing 400 pounds and representing 22 species, were collected.
To put these numbers in perspective, that single catch represented 50 percent of the total 1992 catch.
Several young-of-the-year blue suckers (a candidate species for Federal listing) were also collected and may represent the first documented evidence of blue sucker reproduction in the middle Mississippi River (Hrabik, 1994).
Blue sucker and black crappie are uncommon in the open river.
Since 1991, only five adult blue suckers have been captured by Open River Field Station biologists.
Prior to recent large catches, only 54 black crappies were captured in the open river since 1991.
Maher and Theiling (1994) investigated movements of riverine fishes into flooded terrestrial habitats associated with extended flooding during spring and summer 1993.
Fish communities were sampled at three separate areas of the lower Illinois River floodplain.
Each area contained four separate habitat types: a floodplain depression lake adjacent to the main channel, a forested area around the lake, an open area outside the forested area which was primarily agricultural, and the shoreline as the flood waters rose and receded.
A total of 52 species was collected in the three study areas.
Fish density and species richness were highest in shoreline habitats.
Catch rates were highest in the shoreline habitats for bluegill, followed by gizzard shad, black crappie, golden shiner and largemouth bass.
Common carp was the most abundant species in all other habitats.
Channel catfish catch rates were highest in forested areas.
The duration of the flood allowed nest building sunfishes enough time to successfully spawn.
This was reflected in high catches of young-of-the-year largemouth bass, black crappie, and bluegill.
Post-flood sampling of flood-created scour areas connected to the lower Missouri River showed that they also contained a high abundance and diversity of fishes (J. W. Robinson, Missouri Department of Conservation, unpublished data, 1994).
About one fish per minute of electrofishing was collected during a midwinter 1994 sample and one night of gill netting in March 1994 recovered 14 fish species, including important recreational, commercial, and native taxa (e.g.,black and white crappies, channel catfish, buffalo, carpsuckers, shovelnose sturgeon, and reproductively mature sauger).
Birds are also using these newly created wetland habitats.
Avian use surveys conducted by helicopter during April-May 1994 on flood-scoured connected, nonconnected and seasonally flooded (ephemeral) wetlands in the lower Missouri River floodplain, Missouri, recorded about 2,000 individual birds representing 33 species at 59 sites.
About 50 percent of the total birds observed were using seasonally flooded wetlands (D. Humburg, Missouri Department of Conservation; D. Helmers, Soil Conservation Service, unpublished data).
High resolution digital elevation models are needed to adequately study and monitor these types of shallow habitat.
Conclusion: Preliminary evidence indicates that the flood of 1993 provided significant ecological benefits to river-floodplain fish and wildlife resources.
Recommendation 6.5: Resource agencies should capitalize on the opportunity provided by the flood of 1993 to further evaluate use of newly-created aquatic and wetland habitats by a diversity of river-floodplain plant and animal communities.
This information should be used to identify the habitats that offer the greatest potential acquisition benefits for restoration programs.
OPPORTUNITIES TO RESTORE RIVER-FLOODPLAIN BIODIVERSITY AND ECOLOGICAL INTEGRITY The upper Mississippi, Illinois, and lower Missouri Rivers experienced extensive damage to training structures and levee systems because of the 1993 flood.
Some areas were so damaged that there is uncertainty as to whether these lands can, or should, be restored to pre-flood conditions.
Because of these damages and uncertainty about restoring the area, there is an excellent opportunity to develop an integrated hydrologic, hydraulic, geomorphic, economic and ecologic approach to evaluate these damaged areas with respect to existing and future human and environmental needs.
Success of any long-term management strategy incorporating biodiversity enhancement for the upper Mississippi River-floodplain ecosystem depends on landowner support and coordination with state and Federal agencies.
The Partnership for Missouri Riverlands is an example of such a program (Missouri Department of Conservation, May 27, 1994).
It calls for buying 12,000 acres of flood-damaged land from willing sellers in 25 counties along the lower Missouri River and, obtaining easements on an estimated 20,000 acres through the Emergency Wetland Reserve Program.
Priority will be given to purchasing land which can be restored, without adversely affective neighbors, to the historic floodway by leaving it open to flooding.
The proposal brings together expertise from Federal government organizations (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Soil Conservation Service, Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service), state organizations (Missouri Department of Conservation) and nongovernment organizations (Ducks Unlimited, National Wild Turkey Federation, Quail Unlimited, The Nature Conservancy), and private landowners.
Plans by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service include creation of a new 6,000 acre refuge - Big Muddy National Fish 
This partnership will benefit native plant and animal communities and nine Federally-listed endangered species.
Recreational opportunities provided under the plan will include nature study, wildlife watching, hiking, nature photography, hunting, and fishing.
An area on the lower Missouri River, located in the Kansas City and Marshall quadrangles illustrates the potential for increasing habitat along the Missouri River for restoration, maintenance, and enhancement of biodiversity.
Figure 6.7 shows locations of ecologically important areas overlaid on the 1879 historic floodplain.
These areas represent historic oxbows, wetlands, and backwater areas that are essential habitat for river-floodplain fishes, avian species, and their associated plant and animal communities.
The Sunshine Lake area is an example of a Missouri River habitat complex that contains a pre-1993 flood oxbow lake (Sunshine Lake), wetlands, croplands, bottomland forest, sandbars and flood-created scour holes.
Sunshine Lake, which is privately owned, is one of the few remaining natural oxbow lakes on the Missouri River (W. Dieffenbach, Missouri Department of Conservation, personal commun., 1994).
There is an opportunity to modify levees that failed during the 1993 flood event and to enhance habitat for a wide variety of wildlife, if there is willingness and cooperation on the part of private landowners.
Permanent, semipermanent and seasonal wetlands would provide spawning and rearing areas for riverine fishes, nesting, feeding and resting areas for migratory birds, including waterfowl.
Restored bottomland forests would provide perching and resting sites for bald eagles, herons and egrets, while also providing cover for a wide variety of mammals and resident birds.
Sandbars would provide rearing and feeding areas for endemic mainstem riverine fishes, including candidates for Federal listing such as sturgeon and sicklefin chubs, as well as feeding areas for wading birds.
Additional fish species that would find this complex suitable habitat are buffaloes, channel and flathead catfishs, freshwater drum, paddlefish, crappie, bluegill, short and longnose gar, gizzard shad and numerous minnows.
Bird species that would use this area include mallard, wood duck, Canada goose, great blue heron, and neotropical migrants such as the yellow warbler, yellow-throated warbler, and possibly the willow flycatcher.
Biologists recorded 150 bird species that utilized such a restored riverine wetland area (Ted Shanks Conservation Area) on the upper Mississippi River in Missouri (Smith, 1987).
Scour holes created by levee failure and riverine scour, if not disconnected from the river or filled as part of revetement and levee reconstruction, would enlarge the scarce amount of connected off-channel habitat.
These scour areas would provide important nesting, rearing, and resting habitat for avian species that frequent the Missouri River floodplain, including blue and snow geese, Canada geese, mallard, redwing black birds, killdeer and great blue heron (J. Smith, Missouri Department of Conservation, personal commun., 1994).
Scour holes, although not natural floodplain habitats, are also expected to provide off-channel habitat for spawning, rearing, and over-wintering fishes (G. Farabee and J. Robinson, Missouri Department of Conservation, personal commun., 1994).
FRAMEWORK FOR RESTORATION The SAST hosted a workshop of Upper Mississippi River Basin ecologists to develop questions for evaluating ecological impacts of the 1993 flood.
Over 75 questions were drafted and are being used to (1) provide recommendations for additional information needs and analyses, (2) provide an ecological perspective on measures to reduce flood risks and damage, and, (3) contribute to developing environmentally sound management alternatives for restoration of the Upper Mississippi River-floodplain ecosystem.
The recommendations follow from concepts identified in the National Research Council's (NRC) 1992 report "Restoration of Aquatic Ecosystems".
The report defines the ideal natural state of a river-floodplain as being in "dynamic equilibrium".
This is the idea that local features of a river are created, undergo change through time, and eventually disappear, while the overall pattern (e.g., meandering, braiding) remains constant on a larger spatial and temporal scale.
Physical processes of rivers provide the template upon which biological processes are patterned.
Figure 6.8 demonstrates this principle by illustrating the dependency of biological processes on periodic water level fluctuations in large floodplain rivers.
The NRC report concludes, "The essence of a fluvial system is the dynamic equilibrium of the physical system, which in turn establishes a dynamic equilibrium in the biological components" (page 206).
The dynamic equilibrium of the upper Mississippi, lower Missouri, and Illinois Rivers is best approximated by turn of the century conditions, since no unaltered reaches exist today.
These conditions provide targets for river restoration programs.
Periodic flooding was, and remains, vital to establishing and maintaining this dynamic equilibrium.
[FIG_6_8.GIF]
Three objectives should be addressed to begin restoration of these rivers to some semblance of a naturally functioning river-floodplain landscape within the context of competing human needs.
First, attributes of ecological integrity for the river-floodplain landscape should be defined within the larger context of the entire Upper Mississippi River Basin.
Keddy and others (1993) outline a process for choosing such indicators, using wetlands as a model ecosystem.
Second, historic hydrologic, geomorphic, and economic information should be assembled and evaluated to define acceptable and desirable levels for the indicators.
Third, relevant endpoints as indicators of ecosystem recovery should be identified (Kelly and Harwell, 1990).
Evaluation of impacts from the flood of 1993 should include NRC's goal and supporting objectives for river restoration.
The goal of restoration is defined as, "...to restore the river or stream to dynamic equilibrium, not to 'stabilize' a channel or bank".
Once the attributes of ecological integrity are defined and the historic and current data are acquired these should be analyzed to determine how well they meet the desired endpoints.
The difference between the existing system and the desired end points indicates how nearly the existing system meets the goal of a healthy functioning aquatic ecosystem.
The NRC suggests four objectives to achieve this goal.
Monitoring the ecosystem can provide information on whether or not the NRC objectives are being met.
1.
Restore the natural sediment and water regime, where regime refers to the daily-to-seasonal variation in water and sediment loads and the annual-to-decadal patterns of floods and droughts.
2.
Restore the natural channel geometry, if restoration of the water and sediment regime alone does not.
3.
Restore the natural floodplain plant community, which becomes a functioning part of the channel geometry and floodplain hydrology.
4.
Restore native aquatic and wetland plants and animals if they do not recolonize on their own.
These objectives, in conjunction with the social and economic values of water and hydropower, water-control structures, structures that are threatened by floods, erosion and sedimentation, and human needs for agriculture and recreation, form a sound basis on which to incorporate ecological restoration as part of integrated floodplain management.
This approach considers not only structural methods of management, but also nonstructural methods, such as regulatory floodways, purchase of easements to prevent construction, and purchase of land and removal or relocation of structures (NRC, 1992).
When stream or river management actions are taken without determining whether the aquatic ecosystem is in dynamic equilibrium or disequilibrium, the manager is gambling with the stream or river rather than ensuring improved ecosystem function and dynamic stability (Heede and Rinne, 1990).
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND ANALYSES Rational and cost-effective decision making requires objective, science-based information.
Hydraulic engineers, geomorphologists, ecologists, ant other scientists should collectively identify those areas of the floodplain that have experienced recurrent flood damage, pose the greatest risk for future flood damage, and concurrently would provide significant environmental benefits if the river-floodplain connection were restored.
Such locations would be prime areas for implementing levee setbacks and floodplain wetland enhancement.
Issue identification and information acquisition has occupied most of the SAST effort to date; analysis thus far has been minimal.
Consequently, these recommendations address the need for further study and analyses of various aspects of the basin's ecology.
The goal is to develop an ecosystem-based analysis and model for management of the basin.
These preliminary recommendations are grouped into two main categories: (1) inventorying and monitoring species, communities, and habitats to develop baselines from which to assess change, and (2) developing floodplain and basin-wide ecological models to assess impacts of changes in ecosystem variables based on change inputs to the system.
Inventorying and monitoring species, communities, and habitats Inventory and monitoring activities must include river-floodplain physical processes, basin-wide ecology, river and floodplain ecology, and contaminants.
Inventorying and monitoring define past and present states and provide resource managers with milestones to evaluate progress of restoration programs.
Recommendation 6.6: Develop an inventory of species, communities, and habitats and understanding of their functional interrelationships.
6.6a Analyze information on channel geometry and channel cross-sections for available historical river surveys on the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers.
6.6b Document changes in land cover and land use and changes in the composition, distribution, and abundance of native and introduced flora and fauna over the last 100 years in the uplands and floodplains.
6.6c Quantify distribution and area of floodplain wetlands at various flood stages under various levee scenarios.
6.6d Identify sources, sinks, and transport mechanisms of nutrients, organic matter, and human pollutants in the river-floodplains and their major tributaries.
6.6e Quantify the agricultural potential of lands in the floodplains with respect to other environmental benefits.
6.6f Determine the characteristics of an appropriate flow regime (flood pulse and low flow) for maintaining a semblance of pre-control aquatic ecosystems.
Developing floodplain and basin-wide ecological models Conceptual models using information acquired under inventorying and monitoring must be developed to enhance our understanding of the interrelationships between ecosystem processes and human activities in the basin.
Conceptual and mathematical ecological models must be integrated with rainfall-runoff and geomorphic models if the basin is to be fully modeled.
Animations and visualization of the various processes would greatly enhance our ability to convey these complex issues.
Building integrated models using animations or advanced visualization techniques would likely lead to further understanding of the interrelationships of the various hydrologic, hydraulic, geologic, economic and socio-economic processes and facilitate holistic river basin management.
Recommendation 6.7: Develop a basin-wide ecological model.
6.7a Define effects of sediment runoff to streams and upland impoundments in relation to land management and stream riparian corridors.
6.7b Determine effects of stream sinuosity on stream flows and flood stages.
6.7c Evaluate floodplain wetlands with respect to flood stream hydraulics.
6.7d Evaluate effects of riparian vegetation and other land covers on conveyance and storage of flood waters and the role of riparian corridors as energy dissipaters during flooding.
6.7e Evaluate effects of upland restoration on stream hydraulics at both flood and low flows.
6.7f Determine if, and how much, upland and floodplain wetlands influence flood peaks.
6.7g Define environmental and ecological requirements of important equatic and terrestrial river-floodplain species.
6.7h Characterize the important compositional, structural, and functional interrelationships among plant and animal communities of the major Upper Mississippi River Basin rivers and their floodplains.
Empirical Studies While conceptual and mathematical models provide a useful method for understanding interrelationships of ecological processes and forecasting the effects of changes to the system, empirical analyses and assessment of actual changes are also necessary.
This assessment requires implementation of proposed habitat restoration practices in areas of the various terrain types under consideration.
The habitat restoration sites must be of sufficient size to refine the concepts described in this preliminary report.
Selection of the sites should be based on potential value for ecological restoration and for geomorphologic and hydrodynamic considerations.
Recommendation 6.8: Establish ecological restoration sites on mainstem and tributary floodplains in the uplands.
6.8a Identify suitable locations for the sites.
6.8b Develop criteria to measure the effectiveness of ecological restoration sites.
6.8c Establish a monitoring system to determine how well the restoration sites are meeting the criteria.
6.8d Modify the restoration and ecological management practices as new understanding is gained.
The complex interactions of the physical and biological environment can form a dynamic equilibrium that enhances the flora and fauna in the river basin and, in particular, on the floodplains.
The opportunity for this dynamic equilibrium to occur, however, is dependent on river-basin and floodplain management techniques that incorporate the needs of both the natural ecosystem and human activity.
A basic understanding of both is necessary.
__________________________________________________________________
Back to Chapter 5
Section IV: The Engineered System
Back to the Table of Contents
