[titlebanner_senate.gif] Special Cmte on Year 2000 Technology Problem Business | Government | Litigation | International Health Care | Utilities | Telecom | Transportation | Financial Services Y2K News Hearings Speeches 
API represents over 400 member companies in every aspect of the oil and natural gas industry, including exploration and production, transportation, refining, and marketing.
I am pleased to testify before you today on our industry's preparations for the Year 2000.
I want to assure this committee and the American people that the oil and gas industry is working intensively to prepare for the Year 2000 and feels it will be ready to supply our customers at that time.
We have a responsibility to our shareholders, to our customers, and to our employees to be prepared.
We will meet that responsibility.
To do so, we have been engaged in a variety of efforts.
We have long anticipated the challenge of Year 2000 computer conversions, and the industry has been working hard on this problem for more than five years.
Our members asked API to create a special Year 2000 Task Force to coordinate the industry's efforts and to share technical information directly among more than 50 participating oil and gas companies, and indirectly through an Internet Web site and by other means with thousands of others.
Our Task Force is also sharing information with the electric power and telecommunications industries because of our interrelationship with them and our reliance on their Y2K preparations.
And, we are a leading participant of the President's Council on Year 2000 Conversion where we represent 10 allied industry associations and work closely with many others.
The industry's efforts are coordinated with those of the President's Council and with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).
Within our member companies, our industry's computer experts have been assessing, repairing, and testing software, hardware, and embedded processors.
They have validated their work by testing that equipment both online and offline.
And, they have been preparing contingency plans to ensure that there are responses to virtually any eventuality.
Recent evidence demonstrates that all of this work is paying off.
In January, API and the Natural Gas Council surveyed the domestic oil and gas industry's Y2K readiness.
This evaluation included companies of every size.
We explored several facets of the domestic industry's readiness-including planning, inventory, assessment, remediation, and validation.
Our survey covered both information systems and embedded chips.
The 1,000 companies that responded supply
88 percent of the oil and natural gas the nation consumes.
Here is what they reported:
(The overwhelming majority of companies responding-94 percent-said they would
be Y2K ready by September 30, 1999,
(More than four-fifths-86 percent-of the companies are in the final stages of fixing and testing their business information systems,
(Seventy-eight percent of the respondents are in the final stages of fixing and testing hardware and embedded systems to ensure their operational integrity,
(Embedded chips, once seen as a major obstacle in preparing for Y2K, are not the problem earlier anticipated; and
(Ninety-seven percent of the companies said they expect to have their Y2K contingency plans in place and tested before October 1, 1999.
These figures, which show an improvement in the industry's readiness, update survey data from last year.
We believe it is important that the latest data be part of the official Senate record, because they show the industry's progress and also help ease any consumer concerns that are based on outdated information.
Our survey results are only one reason for our confidence in the industry's ability to meet the challenge of Y2K.
Because of the nature of our industry, crisis planning is a fundamental part of any company's daily business plan.
Companies must have the means available to get the job done, even if some systems fail unexpectedly.
It is within that framework that our companies have been building contingency plans for Y2K into their operations.
Much of the oil and gas industry's equipment already has mechanical and manual backups, so that in the event of a computer malfunction, a company can still run its equipment using mechanical devices or through manual operations.
The industry often operates this way in the face of hurricanes, lightning, and snowstorms.
Oil and gas companies are used to meeting challenges, and successfully handling Y2K-as large as it is-is well within our scope of competency.
Still, we are taking nothing for granted and are doing all we can to assure that we are not surprised and that our systems function smoothly on January 1st and thereafter.
That said, let me turn to the source of much of our supply.
The U.S. is largely self-sufficient in natural gas.
In 1998, the nation imported less than 14 percent of the natural gas we consumed.
Canada was by far the leading foreign supplier, with Mexico and Algeria providing only small fractions of our natural gas imports.
Oil, however, is another matter.
Last year, the nation imported 56 percent of the crude oil consumed in the United States.
That is an average rate of 10.4 million barrels of oil imports a day, according to the U.S. Department of Energy.
Those supplying most of that oil in 1998 were Venezuela, Canada, Saudi Arabia, Mexico, Nigeria, Angola, Iraq, Colombia, the Virgin Islands, and Algeria.
The Department of Energy (DOE) has indicated that the four largest exporters to
the United States-Venezuela, Canada, Saudi Arabia, and Mexico-are preparing their computers for Y2K and expect all critical systems to be Y2K compliant by the end of 1999.
In Venezuela, PDVSA, the state oil company, is addressing the problem of computer programs and embedded chips with a clearly defined program that is moving "at an accelerated pace."
Saudi Aramco has targeted mid-1999 as the deadline for its Y2K remediation problem.
And PEMEX, Mexico's state owned oil company, is meeting its deadline to make its information systems Y2K ready, and appears to be on target in preparing its industrial systems for the millennium.
Its goal is to be Y2K compliant by the third quarter of 1999.
In addition, Indonesia's state oil and gas company has said its computer systems will be Y2K compliant by September.
Two other providers, Colombia and Algeria, are evaluating their systems and are reportedly beginning efforts to be Y2K ready.
And, the United Kingdom, Kuwait, and Norway expect to be Y2K compliant, according to DOE.
Moreover, petroleum associations from the United Kingdom, Canada, Japan, and
Australia are participating either directly or indirectly in API's Task Force on the Year 2000.
They have access to the technical information on Y2K that our companies are
sharing with one another.
American oil companies are in business all over the world.
API members are
indicating that their operating divisions abroad are on track to be Y2K ready.
They are operated according to American standards, and they have contingency plans in place to deal with problems.
Still, to improve Y2K readiness abroad, and to determine the international oil
industry's ability to meet the U.S. demand for energy, API's International Oil Y2K Work Group joined with FERC, DOE, other federal agencies, and the International Energy Agency to create an International Oil Coordination Council.
Council members exchange information on industry and government efforts and are working to assess the industry's Y2K readiness on an international scale.
What if things abroad do go awry because of Y2K? There are a number of factors to consider in evaluating the impact.
First, there is a great deal of crude oil production capacity in the world.
If one country cannot export, another may be able to compensate.
Second, even if a number of suppliers experience Y2K problems, imports into the U.S. would not stop instantly.
There is always some crude oil enroute to the U.S. via tankers, some of which can take five weeks to cross the seas.
If foreign suppliers have production problems, we will know this the day it happens.
It will be an early warning alert that will give the industry time to move supplies around and compensate for lost production.
The industry intends to be prepared to minimize the impact of any failures abroad.
If they can be remedied in a short period of time, then the disruption should be manageable, since inventories can buffer short delays in securing imports.
Third, as for oil and gas industry equipment itself, we do have experience in what would have to be done to redress Y2K problems.
Finally, beyond private resources, the federal government owns and operates the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR).
We regard the SPR as an essential buffer to protect the economy in the event of a serious interruption in foreign oil supplies-such as the two disruptions that occurred in the 1970s.
In our view, the SPR is a resource that could be used if Y2K conditions eventually warrant their use.
The petroleum industry's Year 2000 efforts are designed to ensure that products will continue flowing to consumers as usual on January 1, 2000, and thereafter.
Although the industry has never experienced a challenge quite like this, there have been other disruptions to the flow of oil, and there is a record of our industry's response.
In a 1989 report to the Secretary of Energy, the National Petroleum Council said
it had made 10 inventory studies over the past 50 years to help the federal government in its emergency preparedness.
The NPC noted that "since the end of World War II, no serious petroleum shortages have occurred at the consumer level except gasoline lines in the era of price and allocation controls."
Yet, NPC said, the system has experienced repeated stress, including refinery problems that led to reduced gasoline production in 1988, fuel-switching by electric utilities from natural gas to oil at the time of a heat wave in 1986, and a cold wave that reduced both crude and refinery production in 1983-84.
The oil and gas industry was able to overcome the stresses to its systems because contingency planning and crisis management are a fundamental part of each company's business plan.
Most recently, this industry's flexibility enabled it to serve its customers during the hurricanes of 1998 that disrupted offshore production in the Gulf of Mexico and caused problems at some refineries.
It has continuously brought its products to market despite actions like the Persian Gulf crisis and the gasoline supply difficulties of the summer of 1997.
The industry seamlessly drew on inventory, or used alternate routing to deliver its products, or coped with supply problems when refineries were offline for maintenance by asking other refineries to step up operations to pick up the demand.
The NPC study also evaluated the impact of six hypothetical stress scenarios on the industry's ability to deliver.
NPC considered a disruption of oil imports, colder-than-normal weather, a disruption of natural gas imports from Canada, a disruption in the flow of products in a Midwestern pipeline, a 30-day shutdown of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline System and a 30-day disruption of oil imports from Canada.
While the study did not include a Y2K problem, it showed the industry's ability to respond and what might happen if supplies were disrupted.
NPC reported that "each of these disruptions could be handled with varying degrees of problems, but without major hardship, because of the resiliency and flexibility of the nation's supply system."
At the end of the day, the critical question is: "Can we give you a 100 percent guarantee that absolutely no problems will occur and consumers, without exception, will find what they want when they want it?" No one can make such a blanket assurance because we live in an interdependent world.
But we can guarantee that the domestic oil and natural gas industry is well prepared to serve our customers and keep energizing our economy.
We can guarantee that the domestic oil and natural gas industry has been and is working very intensively on many fronts to prevent Y2K problems from arising and to successfully handle those problems that do arise.
The process of manufacturing gasoline, heating oil, diesel fuel, motor oil and the feedstocks from which essential products are made is not a real-time event.
We are used to managing our way around inconveniences and interruptions at our facilities.
We are used to responding to outages by redirecting the flow of products and by drawing on inventories as necessary.
We believe that capability will enable the industry to handle whatever situations arise with minimum inconvenience to our customers.
We know that some who remember the gasoline lines of the 1970s may question
our resolve.
But every competent analysis of that era concluded that those lines were the result of government price and allocation controls, not a shortage of gasoline.
A well-informed consumer is our best ally.
That is why we are concerned about misinformation on the impact of the Year 2000 conversion being trafficked in the public domain.
We are concerned that some who may mean well but are nonetheless uninformed are inviting unintended consequences in the marketplace when they recommend that consumers should take their money out of the bank, or fill their gasoline tank, or horde gasoline and groceries.
Such changes in behavior could produce consequences that are totally apart from how well our industry and other industries are doing the job of preparing for the future.
Congress can help by putting out factual information about industry preparedness to deal with Y2K, and by avoiding any unnecessary constraints on the private sector, which has a direct commercial interest in assuring a continuous flow of products and services to consumers.
Congress can also use its oversight role to assure the Y2K readiness of the SPR, should it be needed.
The Year 2000 conversion has a very high priority at API and throughout the oil and gas industry.
We are service industry, and we fully expect to meet the tests of the millennium.
What I have presented here represents the highlights of what we are doing.
Additional information is available on the API Web site at www.api.org/y2k.
It includes a Y2K database created to foster the sharing of critical information on testing software, hardware, embedded systems, and related components.
Our site also includes information on what government is doing and what our companies are doing as they prepare now to meet consumer needs next year, and thereafter.
We appreciate the opportunity to testify today and to update and enhance the public record on the oil and gas industry's preparations for the Year 2000.
Thank you.
© 1999 United States Senate.
All rights reserved.
__________________________________________________________________
Special Committee on the Year 2000 Technology Problem United States Senate, SD-B40, Suite 3, Washington, DC 20510 (202) 224-5224, Year2000@y2k.senate.gov
