Testimony Before The Judiciary Committee U.S. House of Representatives
The Honorable Joe Chillura, Jr.
Hillsborough County Board of County Commissioners County Center 601 East Kennedy Boulevard Tampa, Florida 33601 Phone: (813) 276-2640
Tuesday, Feb. 6, 1996
Tampa Bay Area And The Tampa Bay Buccaneers: A Long And Mutually Beneficial Relationship
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers professional football team has been a major asset for the Tampa Bay area, both on and off the field, for 22 years.
The National Football League awarded the franchise to Tampa Bay in 1974, and shortly thereafter the team was purchased by lawyer-businessman Hugh Culverhouse for $16 million .
Although struggling to be a winner on the football field, the team nevertheless is a consistent winner for the community and the owners.
The people in the Tampa Bay area have enthusiastically embraced the Buccaneers as a valuable partner that draws national attention, stimulates the economy, and provides exciting sports entertainment for our dynamic area.
It took years of hard work and determination to bring an NFL franchise to Tampa Bay.
The city and county clearly demonstrated this area was ready to be an NFL community as early as 1966 by building a new, 46,000-seat stadium that would meet the needs of a professional football team.
From 1968 until 1974, the stadium played host to 13 NFL exhibition games and attracted the attention of the NFL by consistent and enthusiastic attendance at these games.
Community pride was overwhelming in 1974 when the Tampa Bay area received word it would be home to one of the NFL expansion teams.
As part of its pledge0f Support tOthe new team, the community made a strong financial commitment and approved a major stadium renovation, increasing its seating capacity to 72,000.
Other improvements requested by the team ownership were approved as well.
Over the years, the stadium has been renovated at public expense to add more Lounge Boxes, install seat backs, and erect a JumboTron scoreboard.
Seating again was increased for a total capacity of 74,246.
In addition, major road improvements were made surrounding the stadium.
Because of these and other publicly funded improvements and the strong base of fans, Tampa Stadium was selected by the NFL to host two very successful Super Bowls, in 1984 and 1991.
The people of Tampa Bay have kept the faith with the Buccaneers as they struggled on the footbal Through many lean years, the community always remained supportive, perpetually optimistic, and eternally expectant for the Bucs to have a winning season.
Expectations did improve when a new owner was announced in January 1995 and he immediately pledged "A New Day in Tampa Bay!" It was welcome news to a community that spent a tense year following the death of the team@s original owner and amid speculation that new owners would seek to move the team to another area.
Palm Beach financier Malcolm Glazer, introduced as the new owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers at a press conference on Jan. 16, told the community that "The Buc stops here," emphasizing that he was committed to keeping the team in Tampa.
The community responded, and a record attendance average of more than 58,600 fans supported the Buccaneers' home games in 1995.
The team's win-loss record improved slightly, and now the corrununity has given a warm and sincere welcome to Tony Dungy, the new head coach, who is well-known and respected throughout the NFL.
In many respects, therefore, the people of Tampa Bay expect the "new day" for the Buccaneers to begin next season.
However, they are apprehensive that the new day may dawn not in Tampa Bay, but in some other community.
The Tampa Bay area and its political and business leaders have done everything possible in the past year to accommodate the new owner.
One of the requirements to make the team a viable franchise in our community, according to Mr. Glazer, was a new stadium.
As a result, business and political leaders rallied around him to see what could be done to make the Bucs financially viable.
First, the Tampa Sports Authority voted to give the new owner the right to renarne the existing Tampa Stadium.
Mr. Glazer has since sold the naming rights to the Houlihan's restaurant chain for $10 million.
That is money that the Authority could have kept and used for other needs.
Then, the Tampa Sports Authority made changes in the stadium agreement to give Mr. Glazer a larger share of the profits from parking fees, concessions and other revenue.
Other incentives also were approved, giving the team a break in stadium rent if attendance fell below 55,000 a game.
(Happily, solid support by football fans kept average ticket sales higher.)
State legislators, meanwhile, approved a bill that is crucial to Hillsborough County's proposal to build a new stadium for the Bucs.
The bill provides up to $60 million in state contributions over a 30-year period.
The contribution comes in the form of a subsidy program that provides sales tax rebates to help build sports facilities or refurbish old ones.
The $2 million-per-year rebate is credited to the Tampa Sports Authority, which will use it for construction bonds.
Plans were prepared for the design of a new, 65,000-seat stadium with a price tag of $168 million.
The stadium was designed with new club seating, additional skyboxes and other amenities that would generate additional revenue requested by the owner.
Already, more than $1.1 million has been spent by the Tampa Sports Authority and the people of Hillsborough County on design and planning of the new facility.
In October, the community kicked off an innovative Bucs Charter Seat Deposit Program with an unprecedented pep rally broadcast by all area television stations and a goal of selling thousands of season tickets tied to a one-time seat deposit charge.
The community responded with more than 30,000 charter seat deposits in one month's time, representing a $20 million commitment from Bucs fans to Mr. Glazer.
This underscores the loyal support of the fans for their football team, win or lose.
Mr. Glazer, meanwhile, offered to pay about half the cost of a new stadium.
Another source of revenue for the new stadium was presented a month ago when Tampa International Airport officials indicated their need to acquire Tampa Sports Authority land next to the stadium to control air space and offered to pay up to $25 million.
Throughout 1995 and into 1996, business and government leaders have been discussing a number of revenue options for a new stadium, all the while cognizant of the total economy of the community.
Many of the revenue options will need the support of the State Legislature, which meets in the Spring.
Because Mr. Glazer said he could not wait that long, city and county leaders developed a creative plan to meet his time schedule for a new stadium.
With great optimism, community leaders announced this new financial plan on Dec. 13, 1995, outlining how a new stadium could be built without new taxes, without the need for action by the Florida Legislature and within the budget of $168 million for a new stadium.
Much of the funding would come from surcharges placed on all tickets, parking fees and concessions at the new facility.
This plan was rejected by the owner within hours after it was announced.
Since then, team officials refused to negotiate, and reports in the media continue to show Mr. Glazer "shopping" the team in Orlando, Cleveland, Hartford, and Los Angeles.
And so, the tension among the residents of our community continues.
The Tampa Bay community actively sought an NFL franchise and has supported the Buccaneers for more than 20 years.
Today, the community is frustrated, hurt and angry over the possibility that it may lose this asset, whose economic impact is valued at more than $85 million annually.
That is why we strongly support and commend the efforts of our Congressional leaders to protect communities like Tampa Bay when sports teams threaten to move.
We are especially pleased with the introduction of Congressman Martin R. Hoke's bill, HR 2740, called the "Fan Freedom and Community Protection Act."
This bill, if enacted, would help protect communities like Tampa Bay from frivolous actions of the owners of professional sports franchises, when they attempt to move a team despite a cornmunity's demonstrated history of support.
The process which this legislation would establish for a league to use in determining whether to permit a relocation will protect cominunities against such moves, and the provision that would require a league to expand into an abandoned community would similarly help protect the interests of the community and the league by promoting a stable base of enthusiastic and loyal fans.
However, while we strongly endorse Congressman Hoke's bill in general, we must, with all due respect, express our strong opposition to one of the bill's provisions.
Section 5 (a) would exempt expansion requirements if a sports team relocates within 60 miles.
While we recognize the intent of the provision to allow moves within a community, we believe that in some regions of the country, the provision would exempt moves between different media markets and different communities.
For example, in Florida, a team moving within 60 miles of Tampa may well be in a different community, and so should be covered by all of the bill's provisions.
Such a move would waste the financial and emotional investment made by the Tampa Bay community.
We also commend other Congressional leaders who understand the serious and detrimental effects to a community when a sports franchise moves away.
That is why we also want to acknowledge the work of Congressman Louis Stokes, who is sponsoring the "Fans Rights Act."
It has many noteworthy provisions, such as basing team relocation on fan loyalty, community support and bonafide offers to purchase a team and keep it in the existing community.
Especially commendable is the provision that would require sports teams intending to relocate to give the community a 180-day notice.
The Tampa Bay community deeply appreciates the concern of Congressman Hoke and Congressman Stokes and their proposals to protect the fans and the communities which have pledged their loyalty and their tax dollars to sports teams, and we offer our enthusiastic support of this legislation and will work aggressively toward its enactment.
[justice.gif] Juduciary Homepage
