OF PAUL TAGLIABUE COMMISSIONER OF THE NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY OF THE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES February 6, 1996 STATEMENT OF PAUL TAGLIABUE Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, I appreciate your invitation and the opportunity to address the legal and business uncertainties that continue to face professional sports leagues, the communities in which they operate, and sports fans across America.
In many respects, those uncertainties are more profound - and more troubling - today than they were over a decade ago, when the Judiciary Committee last considered whether the internal decisions of a professional sports league including a league's decision on where to locate its teams - should be treated for antitrust purposes as a "contract, combination or conspiracy" among independent economic competitors.
Since that time, professional sports leagues have continued to be subject to antitrust concepts that, ignoring economic reality, ultimately undermine the public interest.
Without a clarification of the governing antitrust principles by judicial decision or congressional action, that situation is bound to continue.
Current Conditions In Professional Sports
Today there is a widespread perception - and sometimes deep concern - that professional sports involve unprecedented levels of financial stress and conflict, often reflected in complicated court battles or other dizzying legal disputes.
The controversies include impasses as to planned or proposed new stadiums; concerns about "bidding wars" pitting community against community or "franchise hopping" in the location and relocation of teams; prolonged conflicts (including work stoppages) between leagues and their players' unions; and a steady
2 - diet of sports, business, and legal debate on related issues, all of which are of intense interest to fans and the public at large.
While the specific aspects of the stadium and team location controversies often differ by state or region, a number of considerations, in one measure or another, are generally involved in the mix.
First, there are obvious and significant differences in the size and characteristics of the communities or "markets" in which a league's teams operate.
These produce significant differences in revenue potential among teams, no matter how well they are managed.
In addition, at any given time, about one-half of a league's teams have below average won-loss records and are therefore vulnerable to declines in fan interest.
(This requires a league structure that assures the stability of all teams even when they are in a losing cycle.)
The differences in individual team revenue potentials are affected - and often aggravated - by changes in larger economic circumstances ( M.., demographic changes, shifts of population, changes in industrial activity, plant closures, or "down-sizing").
Nonetheless, and despite differing market conditions and team revenue levels, in order to provide an attractive entertainment product, the members of a professional sports league must compete on the field with a reasonable degree of comparability or equality of opportunity.
Second, in the NFL there have been dramatic changes in the past three years in the terms and conditions of player employment.
These changes resulted from player-sponsored antitrust litigation that challenged collectively-bargained limitations on "free agency" and player movement.
The new provisions include a
3 -
costly, League-wide commitment to revenue sharing with the players through their union and extensive, unrestricted Vee agency" for veteran players.
While this collectively- bargained agreement has brought "labor peace" to the NFL, these new operating conditions are presenting the NFL's teams, particularly those with average or below-average local revenues, with unprecedented and severe financial challenges.
Third, there has been a steady increase in the number of professional sports franchises operating in the various leagues throughout the United States.
There is vigorous competition for the interest and spending of consumers on sports and entertainment generally.
This competition is often intensified in particular markets by new teams, by the construction of new facilities with attractive fan amenities, and by other such factors.
I will address this issue in more detail below.
Fourth, many of the professional baseball and football stadiums throughout the United States were constructed as dual-purpose stadiums during the 1960s when the nation witnessed an explosion of interest in professional sports.
(During that time, for example, the American Football League emerged and, with the endorsement of Congress in 1966, ultimately merged with the NFL.
The number of professional football teams therefore increased from 12 in 1959 to 26 in 1970.)
Now, many of those stadiums are in need of extensive renovation or replacement.
Fifth, there have been significant changes over the decades in federal, state and local policies with respect to the use of tax receipts or tax exempt bonds in the financing of public facilities, including sports stadiums.
These changes include
4 -
the use of other sources of public funding, such as lotteries, for stadiums and the privatizing of stadium construction costs in some communities through various additional charges to fans in the form of seat "premiums" or "licenses."
In addition, the occasional use of public funds on a selective or preferential basis for new stadiums or arenas in one sport has aggravated conditions for competing franchises that lack new facilities.
Finally, confusion, inconsistency, and uncertainty about federal antitrust standards as they apply to the location and relocation of sports teams continue to be a major problem.
Coupled with the vagaries of venue as a factor in the outcome of civil litigation, this circumstance has left both sports leagues and communities seeking to retain such teams with difficult choices and little predictability in assessing the likely outcomes of aftemative courses of action.
Because of the direct bearing of this latter issue on your inquiry, I will address it at some length below, followed by a discussion of the intense economic competition for the sports and entertainment dollar.
The Team Relocation Antitrust Issue A professional sports league is an unusual business entity because it creates and markets a single, jointly produced entertainment "product."
The National Football League, for example, produces athletic competition among 30 separately owned clubs, none of which can produce and present that product on its own.
The NFL's sports entertainment product competes in the marketplace with other sports
5 -
leagues, each of which also creates a single, jointly-produced product, and with other entertainment producers of all kinds.
To encourage strong local ties and operations, and in an effort to ensure the integrity of their competitive performances on the playing field, each NFL franchise is held by separate ownership.
A League franchise, however, entails a formal commitment to all other member clubs to operate in a particular home location, defined as "the city in which such club is located and for which R holds a franchise and plays its home games . . ."
Under the League's Constitution and By- Laws, the relocation of a team requires a three-fourth's vote of the League's membership.
A review of the NFL's operations over the past forty years demonstrates the League's firm commitment to competitive and geographic balance in the location of its franchises, to franchise stability, and to the protection of fan and community interests.
Compelling evidence of that commitment is reflected, among other places, in the League's revenue sharing policies, which enable the League to conduct team operations on a nation-wide scale and in communities of vastly differing economic potential.
Approximately 55 percent of the revenues of the average NFL club today come from thejoint presentation of NFL games on national television networks both broadcast and cable.
These revenues are shared equally among all clubs
6 -
without regard to each club's market size or revenue potential.-!' As a result of the sharing of these and other revenues (including, for example, game receipts that are shared with visiting clubs), the economic advantages of the clubs in the bettersituated markets are balanced, albeit not always fully offset, by revenue sharing with the clubs in smaller communities (such as Minnesota, Green Bay, Buffalo, Kansas City, Cincinnati, and New Orleans) or less well- situated markets.
In the past decade, the NFL's member clubs have modified and focused their revenue-sharing policies to support new stadium construction and renovation.
By deciding to waive a portion of the game receipts that otherwise would be shared by visiting clubs, all League clubs effectively contribute to the payment of stadium construction (or related financing) costs.
Through this mechanism, the League's member clubs have collectively supported the construction of new stadiums in a number of communities (g_%, Atlanta, Miami).
The clubs are also collectively supporting the extensive renovation of existing stadiums-in a number of communities, including Buffalo, New Orleans, and San Diego.
In this context, an internal decision of a professional sports league whether it relates to funding stadium construction or determining where to locate its franchises - bears no resemblance whatsoever to a "contract, combination or conspiracy" among independent economic competitors that provides a coherent basis for applying the antitrust laws.
V There is a short-term exception for the League's two new expansion franchises, the Carolina Panthers and the Jacksonville Jaguars.
7 -
The Judiciary Committee's consideration of this issue in the 1980s was prompted by the Raiders litig ation against the NFL, in which a federal court determined that Section 1 of the Sherman Act should apply to such internal league decisions.
In that case, a Los Angeles jury found that the NFL had acted "unreasonably" in reciprocating the loyalty of Oakland fans (reflected in twelve consecutive sell-out seasons) and denying the Raiders permission to move the Oakland NFL franchise to Los Angeles.
As a result of that decision, the Raiders were allowed, over the NFL's objection, to abandon Oakland; and a new weapon "antitrust brinkmanship" - was introduced into the relationship between sports leagues and the communities that they represent.
Prior to the Raiders litigation, a sports league franchise was viewed as a license to serve the leaoue's fans and to play leacque games in a prescribed geographical area.
A franchise was the means by which the league created a stable, continuous relationship with a community, subject to change only by league decision, ordinarily through a supra- majority vote.
This stable franchise concept reflected the courts' recognition that, in determining the location of a league's franchises, league members "are not competitors in the economic sense ...
They are, in fact, all members of a single unit competing as such with other similar professional leagues."-' Not coinci-91 San Francisco Seals, Ltd. v. National Hockey Lenue, 379 F. Supp. 966, 96970 (C.D. Cal. 1974) (rejecting on summary judgment antitrust challenge to the NHL's denial of the Seals' request to move its NHL franchise from San Francisco to Vancouver).
8 -
Incidentally, prior to the Raiders decision, NFL clubs had been committed to and stable in their home territories for decades.
Since the Raiders decision, federal courts, seeing the Raiders precedent, have failed to recognize (and potential litigants have elected to ignore) the economic reality of a sports league - that league members are co-producers of a joint product, and thus together constitute a single league enterprise in competition with other entertainment providers.
Instead, courts and others have tended to raise form over substance, viewing each team franchise as an independent competitive entity that is portable and transient without regard to Rs commitments as a member of the league enterprise, the needs and preferences of the league, or the interests of the league's fans.
As a result, some clubs - all of which had agreed to be bound by the league's internal procedures for determining franchise location - have been persuaded to abandon their commitments to the league and their fans, and unilaterally to move the league's operations to a new location.
If a league seeks to enforce its contractual rights against such moves, it faces substantial antitrust risks, notwithstanding that every other business enterprise in America can decide without antitrust exposure where to conduct its operations.
The antitrust weapon has been claimed not only by clubs that seek greener pastures elsewhere; it has also been brandished by governmental agencies (including state attorneys general), stadium landlords (who assert that they compete in a "market' for club tenants), and former club owners as well.
All such parties
9 -
purport to find a basis in the Raiders experience to threaten antitrust litigation to influence or prevent the League's exercise of Rs business judgment - for or against - a proposed franchise move.
These threats necessarily affect League decisionmaking.
Regardless of Rs merits, each such threat raises the specter of burdensome, divisive, and costly litigation, similar to the Raiders case in the 1980s, that inevitably takes years to resolve.
If such a suit is successful in establishing financial injury - a possibility that exists especially when the issues are litigated before a "home-town" jury (as in the Raiders case) - each plaintiff automatically receives Punitive damages, three times the "injury" that the jury believes has been proved.
The National Football League has experienced such threats numerous times over the last ten or twelve years, and it has paid the price, in litigation expenses and/or settlements, on several occasions.
In an effort to keep the Raiders in Oakland, during the 1980s the NFL spent almost $50 million in legal fees and in ultimate settlement of the antitrust judgment.
Ironically, the Raiders and the City of Oakland are currently suing the League for hundreds of millions of dollars because of the League's alleged refusal to allow the Raiders - the Oakland Raiders, as of September 1995 - to return from Los Angeles to Oakland in 1994.
The Raiders sued the NFL in the 1980s, claiming that the League was holding the club "hostage" in Oakland; now the Raiders are suing the NFL for holding the club "hostage" in Los Angeles and delaying its return to Oakland.
10-
The recent Raiders' lawsuit, moreover, involves a situation where the club never sought - and the League therefore never held - a vote on the proposed 1994 move.
Similarly, a former owner of the New England Patriots, even though he also never submitted a relocation proposal to the League, has filed an antitrust suit against the NFL claiming that the League diminished the value of the Patriots franchise by prevent ing him from moving the club out of New England in the early 1990s.
(in separate lawsuits pending in Boston, New York and Philadelphia, three former owners of the Patriots are now suing the NFL for "antitrust" grievances, each allegedly arising from a Merent internal League rule or policy.)
Last year, the Rams and the City of St. Louis used the threat of antitrust litigation to force the NFL to acquiesce in the Rams' move from Southern California to St. Louis.
By a vote of the League's members, the NFL initially rejected the proposed move based in part on a report that 1, as Commissioner, filed with the membership finding that the proposed move did not satisfy the specific criteria of the League's guidelines for franchise relocation.
The League's initial decision was immediately met with public and private threats - by the Rams and by the State's Attorney General - to seek "billions" of dollars in antitrust damages from the NFL in suits to be filed in St. Louis.
As a result, the membership eventually reversed its initial decision and reluctantly voted to permit the Rams to move.
Even though we believed that we should have prevailed in any lawsuit, the NFL members were unwilling to endure years of antitrust litigation in a St. Louis court - not to mention the punitive nature of any errant treble damage judgment - in order to enforce their contractual right to require the Rams to remain in Los Angeles.
In short, the League's judgment was understandably influenced by a preference for antitrust peace rather than war, especially in light of the legal conflicts that had recently plagued other sports and have been negatively viewed by millions of fans.
Even though the League allowed the Rams to move, St. Louis sued anyway.
Their complaint, filed in St. Louis by the St. Louis Convention and Visitors Center, alleges that our franchise relocation rules violate the antitrust laws.
That suit demonstrates that, in the absence of legislation, exploitation of the antitrust weapon against professional sports leagues will continue regardless of how the League resolves any particular franchise relocation issue.
Finally, after the League met for the first time to discuss the Browns' proposed relocation, the Maryland Stadium Authority sued the League in Baltimore, claiming in effect that our failure to vote on the proposal at that first meeting constituted a violation of the antitrust laws.
Where will this sort of litigation end? And what public interest does R serve?
Now we face the prospect of additional team moves, with the earlier moves being viewed as indications that a League vote carries an unacceptable antitrust risk, or as "precedents" justifying additional moves, or as establishing a requirement of "equal treatment" enforceable with the threat of treble damage claims.
In the absence of legislation addressing the application of the antitrust laws in these circumstances, the NFL's ability to exercise Rs business judgment with regard to
12 -
these and other moves will inevitably be colored by the specter of antitrust litigation, threats of which have already surfaced.
In 1984, reviewing the trial court decision favoring the Raiders, a federal court of appeals suggested changes supposedly designed to enable the NFL's rules and procedures governing franchise relocation - and the NFL's reliance upon those rules - to pass muster under the antitrust "rule of reason."
The NFL adopted the court's suggestions, as well as a set of objective business criteria for evaluating proposed franchise moves in the future.
A copy of those procedures and criteria is attached.
Despite these provisions, misguided treatment of league members as independent economic competitors continues to confuse the antitrust analysis and to make any league decision susceptible to being characterized as an unreasonable restraint on 'competition" Thus, we know that if we rely on those criteria to bar a proposed franchise move, the NFL can be involved for years in expensive and internally divisive antitrust litigation.
The dispute would likely be litigated in an interested forum, as was the Raiders' case; and the potential damage exposure associated with a jury's second- guessing of the League's internal decision could be astronomical.
Regardless of our confidence in the 12roprig
13 -
The Economic Issues
A key factor driving clubs to seek to construct new stadiums or to renovate existing stadiums, with more favorable stadium financial terms, is intense competition for the sports and entertainment dollar.
Such competition exists in all American cities having major league sports franchises.
In Cleveland, for example, the Browns compete with the baseball Indians and the basketball Cavaliers not only for fan support, but also for business and other support.
In 1994, when the Browns' baseball and basketball counterparts received attractive new facilities built with major investment of public funds - Jacobs Field and Gund Arena - the Browns were not simply faced with intensified competition for fan interest; the Browns lost significant existing revenue streams.
For example, a substantial proportion of the Browns' suite-holders cancelled their leases at Memorial Stadium, which was built in 1931, in favor of suites in the city's brand new, fan-friendly facilities built for the baseball and basketball teams.
The following data, reprinted from materials recently submitted to the NFL by the Browns, illustrate the point.
14 -
LOGE OCCUPANCY RATE AT CLEVELAND SPORTS FACILITIES
Total Facility Number 1993 19941995
Gund Arena 92 9292 (100%)(100%)
Jacobs Field 133 133133 (100%)(100%)
Cleveland Stadium 108 108 8283 (100%) (76%)(78%)
The new baseball and basketball facilities in Cleveland also intensify the competition for potential sources of new revenues for the Browns, including advertising and naming rights, to identify just two examples.
Similar competitive factors are now at work - or will soon exist - in Phoenix and Seattle, among other NFL cities.
Furthermore, in many American cities, there is substantial competition for dollars available to fund the community's participation in the public- private partnerships necessary to replace or renovate aging facilities.
Cleveland again provides an excellent example.
That community invested $175 million to build Jacobs Field and $152 million to build Gund Arena (as well as $92 million to build the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame); the funds necessary to complete proposed renovations of Memorial Stadium (or to construct a replacement stadium) will have to be developed from many of the same public and private sources.
Thus, it is not surprising that despite extraordinary fan loyalty and support - a factor that weighs heavily in our analysis of the League's interests with respect to any relocation proposal - competition on a variety of fronts has caused
15 -
the Browns (after years of effort in pursuit of a new stadium in Cleveland) to consider - and ultimately to accept - an offer of alternative stadium arrangements in Baltimore.
These are different circumstances from those that existed only a decade ago in many NFL markets.
The Washington Redskins, for example, who play in the League's smallest stadium and who have sought for years to build their own privately financed stadium, are already facing new, intense competition from the MCI Center, the publicly financed, state-of-the-art facility in downtown Washington that will be the new home of Washington's NBA and NHL clubs.
The Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who for years were the only professional sports franchise on Florida's West Coast, today face competition from both an NBA club and the NHL, and will soon compete with a Major League Baseball team, which will play in a publiclyfinanced stadium in St. Petersburg.
This intense competition for the local sports dollar comes at a time when player costs are escalating at an extraordinary rate.
Even with a collectively bargained salary cap, during the League Year just ended, NFL clubs spent more than $1.4 billion on a cash basis on player compensation and benefits, nearly 45 percent more than the amount spent only three years before.
In addition, signing bonuses involving large upfront payments have become an increasingly important element in attracting and retaining free agent player talent in the NFL.
Thus, despite extensive revenue sharing that provides even small-market clubs with a foundation on which to build a team, NFL clubs are now more than ever before dependent on
16 -
the revenues generated by modern stadium facilities in order to field representative and competitive football teams.
In business and economic circumstances such as these, sports leagues face complex and difficult questions that require a balance of multiple interests those of fans in communities with teams, those of fans in communities seeking teams, league interests, and individual club interests - to arrive at sound decisions with respect to the location of league teams.
In the NFL, the League itself has increasingly been involved both with its teams and with public officials in seeking to develop solutions to the stadium and facility challenges that are presented in the current environment.
Whatever the outcome of such efforts and decisions, a sports league cannot function in a responsible and predictable manner - and without a nearly paralyzing stream of actual and threatened antitrust treble damage claims - if its decision-making processes on team location matters continue to be subject to review by antitrust courts and juries under the "conspiracy" standards of Section 1 of the Sherman Act.
A Statutory Approach To The Antitrust Issue
My predecessor Pete Rozelle coined the phrase "franchise free agency" in the early 1 980s in predicting the long-term consequences of the Raiders decision.
Yet he was only one of many observers who recognized at an early stage the inappropriateness of treating internal league decisions on franchise relocation as
17 -
"contracts, combinations, or conspiracies" subject to the restrictions and penalties of the antitrust laws.
In August 1982, for example, Senator Heflin addressed the Senate Judiciary Committee on this subject.
He began by recognizing that the NFL "is not composed of economic competitors.
They are engaged in a common business operation."
He made clear that "[alrititrust policies which permit individual team owners to ignore the league's relationship and act as if they were sole proprietors do not reflect free enterprise principles, and they do not serve the public interest."
Senator Heflin concluded that "league agreements voluntarily entered into by league members should be enforced according to their terms" and not subjected to the antitrust laws.
In June 1985, the then-Assistant Attorney General for the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice, Charles F. Rule, testified on the same subject.
Supporting "an antitrust exemption for league decisions to block franchise relocations," he urged on behalf of the Department of Justice that "a league's franchise relocation rule should be deemed per se lawful unless it adversely affects competition with other leagues or is merely a subterfuge to disguise some other egregious anticompetitive conduct."
Indeed, over forty years ago, in the first in-depth antitrust analysis of the nature.of a professional sports league, United States District Judge Allen K. Grim explained that the traditional premises for application of the antitrust laws do not apply to the internal decisions of professional sports leagues.
He recognized that
18 -
clubs in a professional sports league are not independent business competitors, and that treating them as if they were would lead to "first, the creation of greater and greater inequalities in the strength of the teams; second, the weaker teams being driven out of business; and third, the destruction of the entire League.'@-' He concluded:
The League is truly a unique business enterprise, which is entitled to protect Ks very existence by agreeing to reasonable restrictions on its member clubs.1'
In the following quarter century, numerous jurists and distinguished academics concurred.
Chief Justice Rehnquist, for example, observed:
The NFL owners are joint venturers who produce a product, professional football, which competes with other sports and other forms of entertainment in the entertainment marketplace.
Although individual NFL teams compete on the playing field, they rarely compete in the marketplace ...
[OrdinarilyJ the league competes as a unit against other forms of entertainments'
Similarly, Judge Robert Bork has recognized:
Some activities can only be carried out jointly.
Perhaps the leading example is league sports.
When a league of professional lacrosse teams is formed, it would be pointless to declare their cooperation illegal on the
United States v. National Football League, 116 F. Supp. 319, 324 (E.D. Pa. 1953).
A/ Id. at 326.
ki North American Soccer League v. National Football Leagge, 459 U.S. 1074, 1077 (1982) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari).
19-
ground that there are not other professional lacrosse teamsY
Notwithstanding these thoughtful views, when Congress considered these issues in the early- and mid-1980s, it was not accepted that the Raiders decision - which departed from the principles recognized by Chief Justice Rehnquist, Senator Heflin, Judge Bork, and the Department of Justice - would undermine the relationship between professional sports leagues and the communities that they represent.
The Raiders, of course, had moved from Oakland to Los Angeles.
And the Colts had moved from Baltimore to Indianapolis at a time when the NFL - engrossed in litigation with the Raiders - felt powerless to stop them.
But to some in Congress, these moves appeared to be isolated and unrelated to any general or enduring antitrust anomalies that would affect league operations.
The need to correct the anomalous consequences of the Raiders decision therefore did not lead to legislation at that time.
Today, however, there is an ample proof demonstrating that uncertainty over this narrow antitrust issue has had a substantial and deleterious effect.
Congress now has an opportunity - and an ample record - to address this problem and to end the antitrust brinkmanship that (1) impedes a professional sports league's ability to make rational internal decisions and reasonable business judgments about its own affairs and (2) subjects communities to the vagaries of individual team
Robert Bork, The Antitrust Paradox 278 (1978).
20 -
decisions on the next best stadium offer without regard to a league's enforceable evaluation and decision on the proposed move.
Such legislation - to treat sports leagues as a single enterprise for internal decisions on such matters as franchise relocation - would not freeze the status quo.
It simply would allow a sports league to exercise its reasonable business judgment without the threat of antitrust treble damage litigation and, in doing so, to take appropriate account of community interests and fan loyalties.
PROCEDURES FOR PROPOSED FRANCHISE RELOCATIONS
Article 8.5 of the NFL Constitution and Bylaws vests in the Commissioner the authority to 'interpret and from time to time establish policy and procedure in respect to the provisions of the Constitution and Bylaws and any enforcement thereof."
Set forth below are procedures and policy to apply to League consideration, pursuant to Section 4.3 of the Constitution and Bylaws, of any proposed transfer of a home territory.
These provisions were established in December of 1984 and remain in effect.
Section 4.3 requires prior approval by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the member clubs of the League (the normal voting margin for League business) before a club may transfer its franchise or playing site to a different city either within or outside its home territory.
While the following provisions apply by their terms to a proposed transfer to a different home territory, a transfer of a club's playing site to a different location within its home territory may also raise issues of League- wide significance.
Accordingly, the preAnnual Meeting notification date prescribed in section (A) (1) below also applies to a proposed intra-territory relocation, and the Commissioner may require that some or all of the following procedures be followed with respect to such a move.
A. Notice and Evaluation of the Proposed Transfer
Before any club may transfer its franchise or playing site outside its current home territory, the club must submit a proposal for such transfer to the League on the following basis:
1 A club proposing a transfer outside its home territory must give written notice of the proposed transfer to the Commissioner no later than 30 days prior to the opening date of the Annual Meeting in the year in which the club proposes to commence play in a new location.
Such notice will be accompanied by a " statement of reasons" in support of the proposed transfer that will include the information outlined in Part B below.
2.
The Commissioner will, with the assistance of appropriate League committees, evaluate the proposed transfer and report to the membership; if possible, he will do so within 20 days of his receipt of the club's notice and accompanying ustatement of reasons.'
The Commissioner may also convene a special committee to perform factfinding or other functions with respect to any such proposed transfer.
3.
Following the Commissioner's report on the proposed transfer, the transfer will be presented to the membership for action in accordance with the Constitution and Bylaws, either at a Special Meeting of the League held for that purpose or at the Annual Meeting.
S. "Statement of Reasons" for the Proposed Transfer
Any club proposing a transfer outside its home territory must, in its accompanying "statement of reasons," furnish information to the Commissioner essential to consideration of whether such a move is justified and whether it is in the League's interest.
In this connection, the club proposing to transfer must present in writing its views to why its recent financial experience would support a relocation of the club.
Such information would include a comparison of the club's home revenues with League averages and medians; past and projected ticket sales and other stadium revenues at both the existing and proposed locations; and operating profits or losses during the most recent four seasons.
The club should also comment on any other factors it regards as relevant to the League's consideration of the proposed transfer, including but not limited to operations of other professional or college sports in the existing and proposed home territories, and the effects of the proposed transfer on NFL scheduling patterns, travel requirements, current divisional alignments, traditional rivalries, League- wide television patterns and interests, the quality of stadium facilities, and fan and public perceptions of the NFL and its member clubs.
To permit such a review, at least the following information will accompany the "statement of reasons" for the proposed transfer:
1 A copy of the club's existing stadium lease and any other agreements relating to the club's use of its current stadium (e.g., concession agreements, box suite agreements, scoreboard advertising agreements) or to a stadium authority's or municipality's provision of related facilities (e.g., practice facilities).
2.
Audited financial statements for the club for the fiscal years covering the preceding four seasons.
3.
An assessment of the suitability of the club's existing stadium, costs of and prospects for making any desired improvements to the stadium, and the status of efforts to negotiate such improvements with the stadium authority.
4.
A description and financial analysis of the projected lease and operating terms available to the club in its proposed new location.
5.
A description and financial analysis of the stadium lease and operating terms available to the club in its existing home territory, on a basis that permits comparison with the projected arrangements in the proposed new location.
6.
A budget projection, using accepted League charts of account, showing a projected profit and loss statement for the fiscal years covering the first three seasons in the proposed new location.
C. Factors to be Considered in Evaluating the Proposed Transfer
While the League has analyzed many factors in making expansion and team-move decisions in the past, the Commissioner will also give consideration to the factors listed below, among others, in reporting to the membership on any proposed transfer outside a home territory.
Such factors were contained in a bill reported by a Senate committee in 1984; they essentially restate matters that the League has considered vital in connection with team location decisions in the past.
Accordingly, any club proposing to transfer should, in its submission to the Commissioner's office, present the club's position as to the bearing of these factors on its proposed transfer, stating specifically why such a move is regarded as justified on these standards:
1 .
The adequacy of the stadium in which the team played its home games in the previous season, and the willingness of the stadium or arena authority to remedy any deficiencies in such facility;
2.
The extent to which fan loyalty to and support for the team has been demonstrated during the team's tenure in the existing community;
3.
The extent to which the team, directly or indirectly, received public financial support by means of any publicly financed playing facility, special tax treatment and any other form of public financial support;
4.
The degree to which the ownership or management of the team has contributed to any circumstance which might otherwise demonstrate the need for such relocation;
5.
Whether the team has incurred net operating losses, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, sufficient to threaten the continued financial viability of the team;
6.
The degree to which the team has engaged in good faith negotiations with appropriate persons concerning terms and conditions under which the team would continue to play its games in such community or elsewhere within its current home territory;
7.
Whether any other team in the League is located in the community in which the team is currently located;
8.
Whether the team proposes to relocate to a community in which no other team in the League is located; and
9.
Whether the stadium authority, if public, is not opposed to such relocation.
Any club proposing to transfer will have a full opportunity to state its position to the membership and to make its case for the proposed transfer.
In order to fully assess a proposed transfer in light of the variety of League interests involved, and to fairly resolve the interests of all parties, it is essential that the membership be fully apprised of the relevant facts with respect to any proposed transfer.
The procedures and policies outlined above are directed to that end.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
