Skip Past Navigation biography district issues photo gallery press constituent services legislation links contact US Congressman John Sweeney banner image FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE February 12, 2001 CONTACT: Kevin Madden (202) 225-5614 SWEENEY HOLDS PRESS CONFERENCE ON ACID RAIN URGES ACTION ON "SILENT KILLER" IN THE ADIRONDACKS ALBANY, NY - Congressman John E. Sweeney (R/C Halfmoon) held a press conference today to discuss the recent reintroduction of legislation to reduce acid rain and its devastating effects to the environment and public health.
Congressman Sweeney introduced the bill, the Acid Rain Control Act, in January with the cosponsorship of Congressman Sherwood Boehlert (R-New Hartford), and Congressman John McHugh (R-Pierrepont Manor).
The bill will help control acid rain by cutting emissions of nitrogen oxide, sulfur dioxide, and mercury from power plants.
Although similar legislation was not enacted in the last session of Congress, Sweeney believes he and other supporters can build momentum for the Acid Rain Control Act this year based on data the Clinton Administration reluctantly released late last year.
The EPA had kept secret a favorable cost-benefit analysis the agency had written about acid rain control legislation.
The report was only released after the House Government Reform Committee issued a subpoena to obtain the document.
"I am proud to be the original sponsor of the Acid Rain Control Act.
Acid rain is a silent killer that has crippled our region's lakes, wildlife and forests," said Rep. Sweeney.
"Our lakes are a way of life in the Adirondacks and this is a very personal issue for me.
We are continuing to discover more information that shows the acid rain situation is worsening, especially in the Adirondacks.
We cannot afford to be complacent.
This legislation will help reverse years of neglect and begin the environmental recovery process."
H.R. 25, the Acid Rain Control Act, has the strong backing of the Adirondack Council.
This year's bill is based on an earlier version of acid rain control legislation sponsored by Representatives Sweeney, Boehlert and McHugh
.
However, the new Acid Rain Control Act includes a provision to codify a recent announcement by EPA that it intends to regulate mercury as directed in last year's bill.
## 30 ## Site Map | Search | Home
