Chairman Tauzin Prepared Witness Testimony The House Committee on Energy and Commerce W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin, Chairman Link to Committee Tip Line: Fight Waste, Fraud and Abuse
Help
How do I find...?
Contact Us
About The Committee
Search
Menu
Home
Action
Schedule
Members
News
Subcommittees
Issues
Letters
Legislation
Publications
Issues Raised by Human Cloning Research
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations March 28, 2001 12:00 Noon 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Mr. Jaydee Hanson Assistant General Secretary The United Methodist Church 100 Maryland Avenue, NE Washington, DC, 20002
The General Conference of The United Methodist Church, is the only church body that speaks for the entire 8.4 million member United Methodist Church.
This past May, the General Conference called for a ban on all human cloning, including the cloning of human embryos.
This would include all projects, privately or governmentally funded, that are intended to advance human cloning.
(The Book of Resolutions of The United Methodist Church, 2000, p. 254)
The General Conference based its position on the work of the United Methodist Genetic Science Task Force which began its work in 1989, some 8 years before a Scottish laboratory succeeded in cloning Dolly.
Since the cloning of Dolly, this issue of cloning has sparked enormous and sustained concern in the general public, including the church.
Many other denominations other than the United Methodist Church have also issued statements opposing human cloning.
The United Methodist Church opposition to cloning comes from our understanding of a theology of Gods creation and how humans are to be stewards of Gods creation.
The new biological technologies, including cloning, force us to examine as never before, the meaning of life, our understanding of ourselves as humans, and our proper role in Gods creation.
The General Conference caution(s) that the prevalent principle in research that what can be done should be done is insufficient rationale and should not be the prevalent principle guiding the development of new technologiestechnologies need moral and ethical guidance.
(Book of Resolutions, p. 248)
As United Methodists, our reflections on these issues emerge from our faith.
We remember that creation has its origin, value, and destiny in God, that humans are stewards of creation, and that technology has brought both great benefit and harm to creation.
As people of faith, we believe that our identity as humans is more than our genetic inheritance, our social environment, or the sum of the two.
We are created by God and have been redeemed by Jesus Christ.
In light of these theological claims and other questions, fears and expectations, we recognize that our present human knowledge on this issue is incomplete and finite.
We do not know all of the consequences of cloningIt is important that the limits of human knowledge be considered as policy is made.
(Book of Resolutions, p.254)
Dr. Rebekah Miles, associate professor of ethics, at Perkins School of Theology, Southern Methodist University and a member of the United Methodist Task Force on Genetic Science summarized the questions asked by our taskforce.
Will human cloning compromise our God-given uniqueness or distinctiveness?
How might human cloning be misused by sinful humans to further their selfish ends and objectify other people?
Is a desire to replicate ones genetic inheritance in a human clone an attempt to deny our inevitable finitude as human beings?
Will human cloning further social injustice?
When does human alteration of creation go so far as to become a violation of Gods creation?
What is the difference between our human capacities for creation and Gods?
Our Genetic Science Task Force concluded that cloning would compromise human distinctiveness, that it would be used as a way to further social injustice, and was a violation of their understanding of Gods Creation and as such should be banned.
The General Conference statement on human cloning notes a number of ways that human cloning would have social and theological ramifications: (the) use and abuse of people, exploitation of women, (the) tearing of the fabric of the family, the compromising of human distinctiveness, the lessening of genetic diversity, the direction of research and development (on cloning would likely be)controlled by corporate profit (Book of Resolutions, p. 254) The General Conference further noted that Given the profound theological and moral implications, the imperfection of human knowledge that there be a moratorium on cloning-related research.
Cloning proponents will argue that cloning will soon be come a normal way of reproducing humans and that initial opposition will fade away when safety concerns are addressed.
The cloning of human humans should never be allowed to become normal.
The US Congress has the opportunity to join with many other countries where the United Methodist Church has members and ban human cloning.
The rest of the world is looking to the United States for leadership on this issue.
As the ethicist, Leon Kass notes, This is not business as usual to be fretted about for a while but to finally be given our approval.
We must rise to the occasion and make our judgements as if the future of our humanity hangs in the balance.
For so it does.
(Leon Kass, The Wisdom of Repugnance: Why We Should Ban the Cloning of Humans.)
[corner.gif] [spacer.gif]
Related Documents
Energy and Commerce Leaders Questioning U.S. Oncology Letter to Mr. R. Dale Ross U.S. Oncology June 26, 2003
News Release Energy and Commerce Leaders Questioning U.S. Oncology June 26, 2003
News Release Tauzin, Greenwood Examine FDA's Adequacy on Food Import Controls June 11, 2003
Tauzin, Greenwood Examine FDA's Adequacy on Food Import Controls Letter to The Honorable Mark McClellan Food and Drug Administration June 11, 2003
The Safety and Efficacy of Pharmaceuticals Imported into the United States Letter to The Honorable Mark McClellan Food and Drug Administration June 5, 2003
Energy and Commerce Leaders Expand Investigation of Skinny Pill for Kids Letter to Ms. Edita Kaye The Skinny Pill March 25, 2003
News Release Energy and Commerce Leaders Initiate Examination of Ephedra February 28, 2003
More On FDA
More On Cloning
Home | Action | Schedule | Members | News | Subcommittees | Issues | Letters | Legislation | Contact
Committee on Energy and Commerce Seal
The Committee on Energy and Commerce 2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 (202) 225-2927 Contact Us
Printer Friendly
Comment On This Page
Related Documents
Document Menu
Hearing Webcast
Invited Witnesses
Member Statements
Printed Hearing Record (transcript)
