[top_image.jpg] [friedman_image.jpg]
Friedman's quest for the genes that cause obesity began nearly 15 years ago in his Rockefeller lab.
Using the recently developed technology known as positional cloning, he and his colleagues identified and cloned obese, the first recessive obesity gene in mice, and its human homologue in 1994.
Obese causes obesity in mice when mutated.
In 1995, the researchers identified the gene's protein product, which they called called leptin from the Greek word for thin.
When injected into mice, leptin increased the activity of genetically obese mice and caused them to lose 30 percent of their body weight.
Normal mice also lost weight in response to leptin injections.
In the February 15, 1996 Nature, Friedman's laboratory announced that the weight-reducing effects of leptin result from an interaction with a receptor distributed among several tissues, including the hypothalamus, the brain's control center for food intake and energy expenditure.
They also identified at least six different forms of the receptor, known as Ob-R, the functions of which are being investigated.
Friedman was born in Orlando, Fla., on July 20, 1954, and grew up in North Woodmere, Long Island.
He graduated from Renssalaer Polytechnic Institute magna cum laude and, in 1977, at the age of 22, received his medical degree from Albany Medical College of Union University in Albany, N.Y.
While at Albany Medical College, he was elected to Alpha Omega Alpha, the medical honor society.
After completing two residencies at Albany Medical Center Hospital, Friedman came to Rockefeller as a postgraduate fellow and associate physician in 1980.
From 1980 to 1981, he also served as a postgraduate fellow at Cornell University Medical College.
In 1986, he received a Ph.D. under the tutelage of Professor James E. Darnell, Jr., M.D., was appointed assistant professor, and became an assistant investigator at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute.
In 1991, Friedman was promoted to associate professor and named head of the laboratory of molecular genetics at Rockefeller.
In June 1995, he was promoted to professor.
He was appointed the Marilyn M. Simpson Professor in 1999, and serves as chairman of the university's Academic Senate.
Friedman directs the university's Starr Center for Human Genetics, one of the largest U.S. centers for the study of diseases linked to heredity.
The center allows scientists to pursue studies of hundreds of families affected by such illnesses as heart disease, diabetes and Alzheimer's disease.
[USEMAP:bottom_image.jpg]
