U.S.-Afghan Women's Council U.S.-Afghan Women's Council Home | Contact Us | Notices Search: _______________ Go 4.
U.S. Support for Afghan Women and Children: Survey of Current Activities
Both the central rationale and the overarching target for ongoing U.S. efforts on behalf of Afghan women were expressed by President Bush in his message to the inaugural meeting of the U.S.-Afghan Womens Council on April 24, 2002: For years, during the ruinous tyranny of the Taliban, Americans were rightly outraged by the brutal repression of Afghan women.
Today, Afghan women are enjoying new freedoms and opportunities.
Now is the time for America and the world to demonstrate more than just sympathy for past injustices.
We must work together to offer them real support for a better future.
In implementing this guidance, overall U.S.-supported programs in Afghanistan are designed specifically to give Afghan women the schooling, medical attention, skills and tools they need to obtain jobs, support their families, and integrate into the political and public life of this new stage of Afghan history.
We are committed to helping Afghans build a nation where all citizens have the freedom and resources to pursue both an education and a livelihood.
In this connection, it is important to recall that the improvement of conditions for women is likely to be both a cause and a consequence of Afghanistans overall reconstruction process.
As Secretary Powell said in March, if women are the prime victims of conflict, they are also key to a societys recovery from that conflict.
And so, for example, we make assistance to womens organizations and ministries of womens affairs part of our broader post-conflict strategy of promoting civil society, representative government, and sound economic policies.
Perhaps most important of all, women play far-reaching roles in the prevention of conflict by helping to create conditions that are healthy and stabilizing over the long term.
That is why women are major beneficiaries of our development assistance, child survival funds, economic support funds, and high-impact programs in the areas of health care, HIV/AIDS, education and micro-financing.
Accordingly, the varied array of U.S. programs benefiting women and children in Afghanistan will be considered below under two broad headings.
First is Institutional Support, which covers current efforts to help Afghans create their own lasting, organizational mechanisms and management structures to take ownership of the overall effort to better the lives of women and children in their society.
This category is represented by U.S. assistance for Afghanistans own Ministry of Womens Affairs, and by participation in the bilateral, public/private partnership organized as the U.S.-Afghan Womens Council.
The second broad heading considered below is Program Support, which covers specific concrete projects currently underway that directly impact the target populations of Afghan women and their families.
This category is subdivided below into three well-defined program areas: Education and Health, Political Participation, and Economic Participation.
It should be noted that, in all of these areas, the purposely inclusive nature of many programs, and the benefits derived from them by those affected who are women or children, make it impossible to isolate a precise dollar figure for U.S. support intended strictly or solely for the latter groups.
In addition, representative programs that focus more narrowly on either children or refugees will be considered in brief separate sections that follow those immediately below.
Institutional Support for Afghan Women and Children: Current Activities
The Afghan Ministry of Womens Affairs The Afghan Interim Authority (AIA), formed as a result of the Bonn Agreement of December 2001 and headed by Chairman Hamid Karzai, included a Ministry of Womens Affairs in its Cabinet.
The ministrys mission, in the words of its own strategic plan, is "to restore and improve the rights of Afghan women, and to improve their legal, economic, political and social status throughout the country."
Dr. Sima Samar, who established effective working relations throughout the U.S. Government, including with the Department of State and USAID, first headed the ministry.
Today, in the new transitional government formed through the Loya Jirga, the Ministry of Womens Affairs is led by Dr. Habiba Sorabi, appointed to that post on June 26.
In addition, former Loya Jirga Commission Vice Chair Mahbuba Hoquqmal now serves as Minister of State for Womens Affairs.
The United States contributed significant assistance to the AIA as a whole, and to the Womens Ministry in particular.
The Bush Administration donated $4 million to the United Nations Development Program's (UNDPs) Afghan Interim Authority Fund to cover start-up costs for all ministries.
A percentage of this contribution provided the Ministry of Womens Affairs with two computers, a satellite telephone, office furniture and supplies, and a vehicle.
It also helped rehabilitate the Ministrys offices and assisted in the preparation of payrolls so that the staff could receive their salaries.
In addition to this contribution through the UNDP, the United States has contributed directly to the Ministrys refurbishment through USAID, which has provided $64,000 toward the renovation of a suitable building, including an initial 11 office spaces, office equipment, and technical advisers.
In a meeting on February 19, 2002 with U.S. Charge Ryan Crocker, Minister Samar noted with pleasure that Womens Affairs was the first ministry in the AIA to obtain a grant directly from the U.S. government.
With substantial monetary and technical assistance from USAID (and from other bilateral and international agencies, including UNIFEM), the ministrys first priority has been to staff up and establish the basic physical plant needed to make future activities possible.
Beginning with rudimentary office space and equipment, USAID support has progressed to funding for a state-of-the-art media and telecommunications resource center, complete with satellite, video, and Internet hook-ups unparalleled anywhere else in the country.
To ensure that these impressive new capabilities can be put to good use, the Department of State is partnering with the Ministry of Womens Affairs and the private sector through the U.S.-Afghan Womens Council, to launch a prototype womens computer education International Visitors program.
Plans call for training a core group of 18 participants this fall.
Even as these early, capacity-building steps get underway, the Ministry of Womens Affairs is playing a helpful political role in Cabinet-level advocacy for restoration of womens rights.
This applies specifically to restoration of womens jobs in other government ministrieswith promotions to compensate for the years of work and seniority lost under Taliban rule.
It has also reinforced the commitment to a reserved proportion (11% minimum) of seats for women delegates to the Loya Jirga.
In addition, at the practical level, the ministry conducted a consultation for 60 women from nine different provinces, oversaw placement exams for female students, and spearheaded the successful reopening of schools for girls in March 2002.
Now that this central ministry is open for business, the next step in institutional development will be to reach out to women at the local level.
The plan is to open a Womens Center in each one of Afghanistans 32 provinces, plus Mini Womens Centers in each of Kabuls 16 districts.
These local units will be focal points for helping women access education, training, reproductive health care, employment and career information, and informal networking opportunities.
USAID and the Department of State have already committed $160,000 to help fund these centers.
We envision a partnership between U.S. and international donors in setting up this network, with UNIFEM likely providing the wherewithal for its physical facilities, while USAID supports technical advisors to assist the Womens Ministry in establishing operations and developing programs.
The United States will continue to consider requests for assistance from this and all other ministries of the Interim Authority and its official successors in Afghanistan.
The U.S.-Afghan Womens Council Another important institutional component of U.S. support for womens full participation in Afghanistans political, economic, and cultural life is the creation of the U.S.-Afghan Womens Council.
This new organization will help promote partnerships between the public and private sectors, as well as between the two countries and governments concerned.
Its key function will be to mobilize and bring together resources, expertise, and networking capabilities across governments, NGOs, and private companiesand target them specifically toward practical projects for women that might otherwise be missed in the welter of Afghan reconstruction activities.
It will focus on concrete actions that help bring real benefits to the women of Afghanistan, starting with the most urgent priorities: education, health, vocational training, and small-scale credit to help launch productive enterprises.
The Council, established by President Bush and Chairman Karzai in January 2002, is co-chaired by the U.S. Undersecretary of State for Global Affairs and the Afghan Ministers of Foreign Affairs and of Womens Affairs.
Members include several distinguished American figures from academia, foundations, and the media; additional American and Afghan leaders from the business, government, and other sectors are expected to join.
The group held its first formal meeting in Washington, DC on April 24, 2002.
President Bush, in a White House message to mark the occasion, welcomed the Councils efforts to "promote public and private partnerships so that Afghan women can gain the skills and education they need to fulfill their rightful role in society."
At its inaugural meeting, the Council agreed to undertake a targeted computer education project as its first initiative.
This project, which will bring 18 Afghan female government workers to the United States for a month of intensive training, will be underway by September, with initial funding from the State Departments Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.
As Under Secretary of State Paula Dobriansky noted, "Giving Afghan women working at government ministries the skills to use computers responds directly to a priority issue raised by Minister [of Womens Affairs] Samar and other Afghan women, and will enable themin each of their ministriesto become more effective advocates and implementers of programs that benefit women."
If approved by Congress, supplemental funding that we have requested would make possible the expansion of this and similar Council programs for Afghan women workers and students, into the autumn months and beyond.
At the same time, looking to leverage this relatively modest level of government funding, the Council is working with the AOL Time Warner Foundation, Gateway, and others in the private sector to secure the donation of laptops, printers, and other computer equipment to ensure that the program participants return to Afghanistan with new hardware as well as increased knowledge, skills, and professional contacts.
And the Council is working with another private sector marketing firm, Grafik, Inc., to design a website for the Council that will greatly enhance its outreach to potential members, donors, and other supporters both at home and abroad.
In this fashion, the Council promises to reach effectively across borders, and across the public sector-private sector divide, to forge a valuable collaboration that will identify priorities, publicize, and gather support for creative new efforts to improve the lives of Afghan women.
It is quite consciously designed to be directly responsive to their own considered requests, and to supplement rather than substitute for the larger-scale efforts of purely official programs.
Program Support for Afghan Women and Children: Current Activities
Education and Health Consistent with the provisions of the 2001 Afghan Women and Children Relief Act, the United States has provided substantial funds for education and health projects inside Afghanistan.
A significant amount of these funds have been channeled through NGOs.
Additional substantial programs are specifically oriented toward Afghan refugees, both inside and outside their country.
These programs are largely channeled through international and local organizations, as discussed in a separate section below.
On March 23, 2002, schools for girls reopened in Afghanistan after many years of enforced closure.
Thousands of Afghan girls and boys entered the classroom for the first time in their lives.
To assist in this landmark event, and help ensure that such major progress continues, the United States spent $6.9 million for nearly 10 million Dari- and Pashto-language textbooks in science, math, and reading for grades 1-12, along with 4,000 teacher-training kits.
Five million of these books arrived in time for the reopening of schools.
In addition, USAID is funding 20 teams of five teacher trainers to conduct four-week training session with 4,000 educators.
A noteworthy feature is that half of the trainers, as well as half of the educators who will participate in this ambitious program, are women.
Through a global consortium of companies, individuals, and NGOs, we have sent fabric and sewing machines so that Afghan women can make school uniforms for girls.
The Department of Labor has allotted $300,000 to pay the seamstresses salaries.
In other educational projects, the USG has further obligated $200,000 to send teams of teacher trainers and educators to develop curricula.
In addition, the Department of State has contributed $68,000 toward the refurbishment of the womens dormitory at the University of Kabul, which will allow women to remain on campus in a secure environment.
Also, USAID supports the World Food Program's (WFPs) pilot food-for-education project, which is providing nutritious school meals to children in several districts of the remote province of Badakhshan, in northeastern Afghanistan.
This project is slated to expand nationwide to cover one million school children in the near future.
In implementing this initiative, boys and girls receive wheat flour for regular school attendance; girls receive an additional five liters of vegetable oil every month as an extra incentive.
This is an especially effective device to encourage even tradition-bound families to send their girls to school.
A separate USAID-funded program is encouraging Afghan women and girls to read by hosting reading classes and improving the countrys libraries.
USAID monies finance the training of library staff and the purchase of books.
While the large majority of these projects are intended to take place inside Afghanistan, for reasons both of principle and of practical impact, there are several related programs that will require travel abroad for additional professional training and exposure.
An example is a small-scale Afghan Women Teacher Training Program planned by the State Department, which will bring about a dozen female Afghan basic education specialists to the U.S. for a 3-4 week teacher training program in curriculum and materials development, computer literacy, and train-the-trainer techniques.
In order not to interfere with the Afghan school year, this project is tentatively scheduled to occur in January or February of 2003.
In the field of public health, the United States has provided funds and staff for support UNICEFs vaccination campaign, targeting 2.26 million boys and girls in its initial phase.
In FY 02, USAID will provide $10.65 million to support health services nationwide, including $5 million to the Afghan Ministry of Health for maternal and child health care services and other funding for local and international NGO partners on the ground.
At the grass-roots voluntary level here at home, American boys and girls, through the Fund for Afghan Children, have contributed over $4 million to pay for food, shelter, clothing, health care, and toys for their Afghan counterparts.
Political Participation Through grants to NGOs, the United States has aided efforts to help Afghan women improve the environment for womens human rights, address systematic violations, and increase their participation in the political process.
The United States developed and supported similar programs in Peshawar, Pakistan, where hundreds of Afghan refugee women received training and formed womens groups to address the security and law enforcement problems they confronted.
U.S. assistance also enabled the participation of more than 500 such women in a Womens Loya Jirga on the reconstruction of Afghanistan, and helped delegations of Afghan women to participate in major international gatherings in Bonn and Brussels.
In addition, U.S. support helped an NGO based in Kabul to train women for participation in the Emergency Loya Jirga in June and the subsequent political process.
In the first half of 2002, USAID provided assistance to several NGOs to open liaison offices in Kabul.
One of these groups is training Afghan womens rights leaders to develop human rights advocacy skills.
It is also facilitating alliances between Afghan and Pakistani womens rights groups to help Afghan women refugees, and to assist these groups in addressing religious extremism in the region.
In April, the Department of State funded a womens mentoring program in which six female political and human rights advocates from Afghanistan traveled to the United States for public affairs training and networking with Afghan-American community leaders and other NGOs, including local womens groups.
A separate small grant from the Department of States regional Public Diplomacy Office is slated for a womens workshop on "Becoming Full Participants in Democracy."
This project will team up Afghan and American womens NGOs to help develop leadership and advocacy experience and skills, and foster a network of contacts with similar, successful grass-roots organizations in the United States, Africa, and Japan.
In assisting Afghans with the formation of permanent government, we do not intend to install a clone of American democracy.
Rather, we hope that the permanent government will be consistent with both the unique culture and traditions of Afghanistan as well as democratic ideals of accountability, inclusion, transparency and equality.
Only a democratic government that is specifically tailored to the needs of Afghans will change Afghanistan from a country of violence and poverty to one of stability and prosperity.
But the transition to democracy cannot be made without instilling in society a respect for the basic human rights and dignities of all Afghansincluding Afghan women whose rights were so cruelly denied by the Taliban.
This is indeed a delicate balance, one that will require constant creativity and pragmatism to move forward at a reasonable rate.
Economic Participation U.S. efforts in this sphere focus first on re-integrating women into their local economies to become self-sufficient.
In addition to programs that will help provide immediate employment opportunities for women, vocational training will be supplied for women to learn the skills needed to support themselves and their families.
U.S. programs will also work toward opening the ranks of entrepreneurship to women by extending their access to small-scale business credit.
With so many programs underway, this report can only highlight a few of those currently operating under this rubric, including: * With funding from USAID, the WFP is operating bakeries that employ Afghan widows, and at the same time, provide heavily subsidized bread to Afghanistans urban poorparticularly women and children.
At least 250,000 people will be assisted this year.
During the Taliban era, these bakeries were one of the very few places in the country where women could work at all.
Today, with support from USAID, the WFP is moving to expand this innovative and highly successful program nationwide.
* USAID and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) are rehabilitating the offices of a Kabul-based NGO that provides educational and vocational courses to women and girls.
The grant provides training supplies and equipment, and is increasing the NGOs capacity to offer a more extensive range of courses.
* USAID is funding another NGO to provide returning refugees with job skills, including management training, in order to enhance womens ability to achieve economic independence.
This non-political, nonprofit organization aims to promote solidarity and cooperation among Afghan women, and to strengthen their capacity for self-reliance and attainment of their rights.
A large number of highly educated, skilled women fled the country during the last decade; we hope that such efforts will encourage more Afghan expatriate women to return home to help transform their nation.
* USAID is working with another NGO to support the establishment of a womens center in the war-ravaged Shomali Plains region north of the capital.
The center provides basic education, health instruction, and training for income-generation projects, such as making clothing or quilts for distribution to hospitals, orphanages, schools, and families.
This group is in the process of opening four more such centers, in Kabul, Pul-e-Khumri, Maimaneh, and Taloqan, which will benefit more than 5,000 local women.
* The Department of State, with funding from its own South Asia Bureau/Public Diplomacy Small Grants budget, plans to underwrite a Small Business Development Initiative for Women in Afghanistan.
This project, to be carried out by an NGO, will prepare half a dozen Afghan women to become trainers in this field through the creation of a Womens Small Business Development Center at the Womens University in Kabul.
A Dari-language training manual will be developed as part of the program.
The Department of Labor has approved $1.5 million to assess womens skills and provide vocational training and start-up wages for women.
This program is designed to help participating Afghan women, including the relatively high proportion of family breadwinners among them, negotiate the transition to long-term economic self-sufficiency and participation in the countrys career patterns for women working alongside Afghanistans men.
