STATEMENT OF THE ALLIANCE OF AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURERS BEFORE THE: SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE November 1, 2001 PRESENTED BY: Greg Dana Vice President - Environmental Affairs Mr. Chairman,
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before your Subcommittee regarding energy security issues.
I represent the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, a trade association of 13 car and light-truck manufacturers.
Our member companies include BMW Group, DaimlerChrysler Corporation, Fiat, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Corporation, Isuzu Motors of America, Mazda, Mitsubishi, Nissan North America, Porsche, Toyota Motor North America, Volkswagen of America, and Volvo.
Alliance member companies have more than 620,000 employees in the United States, with more than 250 manufacturing facilities in 35 states.
Overall, a recent University of Michigan study found that the entire automobile industry creates more than 6.6 million direct and spin-off jobs in all 50 states and produces almost $243 billion in payroll compensation annually.
Alliance R
The University of Michigan study also found that the total R
In fact, the study stated the following: "The level of automotive R
As we begin the 21^st century, the auto industry is committed to developing and utilizing emerging technologies to produce cleaner, more fuel-efficient cars and light trucks.
According to EPA data, fuel efficiency has increased steadily at nearly 2 percent per year on average from 1975 to 2001 for both cars and light trucks.
The National Academy of Sciences (NAS), in a recent report to Congress, introduced their discussion of promising technologies by stating that "the 1992 NAS report outlined various automotive technologies that were either entering production at the time, or were considered "emerging" based upon their potential and production intent.
Since then, many regulatory and economic conditions have changed.
In addition, automotive technology has continued to advance, especially in microelectronics, mechatronics, sensors, control systems, and manufacturing processes.
Many of the technologies identified in the 1992 report as "proven" or "emerging" have already entered production."
Auto manufacturers are working on future technologies such as hybrid and fuel cell vehicles that may lead to substantial improvements in efficiency and emissions performance without sacrificing safety, utility, and performance.
Fuel cell technology also serves as a potential vehicle to move away from a petroleum dependent transportation sector.
Successful introduction of these new and emerging technologies all share the need for cooperative efforts that bring all the key stakeholders together....including the automakers, energy providers, government policy makers and most importantly, the customers.
Key Energy Policy Initiatives:
1) Promoting Market Based Principles:
The Alliance supports efforts to create an effective energy policy based on broad, market-oriented principles.
Policies that promote research and development and deployment of advanced technologies and provide customer based incentives to accelerate demand of these advanced technologies set the foundation.
This focus on bringing advanced technologies to market leverages the intense competition of the automobile manufacturers worldwide.
This competition drives automakers to develop and introduce breakthrough technologies to meet a variety of demands and customer needs in the marketplace.
The National Academy of Sciences summarized this diversity of demand and priorities in the marketplace when it stated that "automotive manufacturers must optimize the vehicle and its powertrain to meet the sometimes-conflicting demands of customer-desired performance, fuel economy goals, emissions standards, safety requirements and vehicle cost within the broad range of operating conditions under which the vehicle will be used.
This necessitates a vehicle systems analysis.
Vehicle designs trade off styling features, passenger value, trunk space and utility.
These trade-offs will likewise influence vehicle weight, frontal area, drag coefficients and powertrain packaging, for example.
These features together with the engine performance, torque curve, transmission characteristics, control system calibration, noise control measures, suspension characteristics and many other factors, will define the drivability, customer acceptance and marketability of the vehicle."
This is a long way of saying that in the end, the customer is in the driver's seat.
Market based incentives and approaches ultimately will help consumers overcome the initial cost barriers of advanced technologies during early market introduction and increase demand, bringing more energy efficient vehicles into the marketplace.
This will also accelerate cost reduction as economies of scale are achieved in a timelier fashion.
The Alliance is pleased that Vice President Cheney's National Energy Policy report recommends and supports a tax credit for advanced technology vehicles.
In addition, the report supported the broader use of alternative fuels and alternative fuel vehicles.
This is consistent with the Alliance's position of supporting enactment of tax credits for consumers to help offset the initial higher costs of advanced technology and alternative fuel vehicles until more advancements and greater volumes make them less expensive to produce and purchase.
The Alliance commends the House in endorsing consumer tax credits for highly fuel efficient advanced technology vehicles when it passed H.R. 4 on August 1.
The Alliance believes that the overall concepts and provisions found in the bill are the right approach and would benefit American consumers.
H.R. 4 would ensure that advanced technology is used to improve fuel economy and energy independence.
Performance incentives tied to improved fuel economy are incorporated into the legislation in order for a vehicle to be eligible for the tax credits.
These performance incentives are added to a base credit that is provided for introducing the technologies into the marketplace.
2) Maintaining Technology Focus:
The Alliance and its 13 member companies believe that the best approach for improved energy security and fuel efficiency gains is to aggressively promote the development of advanced technologies - through cooperative, public/private research programs and competitive development - and incentives to help pull the technologies into the marketplace as rapidly as possible.
The automobile companies are convinced that advanced technologies with the potential for major fuel economy gains are on the horizon which will allow automakers to continue offering products that consumers demand without sacrificing safety, performance or cargo features.
As a nation, we need to get these technologies on the road as soon as possible in an effort to reach the national energy goals as fast and as efficiently as we can.
New Technologies...Promises and Challenges
Focus on Powertrain and Vehicle Technologies:
Automobile companies around the globe have dedicated substantial resources to bringing cutting-edge technologies - electric, fuel cell, and hybrid electric vehicles as well as alternative fuels and powertrain improvements - to the marketplace.
Each of these technologies bring a set of unique advantages to the marketplace.
At the same time, each technology has a unique set of challenges that inhibit widespread commercialization and acceptance.
The internal combustion engine, fueled by relatively inexpensive gasoline, has been and continues to be, a formidable competitor against which all new technologies must compete.
For consumers sensitive to cost, fuel economy gains must be compared to the increased investment costs and risks in their new vehicle purchase decision.
Assuming a fuel cost of $1.50 per gallon, a 20 percent increase in vehicle fuel efficiency offers an annual fuel savings of just over $100.
This cost must be weighed against the convenience, utility and performance of the alternative.
As automakers, we are keenly aware of the importance of consumer choices and the challenges we have to deliver new technologies that meet their affordability, performance and utility needs.
Fuel Cell Vehicles:
The most promising long-term technology offers breakthrough fuel economy improvements, zero emissions and a shift away from petroleum-based fuels.
From a vehicle perspective, hydrogen-fueled fuel cells offer the biggest improvement in efficiency and emissions but at high cost and with major infrastructure challenges.
Onboard hydrogen storage also presents some difficulty.
Gasoline infrastructure is well established, but gasoline reformers are the least developed and the most costly of reformer technology.
Current sulfur content in gasoline will most likely need further reduction to zero or near zero levels.
A robust fuel cell commercialization plan incorporates breakthroughs and complementary research in stationary power units.
A primary challenge in the introduction of fuel cells into America's light vehicle passenger and truck fleet are the packaging restrictions of size and weight.
Experience and commercial expansion of stationary power units, relatively unconstrained by size and weight will be helpful gaining the experience necessary to meet the cost targets for commercialization in the vehicle sector.
Hybrid-Electric Vehicles:
Hybrid-electric vehicles can offer a significant improvement in fuel economy.
These products capture power through regenerative braking.
When decelerating an internal combustion vehicle, the brakes convert the vehicle's kinetic energy into heat, which is lost to the air.
By contrast, a decelerating hybrid vehicle can convert kinetic energy into stored energy that can be reused during the next acceleration.
Hybrid vehicles do not require additional investment in fuel infrastructure which helps reflect their potential for near term acceptance.
Battery Electric Vehicles
Vehicles that utilize stored energy from "plug-in" rechargeable batteries offer zero emissions.
Battery electric vehicles continue to face weight, energy density, and cost challenges that limit their customer range and affordability.
Advanced Lean Burn Technology Vehicles
Vehicles that are powered by advanced lean burn technology such as clean, direct injection diesels are faced with a significant challenge in meeting the new California and Federal exhaust emission standard.
If the technology challenges can be overcome, these types of vehicles could provide fuel economy gains in excess of 25 percent above comparable conventional vehicles.
Focus on Fuels and Infrastructure
Much of the discussion regarding fuel economy centers on the vehicles of the automobile manufacturers and their role in a national energy policy.
But it is important not to forget about a vital component for any vehicle - the fuel upon which it operates.
As automakers looking at the competing regulatory challenges for our products -- fuel efficiency, safety and emissions -- and attempting to move forward with advanced technologies, we must have the best possible and cleanest fuels.
EPA has begun to address gasoline quality but fuel needs to get even cleaner.
This is important because gasoline will remain the prevalent fuel for years to come and may eventually be used for fuel cell technology.
Low Sulfur Gasoline:
In 1999, new EPA rules were issued which direct oil refiners to reduce the amount of sulfur in gasoline to an average of 30 parts per million, a reduction of 90 percent over current levels.
Low sulfur gasoline is vital to ensuring that vehicle pollution control devices, such as catalytic converters, work more efficiently.
The so-called Tier II regulations were required under the 1990 Clean Air Act and will be phased in beginning in the 2004 model year.
Further improvements will be needed especially if gasoline is to be used in fuel cells.
Low Sulfur Diesel:
In addition to alternative fuels, companies are constantly evaluating fuel-efficient technologies used in other countries to see if they can be made to comply with regulatory requirements in the United States.
One such technology is diesel engines, using lean-burn technology, which has gained wide acceptance in Europe and other countries.
Automakers have been developing a new generation of highly fuel-efficient clean diesel vehicles - using turbocharged direct injection engines - as a way to significantly increase fuel economy and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
However, their use in the U.S. must be enabled by significantly cleaner diesel fuel.
Earlier this year, EPA promulgated its heavy-duty diesel rule that the Alliance supports, as far as it goes.
The rule reduces the amount of sulfur in the fuel.
Low sulfur diesel fuel is necessary to enable the new clean diesel technology to be used in future cars and light trucks.
Providing cleaner fuels, including lowering sulfur levels in gasoline and diesel fuel, will provide emission benefits in existing on-road vehicles.
Unless there are assurances that such fuels will be available, companies will not invest in new clean diesel technologies.
Efforts to reduce sulfur content will provide environmental benefits and allow vehicles to operate more efficiently.
Beyond gasoline, the auto industry is working with a variety of suppliers of alternative fuels.
In fact, the industry already offers more than 25 vehicles powered by alternative fuels.
Approximately 2 million of these vehicles are on the road today and more are coming.
Today, we find vehicles that use:
Ø Natural gas, which reduces carbon monoxide emissions;
Ø Ethanol, a renewable fuel domestically produced with the longer term potential to substantially reduce greenhouse gases;
Ø Liquefied petroleum gas (propane), the most prevalent of the alternative fuels, which reduces VOC emissions; and
Ø For the future, hydrogen, which has the potential to emit nearly zero pollutants depending on feedstock.
One of the key hurdles to overcome in commercializing alternative fuel vehicles is the lack of fueling infrastructure.
For nearly a century, infrastructure has focused primarily on gasoline and diesel products.
Infrastructure and fuel incentives will help the distributors overcome the costs to establish the alternative fuel outlets and support distributors during initial lower sales volumes as the number of alternative fuel vehicles increases.
As you can tell, the automobile companies - from the top executives to the lab engineers - are constantly competing for the next breakthrough innovation.
If I can leave one message with the Subcommittee today, it is to stress that all manufacturers have advanced technology programs to improve vehicle fuel efficiency, lower emissions and increase motor vehicle safety.
These are not "pie in the sky" concepts on a drawing board.
In fact, many companies have advanced technology vehicles in the marketplace right now or have announced production plans for the near future.
That's why now is the perfect time for the enactment of tax credits to help spur consumers to purchase these new vehicles which years of research and development have made possible.
The Alliance and its member companies would urge that public policy decisions focus on the steps that will achieve real reductions in fuel consumption and which support our national energy goals.
As I mentioned earlier, the advanced technology fuel-efficient vehicles are typically more expensive than their gasoline counterparts because of the new technologies.
Therefore, market penetration is a challenge.
As a result, the Alliance is pleased that HR 4 would provide for personal and business tax incentives for the purchase of qualifying advanced technology hybrid and fuel cell powered vehicles as well as alternative fueled vehicles and infrastructure development.
These tax incentives should help "jump start" the market penetration of these highly fuel efficient vehicles leading to increased sales and volumes so that the cost will come down in the long-term with positive implications for energy security.
Thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee today.
I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.
###
