Written Statement of the Electric Vehicle Association of the Americas Before the SUBCOMMITTEE ON ENERGY COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Hearing on "U.S. Energy Security: Options to Decrease Petroleum Use
in the Transportation Sector"
Thursday, November 1, 2001
Introduction and Overview of Statement:
This testimony is submitted on behalf of the Electric Vehicle Association of the Americas (EVAA), a national non-profit organization that advocates the use of electric transportation technologies, including battery, hybrid and fuel cell electric vehicles, as a means of addressing national energy security, energy efficiency and air quality goals.
Members of the organization include international automotive and other equipment manufacturers, energy providers, national associations and government entities.
(A complete membership roster is attached to, and made a part of, this testimony.)
EVAA applauds the Energy Subcommittee's investigation to determine means by which the federal government might cause, or help to cause, a reduction in the use of petroleum.
The statement of EVAA will be confined to addressing those options that can reduce petroleum use in the transportation sector, which is by far the greatest consumer of petroleum in the U.S., accounting for approximately 70% of our current consumption.
And the consumption of energy by the transportation sector is growing at an alarming rate.
By 2020, the Energy Information Administration (EIA) predicts that total energy demand for transportation in the U.S. will be 38.5 quadrillion Btu, compared with only 26.4 quadrillion Btu in 1999.
Therefore, while the Committee can and should consider options for reducing petroleum use within every sector of the economy, a critical key to reducing U.S. dependence on foreign oil is to transition the transportation sector - particularly the light duty vehicle segment - to use of alternatives to gasoline and diesel fuels, like electricity and/or hydrogen.
The results of inaction -- continuing consumption at current trends - are alarming.
EIA projects U.S. petroleum demand will grow from its 1999 level of 19.5 million barrels per day to 25.8 million in 2020.
Electric transportation represents an exciting technology solution to the energy security and environmental problems associated with the use of petroleum -- electric drive systems can be powered by domestically-produced energy derived from a diverse array of feed stocks, they have little-to-no emissions in operation, and they are highly efficient in their use of energy.
Electric transportation technologies are being used effectively in the transportation sector today, notably in light rail and train applications, with exciting new technologies like hybrid-electric passenger cars and hybrid-electric buses being brought to the market.
With electric modes of transportation, we have the ability to continue the high level of mobility in the U.S. without relying on petroleum products and without further degradation to our air quality.
This testimony:
· highlights the important national benefits accruing from the widespread adoption of electric transportation technologies into our transportation network;
· discusses the current technological, market-entry and infrastructure challenges to such widespread deployment of electric transportation technologies; and,
· outlines federal policies and programs that EVAA's members believe are critical to assuring that electric transportation technologies can be a significant segment of the U.S. transportation sector in the 21^st century.
Benefits of Electric Transportation Technologies:
There is a family of electric transportation technologies being developed and/or commercialized.
EVAA defines an electric vehicle as any technology that employs an electric drive system to power the vehicles.
Electric transportation technologies under development and/or commercially available today include battery electric powered systems, hybrid electric powered systems (using an internal combustion engine and an electric motor) and fuel cell powered systems that create electricity on-board through a combination of hydrogen and air.
And, the platforms using - or planning to use -electric drive systems include passenger and light duty vehicles, buses, trains; low-speed or neighborhood vehicles and off-road equipment such as airport equipment.
Each of the technology categories - battery, hybrid-electric and fuel cell -- offers significant energy security and environmental benefits, and together represents the cleanest, most advanced alternatives to conventional vehicles on the road or under development.
Battery Electric Transportation Options:
Battery electric vehicles (BEVs) charged off the Nation's electric utility grid use "fuel" created from a variety of feedstocks, from wind to nuclear.
Importantly, petroleum represents a diminimus fuel feedstock for electricity production in the U.S.
Less than 3% of the current U.S. generation base relies on petroleum.
Electricity is a domestically produced, relatively stably priced fuel that affords us "fuel diversity" for the transportation sector.
Further, the primary charging for BEVs is expected to occur overnight, when electricity demand is at its lowest, allowing for widespread adoption of the technology without adding new capacity.
In addition to significant energy security benefits, BEVs offer the opportunity for continued personal mobility without degradation to the environment.
Nearly 100 cities across the U.S. fail to meet federal air quality standards, and approximately 62 million people live in counties where monitored data show unhealthy air for one or more of the six principal pollutants [carbon monoxide (CO), lead (Pb), nitrogen dioxide (NO[2]), ozone (O[3]
For many urban areas, electric transportation can be a particularly important means to substantially reduce emissions of mobile source pollutants, including volatile organic compounds and oxides of nitrogen that are the precursors of smog.
Battery electric cars and buses are truly "zero emission" transportation modes.
They produce no tailpipe emissions and generate insignificant, ancillary emissions during operations.
They also have the added benefit of mitigating noise pollution and using energy more efficiently than conventional modes.
Battery electric vehicles in the market today include buses for shuttle and transit service, passenger and light duty vehicles, and low speed or "neighborhood" vehicles.
Hybrid Electric Vehicles:
Hybrid electric vehicles, which combine the benefits of electric power with conventional gas-powered engines, can significantly improve the efficiency and environmental performance of vehicles, thereby reducing fuel use and contributing to improved air quality.
HEVs on America's roadways today evidence the tremendous advantages that this technology provides.
The Toyota Prius has a stated fuel economy of 67mpg, and a California environmental rating of "SULEV", or "Super Ultra Low Emission Vehicle," with only about 1/2 of the carbon dioxide and 1/10 of the nitrogen oxide emissions associated with a comparable, gasoline powered vehicle; the Honda Insight is rated at 70+mpg and meets California's "ULEV" emissions rating.
All international auto manufacturers have announced plans to bring hybrid electric vehicles to the market place in the coming years.
A recent study commissioned by EPRI has indicated that the benefits of hybrid electric vehicles may be greatest through the implementation of plug-in (those that store/use electricity provided from the electric gird) hybrid electric vehicles.
Results of the study indicated that such a technology configuration could provide the gasoline equivalent mileage of more than 80 mpg.
The study indicated, further, that the electricity for charging such vehicles would be provided largely during off-peak - the most desirable for efficient and inexpensive generation.
In addition to the passenger and light duty vehicles planned by the automakers, there are a growing number of hybrid-electric buses in transit and shuttle operations in major urban centers around the U.S.
Fuel Cell Electric Vehicles:
Fuel cell electric vehicles (FCEVs), which harness the chemical energy of hydrogen and oxygen to generate electricity, have the potential to change the way we think about energy.
Fuel cells are more efficient than other technologies that rely on direct combustion, and they produce zero, or near zero emissions.
When fueled directly by hydrogen, the only by-product of a fuel cell electric vehicle is water.
Like electricity, hydrogen does not occur naturally in a usable form on Earth; it must be generated or produced by consuming fuels or other forms of energy.
Yet, also like electricity, multiple feed stocks can be used, creating fuel diversity and thereby enhancing national energy security.
Fuel processors "on-board" a vehicle can produce hydrogen from natural gas, methanol, ethanol, gasoline, or diesel.
"Off-board" processors can use all of these feedstocks and can also make hydrogen from the electrolysis of water.
While fuel cell technology is not as fully developed as its sister electric drive systems, significant investment is being made in the development of a wide variety of fuel cell electric options by industry and governments around the world.
Manufacturers and technology developers have shown concepts for fuel cell-powered buses, bicycles, family cars and heavy-duty trucks.
Magnetic Levitation:
Also included in the "family" of electric transportation options is a technology that promises rapid and safe movement of large numbers of people and/or freight.
Magnetic levitation technology is an electronic rail system that is projected to accommodate safe travel at speeds up to 300 mph.
This technology holds the promise of dramatically reducing commute times between major cities while simultaneously reducing highway and airport congestion and pollution.
Demonstrations of this technology have been undertaken successfully in Germany and Japan.
In the U.S., an exciting demonstration of the technology is being built at the Old Dominion University in Hampton Roads, Virginia, which is intended to prove the economics and viability of using magnetic levitation systems for meeting mass transportation needs.
The project, which is being sponsored by the University, the Commonwealth of Virginia and EVAA members DominionVirginia Power and American Maglev Technology, is scheduled to begin transporting passengers from one end of the University Campus to another in the summer of 2002.
Challenges to Widespread Adoption of Electric Transportation Technologies:
Despite the significant societal benefits accruing from their use, years of research and development by companies and governments across the globe, and mandates for commercialization of such vehicles, electric transportation technologies have not yet become a meaningful part of the U.S. transportation network.
Since 1996, a total of only 4,427 battery electric vehicles have been leased and/or sold in the U.S.
And, while sales of HEVs are growing quickly, there still have been only 23,884 put into service to date.
In addition to these light duty automotive offerings, there have been about 250 electric and hybrid-electric buses and over 6,000 low-speed, battery electric vehicles placed into service.
While the sum of all of these vehicles - which is less than 30,000 as compared to 1999 vehicle sales in the U.S. of 16.5 million - may be insignificant statistically, they represent an enormous step toward development of a long-term and sustainable market for such vehicles in the U.S.
The technology - with respect to battery and hybrid electric vehicles - is proven and maturing; customer reception to the vehicles has been tremendous and sales have been constrained more by product availability than by demand; and, incentives to encourage consumer purchase are in place and/or being considered by government at all levels.
However, more must be done if these vehicles are to become an integral part of our transportation network.
Costs for immature and low-volume technologies will be higher than those of comparable, conventional vehicles.
Until a supplier base can be built, the technology matured and volume production established, the incremental costs of electric transportation technologies must be addressed in order to assure consumer acceptance.
Fortunately, battery, hybrid and fuel cell vehicles share a number of subsystems (e.g., power electronics, motors, regenerative brakes).
Therefore establishing a supplier base for battery electric vehicles, for example, can help to lower the costs of early commercial fuel cell vehicles when they are brought forward.
Infrastructure support systems, from re-fueling and charging to service and maintenance, must be put in place to support the convenient and safe operation of electric transportation technologies.
Deploying the infrastructure systems - particularly those to support a hydrogen-based economy - represents a vast and expensive undertaking.
Building markets for electric transportation will require consumer awareness and experience with the technology to establish confidence in the products.
Finally, with respect to fuel cell electric vehicles, there is a continuing need for research and development of the subsystems and components that will allow industry to bring forward a consumer-attractive FCEV.
Role for Government in Overcoming the Technological and Market Challenges to Electric Transportation Technologies:
Consumer Tax Incentives:
Targeted tax incentives can be an effective means by which government can help assure that electric drive technologies are successfully introduced into the marketplace.
EVAA members believe that such incentives should be limited in their scope and duration, and available now and in the immediate future as these new and dramatically different technologies are introduced to consumers.
EVAA members are encouraged that the House has included tax incentives for electric and other alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) as part of its omnibus energy bill, Securing America's Future Energy Act, H.R. 4.
These incentives, which were derived from the Clean Efficient Automobiles Resulting from Advanced Car Technologies Act" ("CLEAR ACT"), H.R. 1864, introduced by Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI) and others, can help drive the biggest consumer of petroleum - the transportation sector - toward use of cleaner, domestically produced alternatives.
EVAA is concerned, however, that the momentum for passage of such legislation in this Congress may wane, and we ask that such incentives be considered separately, or as part of another appropriate vehicle, should a comprehensive energy plan prove unachievable.
All major vehicle manufacturers are poised to bring battery, hybrid and/or fuel cell electric cars and buses to the market.
Federal tax incentives, as called for in the CLEAR ACT, would allow the technology to spread quickly by lowering purchase prices and encouraging deployment of supporting infrastructure.
We believe a very important feature of the CLEAR ACT is its recognition that vehicles which provide the greatest societal benefits in terms of environmental and efficiency performance are deserving of the most generous benefits.
Also, the CLEAR ACT recognizes that fuel cell electric vehicles will be entering the market later than other electric and alternative fuel vehicles, and has provided for incentives for this category of technology to continue for a longer period of time to ensure that the market has matured sufficiently before the incentives expire.
Federal Program to Introduce Advanced Vehicle Technologies to U.S. Cities:
Cities and communities plagued with poor air quality and traffic congestion stand to be the greatest beneficiaries of the successful commercialization of electric and other alternative fuel vehicles; yet, to date, the technologies are largely unknown and "untried".
Deploying electric transportation technologies, from battery-powered bikes to fuel cell electric buses, can result in the clean and efficient transport of people and goods in the urban environment.
Another provision of the omnibus energy legislation adopted by the House creates a federal program to support the introduction of electric and other alternative fuel vehicles in linked transportation systems in up to 15 cities in the U.S.
The provision, which was first introduced by the Chairman of this Committee, Mr. Boehlert (R-NY), as H.R. 2326, the "AFV Acceleration Act of 2001," provides $200 million in federal cost-share funding to help communities deploy clean, efficient modes of transportation and to build the infrastructure that can assure the subsequent widespread adoption of these technologies.
Creating these models of efficient and clean transportation will allow for transit operators, public officials and the citizens who experience the benefits of the technology in their daily lives to gain the experience and confidence necessary to transition to these radically new technologies.
As with the tax incentives included in H.R. 4, EVAA encourages this Committee to assure that the legislation establishing an AFV Acceleration program, as envisioned in H.R. 2326, is enacted into law whether as a stand-alone bill or as part of comprehensive energy legislation.
Forming partnerships and alliances between governments at the local, state and federal levels, and leveraging federal dollars with those of industry and other levels of government, is an effective means of introducing and deploying alternative fuel vehicles to communities and citizens across the country.
Federal Program to Assist in Making Advanced EV Batteries Economically Viable:
In addition to consumers' lack of familiarity with electric vehicles, other challenges to market penetration of the initial series of electric vehicles are high purchase prices and limited range.
Manufacturers currently are not producing greater numbers of EVs, having reached conclusions that the costs are too high and the market too limited.
The cycle of high costs and limited sales is broken only if costs are reduced and/or volume is increased dramatically.
One of the primary contributors to the high costs of EVs is the advanced battery necessary to provide the minimum range deemed acceptable to consumers.
While it is estimated that prices for batteries begin to fall when the volume reaches 10,000 packs (i.e., enough to power 10,000 EVs) per year, auto manufacturers believe that volume alone cannot address the prohibitive costs of advanced technology batteries necessary to create consumer demand for EVs because the materials needed for such batteries (e.g., nickel) are expensive.
To assure volume sales of EVs, a dramatic reduction in the cost of batteries is required.
An innovative approach to addressing this issue may be to "extend" the life - or value - of the batteries beyond vehicular use.
Once the batteries have been "used" in a vehicle, there is an opportunity to refurbish, then "re-use" the batteries in a stationary application.
For example, electric utilities could "re-use" EV battery packs in peak shaving, transmission deferral, back-up power and transmission quality improvement applications.
If successfully demonstrated for secondary, stationary-use applications, the effective price of battery systems is projected to make EVs more competitive.
Preliminary studies have shown that if a secondary market is created that pays $100 to $200/kWh for EV batteries, the costs of such batteries for use in the first application (i.e., the vehicle) could be reduced to $100 to $150/kWh - the price point which auto manufacturers believe is necessary to assure an affordable EV.
Combining the value for using the battery in both a vehicle and then later a stationary application likely would cover the cost of producing the battery pack, even at low volume (estimated at $400/kWh).
EVAA is encouraged that this Committee, with the leadership of Representative Jackson Lee (D-TX), included a provision in H.R. 4 to establish a $15 million program within the Department of Energy to assist industry in demonstrating that "spent" EV batteries can be cost-effective and high-performing in secondary, stationary applications as part of any national energy package it develops.
The program will demonstrate up to 1000 kWh of "used" batteries (approximately 33 vehicle battery packs) in a minimum of 10 stationary use applications.
These "used" batteries would demonstrate electric utility stand-by, peak-shaving and transmission quality improvements and would help to validate the value of "used" batteries as a means to store electricity for purposes beyond use in EVs.
Providing Flexibility in Compliance with EPACT Fleet Requirements:
EVAA requests that this Committee examine the existing provisions of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPACT), P.L.102-486, that require state and federal governments and the providers of alternative fuels (e.g., electric utilities, natural gas utilities, and other producers/suppliers of fuels defined as alternatives to gasoline under the Act) to convert their vehicle fleets to alternative fuel vehicles.
The rationale of building volume and market demand through government fleets and the fleets of those in the business of producing, supplying and/or selling alternative fuels is sound, though the execution of the program to date has not achieved the goals of the ACT, namely to replace 10% of the petroleum used in the light duty vehicle sector by 2000, and fully 30% by the year 2010.
While committed to building a long-term, self-sustaining market for electric vehicles, EVAA's electric utility members have found compliance with the existing EPACT alternative fuel providers' program difficult given the limited availability, high initial purchase price and limited performance of electric vehicles.
These alternative fuel providers, as well as others struggling to meet the dictates of the DOE-administered program, are looking for flexibility in the program and recognition for actions taken that can help to develop the markets for electric and alternative fuel vehicles.
For example, some electric utilities who are unable to incorporate so-called "full function" EVs due to limited availability, have begun to purchase and deploy low-speed electric vehicles to replace the duty cycle of a conventional vehicle; others have made investments in EV charging infrastructure to help encourage the market; and still others have begun to deploy hybrid-electric vehicles to help build demand in that segment and thereby "drive-down" the costs of components that are shared with battery and fuel cell electric vehicles.
These actions, EVAA believes, should be recognized under the EPACT alternative fuel providers' program.
EVAA, in partnership with other alternative fuel interest groups, has crafted a set of modifications to the EPACT alternative fuel vehicle programs that will create flexibility in meeting the goals of the law, while assuring that the goals of the existing law, i.e., displacement of petroleum use in the transportation sector, can be achieved.
The proposed modifications are attached to, and made a part hereof, this testimony.
[Attachment "B"].
Integrating Federal Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Development Efforts:
The world's major automobile and heavy duty vehicle manufacturers who are engaged in efforts to commercialize fuel cell vehicles all face the same technically challenging issue: How can hydrogen be provided to the fuel cell that will power the vehicles? Whether hydrogen is produced elsewhere and then stored onboard the fuel cell vehicle or is produced on the vehicle by use of an onboard fuel processor, hydrogen is a key enabler to the success of these vehicles.
And, not only can hydrogen fuel much of tomorrow's transportation systems, but its versatility could provide the clean energy needed to satisfy our electric as well as our mechanical and thermal energy needs - powering office buildings, homes, industrial complexes and shopping malls.
The reality of the marketplace is that the role of hydrogen in the transportation sector, and to a large extent in the stationary applications sector, is coupled closely with fuel cell development.
While hydrogen R
The recently released report of the National Energy Policy Development Group, led by Vice President Cheney, specifically recommended that the President direct the Secretary of Energy to focus R
EVAA submitted testimony to this Committee in June, as the Members considered reauthorization of the Hydrogen Future Act of 1996.
We asked that any legislation reported by the Committee recognize the need to integrate on-going hydrogen, fuel cell and distributed energy research and development programs and to consider specific mechanisms and programs to insure that coordination is achieved in government and industry efforts to pursue both hydrogen and fuel cell development.
One means for organizing public and private partnerships to address the technical challenges might be to undertake a very significant, large-scale demonstration that invites, under one tent, today's leading fuel cell and hydrogen participants to focus on maturing the technologies and deploying the infrastructure that will allow us to move to this renewable and clean energy resource as quickly as possible.
An example of such a collaborative undertaking can be found in the California Fuel Cell Partnership (CaFCP), which includes participation by the federal government, and is organized to comprehend the infrastructure requirements within the state of California to support use of fuel cell electric vehicles.
Conclusion:
Electric transportation technologies, whether powered by batteries, fuel cells or a combination of batteries and an internal combustion engine, collectively represent our transportation future.
Transitioning to electric drive systems ensures continued mobility without reliance on insecure and often costly sources of foreign oil, and importantly, without degradation to the environment.
Federal partnerships - whether in the form of consumer tax incentives, cost-share for research, development and demonstration, and/or assistance in deployment - to assist industry in bringing electric transportation technologies to the marketplace is a wise and cost-effective investment in our future energy security and in our citizens' quality of life.
EVAA encourages this Committee to consider the industry's recommendations for programs and policies that can effectuate these strategic partnerships between government and industry.
