SURGERY OF EXTREMITIES/VASCULAR SURGERY Total Knee Replacement Type of Pain: The pain from total knee replacement is typically nociceptive in nature.
Severity/Duration: Total knee replacement produces moderate to severe pain of several days' to weeks' duration.
Interventions: Postoperative pain control following total knee replacement surgery can be provided with a variety of techniques.
These include the following: * Epidural analgesia * Intrathecal analgesia * Lumbar plexus blocks * Femoral nerve blocks * Fascia iliaca blocks * Sciatic nerve blocks * Oral, intravenous, intramuscular, and IV PCA opioids * NSAIDs * Acetaminophen * Mixed agonist-antagonist opioid analgesics
Considerations: Pain is frequently exacerbated by the ongoing physical therapy that is vital to the long-term outcome of the surgery.
The use of epidural analgesia or continuous femoral nerve block following total knee arthroplasty provides superior pain control as compared to opioids alone and is associated with a shorter recovery time.
Improved pain control facilitates participation in physical therapy and improves outcome (Capdevila et al., 1999; Singelyn et al., 1998).
For this reason, pain must be aggressively treated following total knee arthroplasty.
The potential for developing thromboembolic complications following total knee replacement is significant.
Medical interventions intended to reduce this risk play a role in the choice of intraoperative anesthetic and postoperative analgesic technique.
Careful planning with the surgeon and adherence to the guidelines (ASRA, 1998) for neuraxial anesthesia/analgesia in the presence of these drugs will help to minimize the risks.
Single shot, continuous epidural, and continuous regional techniques produce better overall pain control than nonregional techniques (Allen et al., 1998; Ganapathy et al., 2000; Singelyn 
The addition of a sciatic nerve block to a femoral nerve block does not significantly improve postoperative pain control when compared to the femoral nerve block alone (Allen et al., 1998).
Intrathecal opioids may be used to improve postoperative pain control (Cole et al., 2000).
Although they have been effective in other arthroscopy settings, intra-articular opioids are not effective for postoperative pain control following total knee arthroplasty (Klasen et al., 1999; Mauerhan et al., 1997).
Intravenous regional delivery of opiates does not improve postoperative pain control over IM opiates following total knee arthroplasty (McSwiney et al., 1997).
EVIDENCE TABLE Intervention Sources of Evidence QE R 1 Improved pain control facilitates participation in physical therapy and improves outcome.
Capdevila et al.,1999 Singelyn et al., 1998
I I
A A
2 Adherence to the guidelines for neuraxial anesthesia/analgesia will help to minimize the risk of thromboembolic complications.
ASRA, 1998
3 Single shot, continuous epidural, and continuous regional techniques produce better overall pain control.
Singelyn 
I I I
A B B
4 The addition of a sciatic nerve block to a femoral nerve block does not significantly improve postoperative pain control when compared to the femoral nerve block alone.
Allen et al., 1998
I
E
5 Intrathecal opioids may be used to improve postoperative pain control.
Cole et al., 2000
I
B
6 Intra-articular opioids are not effective for postoperative pain control following total knee arthroplasty.
Klasen et al., 1999
I
E
7 Intravenous regional delivery of opiates does not improve postoperative pain control over IM opiates following total knee arthroplasty.
McSwiney et al., 1997
I
E
QE = Quality of Evidence; R = Recommendation (See Appendix A)
