REGIONAL PROJECT NO.: S-272 DC 95-06 TITLE: Development of Textile Materials for Environmental Compatibility and Human Health and Safety DURATION: October 1, 1996, to September 30, 2001 STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM The U.S. public increasingly recognizes the need to reduce wastes and/or make products having enhanced biodegradation potential.
This ties in to the need to create value-added products from agricultural products/wastes/derivatives to achieve economically viable agricultural production systems.
This project involves developing newer textile materials (value-added products) and processes that will improve existing textiles and other polymeric materials.
The objectives of this project also address performing consumer end-use testing and making market acceptability determinations of the innovative products.
These research efforts are expected to lead to the development of environmentally compatible textile products that contribute to human health and safety, and also help revitalize the agricultural and rural economics.
JUSTIFICATION
Environmental responsibility is becoming the cornerstone of most major industries in the United States.
Increased consumer awareness, tighter restrictions, new regulations and increased enforcement policies during the 1990's have been critical in the development of new technologies, products and programs that address environmental issues.
Today, substantial evidence indicates that environmental concerns have a major impact on consumers when making purchasing decisions.
Consumers are willing to pay, on average, 6.6% more to purchase selected environmentally friendly products (Hager, 1990).
Consumer researcher Wiseman (Apodaca, 1992) and Esprit International (Brookhart, 1991) stated that awareness of environmental issues also has influenced company attitudes.
Hence, addressing and solving environmental concerns will continue to have a significant impact on the direction of research.
There is a need for development and assessment of new textile and other polymeric products and processes that are environmentally friendly, especially, since textiles are found in an unlimited number and variety of products.
Six research initiatives were recently outlined as research priorities (ESCOP, 1994).
Under one of these priorities, Environment and National Resources, the primary focus was on how to Recover and Use Waste Resources through Agricultural and Forestry Systems.
Under a second priority, Processes and Products, the two major issues were Processing By-products to Beneficial Uses and the Development of New or Improved Non-Food Products.
And, under a third research priority, Economic and Social Issues, two important issues, Enhancement of Agricultural and Rural Economics and Empowering People for Economic and Social Viability, were addressed.
Joint Council on Food and Agricultural Sciences FY 1997, has also listed their five goals which are similar to ESCOP research initiatives.
The research thrust of the new project will address Joint Council's first goal which is to achieve economically viable agricultural production systems that are compatible with environmental and social values.
The new proposed project falls well within the ESCOP high-priority research initiatives.
Several goals enumerated in the Southern Strategic Research Plan (Dec. 1994) provide an impetus for continued development of new textile materials from agricultural waste and by-products.
Development of new value-added products from agricultural crops and by-products will enhance the competitiveness of U.S. agriculture and assure American dominance in a global economy.
In response to USDA initiatives and goals, new textile materials from agricultural products are being developed by Experiment Station scientists.
Commercialization of these products will enhance the profitability of agricultural enterprises in the US and provide more economic opportunities for producers of these crops.
The previous research project (S-250) dealt with the assessment of environmental compatibility of textiles and other polymeric materials.
Solid waste reduction has been demonstrated as one viable way of dealing with waste; altering existing products to make them more environmentally friendly may be a better approach in the long run.
This proposed project addresses three major areas of research: (1) development and characterization of environmentally compatible value-added products from existing agricultural crops; (2) development and characterization of processes that will improve existing textile and polymeric materials, making them safer for human use; and (3) comparison of the functional performance and marketability of these products with the competing products already existing in the market.
All of these research objectives can only be achieved or accomplished through cooperative research because they involve diverse products grown and processed in various parts of the United States.
Kenaf is being investigated as an alternative crop for farmers in many states, including California, Mississippi, Texas, Georgia, Louisiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee.
The major use for kenaf has been in the production of pulp for paper, but the appearance of other kenaf products on the market recently has expanded the use of and interest in this fiber.
Kenaf blends have the potential for penetrating the markets for disposable nonwovens in the medical field, such as drape sheets, and sterilization wraps and interior furnishing materials such as wallpaper and carpet backing.
Apparel including high-fashion garments, and where texture and aesthetics are important, can be constructed of kenaf blends; however, this may well be a niche situation.
Production and evaluation of prototype woven and nonwoven kenaf fabrics will contribute necessary data on product quality and utility as agricultural producers consider investment in kenaf as an alternative crop.
Researchers in Louisiana, a state with significant sugarcane production, have developed processes for conversion of sugar cane rind into textile and geotextile products.
Traditional sugar processing crushes the entire sugar cane stalk to obtain the sucrose from which refined sugar is processed.
The crushed stalks, or bagasse, remaining from such processing have been used in low-value applications such as fuel for the processing mill or animal feed.
Development of higher value-added products would enhance sugar mill operation and provide additional end uses for the high volume of bagasse by-product.
Agricultural byproducts obtained from the Midwest's major commodities (soybeans, corn, grain sorghum, and wheat) potentially could be used to produce a multitude of innovative value-added non-food products, ranging from fibers and films to finishing agents.
For the last five years, a major research emphasis at Kansas State University (KSU) has been to examine non-food uses of soybean byproducts in a variety of textile applications because of its economic importance to the state.
Preliminary work has been done on utilizing a variety of agricultural by-products in textile manufacturing and processing, such as the potential use of tocopherols; soybean-based binders in pigment printing; polyethylene films; and new fiber reactive finishing compounds.
Further work is needed on evaluating the aforementioned compounds.
Water and air pollution from textile processing is still a major problem.
Innovative methods and products to achieve pollution prevention and source reduction are being addressed by the newly developed One Atmosphere Plasma Process and Low Pressure Plasma Treatment at the University of Tennessee (Knoxville) and Wisconsin.
Applications for these processes include the treatment of melt blown nonwovens made of normally unwettable polypropylene (PP) making them wettable.
These plasm processes can also make other synthetic fabrics more wettable so they can be dyed and printed with the more environmentally friendly water soluble dyes and pigments as opposed to solvent based systems
.
An area related to indoor air quality is the maintenance of indoor relative humidity.
As indoor relative humidities increase, occupant comfort decreases while the probability of allergic reactions and pathogenic illnesses increase.
In addition to the health risks, high indoor relative humidities have an adverse effect on building materials.
Moisture absorption/desorption in building materials, especially fabrics, can have significant effects on cooling dehumidification devices.
Fabrics normally found in the interior of buildings (cotton, rayon) can be used to develop a fabric/desiccant window cavity dehumidifier that uses solid desiccants embedded in the fabric structure to dehumidify room air in commercial and residential buildings.
The wearing of protective apparel is highly recommended for all people occupationally exposed to ultraviolet radiation, sunlight, pesticides, blood and body fluids.
Therefore, there is a continued interest in the development of textile systems for human safety, namely, medical, agricultural and sun protective clothing.
The large numbers of patents known to be infected with bloodborne pathogens makes it vital for all healthcare providers to use precaution and treat all body fluids as infectious.
The precarious nature of this work makes it critical that all healthcare employers determine the risk of infection of their employees and equip them with the required level of protective apparel in compliance with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) standards.
The OSHA estimates that more than 5.6 million healthcare and public safety workers are at potential risk of being exposed to human immunodeficiency (HIV) or hepatitis B (HBV) viruses (OSHA, 1992).
Accordingly, OSHA has issued a mandate on personal protective equipment (PPE) with the long term goal of reducing the risk of occupational exposure to bloodborne viruses.
PPE items include surgical gowns, drapes, aprons, and masks.
Concern among healthcare professionals about infection has created a heightened interest in nonwovens research to develop barrier materials providing the highest level of protection.
Also, the environmental costs of medical waste disposal are rising, and a survey of medical protective clothing use suggests that, for both purchasers and wearers of medical clothing, biodegradability will be of concern (Brandt 
This creates the unique opportunity for agricultural fibers such as kenaf and cotton to be included in composite nonwoven structures for such medical applications.
Natural fibers have two distinctive advantages over synthetics: they are moisture absorbent and therefore more comfortable; and they are biodegradable, making them ideal for disposable products.
Skin cancer rates have increased dramatically over the past 50 years, most of them caused by excessive exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun (Jaroff, 1990).
In recent years many individuals began to use chemical sunscreens rather than clothing for photoprotection.
However, sunscreens frequently are not uniformly applied and are removed or diminished in efficacy by water or sweating.
In addition, sunscreens cause hypersensitivity reactions in some individuals thereby limiting or precluding their use.
Consequently, there is renewed interest in the development and evaluation of sun-protective clothing.
Another area of interest related to sun-protective clothing is Acetobacter xylinum cellulose which can be a potential candidate for value added textile products, specifically products that can provide UVR protection.
In addition, the secreted cellulose can be molded or shaped to specific forms such as caps and gloves.
Acetobacter xylinum is a gram negative soil bacterium that secretes cellulose.
The cellulose synthesized is chemically and structurally identical to that produced by higher plants.
Therefore, possibilities of producing a value-added product from this bacterium exist.
The Agricultural Worker Protection Standards specify that the required PPE and clothing be listed on pesticide product labels.
Because most protective clothing specified is reused, pesticide-contaminated protective clothing needs to be decontaminated before reuse to minimize human exposure.
Previous studies have indicated a need for research on understanding the sorption and retention properties of the innovative textile substrates in a protective clothing system to provide a theoretical framework for chemical retention and release from textile substrates (newly developed and existing fabrics).
This multi-faceted research agenda must be well-organized, and a cooperative effort is the only feasible way to accomplish all the goals of the project within a reasonable period of time.
Also, some laboratories are better equipped to carry out particular aspects of the research.
For example, the University of Tennessee, Louisiana State University, Kansas State University, and Mississippi State University are in the forefront of product development research.
Other research laboratories such as the University of Nebraska, University of Georgia, University of Kentucky, Purdue University, University of Wisconsin, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Florida State University, Auburn University, and University of Arkansas have the expertise to characterize fabrics, evaluate functional performance, conduct environmental compatibility research and determine marketability.
The objectives listed in this proposal can only be accomplished efficiently through cooperative research studies.
In total, we have capable scientists from 13 universities/experiment stations that have pledged their support and participation.
The broad spectrum of scientific and technical expertise offered by the participating cooperative states is of the highest caliber and includes textile chemistry, agricultural value-added product development research, fabrication, wear-study, environmental sciences, environmental toxicology, consumer acceptance and market assessibility.
Many different crops, processing facilities, textile testing equipment, and a great variety of nonwoven equipment/facilities are needed to accomplish the objectives outlined herein.
No single university/experiment station alone has the full resources required to produce the value-added products and adequately assess end-use performance characteristics.
Also, funding required to accomplish such broad and comprehensive research goals is substantial.
Therefore, RRF funding is required and necessary.
The significance of the research proposal presented, the broad and comprehensive model for the holistic approach to value-added product development research, and the cooperation of the 10 states fit very well with the mission of an RRF project.
This project is the only cooperative effort addressing the various topics related to value-added product development, processes to improve textile and polymeric materials, consumer-end-use performance testing and market acceptability of these innovative products.
Results of the proposed research project will benefit agricultural producers by providing higher returns; manufacturers/industries by making/selling environmentally friendly products; and consumers by providing high quality product alternatives.
This cooperative research effort will add value to agricultural products and create new business/product opportunities that will help revitalize the agricultural and rural economics by minimizing the environmental and economic impacts of wastes which can be converted into usable products.
Contributions to science and technology will include product development, consumer-end-use performance of these products, market acceptability of environmentally friendly products, environmentally compatible new production processes, determination of the economic viability of local industries based on alternative uses of agricultural and renewable resources, and development of appropriate technology to support these industries.
RELATED CURRENT AND PREVIOUS WORK
Regional project S-250, Assessment of the Environmental Compatibility of Textiles and Other Polymeric Materials (terminates September 30, 1996) focused on the assessment of environmental compatibility, weather and photodegradation, and soil composting of a variety of fiber and filament materials.
It also investigated the possibility of incorporating agricultural products into non-woven materials and the possibility of using recycled polyester in the construction of nonwoven fabrics.
The proposed research described herein will investigate the characteristics, performance and market potential of altered agricultural by-products (or value-added products).
Improved processes that will make textile and polymeric materials more environmentally friendly and useful for human health and safety, will be studied.
Equipment, processes and expertise relative to fiber (kenaf and sugar cane) processing, non-food soybean by-products synthesis, plasma-membrane finishing, soil burial protocols, etc., which were developed through S-250 project will be utilized in the proposed project under some of the objectives listed.
Under the AGRICOLA system, all the listed research related to this project has an environmental compatibility aspect, however, all these projects have been or are soon to be terminated.
In general, these studies support the need for more research on the development of various environmentally friendly processes and products.
Functional performance and market potential are very significant areas of research.
Development of New Value-Added Agricultural By-Products and Processes.
In 1986 the Kenaf Demonstration Project was started in cooperation with USDA and Kenaf International with the primary goal of making the kenaf industry a reality in the U.S. Kenaf newsprint has proven to be a market-ready commodity.
In 1991 efforts on kenaf began to focus more on market development for separated kenaf fiber products made from bast and core materials (Taylor and Kugler, 1992).
Work has been done to develop methods for processing fibers (Ramaswamy et al., 1993a, 1994a).
In addition, research on differences in fiber quality of kenaf varieties has been conducted (Ramaswamy et al., 1993b, Boyd et al., 1993).
The next phase has involved processing fibers so that they may be incorporated into nonwoven and woven textiles (Ramaswamy et al., 1994a, 1994b, 1995a).
Various treatments for obtaining soft, pliable fibers were screened and tested to select the best process for large-scale production (Ramaswamy 
A recent trend in bast/leaf fiber research is the search for unconventional fibers to be used in fabrics.
The apparel industry, especially women's ready-to-wear and haute couture, is always looking for interesting textures.
Kenaf/cotton blends could provide that exciting texture for this limited market.
Also, kenaf/cotton fabrics may have a promising future in industrial fabrics for end-uses such as wallcovering and carpet backing and for upholstery and draperies.
Appearance is another major characteristic of a textile product which determines it acceptability by consumers.
Specifically, new fibers must be able to accept dyes and finishes in order to meet aesthetic and performance property expectations.
The permeability of a fiber is typically regarded as the most crucial aspect of a fiber's ability to be dyed or finished.
Knowledge about the permeability of a dye in a fiber, both in terms of the speed and volume of dyeing, is critical for the dyeing industry.
Specifically, this knowledge can be translated into cost savings for the dyer by knowing which dyeing conditions will produce better dye yield, leveling, fixation, and colorfastness properties (McGregor, 1980).
Sugar cane is produced in large quantities in several southern states.
In most current processing, the cane stalks are crushed to extract the sugar, and the crushed stalks, or bagasse, are then used for fuel or mulch or are discarded.
Attempts to find economical uses for this by-product have not been particularly successful.
Researchers at Louisiana State University (LSU) have developed processes for extracting the longer, finer fibers from the rind of sugar cane after separating it from the pith that contains shorter thicker fibers (Collier 
The process (patent pending) uses the Tilby separator to remove the pith from the rind and alkaline treatment and/or steam explosion to extract fibers from the rind.
Sugar cane rind fibers were formed into nonwoven mats and compared with commercial erosion control mats in laboratory tests (Collier, J.R., et al., 1995b; Thames, et al., 1994).
<
A current field study of sugar cane mats and commercial products is being conducted in cooperation with the Louisiana Transportation Research Center (LTRC).
Preliminary work has begun on producing mat or spray-on erosion control materials directly from bagasse, without the separation of rind and pith.
LSU scientists have used similar extraction processes to obtain fibers from kenaf stalks.
Kenaf mats, similar to the sugar cane erosion control mats, were produced and evaluated.
Properties were similar to those of the sugar cane materials.
Further product modifications and trials are needed to assess the marketability of these geotextile products.
A variety of non-food application of soybean byproducts for textile applications have been investigated at KSU. Czarnecki and Gatewood (1995) evaluated the potential use of alpha- and delta-tocopherois to reduce light degradation in silk, cotton, polyester, and nylon.
However, they were not effective in reducing degradation in the synthetic fibers, and had a pro-oxidant effect, which would limit their commercial usefulness.
One important non-food use for soybean oil has been in the manufacturing of alkyd binders which are incorporated into various coating formulations.
Results of printing trials conducted on cotton and cotton/polyester blend fabrics show that the ease of application, sharpness of print, and depth of shade of the alkyd binders are comparable to the conventional acrylic binder, but the fastness to laundering, dry-cleaning, and crocking was slightly less.
The alkyd binder pigment printing systems show considerable promise, but additional work is needed to improve fastness properties.
Hamilton and Gatewood (1994) investigated soybean protein as an alternative filler because of the extensive limitations of the starch-filled plastic trash bags.
Currently, KSU scientists have successfully prepared polyethylene films containing 40% fatty acids.
Also to be explored is the feasibility of incorporating the fatty acids into other melt spun fibers and plastics (polyamides and polyethylene terephthalate) to enhance biodegradability.
The oils and fatty acids in soybeans can also be used to synthesize a wide variety of finishing agents and auxiliaries for textile dyeing and finishing.
Srinivasan (1995) synthesized a unique fiber reactive softener based on an unsaturated soybean fatty acid (oleic acid) and cyanuric chloride.
The newly synthesized softener reduced stiffness and improved the flame resistance of cotton.
This basic chemistry offers numerous possibilities for the use of soybean derivatives in textile processing and finishing.
Development of Processes to Improve Environmental Compatibility of Textiles and Polymeric Materials
The textile industry has been ranked as the seventh-worst polluter of the United States waters by the Environmental Protection Agency under section 304(1) of the Clean Water Act (CWA) (LaMenzo, 1993).
The large quantity of water and variety of solvents, metals and other target chemicals used in processing contribute to this ranking.
Across all industries, the cost to comply with treatment for the pollutants is overwhelming.
It has been estimated that the cost for treating metal alone will be between 90 and 105 billion dollars (Nichols, 1992).
Therefore, modifying processes to be more environmentally friendly is a sensible alternative requiring immediate attention.
Introduction of Tencel�, a cellulosic fiber made via a solvent spinning process that does not pollute, genetically colored cotton and organic cotton are a few examples of the new trends seen in the textile marketplace.
These products have a positive environmental image and are desired by the consumer.
Another topic that raises increased concern is the quality of indoor air (Baer, 1992).
This concern has led to the evaluation of textiles and textile containing products in indoor environments.
Studies
have shown that indoor air is more polluted than outdoor air, especially in "tight" buildings (Legwold, 1994).
Factors that affect indoor air quality are finishes, furnishings, building materials, people activity and technology.
Topical finishes on fabrics contain hazardous ingredients that may exist as latent primary emissions.
Commercial durable press finishes for cotton and cotton blends contain formaldehyde which can be released under hot humid conditions.
Concern has been expressed both in the U.S. and abroad over the health hazard of such formaldehyde release.
Standard measurement methods are static, determining formaldehyde release under equilibrium specified conditions; therefore they do not stimulate actual use conditions.
To determine formaldehyde release under conditions that simulate actual use, a dynamic chamber for exposure to durable press fabrics has been developed by scientists at the Southern Regional Research Center, New Orleans.
However, the chamber does not control temperature and humidity independently.
An apparatus developed at LSU features computer control of two valves for control of wet and dry air flow which will determine the relative humidity in the chamber.
Previous work determined that release of formaldehyde was lower at higher temperatures for each of two relative humidities tested (Collier et al., 1992b).
A model has been developed to predict formaldehyde release under a variety of conditions and can also be used to determine the relative contribution of fabric type and finish to release.
Research has shown that indoor relative humidity levels above 50% increase the dust mite population, and indoor relative humidity levels above 70% provide an excellent environment for growth of fungi (Sterling et al. 1985).
Fungi and dust mites are identifiable causes of asthma and hay fever.
Infiltration of high-humidity air (through doors, windows, cracks, or walls) has been reported to produce condensed moisture on walls, cause vinyl materials (wall paper) to pull from surfaces, and break down gypsum dry wall (Shakun 1992; Aulbach et al, 1991).
Residential air conditioners (a potential solution to humidity problems) have been described as being inadequate to control indoor humidity for hot and humid climates (Kohlos 1981).
Hunn et al. (1994) evaluated fabrics--for shades, curtains, wall coverings, or other interior furnishings--and system concepts that employ these fabrics, which absorb and desorb water vapor so as to dehumidify room air.
The results indicated that the proposed fabric/desiccant window cavity dehumidifier exhibits satisfactory dehumidification performance.
More work is needed to identify other types of desiccants (that have good moisture absorption desorption properties) to be used in the fabric/desiccant window cavity dehumidifier.
Researchers at the Textiles and Nonwovens Development Center (TANDEC) at the University of Tennessee (TN) have developed the means to make hydrophobic fibers such as polypropylene (PP) wettable and even rewettable for an extended length of time.
This new affinity for water should increase the accessability of the fibers to dyes and finishes, and thereby enable lower energy processing with less pollution (Tsai et al., 1994).
The technology is based on a novel atmospheric plasma reactor, which is capable of generating a uniform, steady state glow discharge plasma at one atmosphere in air and other gases.
The active species from this plasma can be applied to fabrics as part of a continuous production process (Roth et al., 1993).
Some of the variables which must be controlled are the gas or gas mixture used; the exposure time; the type of fabric; the magnitude of the RF electric field and its frequency; the gas flow rate and flow geometry; and the ambient temperature and humdity.
Each of these variables produces an effect on the wettability, wickability, and other surface features of the fabric, which affect its commercial utility.
The x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCA) analyses of treated melt-blown PP fibers has confirmned that durability of the hydrophilic effect is achieved under optimum conditions.
Thus, it may not be necessary for the fabrics or other plasma treated materials to be immediately dyed or printed, as would typically be the case.
Furthermore, the plasma treated and dyed or printed PET and PP textiles may be mroe comfortable to wear and have greater versatility if the hydrophilic property can be maintained.
There are some challenges that need to be faced, such as: which wettability and wickability characteristics are of commercial interest; which independent variables will produce the desired characteristics for dyeing and printing applications; and which physical mechanism(s) wil produce the desired effects on the surface.
Researchers at the University of Wisconsin have worked on synthetic and natural fibers to improve their physical and chemical properties.
They used low pressure plasma treatment to improve dyeability, printability, water absorbency/repellency, surface grafting and metalizing to generate protective layers with enhanced properties of abrasion resistance, surface hardness, heat resistance and electric conductivity (Ying, et al, 1995, Sarmadi, et al (in press), Sarmadi and Denes (in press), Sarmadi, et al, 1995a, Sarmadi, et. al., 1993, Sarmadi, et. al., 1993b).
Development of Textile Systems for Human Health and Safety.
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration passed regulation in 1991 that require employers to provide workers exposed to blood or other potentially infectious body fluids with garments that are effective barrier to blood and blood borne pathogens (OSHA, 1992).
In addition to health care workers, patients must be provided protection in the form of surgical wraps, drapes and other textile products that protect them by preventing fluid or liquid penetration.
These textile systems must be resistant to penetration of bacteria, virus, blood and other body fluids and should be safely disposed.
Many of the textile systems developed in this project will be good candidates for medical protective clothing.
The protective clothing of agricultural workers is assumed to protect workers from exposure to pesticides.
However, when clothing containing pesticide residues comes in contact with skin in the presence of moisture, particularly perspiration, water-soluble pesticides can be absorbed into the body, which may cause potentially serious health hazards.
Fabrics should not wet or wick the pesticide formulation, blood or body fluids.
Recent studies (Hobbs, et al, 1986; Sarmadi, et al, 1993c) have also shown that fabrics treated with low surface tension liquid repellents (LSTLR) such as fluorochemical (FC) treatment, have enhanced barrier properties against liquid penetration.
An expanse of literature can be found concerning laundering methods, variables, and efficiency in removing pesticide residues (Laughlin and Gold, 1988, Easter, 1983).
The sorption and retention properties of pesticide chemicals by the textile substrate are the most important variables in determination of chemical exposure to, and removal from, protective clothing.
Sorption isotherms of insecticide can be easily adapted to measure the retention capacity of textile substrates.
Sorption isotherms may provide a relatively quick and inexpensive method for obtaining basic information needed to compare the quantity of pesticides retained by the various textile substrates that will be tested in this project for use as agricultural protective clothing.
Liquid flow measurements are very critical to the performance of these newly altered textile structures, for protective clothing.
Wilhelmmy Balance techniques can also be used to determine the surface energetics of single fibers by measuring the attractive forces across the interface between a liquid surface and a partially immersed fiber (Miller and Young, 1975).
Liquid flow in porous materials is commonly described by the Washburn equation (1921), which state that the distance (H) traveled by the liquid is directly proportional to the square root of time (t).
Measurements of liquid flow through the newer textile structures that are developed will help to understand the performance of these structures.
Sun protection programs promote the use of sun protective clothing in addition to sunscreen and avoidance of continual exposure.
Sun exposure causes damage such as sunburn, skin cancer and premature aging.
Clothing is a highly effective and easy form of protection compared to sunscreens which require frequent application and sometimes cause hypersensitivity.
Berne and Fischer (1980) examined various textiles and found that tightly woven materials and darker colors offered best protection from the sun.
Welsh and Diffey (1981) also reported that fabric structure was the critical factor in determining the sun-protective value of a textile and not color or thickness.
Robson and Diffey (1990) also confirmed that the fabric construction was more critical than fiber content; however, they excluded nylons in their study.
Jevtic (1990) studied human exposure to solar simulator and concluded that a wet fabric will provide less protection.
Unfortunately, in the studies conducted to date, the textiles were imcompletely and even inaccurately characterized.
A review article (Capjack et al. 1994) summarizes findings and limitations of previous research.
Further studies are needed to systematically investigate the parameters (fabric construction, fiber content, color and finish) that influence sun protective value of textile systems.
Another important area in sun protection is the cellulose produced by Acetobacter xylinum.
Work by Williams and Cannon (1989) suggests that the cellulose produced by Acetobacter xylinum has the capability of protecting bacterial cells from ultraviolet light exposure.
Kuga and Brown, Jr. (1989) analyzed the correlation between the crystalline structure and the biogenic mechanism and suggested that the crystalline structure and the presence of the pores through which the cellulose is extruded contributes to strength, moisture absorbency, and dyeability of the cellulose produced.
However, no evidence of quantitative data for these properties or others have been found in the literature.
Therefore, Acetobacter xylinum will be cultured and studied for its sun protective properties.
OBJECTIVES
1.
To develop and characterize innovative textile and related materials from natural and synthetic polymers with an emphasis on agricultural fibers and by-products
2.
To assess the environmental compatibility of selected and newly developed, processes, materials and products from fibers of polymeric and agricultural origin
3.
To evaluate the functional performance, consumer acceptance and potential commercialization of textile materials for human health and safety and/or value-added products
PROCEDURES
Objective 1.
To develop and characterize innovative textile and related materials from natural and synthetic polymers with an emphasis on agricultural fibers and by-products
Development of new value added products from kenaf and sugar cane and other agricultural crops.
At MSU kenaf fibers will be produced by chemical retting, softened, and mechanically carded to obtain staple fibers.
Kenaf/cotton yarns will be spun and woven as filling yarns with 100% cotton warp yarns in plain, twill, basket, and satin weaves.
Characterization of the woven fabrics will include: tensile strength, tearing strength, abrasion resistance, stiffness, moisture regain, air permeability, dyeing behavior, colorfastness to laundering, light, crocking, and perspiration and evaluation of soil repellent and flame retardant finishes.
Kenaf fibers produced at MSU will also be blended with PP in an 80:20 ratio and carded to make nonwoven webs.
The webs will be needle punched and cured at high pressures to make nonwoven fabrics for wall-covering substrates.
Webs will also be calendered to produce nonwoven textiles for furniture underlays, mattress liners, and other disposable products.
These products will be characterized and compared with current commercial products for thickness, weight, tearing strength, abrasion resistance, stiffness and tensile strength and also compared with product performance specifications.
Since no one station has all the testing equipment required, various combinations of tests will be performed at various laboratories (MS, FL, IN, and GA).
At LSU fibers extracted from kenaf and sugar cane rind will be characterized and spun into yarns.
Textile spinning equipment suitable for processing long-staple fibers will be acquired with a grant awarded by the Louisiana Education Quality Support Fund (LEQSF).
Yarns and knitted fabric from the yarns will be characterized and will also be dyed to determine the dyeing characteristics of the sugar cane and kenaf textiles.
Nonwoven mats of bagasse will be produced by alkaline treatment of bagasse and subsequent screening to eliminate shorter fibers.
The mats will be evaluated for strength, water resistance, light penetration, biodegradation and flammability and compared to earlier benchmark data obtained for the 100% rind fibers (Collier, J. R., et al, 1995; Thames, et al, 1994).
Formulations will be developed for a spray-on erosion control product using sugar cane or kenaf fibers and guar gum (LA, AL, and GA).
These studies will be conducted by the cooperation of MS, IN, FL, GA, LA and AL. Mississippi and Louisiana will assume coordination and leadership responsibilities.
Product development work, characterizations and field studies will be done by MS and LA.
The basic research in dyeing of kenaf and/or sugar cane incorporated textiles will be performed in cooperation with IN.
Many of the mechanical and physical properties will also be performed by FL and GA in cooperation with MS and LA.
Data from two to three stations will be collectively analyzed and inter-laboratory comparisons made.
Interdependence and cooperation among various states will be reflected in joint publications in highly respected research journals.
Several standard ASTM and AATCC test methods have been identified and the specifics will be determined when project approval is obtained.
This research is clearly recognized as being largely developmental in nature and a substantial degree of risk of failure is evident.
However, the potential for developing new value-added products from agricultural crops is considered as worthy justification for the studies.
Development of polymeric materials from agricultural derivatives and evaluate their physical properties and suitability for specific end-uses.
Films and related polymeric materials will be produced by incorporating soybean fatty acids into synthetic polymer to enhance biodegradability.
A two-step film preparation method using a Wiley Mill grinder, a CSI laboratory extruder, and a Carver press will be adapted to make films under high temperature and pressure.
The Carver press also can be used to mold the films into specific products.
The laboratory prepared films will be tested for variations in thickness, weight, strength, stiffness, melting point, color and opacity, and biodegradability using appropriate AATCC and ASTM test methods.
After evaluating the physical properties and performance characteristics of the films, possible product categories will be explored.
Also to be explored is the feasibility of producing a wheat straw board using modified wheat starch as a resinous binder (KS, GA).
Additional fiber reactive softeners will be synthesized from linoleic and linoleic acids from soybean oil and compared with commercial fabric softeners.
The soybean-based fiber reactive softeners will be applied to cotton fabrics by a pad-dry-cure procedure using a Mathis pad-steam range, simulating commercial open width finishing.
The stiffness, whiteness, strength, elongation, absorbency, flammability, and other attributes of the fabrics treated with the conventional and experimental softeners will be evaluated using standard AATCC and ASTM test procedures, and compared to the softener from oleic acid (KS, NC).
The development and characterization of polymeric materials from soybean derivatives will be conducted by KS, GA and NC with KS assuming coordination and leadership responsibilities.
Films and other polymeric materials, softeners will be made by KS and further characteristics, product testing will be done in cooperation with GA and NC.
For example GA will conduct x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to evaluate biodegradation of the above polymeric materials.
Evaluation of the fiber reactive softeners will be done both by KS and NC. Data will be compared between two or more laboratories and jointly analyzed.
Publications will reflect interdependence and cooperation.
Comparisons of costs of the soybean derivatives and other similar derivatives will be made.
Development of One Atmosphere Plasma Treatment for Lower Energy Consumption and Less Polluting Processing of Polymeric Materials.
Nonwoven, woven and knitted fabrics will be exposed to a systematically varied range of parameters which affect the wettability, wickability and subsequent wet processing of the fabrics.
This will establish the conditions under which an in-line industrial atmospheric plasma process should function to produce acceptable dyed or printed fabrics with minimum air and water pollution.
This will require the development of novel plasma diagnostic methods for this one atmosphere glow discharge, to measure the power density, electron number density, electron kinetic temperature, ion kinetic temperature, operating voltage, rms electric field, RF frequency, as well as gas flow characteristics such as flow rate, composition, humidity, and uniformity of the flow pattern.
The fabrics will be characterized before and after plasma surface treatments using the techniques of x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCA), ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in conjunction with measurement of the contact angle, surface tension, wettability, wickability, and the quality of dyed and printed fabrics that can be produced (TN, GA, AR, and NC).
TN will develop many of the diagnostic methods and apply the treatment.
Since the techniques for characterization are very specialized, each state uses a different technique to characterize the fabrics before and after plasma treatment.
Results will be compared between techniques to reflect understanding of the effects of the plasma treatment.
Development of Low Pressure Plasma Treatment and Cotton/Microporous Film Based Nonwovens with Enhanced Barrier and Comfort Properties.
A hot melt adhesive will be melt blown between the interfaces of nonwoven substrates, cotton webs, and microporous polyethylene films, thereby enabling the layered structures to be bonded at ambient conditions between a low pressure nip.
Instead of using thermal point bonding, the pressure sensitive adhesive will be melt blown to produce a very light weight web of 3-5 g/m2 which can bond the laminate layers at the interfaces as the laminate is passed between a single nip of rubber coated rollers.
At least five different fabric compositions will be prepared at a width of one meter based upon adhering different weights of melt blown and spunbond polypropylene nonwovens to an inner core of microporous polyethylene filler/cotton based nonwoven.
By virtue of their unique combination of barrier and comfort properties, it is believed that these laminates will be suitable candidates for protective apparel (medical, agricultural and industrial) (TN, WI, GA, KY).
Kenaf/PP webs will be processed to make nonwoven fabrics and treated with low pressure plasma treatment for surgical sterilization wraps.
Cotton in various nonwoven structures will be produced using selected bonding mechanisms and evaluated for physical characteristics.
Testing of all fabrics for stability in water, reuse and dyeing processes, absorption and moisture transfer properties, frictional characteristics and sewability will be conducted (AL, AR and MS).
TN and WI will develop the appropriate conditions for the treatments and the fabrics will be characterized using laboratories in TN, WI, GA, AL, AR, KY, and MS.
The same fabrics will be used in Objective 3 for functional performance.
Data from cooperating laboratories will be jointly analyzed and published to reflect cooperation of various laboratories and states.
Objective 2.
To assess the environmental compatibility of selected and newly developed, processes, materials and products from fibers of polymeric and agricultural origin
Assessment of the environmental compatibility of selected and newly developed processes, materials and products.
Soil burial of newly developed textiles to assess the effects of various soil characteristics on their biodegration will be completed.
Textiles produced from kenaf, sugarcane, recycled plastics, and plastics containing soybean fatty acid fillers will be buried in four soil types for a total of 128 weeks.
Physical properties will be measured at predetermined intervals to monitor their degradation.
Nonwoven, woven and knit fabrics of PET and PP exposed to the novel atmospheric plasma reactor will also be evaluated for biodegradability in soil burial studies (AR, KS, LA, MS, TN, GA, WI and AR).
In addition, three plain woven fabrics containing 100% organic cotton, 100% high-impact (conventionally grown), and 100% Tencel� will be buried in two different soils of different pH levels for 32 and 64 weeks.
Because materials which are almost 100% cellulose will decay when buried in soil, these three fabrics will be buried along with a fourth synthetic fabric which will serve as a statistical check.
Changes in physical properties of tensile strength, tear resistance and flex abrasion, will be measured before and after burials.
Soil analyses will be performed at these same test periods.
AR will assume leadership responsibilities for soil burial studies, as they have had excellent success with soil burial protocols.
Textile materials made by KS, MS, TN, and LA will be used in soil burial tests.
MS will take the responsibility for soil sample analyses for all states.
Results and data will be shared with cooperating states, so data can be jointly analyzed and published.
Modeling the effect of absolute humidity on durable press fabrics (release of formaldehyde) and other products.
Two different fabrics, 100% cotton print cloth and 100% cotton twill will be finished with two current durable press reactants: dimethyloldihydroxyethyleneurea (DMDHEU) and urea formaldehyde (UF).
A finish being developed at Auburn University (AL) will also be applied.
The finished fabrics will be exposed at various temperatures and humidities.
Air flowing past the samples will be collected in water, and analyzed colorimetrically for formaldehyde using chromotropic acid.
Formaldehyde release will be determined for each fabric at each condition.
Moisture regain characteristics of cotton and rayon fabrics sewn to a fine net structure containing solid desiccants (i.e., silica gel beads, bacteria generated cellulose) will be measured at more than two locations (old vs. newer building).
For each sample, the moisture regain will be determined when exposed to constant relative humidities of 40% and 60% and at a constant temperature (to be determined).
Each sample will be dried in an infrared dryer for about 75 min. to assure essentially zero moisture content at the beginning of each test.
The dry weight will be recorded.
The samples will be weighted on an electronic balance in an environmental chamber that has been preset at the desired humidity condition, and weighed at four-minute intervals until the sample reaches saturation.
A time series plot of the sample will be recorded (LA, AL and NC).
LA will coordinate the efforts of LA, AL and NC for this part of the research and assume leadership responsibilities.
Objective 3.
To evaluate the functional performance, consumer acceptance and potential commercialization of the textile materials for human health and safety and/or value-added products
Resistance to pesticides.
Innovative textile structures produced in this project will be used.
Since alachlor, atrazine, and methyl parathion are widely used pesticides, they will be selected for this project.
Concentrations will be prepared for each insecticide and herbicide using technical grade pesticides.
The solution will be spiked to fabric samples with equal amounts of 14C label Pesticides, Sorption coefficients of the pesticides will be determined by fitting the data to the Fruendlich equation by nonlinear regression method using the SigmaPlot graphics package.
The Sorption coefficients of the selected pesticide chemicals will be related to textile substrate characteristics of fiber content, hydrophobicity, swelling capacity, weave, fabric weight and finish using a descriptive analysis method.
(NC and FL)
The effects of wear abrasion on the barrier properties of both woven and nonwoven protective apparel fabrics that are being developed as well as for products currently on the market will be also investigated.
Fabrics will be subjected to moderate abrasion using standard tests for abrasion and tested for changes in liquid penetration and other liquid/fabric interactions.
Results will be compared to abrasion caused by subjects wearing the fabrics while working.
(FL and NC)
NC and FL will cooperate and NC will coordinate and assume the leadership responsibilities.
Resistance to synthetic blood, virus and bacteria.
Newly developed and untreated fabrics will be evaluated for water resistance and impact penetration using water and synthetic blood; demand wettability and contact angle will be measured also for the nonwoven textiles made in this project.
(TN, GA and WI)
GA will coordinate the efforts and assume leadership responsibilities.
Resistance to solar radiation.
The problem of skin cancer is, of course, of great interest to people with light colored skins as they get older previous exposures start to show their results.
Most of the parameters that create sun protection in fabrics are fairly obvious and are rather easily measured.
Opaqueness to visible light, which correlates very well to opaqueness to UV in fabrics, can be evaluated quickly.
These studies should show the degree to which tighter weaves will give greater protection than loosely woven or knitted fabric.
A selection of new textile materials developed and marketed for sun-protective clothing will be evaluated for sun-protection.
A wide selection of textiles that vary by fiber content, fabric construction, and UV absorbing finishes will be evaluated for their photo-protective effects and durability to use and care.
Appropriate standardized test procedures developed and published by ASTM and AATCC will be followed.
Durability of the products in use will be assessed by laboratory tests including breaking strength, tearing strength, and abrasion resistance.
Durability of the photo-protective properties to laundering will be assessed.
The Comparative UV blocking abilities of the selected textile products will be evaluated by UV-visible spectrophotometric measurements.
Because tighter weaves are known to give better protection than loosely woven materials, research tests will emphasize tighter woven fabrics.
In addition, physical properties and resistance to UR. will also be studied for the cellulose produced by four strains of Acetobacter.
(NB, AR and NC)
NB will assume the leadership responsibilities and coordinate the efforts for this part of research.
Thermal Comfort Studies of Plasma Treated Textiles and Cotton/Microporus Film Based Nonwovens.
Plasma treated polyester and cotton/polyester bonded fabric and cotton/microporous film based nonwovens will be tested for thermal comfort on human subjects.
Participants in the study would be surveyed for potential commercialization of the protective health care clothing products.
(TN, FL and AL)
Wear assessments in a controlled lab setting as well as using the local medical centers' employees for field-wear assessments will be performed.
In the lab setting, subjects will conduct an exercise protocol and will be evaluated for changes in heart rate, deep body temperature, skin temperature, and sweat rate at several intervals during the test.
Results will indicate the comparative potential for protective garments to induce heat stress.
In the field experiment (the field in this case being the medical facility), subjects will wear the garments during their normal work routine and will provide subjective responses related to their comfort during the wear period.
User surveys of hospital personnel to determine components of consumer satisfaction with currently available medical apparel will also be conducted.
(TN, FL, AR and AL)
FL will coordinate the efforts and assume leadership responsibilities for thermal comfort studies.
Consumer Acceptance and Market Analysis of Selected Value-Added Products.
It is also important to gather information from consumers that show their interest in and willingness to accept consumer items of kenaf blend and other newer materials/products.
Therefore, a questionnaire (Likert-type scale) used to gather responses will be designed to help identify concerns or problem areas for consumers.
These findings may be helpful as marketing strategies are developed for increasing consumer and retailer interest/demand.
Findings will also help identify products with most potential for being commercialized.
(MS, AR and NE)
The acceptance of the newly developed protective clothing (gloves, aprons, surgical gowns and shoe covers) by health care professionals through a residency program for family practice physicians located throughout the state of Arkansas (conditional on fabric meeting OSHA requirements) will be conducted.
A survey of users of current medical protective clothing fabrics will be conducted to determine usage and satisfaction.
(AR and AL)
An extensive market analysis of the national and international market potential for sugar cane and kenaf products to impact the soil erosion control market in the U.S. and abroad will be conducted.
A survey of state transportation departments and federal agencies involved in highway and other soil erosion sites will be done to determine current and projected usage of nonwoven and spray-on product.
This information will be used to develop a marketing strategy for sugar cane and kenaf fiber geotextiles for presentation to sugar cane and kenaf producers and processors (LA, MS, Southern Louisiana (SLA) and GA)
LA will coordinate the efforts and assume leadership responsibilities for multi-state surveys which will help identify products with potential for successful commercialization.
EXPECTED OUTCOMES
The successful production of textile consumer products from kenaf and sugar cane will enhance the value of these agricultural crops.
Farmers growing kenaf will enjoy added income if there are superior products that can be marketed.
Other benefits will be the creation of jobs in processing plants and farming, and the use of kenaf in crop rotation schedules.
Similarly, there are numerous nonfood uses of soybean oils and fatty acids, wheat straw, and modified wheat starch in textile manufacturing and wet processing that can increase the commercial importance of these major agricultural commodities while reducing the consumption of petrochemcials.
Development of sugar cane textiles will enhance the profitability of cane production and processing by providing a value-added product from what is currently a waste or by-product.
The support of work at LSU by the American Sugar Cane League has signaled the interest of the industry in development of such products.
The market analysis to be conducted will greatly facilitate the technology transfer to industrial processors and hasten the commercialization of these products.
The nonwoven fabrics of kenaf and/or cotton that are produced experimentally as part of this project will potentially expand the market for these agricultural fibers.
The collaborative work proposed herein includes not only the production and characterization of these fabrics but also extensive studies on biodegradability to examine the environmental impact.
Use of the nonwovens in medical disposable products has significant environmental benefits for the U.S.
In addition the inclusion of market analysis and consumer acceptance will provide useful information as this technology is adopted by fabric producers.
The textile auxiliaries being developed at KS and AL can enhance the properties of current textile products and extend the uses of agricultural commodities.
Softeners and finishes that are environmentally friendly have both economic and consumer appeal.
The plasma treatment to enhance dyeing and finishing properties is likewise a significant advance in decreasing the environmental impact of textile processing
.
An important contribution of this project will be the further development of analytical methodologies for textile characterization.
Methods for determination of barrier properties of fabrics, measurement of pore size in textile structures, surface analysis, and determination of formaldehyde release will be developed, used, and correlated.
The new knowledge about pore size, combined with the dyeing equilibria and kinetics research, will yield critical information for the development of commercially viable dyeing procedures for kenaf fibers and fabrics.
Information regarding the ultraviolet radiation transmission of textiles will be useful in developing more effective sun protective clothing and in evaluating the influx of UV radiation protective clothing on the market.
Agricultural workers who spend many hours outdoors will benefit from these developments.
A wider range of sun-protective clothing articles should become available as a result of this research and increased choices should lead to reduced prices for sun protective clothing.
In addition to the creation of new value-added products, this work will contribute to the theoretical body of knowledge pertaining to the physical and chemical structure of cellulose-based fibers, polymeric materials and various treatments.
It will establish benchmark information on physical properties, dyeing characteristics, printing capabilities, and functional end-use performance of various newer textile products.
This information is not currently available and will make a substantial contribution to the textile literature.
In addition to many publications in research journals, all the findings will be drawn together in one or many Southern Cooperative Series Bulletins and Brochures.
ORGANIZATION
A regional technical committee will be organized upon project approval.
Operational procedures to be followed are according to those outlined on Pages 19-22, and 34-37 of the CSREES Manual for Cooperative Regional Research as revised in October, 1992.
The voting membership of the regional technical committee will include one representative from each cooperating agricultural experiment station or institution as appointed by the director and a representative of each cooperating USDA-ARS research location/unit.
The administrative advisor and the CSREES representative will be considered nonvoting members.
All voting members of the technical committee are considered eligible for office.
The offices of the regional technical committee will consist of the chair, the vice-chair, and the secretary.
These officers, along with the administrative advisor and the CSREES representative, will serve as the executive committee.
Officers for the first year will be elected at the organizational meeting for the technical committee after the project is approved.
After the first year, officers will be elected annually at the technical committee meeting, and they may succeed themselves.
The chair, in consultation with the executive committee, may appoint subcommittees to facilitate the accomplishment of various research and administrative tasks involving the cooperating institutional representatives.
Such tasks may include, but are not limited to, research planning and coordination, the development of specific cooperative research procedures, assimilation and analysis of data from contributing scientists, and publication of regional or other bulletins and reports.
The duties of the technical committee are to coordinate work activities related to the project.
The chair, in accord with the administrative advisor, will notify the technical committee of the time and place of the meeting and will prepare the agenda and preside at meetings of the technical committee and executive committee.
He or she is responsible for preparing the annual progress report and coordinating the preparation of regional reports.
The vice-chair assists the chair in all functions, and the secretary records the minutes and performs other duties assigned by the technical committee or administrative advisor.
The technical committees will meet annually for the purpose of coordination, reporting, sharing of procedures and analyses, and conducting project business.
The executive committee, in consultation with the technical committee, will make annual assessments of progress to consider the need for realignment of research effort.
In consultation with the administrative advisor and the CSREES representative, such realignment will be implemented as appropriate.
SIGNATURES
Regional project Title: Development of Textile Materials for Environmental Compatibility and Human health and Safety.
Approved:
/s/ John D. Sewell August 1, 1996 Administrative Advisor Date
/s/ D. C. Costan August 7, 1996 Chairman, Southern Association of Directors Date
/s/ George E.Cory 9-16-96 Administrator, CSREES Date
REFERENCES
Apodaca, J.K. (1992).
Market of potentially organically grown cotton as a niche crop.
Bureau of Business Research, University of Texas at Austin, working paper.
Aulbach, R., Boelens, T., Brown, G., Diluigi, J.A., Ehle, W.F., Gatley, D.P., Hagenmeyer, F., and Slamen, P. (1991).
Mold and mildew in hotel and motel guestrooms in hot and humid climates.
Washington, DC: The Hospitality Lodging and Travel Research Foundation.
Bayer, C. (December, 1992).
Indoor environmental testing using dynamic environmental chambers.
ITEA Journal.
24-26.
Berne, B. and Fisher, T. (1980).
Protective effects of various types of clothes against UV radiation.
Aeta Dermatovener (Stockholm), 60.
459-460.
Boyd, C.R., Ramaswamy, G.N. and Ruff, C.G. (1993).
Effects of retting process on kenaf fiber color and luster.
Abstract submitted to 1993 Annual Meeting of American Home Economics Association., Orlando, Florida.
Brookhart, B. (August, 1991).
Here comes the environmentalists.
Farm Journal, p. 6.
Brandt, B. and Swift, M.E. (May, 1993).
Surgical gowns: personnel, patient and environmental concerns.
In Consumer Environmental Issues: Safety, Health, Chemicals and Textiles in the Near Environment.
Second Internal Symposium Proceedings, St. Petersburg, Florida.
55-60.
Burdett, B.C. (1975).
Influence of fiber structure on dye uptake.
In C.L. Bird and
W. S. Boston (Eds.).
The Theory of Coloration of Textiles. pp. 111-162.
West Yorkshire, England: Dyers Co.
Pub. Trust.
Capjack, L., Kerr, N., Davis, S., Fedosejevs, R., Hatch, K.L., and Markee, N.L. (1994, December).
Protection of humans from ultraviolet radiation through the use of textiles: A review.
Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal 23(2).
198-218.
Collier, B.J., Collier, J.R., Agarwal, P. and Lo, Y.W. (1992a).
Extraction and evaluation of fibers from sugar cane.
Textile Research Journal, 62, 741-748.
Collier, B.J., Chen, Y.P. and Collier, J.R. (1992b).
A dynamic method for measuring formaldehyde release from durable press fabrics.
Textile Chemists and Colorists, 24(10), 26.
Collier, B.J. and Arora, M.S. (1995).
Water pretreatment and alkaline treatment for extraction of fibers from sugar cane rind.
Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 14(1), 1-6.
Collier, J.R, Collier, B.J., Thames, J.L. and Elsunni, M.M. (1995a) Production and evaluation of sugar cane fiber geotextiles.
Louisiana Transportation Center Report LA-95-290, Baton Rouge, LA: LTRC.
Collier, B.J., Smith, W.R. Godber, J.S., Myers, S.P., and Collier, J.R. (1995b), Value-added agricultural products in Louisiana, Louisiana Agriculture, 38(1), 12-21.
Crews, P.C., Rich, W., and Niemeyer, S. (1994).
A summary of environmental legislation targeting disposable diapers and review of related literature, Journal of Environmental Polymer Degradation, 2(1), 39-48.
Crews, P.C. and Rich, W. (1995) Influence of milkweed fiber length on textile product performance.
Clothing and Textile Research Journal.
(In press)
Czarnecki, L. and Gatewood, B. (1995) Use of tocopherois to reduce photodegradation in natural and synthetic fibers.
Textile Research Journal.
(submitted)
Easter, E. (1983).
Removal of pesticide residues from fabric by laundering.
Textile Chemist and Colorist, 15, 29-33.
ESCOP (1994).
Southern Strategic Research Plan: Research on Food, Agriculture, and Natural Resources.
Strategic Agenda for the Southern Association of Agricultural Experiment Stations, College Station, Texas.
Hager, M. (March/April 1990) What you can do to save the earth.
Consumers Digest: 62-66.
Hamilton, L.E., Gatewood, B. M. and Sherwood, P.M.S. (1994).
Photodegradation of high performance fibers.
Textile Chemist and Colorist, 26(12), 39-45 (1944).
Hobbs, N.E., Oakland, B.G., and Hurwitz, M.D. (1986).
Effect of barrier finishes on aerosol spray penetration and comfort of woven and disposable nonwoven fabrics for protective clothing, ASTM.
In Baker, R.L. 
Philadelphia: American Society for Testing Materials.
How OSHA Regulations on blood borne pathogens protect you from AIDS and Hepatitis.
Brochure from INDA, Association of Nonwovens Fabric Industry, Cary, NC, 1993.
Hunn, B.D., Grasso, M.M. and Vadlamani, V. (1994) Analysis of a fabric/desiccant window cavity dehumidifier.
North symposium on Improving Building Systems in Hot and Humid Climates, Houston, TX, pp 1-12.
Jevtic, A.P. (1990).
The sun protective effect of clothing, including beachwear.
Austalian Journal of Dermatology.
31(1), 5-7.
Kohlos, F.H. (1981).
Opportunities to save energy in tropical climates.
ASHRAE Transactions, 87(1).
Kuga, S. and Brown, Jr., R.M. 1989.
Correlation between structure and the biogenic mechanism of cellulose: new insights based on recent electron microscopic findings.
In Cellulose and Chemistry and Technology, Schurech, C, Editor, New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, pp. 677-88.
LaMenzo, J.A., (September, 1993) Ecology a Means to Future Success.
ATI, 51-52.
Laughlin, J.M. and Gold, R.E. (1987).
Methylparathion residue in cation and polyester functionally finished fabrics after laundering and abrasion.
Clothing and Textile Research Journal, 19, 39-42.
Legwold, G. (1994) Home sick home: make sure indoor pollutants aren't making you sick.
Better Homes and Gardens, 68, 70-71.
Leonas, K.K. (1991).
The mechanism of pesticide transmission through apparel fabrics: A comparison of drop and spray exposure methodologies.
Archives of Environmental Contaminant Toxicology.
20, 427-431.
Leonas, K.K. and DeJonge, J.O. (1986).
Effect of functional finish barriers on pesticide penetration.
Performance of Protective Clothing.
ASTM Special Technical Publication: 900.
McGregor, R. (1980).
Kinetics and equilibria in dyeing.
Textile Chemist and Colorist, 12(12), 306-310.
Miller, B. and Young, R.A. (1975).
Methodology for studying the wettability of filaments.
Textile Research Journal, 359-365.
Nichols, A.B. (March 1992).
Water environment 
NIOSH, Criteria for a recommended standard occupational exposure during the manufacture and formulation of pesticides.
DHEW (NIOSH), No. 78-174.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health, Education, Welfare, Public Health Service, Center for Disease Control, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
1978.
OSHA, Occupational exposure to blood borne pathogens, 3127.
1992.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Ruff, C.G. and Boyd, C.R. (1993a).
Kenaf processing.
In the abstracts of technical papers, 1993 Annual Meeting, Southern Branch of American Society of Agronomy, 20, 6.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Ruff, C.G. and Boyd, C.R. (1993b).
Varietal differences in kenaf fiber quality.
Proceedings of Kenaf International Association.
1993 Annual Meeting, Fresno, CA. 138-144.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Ruff, C.G. and Boyd, C.R. (1994a).
Effect of bacterial and chemical retting on kenaf fiber quality.
Textile Research Journal, 64, 305-308.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Ruff, C.G and Boyd, C.R. (1994b).
Non-woven textiles.
Proceedings of Kenaf International Association.
1994 Annual Meeting, New Orleans, LA.
Ramaswamy, G.N. and Craft, S.A. (1994c) Evaluation of chemical softening processes to extract spinnable kenaf fibers.
Presented at the Annual Meeting of Gulf Coast Textile Chemistry Conference, Baton Rouge, LA, March 10-11, 1994.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Burger, P.B., Ruff, C.G. and Boyd, C.R. (1995a) Kenaf/cotton blends for textiles.
Family and Consumer Sciences Research Journal, 24(2), 180-190.
Ramaswamy, G.N., Craft, S.A. and Wartelle, L. (1995b) Uniformity and sortness of Kenaf fibers for textile products.
Textile Research Journal, 65(12), 765-770.
Robson, J. and Diffey, B.L. (1990).
Textiles and sun protection.
Photodermatology,
Photoimmunology, and Photomedicine, 7, 32-34.
Roth, J.R., Wadsworth, L.C., Spence, P.D., Tsai, P.C. and Liu C. (1993).
A one atmosphere glow discharge plasma reactor for surface treatment of nonwovens, Book of Papers, Third Annual TANDEC Nonwovens Conference.
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, November 1-3.
Roth, J.R., Tsai, P. P., Liu C., Laroussi M. and Spence, P. D. Assignors to The University of Tennessee Research Corporation.
One atmosphere, uniform glow discharge plasma.
U.S. Patent 5,414,324, May 9, 1905.
Sarmadi, A.M., Kwon, Y.A. and Young, R.A. (1993a).
Wettability of nonwoven fabrics, part I: effect of fluorochemical finishes on wetting properties of nonwoven.
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 32, 279-287.
Sarmadi, A.M., Kwon, Y.A. and Young, R.A. (1993b).
Wettability of nonwoven fabrics, part II: effect of cationic surfactant treatment, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 32, 287-293.
Sarmadi, M., Ying, T. and Denes, F. (1993b) "Surface modification of polypropylene fabrics by acrylonitrile (AN) cold plasma."
Textile Research Journal, 63, (12).
Sarmadi, A., Ying, T. and Denes, F. (1995).
"HMDSO-plasma modification of polypropylene fabrics."
European Polymer Journal, 31 (9), 847-857.
Sarmadi, M., Denes, A.R. and F. Denes, "Improved dyeing properties of SICI[4]-plasma treated polyester fabrics," Textile Chemist and Colorist.
(In Press)
Sarmadi, A. and Denes, F., "Surface modification of polymers under cold plasma conditions."
TAPPI (In Press)
Sen Gupta, A.B. and Radhakrishnan, T. (1972).
In "New Ways to Produce Textiles."
Papers of the 57th Annual Conference of the Textile Institute, Lucerne, Switzerland.
112-124.
Shakun, W. (1992).
The causes and control of mold and mildew in hot and humid climates.
ASHRAE Transactions.
98(1).
Smith, C.B. (1986).
Identification and reduction of pollution sources in textile wet processing.
Pollution prevention program, North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources.
Southern Strategic Research Plan - Research on food, agriculture and national resources.
(1996).
Southern Association of Agricultural Experiment Station Directors, Dept. of Agricultural Communications, Texas A
Sterling, E.M., Arundel, A. and Sterling, T.D. (1985).
Criteria for human exposure to humidity in occupied buildings.
ASHRAE Transactions, 91(1B).
Srinivasan, M. (1995).
Synthesis and evaluation of a fiber reactive softener based on soybean fatty acid and cyanuric chloride, M.S. Thesis, Kansas State University, December, 1995.
Stricker, C.L. (1984).
Fluorochemical repellent finishes for nonwovens.
Journal of Industrial Fabrics, 3, 10-18.
Taylor, C.S. and Kugler, E.E. (1992).
Kenaf: annual fiber crop products generate a growing response from industry.
In New Crops, New Uses, New Markets, 1992 Yearbook of Agriculture, 92-98.
Thames, J.L., Collier, B.J. and Collier, J.R. (1994) Production and evaluation of sugar cane fiber geotextiles.
AATCC Book of Papers, Research Triangle Park, NC: AATCC, 42-47.
Tsai, P.P., Wadsworth, LC., Spence, P.D. and Roth, J.R. (1994).
Surface modifications of nonwoven webs one atmosphere glow discharge plasma to improve web wettability and other textile properties.
Book of Papers, Fourth Annual TANDEC Nonwovens Conference.
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, November 14-16.
Wadsworth, L.C., Nataraj, G. and Duckett, K.E. (May 1993).
Cotton laminates for medical and hygiene applications.
In Consumer Environmental Issues: Safety, Health, Chemicals and Textiles in the Near Environment, Second Internal Symposium Proceedings, St. Petersburg, Florida, 36-54.
Washburn, E.W. (1921).
The dynamic of capillary flow.
Physical Review, 17, 374-375.
Welsh, C.
And Diffey, B. (1981).
The protection against solar actinic radiation afforded by common clothing fabrics.
Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, 6, 577-581.
Williams, W.S. and Cannon, R.E. (1989).
Alternative environmental roles for cellulose produced by acetobacger sylinum.
Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 55, 2448-2452.
Ying, T., Sarmadi, A., Hop, C. and Denes, F. (1995).
The structure and properties of
tin-containing Polymenrs Deposited from Tetramethyltin HF-Plasma."
Journal of Applied Polymenr Science, 55, 1537-1551.
PROJECT LEADERS
Development of Textile Materials for Environmental Compatibility
and Human Health and Safety
State Name Agency/Institution/Department Area of Specialization
SAES (1862) University Cooperators
Alabama Lewis B. Slaten Consumer Affairs Textile Chemistry Arkansas (AR) Mary Warnock Human Environmental Sciences Clothing and Textiles Georgia Karen Leonas Textiles, Merch.
&
Science Indiana Christine Ladisch Consumer Sci.
&
Yiping Qui Clothing, Textiles 
Design
Clothing, Textiles 
Design Textile Science
Textile Science Kentucky** Elizabeth P. Easter Human Environment, Textiles Textile Science Louisiana (LA) Billie Collier
Phiroze Dastoor Human Ecology
Human Ecology Textile Prod.
Dev.
Textile Engineering Mississippi Catherine R. Boyd
Gita Ramaswamy Home Economics
Home Economics Apparel and Textiles
Textiles and Toxicology Nebraska Patricia Crews Textiles, Clothing, 
UNCG at Greensboro Charles Kim
Maureen Grasso Clothing 
Clothing 
Textile Science Tennessee* Larry Wadsworth
J. Reese Roth Textiles, Merch., 
Electrical Engineering Textile Science
Industrial Plasma Engr.
Wisconsin Majud Sarmadi Family Res.
&
1890 University Cooperators
Arkansas (AR) Elizabeth Ferguson
Wenwei W. Jin Home Economics
Home Economics Clothing 
Textile Science Louisiana, Southern
Baton Rouge (SLA) Grace N. Wasike Clothing 
NON-SAES University Cooperators
Florida State (FSU)
Tallahassee Rin Cloud
Mary Ann Moore Kay Grise Textiles 
Textiles 
Textiles 
Textiles 
Textiles 
* Statistical consultation as needed will be provided by Tennessee Agricultural Experiment Station.
** Unofficial cooperator.
RESOURCES
Development of Textile Materials for Environmental Compatibility and Human Health and Safety
State Name Agency/Institution/
Department SY* PY* TY* Participation
by Objective(s)
SAES (1862) University Cooperators
Alabama, Auburn Lewis B. Slaten/- Consumer Affairs 0.2 1, 3 Arkansas (AR) Mary Warnock/- School of Human
Environmental Sci. 0.25 1, 2, 3 Georgia Karen Leonas/- Textiles, Merch.
&
Interiors 0.2 0.33 1, 2, 3 Indiana Christine Ladisch/- Consumer Sciences 
Yiping Qiu Clothing, Textiles, 
Clothing, Textiles 
0.2 0.2
0.2 1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3 Kentucky Elizabeth Easter/- Human Environment,
Textiles ** 1 Louisiana (LA) Billie Collier/-
Phiroze Dastoor Human Ecology
Human Ecology 0.1
0.1 1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3 Mississippi Catherine R. Boyd/-
Gita Ramaswamy Home Economics
Home Economics 0.1
0.15 1, 2, 3
1, 3 Nebraska Patricia Crews/- Textiles, Clothing, 
Design 0.15 0.25 3 North Carolina
UNCG at Greensboro Charles Kim/-
Maureen Grasso Clothing 
Clothing 
0.1 1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3 Tennessee Larry Wadsworth/-
J. Reese Roth Text., Merch.
&
Electrical Engineering 0.2
0.1 1, 2, 3
1, 2, 3 Wisconsin Majid Sarmadi/- Family Resources 
Consumer Science 0.1 1, 2, 3
1890 University Cooperators
Arkansas (AR) Elizabeth Ferguson/-
Wenwei W. Jim Home Economics
Home Economics 0.4
0.5 2, 3
2, 3 Louisiana (SLA) Grace N. Wasike/- Clothing 
Non-SAES University Cooperator
Florida State (FSU)
Tallahassee Rinn Clould/-
Mary Ann Moore
Kay Grise Text.
&
Text.
&
Text.
&
**
** 1, 3
1, 3
1, 3
TOTAL 3.60 0.4 0.58 /- Voting member.
* Commitments on file with administrative advisor.
** Program is not funded by USDA; however, total effort planned exceeds 0.1 SY for each participant.
Work at FSU is funded by Margaret A. Simon Endowed Professorship.
Work at Kentucky is funded by the department.
