FY 2000 ANNUAL REPORT 1.
What major problem or issue is being resolved and how are you resolving it?
2.
How serious is the problem? Why does it matter?
3.
How does it relate to the National Program(s) and National Component(s) to which it has been assigned?
4.
What were the most significant accomplishments this past year?
5.
Describe the major accomplishments over the life of the project including their predicted or actual impact.
6.
What do you expect to accomplish, year by year, over the next 3 years?
7.
What science and/or technologies have been transferred and to whom? When is the science and/or technology likely to become available to the end user (industry, farmer, other scientists)? What are the constraints, if known, to the adoption 
8.
List your most important non-peer reviewed publications and presentations to non-scientific organizations, and articles written about your work (NOTE: this does not replace your peer reviewed publications which are listed below).
Scientific Publications
1.
What major problem or issue is being resolved and how are you resolving it? Insect pests have the potential to cause severe losses to sunflower producers.
The research focuses on the development of new and improved pest control technologies for sunflower insects in order to enhance our understanding of natural biological control agents and to develop improved methods for conserving beneficial organisms within agricultural production systems.
The goal is to develop new pest control methods, particularly biologically based technologies, that are cost effective and compatible with the environment.
Parasites and predators, as well as pathogenic microbes, are the major biological controls investigated.
Parasites and predators attacking sunflower pests on native sunflowers and in cultivated fields will be determined and the most promising species will be studied for introduction or increase in commercial fields.
Microbial control of sunflower insects has received little attention in the past, although there is an intensive effort to introduce the gene for B. thuringiensis toxin into sunflower.
To increase our knowledge of the potential for microbial control of sunflower insect pests, this unit surveys, collects, identifies, and tests known and unknown pathogenic organisms of sunflower insects.
In addition to identifying microorganisms by a commercial system and through other resources such as the National Center for Agricultural Utilization Research or the American Type Culture Collection, we are also developing a simple microbial DNA fingerprinting technique to routinely identify and document the pathogens of sunflower insects.
Other pest management strategies, such as cultural control and the use of insect resistant plants also will be investigated.
Top of Page
2.
How serious is the problem? Why does it matter? There is a need to develop new and improved pest control technologies because of overuse and reliance on chemical insecticides which have had serious side-effects on humans, wildlife and the environment.
These concerns have led to the concept of integrated pest management (IPM).
The reliance on pesticides is a serious problem for cultivated sunflower because sunflower is an important vegetable oil crop and the use of insecticides increases production costs, destroys natural enemies of plant feeding insects, and fat-soluble chemical insecticides can affect the quality of the oil.
Sunflower was planted on an estimated 2,866,000 acres in 7 states of the northern Great Plains in 2000.
New uses for sunflower oil (vegetable oils) are being developed including its use as a petroleum substitute which will increase planted acreage and the need for sunflower insect management.
Chemical control and some methods of cultural control of sunflower pests have been implemented but insect control for sunflower is best described as pesticide management.
Thus the problem of overuse and reliance on chemical control of sunflower pests has been minimally addressed.
The seasonal development of pest populations and their major non-microbial natural enemies have been described but implementation of natural enemies or microbes for biocontrol has not been explored.
Top of Page
3.
How does it relate to the National Program(s) and National Component(s) to which it has been assigned? The project is assigned to National Program 304, Crop and Commodity Pest Biology, Control and Quarantine (100%).
Within Program 304 the most relevant problems include the identification and classification of insects, mites, microbes and plants and development of new improved pest control technologies.
Program components focus on research enhancing our ability to recognize and rapidly identify important organisms including both pests and beneficial agents that are crucial for the protection of U.S. agriculture and the development of new environmentally-friendly and cost effective natural enemies.
The specific focus of this project is on biological control of sunflower insect pests, including the use of pathogens, parasites, and predators.
Top of Page
4.
What were the most significant accomplishments this past year? A. Single Most Significant Accomplishment during FY 2000 year:
The sunflower stem weevil, a pest of cultivated sunflower, has recently caused severe crop losses in the major sunflower production areas in Colorado, Kansas, and Nebraska.
Cooperative studies with university scientists and extension agents were conducted to develop integrated pest management strategies using insecticides, evaluating sunflower hybrids and accessions for resistance, and determine the impact of altered planting dates to reduce weevil damage.
Research showed that insecticidal treatments were effective in reducing densities of weevil larvae in sunflower plants; some hybrids and accessions evaluated had about 50% less weevil larvae in the stalks, and populations of larvae in the stalks were reduced and plant lodging was decreased as planting was delayed.
Integrated management techniques that include the use of less susceptible sunflower hybrids, delayed planting dates, and chemical controls when weevil numbers are high can successfully reduce weevil damage in sunflower stalks or improve the plant's ability to tolerate weevil attack.
B.
Other Significant Accomplishments: New pathogens and new strains of existing pathogens are needed to fully exploit the potential of biological control.
We isolated pathogens from diseased insects, soil and plant material, including Metarhizium flavoviride from head moth insect cadavers recovered in Kansas and sunflower heads damaged by head moths.
Our results showed that M. flavoviride seems to be more common in the Kansas isolates than Metarhizium anisopliae, but both are highly pathogenic to insects and useful as biocontrol agents.
The results add to our knowledge of the future potential of a disease organism in controlling insect pests and are useful to scientists and IPM specialists.
C. Significant Accomplishments/Activities that Support Special Target Populations:
Top of Page
5.
Describe the major accomplishments over the life of the project including their predicted or actual impact.
Parasites and disease organisms attacking many of the sunflower pests have been recovered from both cultivated sunflower and native sunflower species and some have been identified.
The information on microbial agents is new and a few of the parasites recovered have not previously been described from sunflower insect pests.
Potentially useful natural enemies could be introduced into commercial fields where they are not present.
A better understanding of their biology and population dynamics could also improve our ability to use them in a biologically-based management system for sunflower.
Studies on the biology and population dynamics of the sunflower midge and evaluation of sunflower hybrids were incorporated into information on IPM strategies for this pest and released to sunflower producers through talks and extension publications.
Top of Page
6.
What do you expect to accomplish, year by year, over the next 3 years? Investigations during FY2001, FY2002, and FY2003 on the biology, population dynamics, natural enemies, and the screening of germplasm for resistance, will result in recommendations by ARS on IPM strategies to reduce losses from the sunflower midge in the northern Great Plains and sunflower stem weevil in the central Great Plains production regions.
Top of Page
7.
What science and/or technologies have been transferred and to whom? When is the science and/or technology likely to become available to the end user (industry, farmer, other scientists)? What are the constraints if known, to the adoption 
Information on the biology and pest management of the key sunflower insect pests in the Northern Plains was presented to crop consultants and crop scouts from North Dakota, Montana, and Canada at a meeting in March 2000 and detailed information on biology, damage and control strategies for the sunflower midge was provided to agricultural industry representatives and scientists at a workshop in April 2000.
Top of Page
8.
List your most important non-peer reviewed publications and presentations to non-scientific organizations, and articles written about your work (NOTE: this does not replace your peer reviewed publications which are listed below).
Charlet, L. D. Sunflower insect pests and their management.
North Dakota State University, Western Crop Scout School, Dickinson, ND, 8 March 2000 (200 crop consultants).
Top of Page
Scientific Publications: Charlet, L.D. Biological control of sunflower pests: searching for new parasitoids in native Helianthus - challenges, constraints, and potential.
Charlet, L.D., Brewer, G.J., editors, Biological Control of Native or Indigenous Insect Pests: Challenges, Constraints, and Potential, Thomas Say Publications in Entomology, Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD. Nov. 1999.
p. 91-112.
Brewer, G.J., Charlet, L.D. Introduction and overview.
Charlet, L.D., Brewer, G.J., editors, Biological Control of Native or Indigenous Insect Pests: Challenges, Constraints, and Potential, Thomas Say Publications in Entomology, Entomological Society of America, Lanham, MD. Nov. 1999.
.p. 1-3.
Knodel, J.J., Charlet, L.D., Glogoza, P.A. Biology and management of the sunflower beetle in North Dakota.
North Dakota State University Extension Service Bulletin.
Mar 2000.
E-824.
p. 1-8.
Charlet, L.D. Management of the sunflower stem weevil, Cylindrocopturus adspersus, in the central Plains.
22nd Sunflower Research Workshop, National Sunflower Association, Fargo, ND. January 2000.
p. 1-9.
Charlet, L.D. Impact of different strategies for sunflower stem weevil management in cultivated sunflower.
Presentation at the 55th Annual Meeting North Central Branch, Entomological Society of America, Minneapolis, MN. March 2000.
p. 65 (#190).
Charlet, L.D. Biology and pest management strategies for the sunflower beetle in cultivated sunflower in North America.
15th International Sunflower Conference, Toulouse, France.
June, 2000.
p. H22-H27.
Barker, J.F. Laboratory evaluation of the pathogenicity of Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium anisopliae to larvae of the banded sunflower moth, Cochylis hospes Walsingham (Lepidoptera: Cochylidae).
Great Lakes Entomologist.
1999.
v. 32.
p. 101-106.
Top of Page
[sun_1.gif]
Sunflower Homepage | Fun Stuff | Goals | Other Links/Acknowledgments Personnel | Photos | Projects | Upcoming Events
Page Last Updated 12/28/00
