[dwsPage_banner.gif] DWS Home For Job Seekers For Employers DWS Services DWS Divisions DWS Information Quick Links Search Help Site Map Calendar Feedback DWS Home Section DWS Quick Links Section Department of Workforce Services - Mountainland November 29, 2001 Regional Council Meeting 12:00 - 2:00 P. M.
PRESENT
Melissa Finch, Region Director; Kevin Crandall, Chair; Julie Lay, Regional Council Coordinator; Anna G. E. Larson, DWS Eligibility Services Center Manager; Bill Snow, DWS Quality Coordinator; Bryan Kessinger, DWS Employment Center Manager; Christie Hulett, Micron; David Ostrom, DWS SDS; Debbie Fotheringham, DWS SDS; Duane Frisby, Division of Rehabilitation Services; Gary Ashby, GHA; Jack Trent, Wolf Electronix; Jo An Gerber, Region Executive Secretary (Minutes); John Talcott, Region Admin Services Manager; Judy Bell, Orem City; Karen Daniels, Provo Employment Center Manager; Karen Larsen, Heber/Park City Centers Manager; Kent Gygi, Provo Employment Center Business Consultant; Larry Elertson, United Way; Leslie Judd, Provo Employment Center Supervisor; Raymond McPherron, Provo Employment Center Supervisor; Rickie Bryan, ALF/CIO; Rod Crockett, Provo School Districts; Ron Tiffany, Regional Council Veteran Representative; Sherami Jara, DWS Employment Counselor;
WELCOME - Kevin Crandall, Regional Council Chair
Welcome and thanks for coming out on this snowy and messy day.
As you leave be really, really careful.
Your representation at the Park City Council of Councils was appreciated.
We have received training and new ideas and still have a lot to do to build and present ourselves.
There are issues to target and decisions of what to do about them.
In the mean time, let's focus on the Mystery Shopper activity which permits us to give feedback to DWS and DWS to educate us on the available services.
OUTSTANDING CUSTOMER SERVICE RECOGNITION - Kevin Crandall
1.
Kent Gygi * Going extra mile for all customers; giving quality service.
Example was displayed during lunch today - he bought Judy Bell a Diet Coke today so she could have a diet drink with her lunch! * Employers request him often for writing job orders, recruiting and other needs they may have.
2.
Sherami Jara * Has the ability of putting people at ease with her exceptional customer service.
* She was involved with coordinating a customer conference where customers gave feedback on what made them comfortable when applying for services, etc.
MYSTERY SHOPPER UPDATE/ASSIGNMENTS - Bill Snow
1.
The Pilot Project has been completed and positive as well as negative feedback has been gathered and reported.
2.
The objectives which were feedback concerning DWS services to the Employment Centers and education about DWS (services, pathways, processes) for the Regional Council were met.
3.
The Mystery Shopper program will continue.
* Two Mystery Shopper visits will be made to each Employment Center bi-monthly.
* Completed by January 24, 2002 * American Fork: Jack Trent * Heber/Park City: Christie Hulet will send two Micron staff members * Payson: Gary Ashby * Provo Employment Center: Kevin Crandall * Use the telephone as a job seeker for part of the mystery shopping.
This would be helpful since the telephone referrals at the Provo Employment Center have tripled, and it would be good to review the service being given.
* Rate only the categories that are applicable.
* Use the Mountainland Mystery Shopper Survey to gather feedback.
A written summary is also acceptable.
4.
Mystery Shoppers will present findings at each full Council meeting.
5.
The Executive Council members will discuss and evaluate each of the surveys before releasing the data to the Region Management Team.
6.
The Regional Council Executive Committee will finalize the report(s) and present the information in Mountainland Region Management Team meeting.
7.
Individual Center data will be shared with the Employment Center manager.
8.
Individual Center data will not be shared with other Centers.
9.
Based on the scores received, Centers may receive a grade, A or B, but competition has been removed; thus, the original traveling trophy and celebration is eliminated.
CUSTOMER SIMULATION EXERCISE - ½ Hour
1.
Each Council member will be given a scenario and assigned to an employment counselor who will be expecting them.
* It will be necessary to give a social security number, but the information you give for the Form 61 is not trackable, etc.
* The information (name, SS#, address, etc.) will be entered into the computer, but can be made inactive.
* Scenarios * #1 Kevin Crandall (Shane Jorgenson) * #3 Christie Hulett (Jenny Nisonger) * #4 Rickie Bryant (Bret Pope) * #5 Ron Tiffany (Veterans) * #7 Judy Bell (Michelle Viertel) * #8 Rod Crockett (Colleen Cowden) * #9 Duane Frisby (Susan Rogers) * #10 Jack Trent (Sarianna Kay) * #12 Larry Ellertson (David Matkin) * #13 Gary Ashby (Jason Miller)
2.
Begin at the Information Desk.
Give the Information Specialist the scenario information and follow the pathway as directed.
3.
There are four types of services.
* Core * Intensive * Training * Support
4.
Go to the Information Desk and present the reason you are at the Center today to the Information Specialist.
Follow the instructions and pathway as directed.
5.
As you proceed, ask these questions to yourself: What services were offered? Was it easy to access these services?
6.
If you find something while shopping, make a recommendation(s) to managers.
* It is important to have staff up on newspaper articles as to the jobs available.
Customers come to DWS wanting information on job ads such as the one hiring air marshals.
There was no information to be had about this ad.
Some information is being shared.
Sometimes there is no information, even after several inquiring phone calls.
* Services may be labeled alphabetical, but as a shopper be careful in judging the information given as the official title may not be used, but the same information may be given under different terms.
7.
After following the "customer" scenario, complete the Mountainland Mystery Shopper Survey and give to Julie.
8.
Julie and Bill will rate A or B and report to the Regional Council.
9.
The Mystery Shopper feedback will then be reported in Region Management Meeting.
10.
TANF RAINY UPDATE/PACMIS PROPOSAL - Dave Ostrom
1.
The PACMIS Gap Analysis of October 9, 2001, was performed by Information Technology International.
* The purpose was to determine whether PACMIS (Public Assistance Case Management Information System) adequately meets the eligibility-related business needs of Department of Human Services, DWS and Department of Health.
* Based on the report findings, PACMIS is only meeting 52% of business needs.
It only does what we tell it to do.
It does not support looking at other programs.
It is now a support system, but a decision making system is needed.
* Recommendations were to replace PACMIS.
2.
PACMIS is a project costing approximately 20 million dollars and does have an impact on TANF dollars.
Shortfalls caused money shifts.
There are programs that are not being worked on or utilized which would allow monies.
The Adult Literacy program has given $117,000 for the "new" PACMIS.
* Concern: How will the programs giving up money be impacted? It seems unfair - people versus program.
* Answer: PACMIS will utilize information and give assistance to people more accurately and readily; thus, the people really are served better.
3.
PACMIS will come from partnering with other states who want to implement, some product will be purchased and some will be developed on our own.
TANF surplus funds will be paying for this.
* The expense to enhance the current PACMIS system was proposed at 2.6 million.
The decision was to put this amount into the pot to building a new system.
* Projects in session have money to fund them.
* $400,000 is being used to begin the new PACMIS system.
* #42 Education and Training Software-Mtland $183,000 * #43 Grant to Fund Literacy Program-Mtland $40,000 * #44 Discretionary Services, Family Issues-Mtland $200,000
4.
MOTION by Ron Tiffany for approval.
* Rod Crockett seconded the motion.
* The voting was unanimous.
PROPOSAL for OREM EMPLOYMENT CENTER AND REGIONAL ADMINISTRATION OFFICE - John Talcott
1.
Justification * Consistency of Services * Convenience to Customers * Improved Customer Service * Employment Center Design * Consolidation of Offices eliminating duplication of offices in the same city.
2.
Approximate cost for the above building: $460,000.
This amount would come from the operating budget.
There would be no additional cost to the State.
The on-going costs a year would be $247,000.
Other agencies will rent the currently DWS Region occupied 3rd and 4th floor spaces at 150 E Center which will pay the State so tax payers are not getting hit.
Agencies are already showing a great interest as to when DWS will vacate and what properties (desks, chairs, etc.) will remain.
3.
Floor space would be 16,500 square feet which is 11,000 square feet less than what the Region now occupies.
However, a lot of the 27,500 square feet we now pay for, is wasted space.
The Region does not facilitate the kind of service DWS gives.
The Region would be housed in the same building, but would be separate from the Employment Center.
4.
Central north Orem is the location in mind, but the specific property has not been selected.
There is a glut of office space for rent in Orem.
There will be O
Fifteen dollars ($15.00), which is a ball park figure includes O
5.
It is desired to have the contract secured in the next four to six months, but the Council's support is needed by way of vote before this proposal can be taken to the building utilization committee.
This is early in the process, but it takes a long time to complete the necessary steps.
6.
MOTION by Jack Trent to accept the proposal for an Orem Employment Center and Regional Administration Office.
John forward on to DFCM.
* Seconded by Gary Ashby * A unanimous vote from the 8 Council Members present was received.
* 4 additional votes will be taken by telephone calls to the Council members not present to vote.
A total of 12 votes are needed to have a valid count.
Report at the January 24, 2002
7.
Concern: Will there be money left for failure of equipment and etc.? Computer recycles will not be impacted.
8.
Next Steps (Depending on result telephone calls to voting Council Members.)
* Present proposal to the building utilization committee.
* Make recommendation to the Senior Management Team, pending approval to proceed.
* Get with the facility planner of DFC - work on RFP, select site.
* Develop floor plans * Have the proposal hit the paper by February, 2002.
* If DWS has the money to pay for the building, DFCM will give the approval.
COUNCIL CONCERNS - None expressed.
DATE OF NEXT MEETINGS * January 24, 2002 - Location TBA * No meetings in February, 2002.
* March 28 - Location TBA * May 23 - ½ Strategic Planning Retreat * July - No meeting * September 26 - Location TBA * November 21 - (4th Thursday is Thanksgiving) * State Council Dates * January 10 * April 11 * July 11 * October 10 
ADJOURN 2:25 P. M.
This site is best viewed using either Internet Explorer (v5.5) or Netscape Navigator (v6.1) set for 800x600
