810 KAR 1:001.
Definitions.
RELATES TO: KRS 230.210 to 230.360
STATUTORY AUTHORITY: KRS 230.260
NECESSITY, FUNCTION, AND CONFORMITY: To regulate conditions under which thoroughbred racing shall be conducted in Kentucky.
The function of this administrative regulation is to define the terms used in the commission's administrative regulations.
Section 1.
Definitions.
(1) "Added money" means cash, exclusive of trophy or other award, added by the association to stakes fees paid by subscribers to form the total purse for a stakes race.
(2) "Age" means the number of years since a horse was foaled, reckoned as if the horse was foaled on January 1 of the year in which the horse was foaled.
(3) "Arrears" means all sums due by a licensee as reflected by his account with the horsemen's bookkeeper, including subscriptions, jockey fees, forfeitures, and any default incident to these administrative regulations.
(4) "Association" means any person or legal entity, required to be licensed under KRS 230.300 to conduct a race meeting, and when used herein, the association conducting a race meeting where such rule is applicable.
(5) "Authorized agent" means any person currently licensed as an agent for a licensed owner principal by virtue of notarized appointment of agency lodged with the commission.
(6) "Betting interest" means a single horse, or more than one (1) horse joined as a mutuel entry or joined in the mutuel field, on which a single pari-mutuel wager may be placed.
(7) "Bleeder" means any horse known to have bled internally or from its nostrils during a workout or race.
(8) "Breeder" means the owner of the dam of a horse at the time the horse was foaled.
A horse is "bred" at the place of its foaling.
(9) "Claiming race" means any race in which every horse running therein may be transferred in conformity with these administrative regulations.
(10) "Closing" means the time published by the association after which entries for a race will not be accepted by the racing secretary.
(11) "Commission" means the Kentucky State Racing Commission.
Commissioner is a member of the commission.
(12) "Day" means any twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at midnight.
Racing day means a day on which races are conducted.
Calendar days means consecutive days counted irrespective of number of racing days.
(13) "Declaration" means the withdrawal of a horse entered in a race prior to time of closing of entries therefor in conformance with these administrative regulations.
(14) "Disciplinary action" means action taken by the stewards or the commission for a violation of an administrative regulation and can include suspension, revocation, voidance of a license, ejection or exclusion from association grounds, assessment of a forfeiture, or reprimand, any combination thereof.
(15) "Disqualification" means a ruling of the stewards or the commission revising the order of finish of a race.
(16) "Entry" means the act of nominating a horse for a race in conformance with these administrative regulations.
(17) "Equipment" means accouterments other than ordinary saddle, girth, pad, saddle cloth, and bridle carried by a horse, and includes whip, blinkers, tongue strap, muzzle, hood, noseband, bit, shadow roll, martingale, breast plate, bandages, boots, and racing plates or shoes.
(18) "Exhibition race" means a race between horses of diverse ownership for which a purse is offered by the association, but on which no pari-mutuel wagering is permitted.
(19) "Field, or mutuel field" means a single betting interest involving more than one (1) horse formed when the number of horses starting in a race exceeds the numbering capacity of the totalizator, and the highest numbered horse within the numbering capacity of the totalizator and all horses of a higher number are grouped in the mutuel field.
(20) "Forfeit" means money due by a licensee because of an error, fault, neglect of duty, breach of contract, or alternative ruling of the stewards or the commission.
(21) "Handicap race" means a race in which the weights to be carried by the horses therein are assigned by the association handicapper with the intent of equalizing the chances of winning for all horses entered in the race.
A "free handicap" means a handicap for which no nominating fee is required to be weighted, but an entrance or starting fee may be required for starting therein.
(22) "Horse" means a thoroughbred registered with the Jockey Club in New York and when used in these administrative regulations, any thoroughbred irrespective of age or sex designation.
(23) "Ineligible" means a horse or person not qualified under these administrative regulations or conditions of a race to participate in a specified racing activity.
(24) "Jockey" means a rider currently licensed to ride in races as a jockey, apprentice jockey, amateur jockey, or a provisional jockey permitted by the stewards to ride in three (3) races prior to applying for a license.
(25) "Lessee" means a licensed owner whose interest in a horse is a leaseholder.
(26) "Licensee" means a person or association that has been duly issued a currently valid license to participate in racing in this Commonwealth.
(27) "Maiden" means a horse which has never won a race on the flat at a recognized meeting in any country.
A maiden which was disqualified after finishing first remains a maiden.
Race conditions referring to maidens shall be interpreted as meaning maidens at the time of starting.
(28) "Match race" means a race between two (2) horses, for which no other horses are eligible.
(29) "Meeting" means the entire period of consecutive days, exclusive of dark days, granted by the commission to a licensed association for the conduct of racing.
A meeting shall begin at 10 a.m. of the first racing day and extend through a period ending one (1) hour after the last scheduled race of the last day.
(30) "Month" means calendar month.
(31) "Mutuel entry" means a single betting interest involving two (2) or more horses entered in the same race and joined for pari-mutuel purposes because of common ties as to ownership or training so that a wager on one (1) horse joined in a mutuel entry is a wager on all horses joined in the same mutuel entry.
(32) "Mutuel field" means the same as "field."
(33) "Nominator" means the person in whose name a horse in entered for a race.
"Nomination" is a subscription or entry of a horse in a stakes or early closing race.
(34) "Owner" means any person who holds, in whole or in part, any right, title, or interest in a horse, or any lessee of a horse, who has been duly issued a currently valid owner's license as a person responsible for the horse.
(35) "Place" when used in the context of a single position in the order of finish in a race, means second; when used in the context of pari-mutuel wagering, a "place" wager means one involving a payoff on a betting interest which finished first or second in a race; when used in the context of multiple positions in the order of finish in a race, "place or placing" means finishing first, or second.
(36) "Post" means the starting point of a race.
(37) "Post position" means the relative place assigned to each horse, numbered from the inner rail across the track at the starting line, from which each horse is to start a race.
(38) "Post time" means the advertised moment scheduled for the arrival of all horses at the starting point for a race.
(39) "Prize" means the combined total of any cash, premium, trophy, and object of value awarded to the owners of horses according to order of finish in a race.
(40) "Purse" means the gross cash portion of the prize for which a race is run.
(41) "Purse race" means any race for which entries close less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to its running, and for which owners of horses entered are not required by its conditions to contribute money toward its purse.
(42) "Race" means a running contest between thoroughbreds, ridden by jockeys, over a prescribed course free of obstacles or jumps, at a recognized meeting, during regular racing hours, for a prize.
(43) "Racing official" means a racing commissioner, commission staff as duties require, and all association racing department employees, as duties require.
(44) "Recognized meeting" means any meeting with regularly scheduled races for thoroughbreds on the flat, licensed by and conducted under administrative regulations promulgated by a governmental regulatory body, to include foreign countries which are regulated by a racing authority which has reciprocal relations with the Jockey Club of New York and whose race records can be provided an association by the Jockey Club.
(45) "Registration certificate" means the document issued by the Jockey Club of New York certifying as to the name, age, color, sex, pedigree, and breeder of a horse as registered by number with the Jockey Club.
It shall be deemed to refer also to the document known as a "racing permit" issued by the Jockey Club in lieu of a registration certificate when a horse is recognized as a thoroughbred for racing purposes in the United States, but is not recognized as a thoroughbred for breeding purposes insofar as registering its progeny with the Jockey Club.
(46) "Administrative regulations" when used in the plural, shall be deemed to mean all current administrative regulations promulgated by the commission; when used in the singular, shall be deemed to be confined to the numbered administrative regulation.
(47) "Rulings" means all determinations, decisions, or orders of the stewards or of the commission duly issued in writing and posted.
(48) "Scratch" means the withdrawal of a horse entered for a race after the time of closing of entries therefor in conformance with these administrative regulations.
(49) "Scratch time" means the time set by the racing secretary as a deadline for horsemen to indicate their desire to scratch out of a race.
(50) "Secretary" means the duly appointed and currently serving secretary of the commission.
(51) "Specimen" means a sample of blood, urine, or other specimen taken or drawn from a horse for chemical testing.
(52) "Stakes" means all fees paid by subscribers to an added-money or stakes race for nominating, eligibility, entrance, or starting, as may be required by the conditions of the race.
These fees shall be included in the purse.
(53) "Stakes race" means a race which closes more than seventy-two (72) hours in advance of its running and for which subscribers contribute money towards its purse, or a race for which horses are invited by an association to run for a guaranteed purse of $50,000 or more without payment of stakes.
With the exception of stakes races in North America, "stakes race" shall exclude races not listed by the Jockey Club Information System International Cataloguing Standards, Part One (1).
(54) "Stewards" means duly appointed racing officials with powers and duties specified in 810 KAR 1:004 serving at a current meeting in this Commonwealth.
(55) "Starter" means a horse in a race when the starting-gate doors open in front of it at the moment the starter dispatches the horses for a race.
(56) "Subscription" means nomination or entry of a horse in a stakes race.
(57) "Thoroughbred racing" means running contests between horses registered with the Jockey Club of New York, certified as having a thoroughbred pedigree, and ridden by a jockey.
Thoroughbred racing shall be licensed by a governmental regulatory body.
(58) "Unplaced" means not among the first three (3) horses finishing a race.
(59) "Walkover" means a race in which the only starter or all starters represent single ownership.
(60) "Weigh in" means the presentation of a jockey to the clerk of scales for weighing after a race.
(61) "Weigh out" means the presentation of a jockey to the clerk of scales for weighing prior to a race.
(62) "Weight for age" means the standard assignment of pounds to be carried by horses in races at specified distances during specified months of the year, scaled according to the age of the horse as set out in 810 KAR 1:014(12).
(63) "Workout" means the training exercise of a horse on the training track or main track of an association during which the horse is timed for speed over a specified distance.
(64) "Year" means twelve (12) consecutive months beginning with January and ending with December.
(KSRC Ch. 1, 1.01 to .64; 1 Ky.R. 891; eff. 5-14-75; Am. 10 Ky.R. 652; eff. 3-1-84; 15 Ky.R. 2277; 16 Ky.R. 163; eff. 7-14-89; 18 Ky.R. 1977; eff. 2-19-92; 24 Ky.R. 2445; 25 Ky.R. 852; eff. 10-12-98.)
