Can We Prevent Cancer? S cientists have been seeking to learn how to prevent cancer for decades.
Through these efforts, we have identified many ways to help lower our risk of developing certain cancers and discovered agents that can help prevent cancer.
Today, our increasing knowledge of the cellular and genetic changes that lead to cancer, and the factors that cause these changes, is enabling us to create targeted preventive strategies designed to stop the process of cancer development before it begins.
Understanding what causes cancer helps us to design and implement prevention strategies.
For example, we have shown that tobacco products - cigarettes, cigars, and smokeless tobacco - cause cancer, therefore, Americans can markedly reduce their cancer risk by changing a behavior.
We know that sun exposure can cause skin cancer; therefore, reducing sun exposure can reduce the risk of developing skin cancer.
We have firmly linked several occupational exposures to increases in cancer, enabling manufactures to realize the dangers of substances such as asbestos and benzene and find ways to remove them from the work environment to reduce cancer risk for both employees and consumers.
We have discovered that our lifestyles affect our risk for developing certain cancers - how much we weigh, and how many fruits and vegetables we eat.
Studies also suggest that reducing intake of red meat and increasing consumption of vegetables, fruits, and grains may help us lower our risk of certain cancers.
We also are moving ahead in our search for drugs or natural substances that can help us prevent cancer.
Recent results from the Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT) have shown that tamoxifen, a drug that has long been used to treat breast cancer, led to a 49 percent reduction in the incidence of primary breast cancer in women at high risk for developing the disease (see Story of Discovery).
This study also confirmed certain risks attached to taking tamoxifen, including an increased risk of endometrial cancer in women over age 50, and a risk of developing life-threatening blood clots in the lungs and major veins.
The BCPT results represent a significant step toward finding an agent that can halt the onset of breast cancer, but the study's findings are applicable only to women who are at a high-risk of developing the disease.
The ultimate aim of cancer prevention research is to develop a strategy or agent that can effectively stop the onset of cancer in both high-risk populations, and in the general population.
But to conduct studies that will determine if an agent works for people no matter their cancer risk, thousands of people are needed to participate in each trial.
Moreover, the number of participants required for a prevention trial is considerably higher than that required for a treatment trial.
Therefore, recruiting and financing trials large enough to prove that a preventive agent does work in the general population remains a challenge.
More than 13,000 BCPT participants were needed to prove the benefit of tamoxifen for women at high-risk, and approximately 18,000 men were needed for the Prostate Cancer Prevention Trial's (PCPT) test of finasteride - an agent that blunts the growth-promoting effects of male hormones on prostate cells - as a prostate cancer preventive in men.
Many of the lessons learned while studying high-risk populations are helping us identify prevention strategies that may be useful for the general population.
As we pursue our ultimate goal of developing effective prevention strategies for all people, NCI is following several lines of inquiry, including:
Chemoprevention NCI is investigating ways to prevent cancer using many types of man-made or natural chemical substances - the science of chemoprevention.
Recent successes with tamoxifen and the discovery of substances in grapes, broccoli, and many other foods that seemingly neutralize the negative effects of many cancer-causing substances in the body are guiding the development of effective preventive agents.
Researchers are analyzing results of studies of food intake, isolating the micronutrients or nutrients most likely responsible for the observed protective effect, and developing man-made chemicals, "nutraceuticals."
Two such micronutrients being investigated are selenium and vitamin E, both of which appear to help prevent prostate cancer.
NCI also is testing several other chemoprevention agents - 13-cis-retinoic acid for prevention of lung, skin, and secondary head and neck cancers, and 4-HPR, or fenretinide, for prevention of skin, breast and bladder cancers.
Hormone-related Preventive Agents The growth of prostate and breast cancers, the most prevalent cancers among American men and women, respectively, is significantly affected by hormones.
The recent demonstration that tamoxifen, a Selective Estrogen Response Modulator (SERM) that partially blocks the effect of the hormone estrogen in breast tissue, helps reduce the risk of breast cancers in women at high risk marks an historic achievement in our continuing quest for a drug that will prevent breast cancer in all women.
We already are working on development and testing a second generation of SERMs, such as raloxifene, a drug that may help reduce the risk of breast cancers without some of the potential side effects of tamoxifen.
Later this year, we will launch the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene (STAR) to compare the chemopreventive effects and toxicities of these two medications.
In addition, NCI is continuing to pursue research into anti-androgen agents, such as finasteride that may help reduce the risk of prostate cancer.
Understanding Genetic Risks The development of most cancers cannot be attributed to a single cause, but rather to a combination of factors.
Our greater understanding of the genetic causes of cancer is leading us to make more connections between exposures in our environment and how they affect our genes.
For example, studies suggest that people who have a variant of the gene responsible for the breakdown of alcohol (an environmental exposure) appear to be at increased risk of head and neck cancers.
We are also studying whether women with mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes will benefit more or less from tamoxifen than other women at high risk for breast cancer.
Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool
A m I at increased risk of developing breast cancer?" Many physicians and other health professionals are asked this question by their patients.
Now, new software developed by NCI and the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) is helping them respond to their patients' concerns.
The Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool currently is undergoing testing among health care professionals across the country.
The tool is designed to assist in determining a woman's risk for developing invasive breast cancer based on six key factors: current age, age at menarche, age at first live birth, number of first-degree relatives (mother, sister, or daughter) who have had breast cancer, number of positive or negative biopsies, and number of biopsies with atypical hyperplasia.
Once data on these six factors have been entered, the program then can compute the woman's risk (expressed as a percentage) of developing breast cancer within the next five years or over her lifetime.
These percentages generated are then compared to those of a woman of the same age with no risk factors.
These criteria and calculations are the same as those that were used to determine a woman's eligibility for the NSABP's Breast Cancer Prevention Trial (BCPT).
The BCPT tested tamoxifen as a preventive agent for women at high risk of developing the disease.
Women who had a five-year risk of 1.7 percent or higher were accepted into the trial.
Using the Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool, a health care professional will be able to determine if a patient would have qualified for the BCPT; knowing this may help physicians and patients decide if taking tamoxifen would be beneficial.
The program is not designed however, to determine risk of invasive breast cancer for women who have BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations, who have had breast cancer previously, or who have a history of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS).
Refining Risk Assessment Tools To understand better the links between genes, the environment, and cancer, we are refining tools that identify individuals at higher risk for cancers who might benefit most from preventive measures.
Current assessment tools often use surveys of personal history - how many relatives have had cancer, number of biopsies, on-the-job exposures.
While these tools are useful for identifying those at increased risk for developing a type of cancer, they lack precision.
Therefore, NCI is interested in developing more precise ways of assessing a persons' cancer risk.
For example, we know that smoking causes lung cancer, yet less than 20 percent ever develop the disease.
What distinguishes those who get cancer from those who do not? Only research can answer this question, and a number of studies are underway.
Some researchers are hoping to answer this question through a laboratory test using bleomycin that shows the ability of cells to repair DNA damage.
It is hoped that individuals more sensitive to DNA-damage from tobacco smoke can eventually be identified using this test.
Infectious Agents Some cancers can be linked to exposure to infectious agents.
For example, more than 90 percent of cervical cancers are linked to infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) a sexually transmitted agent (see Story of Discovery).
Many stomach cancers may be linked to the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, chronic infections by some types of hepatitis virus can lead to liver cancer, and infection with human herpes virus-8 has been linked to the development of Kaposi's sarcoma.
NCI is funding researchers who are focusing on ways to intervene and prevent cancers caused by these and other infectious agents.
Strategies to prevent such cancers may include development of vaccines to prevent the initial infection by cancer-causing infectious agents; NCI scientists already are engaged in the production and testing of an HPV vaccine.
It is hoped that this vaccine will both prevent infection, and benefit women already infected by inhibiting HPV replication.
Diet and Lifestyle Lifestyles often affect cancer risk.
There is evidence that certain foods in our diet - fruits, vegetables, high-fiber items, and legumes - may help reduce our risk of developing certain cancers including lung, colorectal, breast, stomach, pancreas, and prostate.
We are working to improve our ability to measure these connections by looking for "biomarkers of dietary intake," that is, looking for specific signs in the body that indicate level of exposure to a beneficial or harmful substance in our diets.
One example would be developing a way to determine if eating a diet high in fiber is helping a person guard against colorectal cancer.
We are also assessing how changes in food supply can affect cancer incidence, and we are continuing to study the effects of exercise on preventing cancer.
S P O T L I G H T O N R E S E A R C H P r e v e n t i o n
NCI's current prevention research efforts range from the discovery, development, and testing of new chemoprevention agents, to investigations of how we can prevent the spread of infectious agents implicated in cancer development, to research into effective public health strategies.
A few examples of specific prevention research efforts are:
Cyclo-oxygenase-2 E arly in the development of colon cancer, there is an increase in the amount of cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2), an enzyme involved in synthesizing of prostaglandins (steroid-like chemicals that control many complex functions).
New understanding of this pathway is providing us with targets for colon cancer prevention.
Several studies suggest that many of the non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDS (such as aspirin and ibuprofen) may help prevent colon cancer by inhibiting both COX-2 and a related enzyme, COX-1.
We are continuing to investigate why these nonspecific COX inhibitors offer this protective effect and at least four Phase III trials are underway to test the effectiveness of NSAIDS, including aspirin and sulindac in colon cancer prevention.
In addition to testing nonspecific inhibitors of the cyclo-oxygenases, two clinical trials are underway to determine if a specific COX-2 inhibitor, celecoxib, is effective in preventing colon cancer in groups at high risk for developing the disease.
Ways to shut down the specific gene that overproduces COX-2 are also being explored.
Helicobacter pylori E vidence gathered by NCI in conjunction with the National Institute of Digestive Diseases and Kidney Disorders is accumulating to suggest that Helicobacter pylori, a bacterium that is the principal cause of stomach ulcers and gastritis, is one of the most likely causes for stomach cancer.
Stomach cancer is one of the most common cancers in the world, and the fact that bacteria appear to be involved in its development has prompted researchers to explore ways to combat H. pylori infection.
Antibiotic regimens are now available, but it remains unclear as to whether eradicating bacteria from the system will really reduce stomach cancer risk.
A vaccine might ultimately be developed that could prevent H. pylori infection and perhaps thereby reduce the occurrence of stomach cancers.
Tobacco T obacco use is the leading preventable cause of death in the United States, but 50 million Americans continue to smoke or use smokeless tobacco, despite strong evidence linking smoking cigarettes or cigars to lung cancer and linking all forms of tobacco to oral cancers.
Furthermore, another 46 million Americans are former smokers, and these individuals will retain a somewhat heightened cancer risk for the remainder of their lives.
In fact, 50 percent of newly diagnosed lung cancers are now found in former smokers.
During the past several decades, NCI has been alerting Americans to the dangers of tobacco use and its addictive nature, as well as developing effective interventions to help people quit smoking.
To continue and intensify this effort, and to develop effective methods of further lowering cancer risk for former tobacco users, NCI has gathered a group of intramural and extramural researchers, the Tobacco Research Implementation Group, who are preparing and implementing a comprehensive agenda for tobacco research.
The goal is greater coordination of NCI's varied tobacco research efforts from basic research on cellular changes caused by smoking, to behavioral research on innovative ways to prevent young people from starting to smoke and help those who smoke stop, to population-based research to help us tailor public health messages.
One of the principal focuses of this effort will be to expand our research into the biobehavioral aspects of tobacco use, including the relationship of behavior to biology and the mechanisms of addiction, and developing better ways of treating tobacco dependence, while continuing our community-based research efforts.
In addition to the coordination and expansion of our future tobacco research efforts, we are also engaged in many ongoing tobacco research projects.
In FY 1997 and again in FY 1998, we set aside funding for research on youth and tobacco, and on methods of prevention and cessation.
By early 1999, more than 30 new teams of researchers will be engaged in the struggle to prevent tobacco use among children and to help those who are using tobacco products to quit.
We are engaged in pharmacobehavioral research - evaluating new pharmacologic agents and methods of behavior modification - to help adults stop using tobacco and to identify biological and behavioral factors that influence who benefits most from different treatments.
We have several ongoing research projects to help people understand the cancer risks of smokeless tobacco and to look for ways to help people stop using it.
Also, in response to the recent increase in cigar use, NCI has published a monograph, Cigars: Health Effects and Trends, which provides a complete review of available information on health risks, especially cancer, and cigar smoking.
This review confirms that cigar smoking can cause cancers of the lung, oral cavity, larynx, and esophagus, as well as, increase the risk of coronary heart disease and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, depending on inhalation and frequency of use.
