Welcome to the State Treasurer's web site [pets1.jpg] [USEMAP:AAFLo499.jpg]
We have also received awards from the American Veterinary Medical Assocation and the International Fund for Animal Welfare and have been recognized five years in a row (1998-2002) by the Muntwyler Foundation.
Mission Statement
The A.A.F. is dedicated to providing the shelter, care, and when appropriate re-homing of animals to caring, permanent homes.
We abide by a no killing policy, which allows for euthanasia only under professional veterinary assessment, recommendation, and administration in cases of terminal illness which cause suffering, in cases of injury too severe to repair, or in cases of such severe aggression that it is a threat to other shelter residents and caregivers.
The A.A.F. is dedicated to educating the public on such issues that impact on animal welfare, preservation, and protection, developing humane attitudes and compassion in young people, providing a pet therapy program to area nursing centers, and providing a continuing care program for dogs and cats.
The A.A.F. is dedicated to improving and protecting sentient life
.
Adoption
We have many wonderful cats and dogs in need of a responsible and permanent home.
Just call us at 815-455-9411.
An A.A.F. representative will ask a few questions to determine which of our kids will be best suited to you and your home environment.
If we have a suitable match, an appointment will be made for you to come to the shelter and fall in love!
An adoption includes a complete physical, testing for disease, inoculations, and if a young animal, a certificate for future spay or neutering.
We strongly recommend considering an adult animal.
An adults personality is clearly evident which is critical to a long and harmonious relationship between pet and owner.
Call now to save a small life and add years of unconditional love to your life!
Volunteer
Adult volunteers who are willing to roll up their sleeves are always welcome with as little as two morning hours bi-weekly.
Youll have the satisfaction of working surrounded by affectionate, uncaged animals in a cheerful environment with friendly people who share your interest.
We are in need of volunteers to feed and love the animals, clean their living areas, do handyman work, go on pet therapy visits to local nursing homes, create and present educational programs, assist in fundraising efforts, or put to use any skill or talent you possess.
We also have a number of events to participate in and enjoy.
Call us to start a fulfilling and heart-warming endeavor.
Our Story
The two founders of the Assisi Animal Foundation, I.L. Yarosh and I. Linklater, are a mother and daughter team.
The former a retired business woman, the latter a teacher.
Encountering strays, giving them care, and providing homes had been a family tradition, but the idea of the A.A. F. as an actual shelter started in Chicago in the mid eighties with work toward legal status.
Then the search for a site began.
The founders sold a home they loved in Chicago, and moved to McHenry County.
Shortly, the first newsletter went out to a handful of friends and animal lovers asking for support of the project.
Meanwhile, our animal population increased.
After some months, it was evident we had to get started on construction, so personal funds and modest donations were used to start renovations on a small horse barn on the property.
The contractor hired promised the project would be complete for Christmas 1987.
The following March 1988, he abandoned the project, left us with no materials, and had already been paid 80% of the total project cost! To make it worse, when we called in County inspectors to tell us where we stood, they regretfully informed us that the work was substandard, in violation, and had to be torn down! After the initial shock, we realized that we had just two alternatives putting down the 150 animals living in our home and accepting defeat, or remortgaging our home and property for startup money once more and working to save the animals and the dream! Obviously the first alternative was not acceptable.
Instead, we chose to tough it out and a full year later we moved all the animals in to their brand new home! Then we set about reclaiming and repairing damage to our home that had suffered considerably in the interim.
The year was something of a nightmare, but with interminable work, help from wonderful people, and considerable personal debt, we were able to save the animals, the dream, and open the countys first no-kill, cageless shelter! Were very proud of that, and other programs that serve the community.
We are a not-for-profit, 501(c)3, charitable organization with dreams of broadening our work, our space, and the number of innocent lives we save.
Please contact us and help save a small life today.
Thank you.
Community Services
Animal Assisted Therapy:
Pets for Patient Progress This special program introduced in 1987 by the founders takes some of our dogs and cats to visit residents in area convalescent centers.
The benefits of these visits are numerous.
The visits are something residents can look forward to, because they know pets pay little attention to age or physical disability, but accept people as they are.
The physical interaction encourages use of a persons hands and arms, and stretching and turning their body.
Handling and petting the dog or cat has shown to reduce a persons blood pressure.
The program reaches hundreds of people in 11 different local nursing homes each month.
Pets for Patient Progress allows people to feel once again the unconditional love animals give.
Educational Outreach The A.A.F. visits adult and childrens groups and classrooms to provide education on humane animal treatment and animal welfare issues.
The A.A.F. newsletter provides information about issues such as health and legislation that impacts animal wellbeing.
We also plan and lead Eco-Tour Safaris to East Africa, India, and other wildlife areas
Pet Retirement
In our visits to nursing and convalescent centers, we discovered some residents needed a permanent home for their beloved pet when entering a nursing home became necessary.
In response to that need, we have established a Pet Retirement program that offers a lifetime of continuing care at the A.A.F.
The plan offers two alternatives: One for immediate placement, and one for planning to cover the need for care when the owner no longer can provide that care.
Also, people may make a specific bequest in a will to care for a pet.
We are most appreciative of bequests that provide care for all our animals in a donors name.
Please contact us for details.
Armchair Adoption Many true animal lovers are unable to have pets, or cant have yet another pet in their home.
The Armchair Adoption program is just the thing for you.
The adopter receives regular letters and photos about the selected companion until the time (if it occurs) it finds a permanent home.
Usually the Armchair candidates are older, or have a personality or behavior that causes people to pass them up for regular adoption.
A caring gift of fifteen dollars monthly will provide all the care your chosen adoptee will need for a comfortable life in the shelter.
Join Us We are a small, not-for-profit, 501(c)3, grass roots group that operates solely on support from members and friends of animals.
Donations are tax deductible to the full extent of the law.
Please consider:
* Donations
* Adopting a loving companion
* Volunteering
* Attending fundraisers
* Armchair adoptions
* Membership
* Board participation
Thank you,
The Assisi Animal Foundation
HOW TO CONTACT
ASSISI ANIMAL FOUNDATION 815-455-9411
This page last updated on December 5, 2003
Please feel free to email the Webmaster at the Treasurer's Office
Home | Daily Rates | Site Map | Search | Email | Inside the Office | Personal Finance | The Illinois Funds Education | Programs 
