"Good Stewards of the Sea" Seabird Facts SEABIRDS 
TODAY...
People are everywhere.
Today's situation is dangerous for seabirds.
· Most SEABIRDS come to land ONLY to nest and raise their chicks.
This is a critical time in the survival of each species.
· Seabirds nest together, often in huge colonies.
The spectacle of these colonies lures people to come close to view them.
· Seabirds nest on beaches, cliff faces, and level ground.
No place is really seabird-free during the nesting season.
· Some cliff-nesting seabirds lay their eggs directly on rock ledges.
When frightened, seabirds panic, often bumping eggs or chicks off the cliff.
· Some seabirds dig burrows in the soil or lay their eggs in caves between rocks.
Trampling and rock slides, caused by hikers, could destroy their nests.
· Some seabirds come out of their burrows only at night.
The island looks deserted during the day, seeming safe to go ashore.
CONSERVATION
OF
A
RCTIC
F
LORA AND
FAUNA (CAFF)
Seabirds lived isolated from people
Circumpolar Seabird Working Group Canadian Wildlife Service Finnish Ministry of the Environment Greenland Home Rule Government Icelandic Institute of Natural History Norwegian Ministry of the Environment Swedish Environmental Protection Agency State Committee of the Russian Federation for Environmental Protection United States Fish and Wildlife Service 1999
CAFF International Secretariat Hafnarstraeti 97 600 Akureyri, Iceland E-mail: CAFF@nattfs.is Internet: http://www.grida.no/caff
PILOTS Aircraft close to frightens panicked flying low and seabird colonies the nesting birds.
Their takeoffs might bump eggs or chicks off ledges.
Sonic booms cause the same panic.
MARINERS Nesting seabirds fly away in panic when they hear loud noises.
How you can help: · Please observe and photograph from a distance.
· Use binoculars and telephoto lenses.
· Avoid going near colony islands.
COMMERCIAL FISHERS Seabirds congregate in waters below and near nesting colonies.
If you set your gillnets or longlines nearby, you'll catch birds instead of fish.
That wastes birds, time, and money.
How you can help: · Fish at a distance from seabird colonies.
· If you hook or net a seabird, carefully free the bird.
If the bird is hooked, remove the hook or cut the line next to the hook.
Mariners to the rescue! SOS from seabird colonies-STOP A RAT INVASION! Rats devastate island wildlife -- killing and spreading disease.
Rats must be kept off islands.
How you can help: · Please, keep a good distance between you and seabird nesting colonies.
Recommended distance-minimum of one kilometer (or more!).
Keep your ship rat free: · Eliminate sources of food and water (keep trash and food in metal containers).
· Clean up debris that can provide shelter for rodents.
· Use line guards when tied in port.
· Inspect cargo for signs of rodents.
· Install traps.
Seabird Fact · Many seabirds have no natural land predators.
They are helpless against dogs or other introduced mammals such as rats and mink.
Safety Warning: · Birdstrikes are a life-threatening hazard.
They can cause aircraft crashes or major damage.
Seabird burrows often collapse if stepped on.
Dogs can dig into burrows and chase or kill the chicks.
How you can help: · You seldom know where burrows are until it's too late -- so it's best to avoid going ashore on seabird islands.
· If you do go ashore, watch your step!
Curious seabirds can entangle themselves in trash or mistakenly eat indigestible plastics.
In both cases, they are doomed to starve.
Oil and birds don't mix -- even a little oil smeared from adult breast feathers to eggs can kill the growing embryo.
How you can help: · Please keep plastics, trash and oil on board until you reach a port with proper disposal sites.
Seabird Fact · Unprotected eggs and chicks can chill or overheat, depending on the weather.
· Predators take advantage of chaos and eat unprotected eggs and chicks.
Remember, don't throw live rats overboard.
They are good swimmers and may reach islands.
