Agency Overview · The Indiana Commission for Women (ICW) was established in 1992 by Executive Order 92-15.
In 1996, Senate Enrolled Act 500 instituted the Commission.
Indiana became the 27th State in the country to create a Women's Commission.
The ICW is symbolic of Indiana's true commitment in improving the quality of life for women and families.
· According to the 2000 U.S. Census report, women make up 51% of the 6,080,485 population in Indiana and 35.7% of Indiana's female population is under the age of 18.
This 51% of the population is the constituency that the ICW serves on a daily basis.
· The ICW is charged with assessing the needs of Indiana women and their families and with promoting the full participation of Indiana Women in all aspects of society.
· The ICW provides outreach, support and education to Hoosier women while serving as a liaison between government and private interest groups concerned with services for women.
· The ICW informs leaders of business, education, government and media of the nature and scope of the problem of sex discrimination with a view to enlist their support in working toward improvement.
· The commission also promotes the consideration of qualified women for all levels of government and oversees the coordination and assessment of programs in all state agencies as they affect women.
· The ICW is required to evaluate laws and governmental policies with respect to the needs of women, and to monitor legislation and other legal developments in order to make recommendations to the Indiana General Assembly and the Governor on issues concerning women.
As well, the Commission is focusing on ways to enhance the economic status of Indiana women.
2001-2002 GOVERNOR Frank O'Bannon
Staffing and Budget · The ICW currently has two full-time employees on staff, an Executive Director and a Director of Programs.
· The ICW implemented the Work for Credit Internship Program for college students to work on a project(s) for the commission for credit towards their degree.
In 2001, Sarah Fullam from Ball State University interned with the Commission and in 2002 Chaunta Redfield from Indiana State University interned with the ICW.
· The ICW has 14 Commissioners from all areas of the State ranging from Northwest Indiana to Evansville.
· The ICW's annual budget for FY 2001-2002 and 2002-2003 is $99,024 for Personal Services, and $21,772 for Other Operating Expenses.
The Indiana Department of Workforce Development provides staff and administrative support for the ICW, as required by statute (IC 4-23-25).
COMMISSIONERS Gazella A. Summitt, Chair Rep. Vaneta Becker Jane Blessing Linda K. Bloom Rep. Linda Lawson Melissa Martin Teresa Jeter-Newburn Joanne Sanders Sen. Vi Simpson Sen. Becky Skillman Sharon Walker Ann Windley Katie Wolf
Women as Leaders 
The event was held at the State House in March and a breakfast was held in honor of the female legislators that were currently serving in the Indiana General Assembly.
Women from various organizations, businesses, and clubs across the State attended the event to network and meet with their local members of the Indiana General Assembly to discuss policy initiatives and tour the State House.
Women attended a bi-partisan panel presentation made up of female legislators, female agency heads and female lobbyists.
In 2002, the ICW once again hosted the Legislative Day at the State House.
The breakfast held in the rotunda was sponsored by Ice Miller and their clients including: Anthem Insurance Companies, Eli Lilly, Girl Scout Councils of Indiana, Indiana Adoption Agencies United Coalition and the Indiana Health Care Association.
The day continued with two panel presentations in the Indiana Supreme Court Chambers.
Information was presented on the 2002 legislative session, serving as a woman leader in the General Assembly and helpful lobbying tips from the State House's top lobbyists.
The ICW has joined the University of Indianapolis, AAUW, NAWBO, WFYI, Greenleaf Center for Servant Leadership, Stanley K. Lacy Leadership Association and others to host The Women's Leadership Exchange.
The WLE is a monthly event open to women from all areas of business, labor, government entities, education, non-profit business, religion, medicine and the community.
The purpose of the event is to give women leaders the opportunity to meet other leaders, to develop one's own leadership strategy by hearing other leaders' experiences and triumphs, to be encouraged and challenged, and to mentor and develop young women leaders.
The ICW hopes
to assist other communities across the State in organizing a similar leadership structure to support women in their community.
On November 18, 2002, the ICW in collaboration with the Gender Fairness Foundation hosted its first annual 2002 Virginia Jenckes Awards Reception in the rotunda of the Indiana State Capitol.
The Award is named for Virginia Ellis Jenckes who was the first woman elected by Indiana voters to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives.
It recognizes the outstanding accomplishments of Indiana women in the fields of business, education, government, and law, as well as a male who has made significant contributions to gender equality.
The 2002 Awardees are: Patricia Miller and Barbara Baekgaard with Vera Bradley Designs in the Field of Business; Dr. Rebecca L. Pierce in the Field of Education; Geneva Shedd in the field of Government; Sheila Suess Kennedy in the Field of Law; and Elmer Blakenship for significant contributions by a male to gender equality.
ICW Executive Director, Annette Craycraft, was a guest speaker at AAUW's State Convention held in French Lick, Indiana.
She shared information about the Indiana General Assembly and helpful tips on advocating for women's issues.
The ICW assisted the national organization of Federally Employed Women (FEW) in organizing the FEW Annual National Conference held in Indianapolis in the summer of 2001 at the Indianapolis Convention Center.
The ICW assisted the organization in obtaining guest speakers, disseminating conference brochures and flyers, and other items.
ICW Executive Director, Annette Craycraft, brought greetings on behalf of the State of Indiana at the event's breakfast.
The ICW has also been working with local judges in the planning of the upcoming National Women Judges Conference to be held in Indianapolis in 2004.
EX-OFFICIO MEMBERS First Lady Judy O'Bannon Robin Tew
ADVISORY BOARD Jade Cooney Sandi Huddleston Sandra Leek Judy Singleton Gloria Lowe-Walker 10 N. Senate, SE 204 Indianapolis, IN 46204 (317) 233-6303/Fax 232-7485 Indiana Government Center South
ICW STAFF Annette E. Craycraft, Executive Director Kimberly Thacker, Director of Programs
ICW@state.in.us www.IN.gov/icw
Women's History In March, the ICW joined other women's groups in participating in National Women's History Month.
The ICW received a proclamation from Governor O'Bannon in March of 2001 and 2002 proclaiming March as Women's History Month in the State of Indiana.
The ICW staff and commissioners traveled extensively across our State during March, and throughout the year, to provide discussions and presentations to various organizations and schools as part of our Speaker's Bureau Program entitled 2016-Linking the Future.
Discussions included: women in history, Title IX, sexual harassment, gender equity, realizing the obstacles women overcame on the road to success, and the still existing barriers.
As our State approaches its 200th Birthday, December 2016, these presentations are designed to inspire, encourage, and empower Indiana women and girls and the importance of establishing lifelong goals.
In March of 2001, the ICW co-sponsored the Sesquicentennial Anniversary of Indiana's First Women's Rights Convention at the Dublin Friends Meetinghouse with a reenactment of the convention that launched the women's suffrage movement in the State.
The ICW sponsored a Historical Marker which will be placed by the Indiana Historical Bureau at the site of the Dublin Friends Meetinghouse so visitors and tourists will be educated for years to come about the beginning of Indiana's suffrage movement.
The ICW joined the Indiana Women's History Association, the American Association of University Women and the NCAA to host For the Sport of It: Female Athletics and Title IX, 1972-2002 in September of 2002 to celebrate the 30th Anniversary of Title IX.
During a panel presentation, Indiana sports experts discussed the impact of Title IX. Donna Lopiano, Executive Director of the Women's Sports Foundation, was the keynote speaker, and former U.S. Senator Birch Bayh was honored for sponsoring the Title IX legislation.
In November 2002, the ICW partnered with the IUPUI Spirit and Place Festival Committee, the Indiana Supreme Court and the National Organization of Women to host a reenactment of the Trial of Susan B. Anthony in the Indiana Supreme Court Chambers.
The ICW sponsored the Live Web Telecast of this event for schools, churches and organizations across the State, and the ICW continues to archive the web-cast for further women's history education.
Partnerships and Involvement The ICW attends conferences throughout the State annually to display materials and answer questions from Hoosiers about government services for women.
The ICW staff also participated in the Hunt Construction/U.S.
Department of Labor Mega Project Planning Committee to advise on how to recruit and retain female workers on the Fort Benjamin Harrison Project.
The ICW was also involved with the Northwest Indiana Study of Indiana Women in Business to discuss ways to promote women businesses in Northwest Indiana and how the State of Indiana can better assist women business owners.
The ICW is also involved with the Building Bright Beginnings Council, the Office of Women's Health Advisory Board, Indiana Women's History Association Board of Directors, the Domestic Violence Roundtable, and the gender specific roundtable to study girls in the Indiana judicial system.
The ICW continues to collaborate with Indiana's women's organizations on advocacy, program initiatives and outreach.
The ICW would like to thank the following organizations for their support and efforts:
Indiana Breast Cancer Alliance Indiana Women's History Association (IWHA) Central Indiana Women's Collaborative Fort Wayne Women's Bureau Indiana Coalition Against Sexual Assault (INCASA) American Association of University Women (AAUW) Gender Fairness Coalition (GFC) National Association of Women Business Owners (NAWBO) League of Women Voters (LWV) Business and Professional Women (BPW) American Business Women's Association (ABWA) Indiana Coalition Against Domestic Violence (ICADV) Domestic Violence Network of Greater Indianapolis National Organization for Women (NOW) Ball State University Women's Studies Department Office of Women's Health at the Indiana State Department of Health Breast and Cervical Cancer Program at the Indiana State Department of Health Indiana Department of Corrections Office of Minority Business Enterprise at the Indiana Department of Administration
Women's Health The ICW, in collaboration with the Office of Women's Health at the Indiana State Department of Health, made available the Women's Health Mini Grant Program to Indiana community organizations, government agencies, and educational facilities.
These grants are known to provide for the development of programs that promote healthy behaviors in women and girls in Indiana.
In 2001, the topic for the grant program was domestic violence.
A combined total of $79,550 was awarded to eight programs across the State.
These eight programs focused on domestic violence prevention, education and intervention.
The following organizations were the 2001-2002 grantees: · Women's Homeless Prevention Program Marion County · Battered Women, Silent Tears: An Investigation into Domestic Violence in America Allen 
· Directions! Domestic Violence Programming Dearborn, Franklin, Ohio, Ripley and Switzerland Counties The ICW hosted the Breast Cancer Illumination Initiative in the State of Indiana for the first time in collaboration with the Estee Lauder Global Landmarks Illumination Project in 2001.
The Indianapolis Artsgarden was illuminated in pink lights on October 1st to promote awareness about breast cancer issues, especially the importance of early detection.
In the fall of 2001, the Indiana Breast Cancer Alliance (IBCA) was formed, and includes members from the healthcare community, advocates, state agencies, not for profit supporters, and the ICW.
The IBCA hosted the 2002 Illumination Program.
Once again the Indianapolis Artsgarden was bathed in pink lights while approximately 100 breast cancer survivors, advocates and friends heard from various speakers including State Senator and survivor Beverly Gard, survivor Maria Wilson, survivor Martha Bonds, and First Lady of the City of Indianapolis-Amy Minick Peterson.
Dr. Greg Wilson with the Indiana State Department of Health read a proclamation from Governor O'Bannon proclaiming October as Breast Cancer Awareness Month.
Women and the Economy The Indiana Commission for Women was awarded a grant from the U.S. Department of Labor to host a series of Financial Planning Seminars in the State to benefit women.
The ICW developed a `Train the Trainer' program.
With information provided by the FDIC and the expertise and assistance of the Purdue Extension Staff, the ICW provided service providers with the necessary skills to assist their clients in making sound financial management decisions.
Topics included in the seminar were Spending Choices, Systems to Make Your Money Work, Using Credit Wisely, and the FDIC Money Smart Program.
Participants learned effective ways to save money, money traps, how to build and sustain a positive credit record, and much more.
The ICW played a very large role in the planning and coordination of the 2001 and 2002 Women and Work Conference.
The conference is organized each year by an advisory board made up of federal, state and local agencies, private organizations, businesses, educational institutions and labor organizations who work to improve the status of women in the workplace.
The conference demonstrates and encourages unique ways of working together, ensuring that Indiana women are offered the best possible education, job training, employment and support services available.
The 2001 Women and Work Conference "Celebrating Women of Courage and Vision" was held in October at the Sheraton Four Points Hotel in Indianapolis.
Carolyn Coleman, Deputy Mayor of the City of Indianapolis, provided the Keynote Address.
The 2001 recipient of the Outstanding Achievement Award was Deneane Goodson, a single mother who has rebuilt her life after enduring domestic violence and other diversities.
IndyPendence Career Development Center was also honored for its empowering mission to motivate and train young women to reach their career goals and become the leaders of tomorrow.
The 2002 Conference "Celebrating the Heritage and Culture of Women" celebrated the 15th year of the annual event.
Sportscaster Kimberly Harms was the keynote speaker.
Yvonne Perkins, Director of Corporate Affairs Citizens Gas, and Charlotte Zietlow with Middle Way House in Bloomington were both honored, along with Dress for Success in Indianapolis, the Fort Wayne Women's Bureau Women's Enterprise Initiative, and Vincennes University's Program for Adult Student Success (PASS).
The ICW staff also attended the U.S. Department of Labor's conference Expanding the Pipeline: Women and Girls in Science, Engineering and Technology to receive further training and education on the benefits of non-traditional careers for women.
The conference provided the ICW with innovative ideas to create new mentoring programs targeting young girls.
