DUR Bulletin Published by the Ohio DUR Board Thomas E. Gretter, M.D., Chair Anne Gentry, Pharm.D., Medical Advisor Stephen Baez, M.D. Marc Carroll, D.O. Suzanne Eastman, R.Ph. Marty Giannamore, Pharm.D.
Robert Kubasak, R.Ph. James Powers, M.D. Donald Sullivan, R.Ph., Ph.D.
Editor: Anne Gentry, Pharm.
D. Contributing Authors: Andrew Irons,R.Ph.
&
Setting appropriate goals for patients to meet, along with a physician directed diabetes education team following the American Diabetes Association (ADA) standards of care can significantly reduce the risks of developing diabetic retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy.
The ADA published standards of care should be included in every treatment plan for patients with diabetes.
This newsletter will review the ADA Clinical Practice Recommendations for 1999.
The treatment options for type II diabetes will also be reviewed looking at the mechanism of action and their place in therapy.
It is important to keep in mind two major studies when establishing treatment goals for individual patients.
In type I diabetes, the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) conclusively demonstrated that when intensive treatment regimens were used compared to conventional regimens the risk of development or progression of retinopathy, nephropathy, and neuropathy were decreased by 50-75%.
The United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) is the longest and largest study looking at type II diabetic and blood glucose control.
UKPDS conclusively demonstrated that improved blood glucose control reduces the risks of developing retinopathy and nephropathy and possibly reduces neuropathy.
The study also showed that when following ADA treatment recommendations for reducing blood pressure the risks of strokes, diabetes-related deaths, heart failure, microvascular complications, and visual loss was significantly reduced.
The ADA recommends that it is important when treating type I and type II diabetes to keep in mind the patients' ability to understand and carry out the treatment regimen, the patients' risk for severe hypoglycemia, and other patient factors that may increase risk or decrease benefit to the patient.
ADA clinical practice recommendations state that assessment of weight, blood pressure and feet should be included at each visit.
Assessment of the patient's blood pressure will allow for early detection of hypertension.
D Medical Management 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
Statement of short and long term goals Medications Individualized medical nutrition therapy Lifestyle changes Education for patient and family Monitoring instructions for self monitoring blood glucose Annual referral to eye specialist Specialty consultation as indicated Agreement on continuing follow-up Dental Hygiene Pneumococcal vaccine; influenza vaccine annually Discussion of contraception and pregnancy for women of childbearing age Hypertension has been contributed to the development of chronic complications in patients with diabetes.
Goal blood pressure for a patient with diabetes is 
Laboratory evaluation is also an important component to the follow-up assessment of the diabetic patients.
Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1C) is key in assessing the patient's mean glycemic control over the past 2-3 months.
The ADA recommends HgA1C be monitored every 3 months if the HgA1C is 
A fasting lipid profile should also be drawn annually.
This profile should include fasting serum cholesterol, triglycerides, HDL cholesterol, and calculated LDL cholesterol measurements.
It is well documented that persistent albuminuria in the range of 30-300mg/24h has been shown to be the earliest sign of diabetic nephropathy.
Type II diabetics should be evaluated for microalbuminuria at the time of diagnosis and then annually.
The ADA also recommends that a comprehensive dilated eye and visual examination should be performed annually.
Type II diabetes is the most common form of diabetes with approximately 15.6 million people diagnosed with the disease.
If diet and exercise modification alone cannot maintain blood glucose control, oral therapy and insulin become the standard of care for type II diabetes along with treatment of comorbidities such as hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
Oral classes of agents now available for type II diabetes are: Sulfonylureas, Meglitinide, Thiazolidinediones, Biguanides, and Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors.
Sulfonylureas primarily increase insulin production by stimulating release of insulin from the pancreatic beta-cells.
Efficacy can normally be seen by a 1.5-2% decrease in HbA1C levels.
Sulfonylureas are recommended as first line monotherapy and may be used along with other agents to lower blood glucose.
It is estimated around 5-7% of patients will fail on sulfonylureas after one year requiring a second add on agent.
Ideally patients will respond best when duration of illness has been less then 5-10 years, fasting plasma glucose is 
Primary adverse events are hypoglycemia, weight gain, and an increase in liver function tests.
It is important to be cautious in using these agents in patients with hepatic and/or renal failure and may want to begin with low doses initially in these patients.
Metformin, a biguanide, works by decreasing hepatic glucose output and will also help increase peripheral glucose utilization.
It does not stimulate release of insulin from the pancreas and hypoglycemia is seldom an issue when used alone.
Metformin has shown to decrease HbA1C levels by 1.5-2%.
This agent can be used as monotherapy and also in combination with sulfonylureas in patients with primary or secondary sulfonylurea failure.
The advantages in using metformin are modest weight loss or at least no weight gain, reduction in LDL and triglycerides, and a possible decrease in macrovascular complications Adverse effects are mainly associated with gastrointestinal disturbances and lactic acidosis is extremely rare.
The medication is contraindicated in patients with renal and/or hepatic failure or a history of lactic acidosis.
Metformin must be discontinued 48 hours prior to surgery and IV contrast administration.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, acarbose and miglitol, competitively inhibit enzymes that break down sucrose into glucose and fructose thus delaying digestion of carbohydrates and subsequent absorption of glucose.
This class of drugs have no direct effect on circulating glucose levels.
This class of drugs has been shown to be less effective at lowering HbA1C than sulfonylureas or metformin.
A decrease in HbA1C by 0.5 to 1% have been seen clinically.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors are indicated in use in patients with type II diabetes with mild fasting hyperglycemia and in combination with either metformin or sulfonylureas in new onset type II patients needing further reduction in blood glucose.
It is most useful in patients with post-prandial hyperglycemia.
The class is dosed with each meal and the major side effects are gastrointestinal symptoms, occurring in 2/3 of patients in clinical trial.
Liver function must be monitored due to elevated liver enzymes seen at higher doses.
Thiazolidinediones work by decreasing insulin resistance, thus improving insulin action in muscle and fat tissues.
They also have a minor effect on hepatic glucose production and output.
Currently two products are on the market dosed once a day; pioglitazone and rosiglitazone.
Pioglitazone (Actos®) is indicated in type II diabetes alone or in combination with sulfonylureas, metformin, or insulin when adequate control cannot be achieved with monotherapy.
Rosiglitazone (Avandia®) is indicated in the treatment of type II diabetes as monotherapy and in combination with metformin.
These agents result in approximately a 1-2% decrease in HbA1C levels.
It is important not to use thiazolidinediones in patients with hepatic dysfunction or elevated LFTs and to use caution in patients with CHF due to plasma volume expansion because mild to moderate edema can be seen with their use.
Patients must have LFTs monitored every II months for 1 year then periodically thereafter.
Note that Pioglitazone is metabolized by the CYP3A4 system and drugs known to inhibit CYP3A4 may increase the effects of the drug.
Rezulin®, recently removed from the market is a thiazolidinedione.
The last oral medication is Repaglinide (Prandin®), the only approved meglitinide in the United States.
It works by stimulating release of insulin from pancreatic beta cells.
This is the same mechanism as sulfonylureas but is rapidly absorbed and eliminated.
The pharmacokinetics of this medication allows it to be dosed 15 minutes before each meal to stimulate insulin secretion.
It seems to be as efficacious as sulfonylureas in decreasing HbA1C.
Adverse effects were mainly hypoglycemia and weight gain.
It is contraindicated in type I diabetics and patients with severe hepatic or renal dysfunction.
Repaglinide is metabolized by the CYP3A4 system therefore caution in use with known inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4.
Insulin can and should be used in the treatment of type II diabetes.
The decision to use insulin is usually made based on discussions between the patient and physician.
Insulin can be used as monotherapy or in combination with oral agents.
Bibliography American Diabetes Association.
American Diabetes Association: Clinical Practice Recommendations 1999.
Diabetes Care, 22 S1: S1-S114.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
National Diabetes Fact Sheet: National and general information on diabetes in the U.S. Revised Edition.
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1998.
DeFronzo RA. Pharmacologic Therapy for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.
Ann Intern Med 131: 281303, 1999.
Micromedex SmithKline Beecham.
Rosiglitazone.
Package Insert 1999.
Takeda Pharmaceuticals America, Inc.
Pioglitazone.
Package Insert 1999.
