virginiAVIATION May/june 2003 VIRGINIA AVIATION j Page Published by THe Virginia Department of Aviation may/june 2003 New General Aviation Terminal for Chesterfield County Airport Chesterfield County Airport is sporting a new General Aviation terminal.
The new terminal was just recently completed and the dedication ceremony will held June 24th.
At just under 9,000-square-feet, the two-story terminal is a beautiful facility that houses the airport business offices along with a very nice 35-person all on the second floor.
The first floor has a large vending area, flight planning room, pilot's lounge with quiet rooms for pilots to relax, a very large passenger area and ethernet (internet) access on both floors.
"This terminal was designed for general aviation but with corporate pilots in mind," said Aviation Director Steven Calabro.
"This facility is a testament to the community support for the airport."
New security features are also in
conference room, bathrooms with showers and outside observation deck,
place, with the addition of a magnetic ID system, seven cameras are also in place inside and outside of the terminal.
Chesterfield County Airport is located in one of the fastest growing areas of the U.S., the corridor that runs from Florida to New York and New England.
Less than 2 miles from the Chesterfield County government center and 12 miles south of downtown Richmond.
The airport is conveniently located at (please see Terminal cont. on pg. 8)
Department of Aviation Has Local School Flying High on Aviation Community Outreach program a success The Virginia Department of Aviation embarked last year on a community outreach initiative.
This community initiative has been put in place to help strengthen the Department's partnerships in the community.
The community outreach initiative started by employees at the Department is the Adopt-A-School program.
This has allowed the Department to develop a relationship with Donahoe Elementary School's second through fifth grade by giving the staff a chance to mentor a class, raise awareness about aviation to youth and help boost academic performance.
Numerous Department employees have commitments to the program allowing all classes to have a designated Department employee throughout the school.
These visits are accomplished through lunch and classroom visits and various other school sponsored activities.
"The Department of Aviation has been wonderful to work with," said Donahoe Principal Dr. Henry (please see School cont. on pg. 8)
Page 2
VIRGINIA AVIATION
may/june 2003
Middle Peninsula Regional Airport Hires New Manager At its monthly meeting recently, the Middle Peninsula Airport Authority announced the hiring of William T. Gaylord of Manteo, N.C. as the Middle Peninsula Regional Airport manager.
Gaylord, who retired from the Air Force in 1985, has served as director of the Dare County Regional Airport for more than a decade.
He is a board member of the North Carolina Airports Association.
He holds a bachelor's degree in business administration with a minor in education.
"As current airport manager, I'm absolutely thrilled to see him take over," said Anthony Romanello, West Point town manager who has been running the airport as well.
Gaylord was offered the job last month from a field of 56 applicants.
The new manager began his duties May 1.
West Point owns the airport, which actually is just outside the town limits in King and Queen County.
Its sale to the authority is in its final stages.
The authority consists of West Point and the counties of Gloucester, King and Queen and King William.
Each member will pay annual dues of about $19,000 in addition to a share of the $3 million estimated cost for airport improvements and operation over 15 years.
Federal and state funding totaling about $5 million is also expected to help get the airport off the ground.
Built in World War II to train pilots, the airport now serves private aircraft.
The authority hopes to attract corporate planes and charter services.
It's envisioned as a selling point for Middle Peninsula communities in their efforts to draw new industry to the area.
The Middle Peninsula Regional Airport is a public, general aviation airport located approximately two miles Southeast of the Town of West Point, off of Virginia Route 33.
Centrally located in the Middle Peninsula region, the airport lies within a 25 minute drive to the majority of businesses and population located on the Middle Peninsula.
The airport also has direct access to the site of the future Middle Peninsula Regional Industrial Park, which is to be developed on land adjacent to the airport.
The airport has a 3,700 foot runway and a full length parallel taxiway.
The airport averages about 21 flights a day, with 29 aircraft based there.
Other airport facilities include a terminal building, fueling station (100LL), corporate hangar, and five T-hangar units.
Future plans for the airport include extending the runway to 4,300 feet, expanding the terminal building, installing new fuel facilities, and installing additional navigation aids.
Other available services are agricultural spraying and skydiving.
Virginia Aviation Events July 29-August 4, 2003 EAA Airventure will take place in Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
August 20-22, 2003 30th Annual Virginia Aviation Conference will be held at the Omni Richmond Hotel in Richmond.
Register now! For additional information contact Betty Wilson, Virginia Department of Aviation.
September 5-7, 2003 Neptune Festival Air Show at NAS Oceana.
Virginia's premier military air show featuring the Navy's Blue Angels.
September 13, 2003 12th Annual Louisa County Air Show will take place at Louisa County Airport/ Freeman Field from 11:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m. Airplane rides, aerobatic performances, skydivers, radio controlled airplanes, static aircraft displays, face painting and free balloons for the children.
A fun-filled event for the entire family! For more information contact Dawn Pickhardt at (540) 967-0050.
Sponsored by the Industrial Development Authority of Louisa County.
September 20-21, 2003 Virginia State EAA Fly-In will take place at the Dinwiddie County Airport.
Sponsored by the Virginia Council of EAA Chapters.
September 27, 2003 EAA Chapter 511 Fall Fly-In at Eagle's Nest (W13).
For more information contact Eldon Bowman, namwob@planetcomm.net, (540) 896-3992.
The 2003-2004 Virginia Aeronautical Chart is now available.
Please visit the Virginia Department of Aviation website (www.doav.state.va.us ) to request yours today.
Newsletter Editor 5702 Gulfstream Rd Richmond, VA 23250-2422 (804) 236-3631 fax (804) 236-3635 e-mail: sdye@doav.state.va.us
Submit upcoming event information to :
May/june 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Page 3
Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority President/CEO James A. Wilding Announces Retirement James A. Wilding recently announced his retirement from the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, which took effect at the end of April of this year.
Chip Glasgow, Airports Authority Chairman said, "Jim Wilding has personified excellence in both public service and business leadership, and his contributions to the state of aviation in the Metropolitan Washington Region benefit everyone who lives and visits our area.
We are indebted to him for his many years of dedicated service and will be grateful for his legacy for years to come."
Mr. Wilding's aviation career spans 43-years - all of them at the Washington Airports.
He graduated as a Civil Engineer with a degree from the Catholic University of America and joined the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) in 1959 to participate in the original planning and development of Washington Dulles International Airport.
Following the opening of Dulles in 1962, he held progressively responsible positions in all phases of engineering for the two federally owned airportsWashington Dulles International and Ronald Reagan Washington National-- eventually becoming the organization's Chief Engineer.
He served as Chief Engineer until becoming the Airports' Deputy Director in 1975, and then the Director four years later.
Mr. Wilding served in that capacity as the Director of the FAA's Metropolitan Washington Airports organization from December 1979 until the June 1987 transfer of the airports to the new Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority when he assumed the position of President.
While serving in the Federal Aviation Administration's Senior Executive Service, Mr. Wilding won several Presidential and Department of Transportation Awards including the Secretary of Transportation's Gold Medal, the highest award in the Transportation Department.
During his tenure as President/CEO of the Airports Authority, he has overseen a massive capital development program at both airports totaling well over $3 billion dollars.
Under his leadership, (see Wilding cont. on pg. 5)
Photos Courtsey of MWAA
James E. Bennett Selected as New President/CEO of Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority The Board of Directors of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority recently selected James E. Bennett as President/CEO of the Airports Authority.
Mr. Bennett will be only the second person to hold this position, succeeding James A. Wilding who will retire on May 2nd.
"We have confidence that Jim Bennett will provide the leadership and management skills necessary to continue the strong legacy of aviation service the Airports Authority has provided to the Washington region and the travelers throughout the world who use our airports," said Norman M. Glasgow, Jr., the Chairman of the Board of Directors.
Said Mr. Bennett on his appointment, "I thank the Board for their confidence in me, and I want to assure them and the traveling public that the Airports Authority will keep focused on being an organization that provides a high level of service to the community.
I know we will do this with the support of the excellent employees who work with me at Reagan National and Dulles International Airports."
Mr. Bennett has served as the Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer of the Airports Authority since 1996.
In that capacity he directed the operations of the Authority including the administrative support functions and was responsible for airport management at both National and Dulles airports as well as Authority wide public safety, business administration, human resources and technology.
Prior to joining the Authority Mr. (see Bennett cont. on pg. 5)
Photo Courtsey of MWAA
Page 4
VIRGINIA AVIATION
may/june 2003
Culpeper Regional Airport New Beginnings and Sad Endings By Tanya Woodward
The WHITE HAWK AVIATION FLIGHT SCHOOL, located at the Culpeper Regional Airport, is under new management.
The new manager, Robert W. Harmon, brings many years of flying and teaching experience to the school.
He has been a pilot since 1970 and has been a Certified Flight Instructor (CFI) since 1980.
He has accumulated more than 4000 hours as a CFI with more than 5000 total flying hours.
He is a graduate of Ohio State University, served in the USN 1952-1956, taught in the public schools, grades 7 through 12, for 7 years, served as a Special agent FBI for 21 years both as "street agent", supervisor, and instructor at the FBI Academy, Quantico, VA.
He was the Aviation Program Head at Northern Virginia Community College, Manassas, VA for 11 years, and a CFI and the Chief Ground Instructor at the USMC Quantico Flying Club.
The airplanes presently used for training at the flight school are Cessna 172 models, model years 1987 through 2001 with a 2002 model expected to come on board in March of this year.
All are certified for Instrument Flight and the newer models are equipped with GPS.
At this time, the school is staffed and equipped to offer ground schools and flight training for the Private Pilot License, the Instrument Rating, and to administer FAA Flight checks and currency training.
The school will offer training for the Commercial License, High Performance, and Complex Airplane endorsements when the required airplanes are acquired.
If you are interested in flight training, please call White Hawk at (540) 727-8400.
On a somber note, we lost a very integral part of our airport family on February 27, 2003, when Joe Natoli died at Culpeper Regional Hospital.
passionate about instructing and has many students to attest to that.
Nothing gave him more joy than to fly.
We will miss Elmer and we send our prayers out to his family as well.
The following poem, High Flight, Joe was a veteran of the United written by John Gillespie Magee, Jr. is States Army.
He was an active member of such clubs as the Quiet Birdman a befitting end to this article and let us Assoc., the Lions not forget to support our troops overClub of Spring- seas. field, Aircraft Owner and Pilot HIGH FLIGHT Assoc., Experi- By John Gillespie Magee, Jr. mental Aircraft Assoc. and the Oh, I have slipped the surly bonds of Warbird Assoc. earth Joe and his wife And danced the skies on laughterGeri had cel- silvered wings ebrated their 50th Sunward I've climbed, and joined the Wedding Anni- tumbling mirth versary on New Of sun-split clouds-and done a Year's Day 2003.
hundred things Joe was a ray You have not dreamed of-wheeled and of sunshine to all soared and swung of us here at the High in the sunlit silence.
Hov'ring airport.
He had there, I've chased the such a wonderful way with people.
He shouting wind along, and flung went the extra mile for his customers My eager craft through footless halls and his co-workers by bringing baked of air. goodies from home, to keeping the air- Up, up the long, delirious, burning port open late to accommodate the last blue flying straggler that needed gas.
We I've topped the windswept heights will all certainly miss Joe and we keep with easy grace Where never lark, or even his family in our prayers.
In March, we also lost a part of our eagle flew. extended family, Elmer Dyer passed.
And, while with silent, lifting mind Elmer had been the Manager here at the I've trod Airport some years ago and a Flight The high untrespassed sanctity of Instructor here for many years thereaf- space, ter. Elmer could be found at whatever Put out my hand, and touched the face airport he was working at from sunrise of God. to well after sunset.
He was incredibly
May/june 2003 (Wilding cont. from pg. 3)
VIRGINIA AVIATION tional reputation as an expert in the industry.
Mr. Wilding has served as the Chairman of the Airports Council International - North America, on the Board of Directors of the regional organization and on the Board of its worldwide parent based in Geneva, Switzerland.
He has served as the President of the Aero Club of Washington and currently serves on the Policy Review Committee of the American Association of Airport Executives.
He has also been an active participant in regional affairs.
Mr. Wilding has chaired the United Way Campaign of Arlington County Virginia.
He is a member of the Economic Development Commission of Arlington County and has served on the Board of Directors as well as the Executive Committee of the Arlington County Chamber of Commerce.
He has served on the Advisory Board of the Eno Transportation Foundation, and currently serves on the Board of the Washington, DC Convention and Tourism Corporation, on both the Board of Directors and Executive Committee of the Dulles Area Transportation Association, and has served on the Executive Committee of the Transportation Research Board.
(Bennett cont. from pg. 3)
Page 5 Bennett served as Assistant Aviation Director at Sky Harbor International Airport in Phoenix, Arizona.
In that capacity he oversaw the operations, business affairs, finance, planning and maintenance of the airport.
Mr. Bennett has also served as the Director of the Shreveport, Louisiana, Airport Authority, the Director of Aeronautics for the City of Flint, Michigan, and the Manager of Technical Services for Airport Operators Council International (currently, ACI-North America).
He has served in leadership roles within ACI-North America, AAAE Chapters and is the current Chairman of IAAE Mr. Bennett is a graduate of Auburn University (B.A., Aviation Management, 1978) and the University of Michigan (M.P.A. 1986).
He holds the designation of Accredited Airport Executive from the American Association of Airport Executives.
During his tenure with the Airports Authority, he has also been involved in several regional activities, serving as the 2000 Chairman, Arlington Chamber of Commerce; Campaign Chair for the 2002 Arlington United Way; former Chair of Leadership Arlington and a member of the Board of the Loudoun County Economic Development Commission.
very humble and gentle person."
Brown, as a member of the Blue Team, worked with the following experiments: European Space Agency Advanced Respiratory Monitoring System (ARMS); Combustion Module (CM-2), which included the Laminar Soot Processes (LSP), Water Mist Fire Suppression (MIST) and Structures of Flame Balls at Low Lewis-number (SOFBALL) experiments; Mediterranean Israeli Dust Experiment (MEIDEX); and the Physiology and Biochemistry Team (PhAB4) suite of experiments, which included Calcium Kinetics, Latent Virus Shedding, Protein Turnover and Renal Stone Risk.
Selected by NASA in April 1996, Brown was making his first spaceflight.
Reagan National Airport was modernized as a result of the new terminal building which opened in 1997 which also brought major improvements to traffic management on the airport as well as improved connections to the Metro system.
At Dulles, he directed the extensive growth during the l990's that required the expansion of the world famous Saarinen-designed Terminal, construction of new concourses and the build-
Virginia Aviation Board Chairman Pete Ramsey and Jim Wilding share a smile during Mr. Wilding's retirement reception.
ing of the airport's first parking garages.
During his tenure leading the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority passenger activity at the two airports has nearly doubled to 31 million passengers in 2002.
In addition to his involvement in the region's air service, he has earned a national and interna-
Columbia Astronaut Took Flight Lessons At Willamsburg-Jamestown Airport On February 1, 2003 the Space Shuttle Columbia was lost during its reentry into Earth's atmosphere.
The seven member crew was also lost.
Among the crewmembers was David M. Brown, 46, a captain in the U.S. Navy.
He was a naval aviator and flight surgeon.
He served as Mission Specialist 1 for STS-107.
Brown received a bachelor of science in biology from the College of William and Mary in 1978 and a doctorate in medicine from Eastern Virginia Medical School in 1982.
Mr. Brown took his initial flight training at Williamsburg-Jamestown Airport (JGG) while attending William and Mary.
He had recently come back to JGG to stop in while in the area.
While there he had a very pleasant conversation with airport owner Jean Waltrip.
"I was so excited to hear all about what David had been doing with his flying career," said Waltrip.
"Right before he left he handed me a business card that said he was an astronaut.
I said to him, `you didn't tell me you were an astronaut'.
But that was David, a
Page 6
VIRGINIA AVIATION
may/june 2003
Aviation Briefs Manassas Regional Airport Runway Construction
Virginia Aviation Board Allocates Funds To Commonwealth's Airports
At its bimonthly meeting held in Richmond, the Virginia Aviation Board (VAB) approved tentative allocations for five of the Commonwealth's airports from the Commonwealth Airport Fund, totaling $82,874.
Receiving one of the largest allocations was Manassas Regional Airport, in the amount of $35,280 for Extensive airport construction is Obstruction Removal Runway 34R Approach (construction).
Other airports planned for Manassas Regional/Harry receiving allocations from the VAB were: P. Davis Field (HEF) in Manassas, VA this summer.
On June 16, the Runway · Leesburg Executive Airport in the amount of $25,600 for Land 16L threshold will be displaced 700 Acquisition West Side ­ Phase I; feet, leaving 5,000 feet of usable run- · Tappahannock-Essex County Airport was awarded $6,394 for way from June 16 until the total cloLand Acquisition (Parcel I) ­ Increase; sure of Runway 16L on or about July · Chesapeake Regional Airport received $3,600 for a Maintenance 21, for a period of approximately 55 Equipment Storage Building (design); days.
The ILS is being decommissioned · Hampton Roads Executive Airport in the amount of $12,000 because of the 16L threshold displacefor T-Hangar Taxiways and Access Roads Rehabilitation (design). ment and associated construction.
For more info contact the airport's In other significant action, the VAB also allocated $24,800 from the Aviation Joe Lee at jlee@ci.manassas.va.us or Promotion/Air Service Development and Enhancement Grant-in-Aid Program to NBAA's Harry Houckes at five of the Commonwealth's airports.
hhouckes@nbaa.org.
· Danville Regional Airport received $7,500 for advertising of the Airfest to be held this spring; · Tazewell County Airport was allocated $7,500 for advertising and support for the annual Fly-In; · Virginia Highlands was awarded $1,500 for summer camp; · Emporia-Greensville Regional Airport received $7,500 for a business plan; By letting a cancer patient use an empty seat on your corporate aircraft, · Mecklenburg/Brunswick Regional Airport was awarded $800 for print advertising.
you can enable that patient to access critical treatment they might otherwise The Virginia Aviation Board has eight members representing seven regions.
have to forgo.
Often a clinical trial or specialized regimen is only available at The Board approves funding requests brought to it by the Virginia Department of one medical center, perhaps thousands Aviation, a state agency working to support and promote commercial and private of miles from a patient's home.
Some- aviation interests for the Commonwealth's 69 public-use airports.
times a patient must return weekly or monthly.
Transportation costs can quickly add up to an impossible burden for a patient whose illness has already Checked bags weight will rise as well caused financial stress.
Join with Corporate Angel Network The FAA this week issued notice to operators that they must add 10 pounds (CAN) to provide cancer patients with to the estimated weight of each passenger and 5 pounds for each checked bag to free transportation to recognized treat- ensure that aircraft do not take off overweight.
ment centers.
It's easy and costs you Under the old rule, airlines estimated that passengers older than 12 weighed nothing.
To add your name to CAN's 180 pounds in warm months and 185 in the winter.
That includes 20 pounds of roster of 500 top U.S. corporations, call carry-on luggage.
(914) 328-1313.
To see current destiStarting in the third quarter of 2003, all airlines must assume that passengers nations and date range of rides needed, weigh 190 or 195 pounds depending on the season.
Similarly, checked bags on please visit: domestic flights will rise from an estimated 25 to 30 pounds.
The 30-pound estiwww.corpangelnetwork.org/corporate/ mate for checked bags on international flights will not change.
The change will effect capacity issues for airlines.
seats.html.
Your Empty Seats Can Be Powerful Medicine
FAA Issues Weight Gain for Passengers
May/june 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Page 7
The Seventh Annual Virginia State EAA Fly-In When: September 20 
· Charlie Kulp - The Flying Farmer · Split Image - Pitts Aerobatic Team · Charles Schwenker - Extra 300 Aerobatics · Hardees Air Show Team RC controlled 1/4 scale aircraft n Activities for Children · Wing Rib Building · NASA activities · Pedal Airplanes · Control Line Airplanes Additional Fly-in Information n Committee Chairmen are needed in the following areas: · Fly Mart · Forums 
n Fly-in Headquarters Motel is the Days Inn at I-95 
Rooms have been reserved under the name of EAA. Room rate, including taxes is $53.20 per night.
Call (804) 733-4400 to make reservations.
n Aircraft Parking Seminar for volunteers is tentatively scheduled for 28 June 2003 at Dinwiddie County Airport Petersburg, VA.
Contact Tom
Visit the VA EAA website:
www.vaeaa.org Tyndall, Fly-in Operations Manager at (804) 261-7501 for more information.
A Note of Sadness Last month the VAEAA lost a dear friend and dedicated volunteer in an aircraft incident.
Our deepest sympathy goes to the family of Jerry Holsinger, of the Petersburg Pilots Association.
He will be greatly missed.
Calendar of Events Northern Virginia VAHS Annual Picnic June 28, 2003 - Contact Judy Sparks at (703) 590-9112 for more information.
8th Annual Wings 
- VIRGINIA AVIATION Published bi-monthly by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Aviation, Public Relations Division in the interest of and for the promotion of aviation.
CHARLES MACFARLANE Director
CHERRY EVANS Manager
2003 Virginia State Fly-In Sept. 20 
SETH DYE Please send material for publication to: Editor, Virginia Aviation newsletter 5702 Gulfstream Road Richmond, VA 23250 or e-mail to sdye@doav.state.va.us Editor
Be There!
Page 8 (Terminal cont. from pg. 1)
VIRGINIA AVIATION (School cont. from pg. 1)
may/june 2003
Macfarlane has been taking helicopter the juncture of Virginia Highway 10 and Nelson.
"They have really made a great pilot lessons and is a member of the 288.
Interstate 95 is located five miles effort to be active with our young program, mentoring one of the second grade classes.
He and Rob Roberts south of the airport.
It is at the center of (NBC 12 traffic reporter), flew a helia triangle formed by the highly induscopter in and landed it behind the trialized cities of Richmond, Petersburg school.
This gave all the children of and Hopewell. the school a chance to peek at the whirly Chesterfield County Airport is desbird, sit inside and ask questions of ignated by the FAA as an official genCharles and Rob about flying.
eral aviation reliever airport for the "This program is a wonderful way busier Richmond International Airport.
FCI boasts a 5,500-foot runway, one precision and three non-instrument approaches including a new Instrument DOAV Director Charles Macfarlane talks flying with the kids.
Landing System (ILS).
Business and recreational fliers people."
alike prefer Chesterfield County Airport Recently the staff went to Donahoe for its convenience and service.
The for a culminating year-end visit.
The already modern facilities are constantly Department's Director Charles being improved, enlarged and added to.
We invite you to take a new look at Chesterfield County Airport.
Rob Roberts and Shannon Morris share a laugh.
Donahoe Principal Dr. Nelson (far back right) enjoyed the visit as well.
to get involved with the local community," said Director Charles Macfarlane.
"Our employees really enjoy seeing these kids get so excited about aviation."
The Department plans on continuing the program again next school year.
If you are interested in learning more about what is going on in the Department of Aviation, please call our office at (804) 236-3624 or our Sponsor Hotline at (800) 292-1034.
Visit our website for updates on future events at: www.doav.state.va.us.
Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Aviation 5702 Gulfstream Road Richmond, VA 23250-2422
Presorted Standard U.S. POSTAGE PAID Richmond, VA Permit No. 949
The Department of Aviation does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age or disability in the employment or the provision of service.
*MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STATE AVIATION OFFICIALS* Purpose: "To foster aviation as an industry, as a mode of transportation for persons and property and as an arm of the national defense; to join with Federal government and other groups in research, development and advancement of aviation; to develop uniform laws and regulations; and to otherwise encourage cooperation and mutual aid among the several states."
