Department of Revenue Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission Chapter 10--Definitions Title Page Rules of 12 CSR 50-10.010 Definitions ......................................................................
................3 12 CSR 50-10.011 Definitions (Thoroughbred and Quarterhorse) ............................................4 MATT B LUNT (5/31/01) Secretary of State CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS 1 Chapter 10--Definitions 12 CSR 50-10 Title 12--DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission Chapter 10--Definitions 12 CSR 50-10.010 Definitions PURPOSE: This rule sets forth the definitions applicable to the commission's rules contained in 12 CSR 50.
(1) The United States Trotting Association's (U.S.T.A.) current rule 4 shall be the commission's definitions with the additions and exceptions noted in this rule.
(2) Arrears.
All monies owed by a licensee, including subscriptions, forfeitures and any other payment and default incident to the rules of the commission.
(3) Association.
An organization holding a Class B or Class D license from the commission to conduct harness racing and parimutuel wagering.
(4) Betting interest.
An assigned number of the tote on which wagers may be placed.
A single betting interest may be one (1) horse or more than one (1) horse.
(5) Bleeder.
A horse which hemorrhages from within the respiratory tract during a race or within a reasonable time, post-race or during exercise or within a reasonable time of exercise.
(6) Bleeder list.
A tabulated list of all bleeders.
(7) Chemist.
An official racing chemist designated by the commission.
(8) Contractual concessionaire.
Any business or individual dealing in the furnishing, sale or distribution of materials, supplies and/or services to an association or patrons of an association.
(9) Day.
A twenty-four (24)-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at 12:00 midnight.
Also referred to as a racing day.
(10) Dead heats.
A tie in the finish of any place in a race by two (2) or more horses.
(11) Driver.
A driver licensed in Missouri to drive in harness races as a driver.
(12) Entry.
A horse entered for a race.
MATT B LUNT (13) Ejection.
The unconditional expulsion and exclusion from any race meeting or premises and disqualification from any participation, either directly or indirectly, in the privileges and uses of the course and grounds of any licensee.
(14) Foreign (prohibited) substances.
All substances except those which exist naturally at normal physiological concentration in the untreated horse.
(15) Forfeit.
Money due by a licensee because of an error, fault, neglect of duty, breach of contract or penalty imposed by order of the judges or the commission.
(16) Furosemide (known under the trade name Lasix).
4 Chloro-N-(2 furylmethyl)-5sulfamoy-lanthanilic acid.
(17) Hypodermic injection.
An injection into or under the skin or mucosa including intradermal injection, subcutaneous injection, submucosal injection, intramuscular injection, intravenous injection, intraarterial injection, intraarticular injection, intrabursal injection or intraocular (intraconjunctival) injection.
(18) Judges.
The duly appointed racing officials or their deputies serving at a licensed harness meeting.
Judges shall be considered stewards as that term is used in section 313.500, RSMo (1986).
(19) Licensee.
Any organization or individual holding any license from the commission.
(20) Meeting.
A race meet or race meeting.
(21) Minor.
Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
(22) Overnight race.
A race for which entries close seventy-two (72) hours or less before the time set for the first race of the day on which the race is to be contested.
In the absence of conditions or notice to the contrary, all entries in overnight events must close not later than 12:00 noon the day preceding the race.
(23) Owner.
(A) A person who holds any title, right or interest, whole or partial in a horse.
(B) A lessee of a horse holding an owner's license.
(C) An interest only in the winnings of a horse does not constitute partial ownership.
CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS (24) Patron.
A member of the public present on the grounds of a pari-mutuel association for the purpose of wagering or to observe racing.
(25) Permit.
A Class A, Class B or Class D license issued by the commission.
(26) Permit holder.
An organization holding a Class A, Class B or Class D license.
(27) Post position.
The position assigned to the horse in the starting gate of the race.
(28) Race.
A contest between horses for a purse, prize or other reward contested at a licensed association in the presence of the judges of the meeting.
Every heat or dash shall be deemed a race for pari-mutuel betting purposes.
(29) Racing program.
A schedule of races per day authorized by the commission.
(30) Rules.
Rules promulgated by the commission and/or the United States Trotting Association (U.S.T.A.) to regulate the conduct of harness racing.
(31) Security stall.
The stall assigned by the commission to a horse on the bleeder list, for occupancy as a prerequisite for receiving bleeder medication.
(32) Security area.
The area surrounding the security stall delineated and controlled by the commission.
(33) Specimen.
Any bodily substance including, but not limited to, blood or urine, taken from a horse under the supervision of the commission's veterinarian and in the manner prescribed by the commission for the purpose of analysis.
This term is used interchangeably with test sample.
(34) Stable name.
A name used by an owner or lessee and registered with the commission.
(35) Subscription.
Nomination or entry of a horse in a stake race.
(36) Test level.
The concentration of foreign substance found in the test sample.
(37) Test sample.
Any bodily substance including, but not limited to, blood or urine taken from a horse under the supervision of the commission veterinarian and in the manner as prescribed by the commission for the purpose of analysis.
This term is used interchangeably with specimen.
3 (5/31/01) Secretary of State 12 CSR 50-10--REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission (38) Year.
A calendar year.
AUTHORITY: section 313.540, RSMo 1986.* Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, effective June 30, 1986, expired Oct. 13, 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
*Original authority: 313.540, RSMo 1986.
(9) Chemist.
Any official racing chemist designated by the commission.
(10) Claiming race.
Any race in which every horse running therein may be transferred in conformity with these rules.
(11) Closing.
Time published by the association after which entries for a race will not be accepted.
(12) Commission.
The Missouri Horse Racing Commission.
(13) Contractual concessionaire.
Any business or individual dealing in the furnishing, sale or distribution of materials, supplies and/or services to an association.
(14) Day.
A twenty-four (24)-hour period beginning at 12:01 a.m. and ending at 12:00 midnight.
Also referred to as a race day.
(15) Dead heats.
A dead heat is the finish of a race by two (2) horses or more at the same time.
(16) Declaration.
The act of withdrawing an entered horse from a handicap.
(17) Disciplinary action.
That action taken by the stewards or the commission for a rule violation and can include suspension, revocation, voidance of a license or ejection or exclusion from association grounds or assessment of a forfeiture or reprimand or any combination thereof.
(18) Disqualification.
An order of the stewards or commission revising the order of finish of a race.
(19) Entry.
(A) A horse entered for a race; or (B) Two (2) or more horses entered and joined for the same race for pari-mutuel wagering purposes because of common ties of ownership, lease or training.
(20) Foreign substances.
All substances except those which exist naturally in the untreated horse at normal physiological concentration.
(21) Forfeit.
Money due by a licensee because of an error, fault, neglect of duty, breach of contract or penalty imposed by order of the stewards or the commission.
(22) Furosemide.
4 Chloro-N- (2 furylmethyl)-5-sulfamoylanthanilic acid, known under the trade name Lasix.
CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS (23) Handicap.
A race in which the weights to be carried by the horses are assigned by the racing secretary or handicapper for the purpose of equalizing the chances of winning for all horses entered.
(24) Horse.
Any horse (including and designated as a mare, filly, stallion, colt, ridgling or gelding) registered for racing under the jurisdiction of the commission.
(25) Hypodermic injection.
Any injection into or under the skin or mucosa, including intradermal injection, subcutaneous injection, submucosal injection, intramuscular injection, intravenous injection, intraarterial injection, intraarticular injection, intrabursal injection, intraocular (intraconjunctival) injection.
(26) Ineligible.
Horse or person not qualified under these rules or conditions of a race to participate in a specified racing activity.
(27) Jockey.
Rider currently licensed to ride in races as a jockey or apprentice jockey or amateur jockey or a provisional jockey permitted by the stewards to ride in two races prior to receiving a license.
(28) Lessee.
Licensed owner whose interest in a horse is a leasehold.
(29) Licensee, Occupation.
Any person who has been duly issued a currently valid license to participate in racing in this state.
(30) Maiden.
Horse which at the time of starting has never won a race at a legally permitted track in any country; a maiden which was disqualified after finishing first remains a maiden; race conditions referring to maidens shall be interpreted as meaning maidens at the time of starting.
(31) Match race.
A race between two (2) horses, the property of two (2) owners, on terms agreed upon by them.
The match is void if either of the horses or if either owner dies prior to the running of the race.
It remains a match even if money or other award is added to the stakes.
(32) Meeting.
The specified period and dates each year during which an association is authorized to conduct racing by approval of the commission.
(33) Minor.
Any person under the age of eighteen (18).
(34) Month.
A calendar month.
(5/31/01) MATT B LUNT 12 CSR 50-10.011 Definitions (Thoroughbred and Quarterhorse) PURPOSE: This rule sets forth definitions applicable to the commission rules contained in 12 CSR 50.
(1) Added money.
Cash, exclusive of trophy or other award, added by the association to stakes fees paid by subscribers to form the total purse for a stakes race.
(2) Age.
The number of years since a horse was foaled, reckoned as if the horse were foaled on January 1 of the year in which the horse was foaled.
(3) Arrears.
All sums due by a licensee as reflected by his/her account with the horsemen's bookkeeper, including subscriptions, jockey fees, forfeitures and any default incident to these rules.
(4) Association.
An individual, business entity, organization or race track licensee holding a permit from the commission to conduct racing and pari-mutuel wagering and an annual license authorizing the specific dates of the annual racing meeting.
(5) Authorized agent.
A person licensed by the commission as an agent for a horse owner or principal by virtue of a notarized appointment of agent on a form approved by the commission filed by the owner or principal with the commission and the horsemen's bookkeeper authorizing him/her to handle matters pertaining to racing and stabling.
(6) Betting interest.
A single horse, or more than one (1) horse joined as a mutuel entry or joined in the mutuel field, on which a single pari-mutuel wager may be placed.
(7) Bleeder.
A horse which hemorrhages from within the respiratory tract during a race or within one (1) hour post-race or during exercise or within one (1) hour of exercise.
(8) Bleeder list.
A tabulation of all bleeders to be maintained by the commission.
4 Secretary of State Chapter 10--Definitions 12 CSR 50-10 (35) Mutuel field or field.
A group of two (2) or more horses upon which a single bet may be placed.
A mutuel field is required when the number of horses starting in a race exceeds the capacity of the track totalizator.
The highest numbered horse within the totalizator capacity and all the higher-numbered horses following are then grouped together in the mutuel field.
(36) Nominator.
The person in whose name a horse is entered for a race.
(37) Official time.
The official time for a race shall be the period from the time the first horse crosses the timing beam until the first horse crosses the finish line.
(38) Overnight race.
A race for which entries close seventy-two (72) hours, or less, before the time set for the first race of the day on which the race is to be run.
(39) Owner.
(A) A person who holds a title, right or interest, whole or partial in a horse; or (B) A lessee of a horse holding an owner's license; an interest only in the winnings of a horse does not constitute partial ownership.
(40) Patron.
A member of the public present on the grounds of a pari-mutuel association during a meeting for the purpose of wagering or to observe racing.
(41) Performance.
A schedule of ten (10) races per day unless otherwise authorized by the commission.
(42) Permit.
An authorization by the commission to an association to conduct thoroughbred racing and pari-mutuel wagering, at a specified place.
(43) Permittee or permit holder (race track licensee).
An association holding a commission permit to conduct racing meetings and pari-mutuel wagering.
(44) Place.
(A) In general, to finish a race in either first, second or third place; (B) In particular, to finish second in a race; or (C) Example-- 1.
Win--to place first in the finish; 2.
Place--to place second in the finish; and 3.
Show--to place third in the finish.
(45) Post position.
The position assigned to the horse in the starting gate of the race.
MATT B (5/31/01) (46) Post time.
The time set for the arrival of all horses in a race at the starting gate.
(47) Purse.
The gross cash portion of the prize for which a race is run.
(48) Purse race.
Any race for which entries close less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to its running and for which owners of horses entered are not required by its conditions to contribute money toward its purse.
(49) Race.
A running contest between horses for a purse, prize or other reward run at a licensed association in the presence of the stewards of the meeting.
This includes purse races, overnight races and stake races.
(50) Racing official.
Racing commissioner, commission staff as duties require and all association racing department employees, as duties require.
(51) Recognized meeting.
Any meeting with regularly scheduled races for horses in a jurisdiction having reciprocal relations with this state and the commission for the mutual enforcement of rulings relating to racing.
(52) Registration certificate.
Document issued by the Jockey Club of New York certifying as to the name, age, color, sex, pedigree and breeder of a horse as registered by number with the Jockey Club; shall be deemed to refer also to the document known as a racing permit issued by the Jockey Club in lieu of a registration certificate when a horse is recognized as a thoroughbred for racing purposes in the United States, but is not recognized as a thoroughbred for breeding purposes insofar as registering its progeny with the Jockey Club.
(53) Rules.
The rules promulgated by the commission to regulate the conduct of racing.
(54) Rulings.
All determinations, decisions or orders of the stewards or of the commission duly issued in writing and posted.
(55) Scratch.
The act of withdrawing an entered horse from the race after the closing of overnight entries.
(56) Scratch time.
The time set by the association for the closing of applications to withdraw from races of that day.
(57) Specimen.
Any bodily substance including, but not limited to, blood or urine taken from a horse under the supervision of the commission veterinarian and in manner pre- scribed by the commission for the purpose of analysis.
(58) Stable name.
A name used by an owner or lessee and registered with the commission.
(59) Stake race.
One in which nominators of the entries contribute to a purse for the winners.
Official recognition of the race by other states' racing regulatory agencies as being a stake race requires that the race be run for a guaranteed purse of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or more, without payment of stakes.
(60) Starter.
A horse in a race when the starting gate doors open in front of it at the moment the official starter dispatches the horses for a race.
(61) Stewards.
The duly appointed racing officials or their deputies serving at a licensed thoroughbred meeting.
(62) Subscription.
Nomination or entry of a horse in a stake race.
(63) Test level.
The concentration of a foreign substance found in the test sample.
(64) Test sample.
Any bodily substance including, but not limited to, blood or urine taken from a horse under the supervision of the commission veterinarian and in the manner as prescribed by the commission for the purpose of analysis.
(65) Unplaced.
Not among the first three (3) horses finishing a race.
(66) Veterinarian.
A veterinarian licensed by the appropriate state regulatory authority and the commission.
(67) Walkover.
Race in which the only starter or all starters represent single ownership.
(68) Year.
A calendar year.
AUTHORITY: section 313.540, RSMo 1986.* Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
*Original authority: 313.540, RSMo 1986.
LUNT Secretary of State CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS 5
