Rail Cost Model APPENDIX J T E C H N I C A L MEMOR AND UM 4 Solid Waste Facilities Master Plan Technical Memorandum No. 4 - Rail Cost Modeling PREPARED FOR: PREPARED BY: Seattle Public Utilities MainLine Management CH2M HILL July 31, 2003 DATE: Introduction This memorandum is one of a series of memoranda that document technical analysis conducted by the CH2M HILL consultant team in support of the Seattle Public Utility Solid Waste Facilities Master Plan.
The consultant team includes Herrera Environmental Consultants, Ecodata, MainLine Management, Triangle Associates, and Environmental Planning Consultants.
The memoranda that document the analysis are as follows: 1.
Decision Process 2.
Design Criteria and Conceptual Layouts 3.
Peak Flows and Waste Stream Analysis 4.
Rail Cost Modeling 5.
Cost Modeling in Support of SPU's System Cost Model 6.
Modeling Cost Uncertainty This memorandum includes the results of an analysis of the cost of rail transport from an intermodal transfer station to a regional landfill.
Estimates were prepared for three scenarios: · · · Scenario 1: SPU waste on a merchandise train Scenario 2: SPU waste combined with waste from other sources Scenario 3: SPU waste combined with waste from King County Preparation of Rail Cost Estimates A component of the overall cost associated with an intermodal waste transfer facility is the cost of transporting the waste from a location in Seattle to a landfill site.
The Seattle waste transfer facility site MainLine Management ("MLM") considered for its analysis is on Harbor Island, which is served by both Burlington Northern and Santa Fe Railway ("BNSF") and Union Pacific Railroad ("UP").
The landfill site included in the analysis was Arlington, OR, which is on UP's mainline between Portland and Hinkle, OR.
The Arlington site was chosen because it is the greatest rail distance from Seattle.
A similar BNSF landfill site at TM4 08-27-03.DOC 1 179518.A1.17 SOLID WASTE FACILITIES MASTER PLAN TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM NO. 4 - RAIL COST MODELING Roosevelt, WA, is approximately 15 miles closer by rail than the Arlington site, however it requires a truck haul of the container to the landfill from the rail unloading area.
MLM analyzed the longer rail haul to Arlington but it believes the additional rail miles would essentially offset the truck haul costs at Roosevelt.
MLM considered many factors during this analysis.
To complete the costing of the rail line haul and switching portions of the project, rail mileage, train operating plans, train makeup, routes, facility layout, turn time, estimated railroad margins and other issues were reviewed to determine likely costs, so a total cost could be calculated.
A brief discussion of questions and answers about the model follows.
Questions and Answers 1.
What questions were we trying to answer in this study? Estimate the cost of rail transport to a distant landfill · · · With and without an intermodal transfer station With and without partner tons Consider rail operating circumstances related to Lockheed/Fisher Mills site 2.
Who developed the model? Qualifications 
The model was developed by Mainline Management: Their local staff member is David Hatzenbuhler (based in Tacoma), and their operations specialist is Eric Lyman (based in Texas).
They have many years experience working for BNSF and other railroads, and have done extensive modeling of local rail operations for the Port of Seattle (Terminal 18) and Sound Transit.
3.
What factors are included in the model? There are six main components to the model: switching, line haul, car ownership/lease, container ownership/lease, off-site track leasing, profit, and transport insurance.
· Switching costs were modeled by modeling the cost per shift for a switch engine, including labor, benefits, engine annuity, fuel, and maintenance.
Cost per shift was multiplied by shifts needed per year for each scenario.
Line haul costs were modeled using labor costs per route segment, and estimating the number and cost (fuel, maintenance, annuity) of locomotives required based on known operating conditions on the route to the LFs.
Car leasing costs were modeled by estimating the number of days cars would need to go to LF and back, multiplied by an annual annuity cost for cars.
Container costs were calculated by multiplying the number of containers (one day's waste plus the number of cars needed) times an annual annuity cost for containers.
Off-site track leasing was needed in one option.
The lease rate was estimated based on prices paid for similar operations in the greater Puget Sound area.
Profit was assumed at 35% - toward the low end of what is typically sought by railroads.
· · · · · TM4 08-27-03.DOC 2 SOLID WASTE FACILITIES MASTER PLAN TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM NO. 4 - RAIL COST MODELING · Transport insurance (truck haul when railroad is out of service for strike or natural disaster) was estimated by assuming purchase and storage of an extra set of containers (a conservative assumption) plus an extra $0.30 per ton for the added cost of emergency trucking over and above what would have been paid for rail.
4.
What are the results? We modeled the following three scenarios: A. Merchandise train worst case in which Seattle's waste is delivered daily to the railroad, combined with other cargo, and dropped off at landfill while the remainder of the train goes on to more distant locations.
B. Seattle's waste is combined with an equivalent quantity of waste from other sources.
Train runs M, W, F similar to current situation in which SPU combines their waste with a similar amount from other sources (CDL, other counties/cities).
C. City combines its waste with waste from King County to make daily train.
The results of these operating scenarios are shown in the following table.
Summary Results of Rail Operating Scenarios Scenario 1 Merchandise Train Switching Line Haul Cars Track Lease Containers Profit Insurance (temporary rail outage) Total Estimated Savings from Scenario 1 Estimated Savings from Scenario 2 $1.85 $7.29 $2.05 $0.00 $0.72 $3.92 $1.00 $16.83 Scenario 2 SPU Waste With Others $1.99 $5.90 $1.73 $0.05 $0.64 $3.38 $1.00 $14.69 $2.10 Scenario 3 SPU Waste with King County $1.52 $5.86 $1.39 $0.00 $0.56 $3.07 $1.00 $13.40 $3.40 $1.30 5.
How do the results compare with what we think Seattle is currently paying? A comparison of the rail cost estimates above and the rail cost component of Seattle's current contract is complex because of a number of features of Seattle's current contract with Waste Management, including: · · · Transport and disposal prices are combined into a single unit price The price increases at 70% of the consumer price index Negotiated future price reductions TM4 08-27-03.DOC 3 SOLID WASTE FACILITIES MASTER PLAN TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM NO. 4 - RAIL COST MODELING · It's likely that the City could negotiate a better rate in the future regardless of whether it operated an intermodal transfer station, particularly if King County is also sending its waste to a distant landfill A separate model was built to investigate the long-term differences between prices that would be paid for transport and disposal in Seattle's current contract, and a price that reflects the rail costs estimated above.
The savings associated with operating an intermodal transfer station and negotiating directly with the railroads is shown in the table below.
Estimated Rail Transport Cost Savings 2003 $/ton 2010 2020 2028 $4.30 $3.90 $3.70 Note: Based on Scenario 2: SPU Waste with Others ($14.69 per ton).
The savings would be greater if SPU partners with King County.
Estimated additional savings that could be realized from partnering with King County are likely to range from between $1.00 per ton and $2.50 per ton depending the nature of that partnership and the year in which the comparison is conducted (the savings will decline as time goes on).
6.
Other observations.
If the City develops the intermodal transfer station, there will be a strong economic incentive for the City to partner with other entities.
It would cost at least $2 per ton more to operate a Seattle-only train without partners, and the long turnaround time and uncertainty of scheduling may make the use of a merchandise train unacceptable to the City.
With an intermodal transfer station, the City will need to think strategically about how to contract with the railroads, disposal companies, and other potential waste generator partners to ensure that risks are accounted for and assigned reasonably to each party.
If the City operates an intermodal transfer station, it will need to have operations staff whose job it is to work with the railroads on a daily basis coordinating switching operations and container movements.
It will also need to set up its own "insurance" arrangements to ensure that waste can be transported to the landfill in the event of a rail outage from a strike, natural disaster, or other unforeseen event.
By owning an intermodal transfer station, the City would protect itself against the risk of market changes that could lessen unloading yard capacity in the greater Seattle area or substantially increase prices paid for use of that capacity.
TM4 08-27-03.DOC 4
