Title: Powerful Patterns Brief Overview: These performance-based activities integrate language arts, technology and the study of patterns.
The students will organize information, work cooperatively, use computers to develop a function table, and create a story slide show using the Kid Pix computer program.
Links to NCTM 2000 Standards: ! Standard 1: Number and Operation Mathematics instructional programs should foster the development of number and operation sense so that all students understand numbers, ways of representing numbers, relationships among numbers, and number systems; understand the meaning of operations and how they relate to each another; and use computational tools and strategies fluently.
! Standard 2: Patterns, Functions, and Algebra Mathematics instructional programs should include attention to patterns, functions, symbols, and models so that all students understand various types of patterns and functional relationships; and use mathematical models and analyze change both real and abstract contexts.
! Standard 6: Problem Solving Mathematical instructional programs should focus on solving problems as a part of understanding mathematics so that all students build new mathematical knowledge through their work with problems; develop a disposition to formulate , represent , abstract, and generalize situations within and outside mathematics; and apply a wide variety of strategies to solve problems and adapt the strategies to new situations.
! Standard 7: Reasoning and Proof Mathematics instructional programs should focus on learning to reason and construct proofs as part of understanding mathematics so that all students recognize reasoning and proof as essential and powerful parts of ,mathematics; make and investigate mathematical conjectures; develop and evaluate mathematical arguments and proofs; and select and use various types of reasoning.
! Standard 8: Communication Mathematical instructional programs should communicate to foster an understanding of mathematics so that all students organize and consolidate their mathematical thinking to communicate with other; express mathematical ideas coherently and clearly to peers, teachers, and others; extend their mathematical knowledge by considering the thinking and strategies of others; and use the language of mathematics as a precise means of mathematical expression.
! Standard 9: Connections Mathematical instructional programs should emphasize connections to foster an understanding of mathematics so that all students recognize and use connections among different mathematical ideas; understand how mathematical ideas build on one another to produce a coherent whole; and recognize, use, and learn about mathematics in contexts outside of mathematics.
! Standard 10: Representation Mathematical instructional programs should emphasize mathematical representations to foster an understanding of mathematics so that all students create and use representation to organize, record, and communicate mathematical ideas; and develop a repertoire of mathematical representations that can be used purposely, flexibly, and appropriately.
Grade/Level: Grades 3 and 4 Duration/Length 4 to 5 class periods Prerequisite Knowledge: Students should have working knowledge of the following skills: ! ! ! ! ! ! Copying, continuing, and describing patterns Creating and identifying basic patterns Basic computer skills Working cooperatively Using repeated addition and multiplication Basic addition and subtraction facts
Student Outcomes: Students will be able to: ! recognize and use the inverse relationships between addition/subtraction and multiplication/division to complete a function table.
! recognize and describe patterns formed using concrete objects, tables and pictures to extend patterns.
! analyze a given pattern formed by using objects and pictures and create a pattern with the same attributes.
! use a computer to generate a story slide show incorporating patterns.
Materials/Resources: ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! Beans (lima, pinto, kidney) Paper clips Straws Kid Pix (or slide show program) T-108 calculator Overhead calculator Sentence strips Markers Overhead projector Half sheets of paper Chart paper Index cards Star patterns Star stickers Computer Transparencies of Teacher Resource Sheets 1-6 Student worksheet
Development/Procedures: Day 1: Task 1 Teacher materials: overhead, items such as: beans, paper clips, straws, Teacher Resource Sheet #1 Student materials: workmat, items such as: beans, paper clips, straws, pencil, paper ** The class will be arranged in groups of four prior to the unit.
The teacher presents patterns on the overhead using three items from the materials list (beans, paper clips, straws).
Using the half sheets of paper, students will write down three things that they notice about this pattern (wait time: 3 - 5 minutes).
Students will have a dialogue with the class.
The teacher will rearrange the same items and create a different pattern and again ask the students to discuss the pattern after writing three things about it.
Together the class will come up with a rule so that the pattern can be reproduced.
Sample: (1) You may use 3 different items and 3 of each.
(2) The first term will repeat.
(3) The core has four terms.
(4) The core ends with a paper clip.
Example: Core þ heart=lima, diamond=kidney, club=paper clip Term = °
Day 3: Task 1 --Patterns in Literature Teacher materials: story transparency of Sad Sam by: Charlotte Burton, Teacher Resource Sheet #3 Student materials: paper , pencil, story The Little Red Hen retold by: Veronica Hutchinson, calculators Read Sad Sam.
Teacher: Questions for students (also see Teacher Resource Sheet #4) (1) What part of the story was repeated? (2) What is the pattern? (3) How many items are in the core? (4) How many items would there be if the pattern repeated twice? Four times? (5) Set up a function table.
(6) What are the inputs and outputs for the table? Students will set up function table individually and complete at least six entries.
Task 2 Each group will be given a copy of the story, The Little Red Hen.
** Place the questions on the overhead, using a transparency of Teacher Resource Sheet #4.
Each group will develop a function table based on the pattern in the story.
The function table must have at least 8 entries for input and output.
Day 4: Task 1 Teacher materials: presentation system, Kid Pix (slide show program), transparency of "Vignette" (Teacher Resource Sheet #5) Student materials: computer, handwritten story This problem solving vignette can be used as the culminating project for this learning unit.
Students will begin formulating a story using patterns.
They may approach writing the story by incorporating picture, word or numbers patterns.
They must provide a function table to accompany their story.
The Core must repeat at least three times.
Day 5: Students will present the slide shows to the class.
** Students will do peer evaluations.
Make a transparency or post the scoring rubric.
(Teacher Resource Sheet #6)
Performance Assessment: Students will be evaluated on the following criteria: ! ! ! ! Class discussion Group participation and performance Written responses Daily anecdotal records - integration into other subjects throughout the year, e.g., patterns in nature, literature, etc. ! Story slide show and the creation of the function table ! Peer evaluations Extension/Follow Up: For the duration of this unit, the classroom center will provide students with the opportunity to work with patterns during choice time.
! Students can design patterns on sentence strips (Be sure to include the answer to the pattern on the back.).
! Students can make pattern jewelry.
! Students can identify patterns in popular songs and poems.
Authors: Dannette Redmond Mount Eagle Elementary School Fairfax County Public Schools, VA Charlotte Burton Kimball Elementary School District of Columbia Public Schools, DC
Teacher Resource Sheet #1
(1) You may use 3 different items and 3 of each.
(2) The first term will repeat.
(3) The core has four terms.
(4) The core ends with a paper clip.
Teacher Resource Sheet #2
! Select 3 different items and five of each from the collection of materials.
(Materials) ! Create a pattern with the pieces.
! Write down a set of instructions (4), one on each card, on how to discover the pattern.
(Recorder) ! Send your cards to another group to solve, making sure they are labeled correctly.
(Manager) ! The solving group will present to the class what they believe is the solution and how they solved the problem.
(Reporter)
Teacher Resource Sheet #3
SAD SAM by: Charlotte A. Burton
Sad Sam was so unhappy.
He had no toys.
It wasn't always this way.
Sam used to have a lot of toys.
Grandma had given him two choo-choo trains with loud whistles.
Uncle Lou had sent him three stuffed elephants from Africa.
His best friend, Mike, had given him five special marbles.
One day his icky cousin, Marvin, came to visit for a week.
Sam's toys started to disappear.
On the second day of Marvin's visit, Sam could not find his two choo-choo trains with loud whistles, his three stuffed elephants from Africa, or his five special marbles.
Sam asked his icky cousin, Marvin, about his missing toys but Marvin said that he had seen nothing.
Although late that night, Sam was sure he heard a train whistle.
Sam was so sad.
Even though he still had a baseball, bat and glove, a puzzle, toy cars, and a light-up yo-yo to play with, he still missed his two choo-choo trains with loud whistles, his three stuffed elephants from Africa, and his five special marbles.
The day came for Marvin to go back home.
While Marvin was hugging Aunt Mary, shaking hands with Uncle Joe, petting Max, the cat, and getting juicy kisses from Grandma, Sam took a peek in Marvin's suitcase.
There, under a pair of smelly old socks, Sam found his two choo-choo trains with loud whistles, his three stuffed elephants from African and his five special marbles.
Sam was not sad anymore.
From then on Sam kept his two choo-choo trains with loud whistles, his three stuffed elephants from Africa, and his five special marbles in a safer place -- right in bed beside him.
Teacher Resource Sheet #4
(1) What part of the story was repeated? (2) What is the pattern? (3) How many items are in the core? (4) How many items would there be if the pattern repeated twice? Four times?
Teacher Resource Sheet #5
Vignette
Y Attention! Pete the Pattern Eater has broken into the school library.
He's devoured all the patterns found in some of our favorite stories.
No more, Not I, and very well in The Little Red Hen. Good-by 3 Billy Goats Gruff.
We can't even catch the "Gingerbread Man"! We need your help.
You are asked to create a story.
You must include a pattern of numbers, words, or figures.
The core must be repeated at least 3 times.
Good Luck! Our readers are depending on you.
Student Worksheet
Function Table (Title 1) (Title 2)
