Second Annual Report to The Honorable M. J. "Mike" Foster, Jr.
Governor, State of Louisiana
"...to improve the lives of women of all ages in Louisiana..."
Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission State Representative Diane Winston, Chair Dr. Beth Willinger, Vice Chair 2002
Report to the Governor Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission 2002
T ABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.1 Mission, D uties, Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.4 2002 Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.5 Review of 2000-2001 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.7 2002 Focus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.11 Action Plan 2002 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.13 Administrative Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.15
Introduction The Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission, established by Executive Order No.
MJF 2000-6, issued on Februar y 16, 2000, as amended by Executive Order No.
MJF 2000-54, issued on December 1, 2000 and Executive Order No.
MJF 2001-6, issued on Februar y 9, 2001, consists of 27 women and men selected from the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus, state agencies, and academic and business professionals in law, education, health, and the social sciences.
The charge to the Commission is to document and monitor the status of women and girls in Louisiana; identify persistent gender-based disparities, especially in the areas of earnings potential and health care; and recommend policies that will significantly improve the quality of life for Louisiana women of all ages.
The first meeting of the Commission was held in August, 2000.
In its first year, the Commission sur veyed the state ser vices available to Louisiana women, conducted public hearings to learn about women's concerns and needs, and recommended a series of legislative and administrative actions based on these findings.
The tremendous efforts of the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus were critical to the enactment of legislation on many of the recommendations made by the Commission (please see page 7).
O verall, the Commission was ver y pleased with the progress made in its first year.
However, much remains to be accomplished.
The 2000 U.S. Census, along with several reports released by non-profit organizations in recent months, provide state-by-state rankings relating to many of the Commission's concerns.
According to the 2000 Census, women comprise over half (52 percent) of the population of Louisiana and head nearly 24 percent of all family households (up from 21 percent in 1990).
*
*A household includes a householder and one or more people living in the same household who are related to the householder by birth, marriage, or adoption.
All people in a household who are related to the householder are regarded as members of his or her family.
A family household may contain people not related to the householder, but those people are not included as part of the householder's family in census tabulations....Not all households contain families since a household may comprise a group of unrelated people or one person living alone.
(U.S. Census Bureau)
1
Louisiana women rank 50th in the ratio of women to men's earnings with Louisiana women earning just 64.8 cents to ever y dollar earned by a man in Louisiana.
51st for women living in poverty: 19.8 percent of Louisiana women live in poverty compared to 12.2 percent nationally; 50th in the ratio of women to men's earnings with Louisiana women earning just 64.8 cents to ever y dollar earned by a man in Louisiana; 48th in the high school completion rate: 79.4 percent of women over 24 years of age completed high school in Louisiana compared to 84 percent nationally; 51st in percent of women without health insurance: 26.5 percent of Louisiana women have no health insurance compared to 13.2 percent nationally; and 50th in life expectancy, women in Louisiana have a life expectancy nearly two years below the national average of 78.81 years.
In addition, the median income for women in Louisiana is $22,000 compared to $25,000 for women nationally.
Moreover, while births to teen mothers have declined or remained constant in the U.S., with a national average of 12.8 percent, the rate in Louisiana increased from 17.6 percent in 1990 to 18.6 percent in 1997, ranking Louisiana 3rd among the states in the rate of births to teen mothers.
The 2001 edition of Making the Grade on Women's Health: A National and State-by-State Report Card ( Women's National Law Center) ranked Louisiana women's overall health 51st in a stateby-state comparison that included Washington DC - down from 50th in 2000! Women's health is intimately tied to economics, poverty, education and access to health care.
More women in Louisiana live in rural areas, have no health insurance, earn lower wages, and obtain lower education levels than women nationally.
All these factors limit access to health care, especially preventive care, and result in greater health risks and lower longevity.
According to the Women's National Law Center report, out of the 50 states and the District of Columbia, Louisiana ranks:
2
The Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission is working to reverse the current status of women living and working in Louisiana.
Bringing women's strengths and views into the decision making process has helped to increase awareness of the concerns for women's health, education, employment, and economic well-being.
The Louisiana legislature currently counts 23 women legislators, 16 percent of the legislative body (up from just three, or 2.1 percent, in 1990), ranking us 39th nationally in representation by women (Center for American Women and Politics).
However, with respect to the number of women in appointed policy positions, only 17.4 percent of the policy making positions in Louisiana are held by women compared to 43.7 percent nationally, ranking Louisiana 50th (Center for Women in Government and Civil Society).
The Commission needs the help of ever yone in the state, especially policy makers.
In particular, the Commission implores all appointed and elected policy leaders, at both state and local levels, to ask themselves each time they make a decision affecting their constituents: "How does this decision or piece of legislation affect women in the state? Will it benefit the education, health and economic well-being of women, and the education, health and economic well-being of the people who are in their care?"
3
Mission, Duties, and Focus Mission As advisors to the Governor, the mission of the Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission is to improve the lives of women of all ages in Louisiana through research, education, and recommendations for legislative and administrative reform.
Duties The duties of the Commission, as specified in the Executive Order, include but are not limited to the following: to advise the Governor on the particular hardships, concerns, and needs that challenge Louisiana women and their possible solutions; to identify and analyze trends that negatively impact the health and prosperity of Louisiana women; and to monitor the status of Louisiana women for the purpose of evaluating their economic, educational, and health concerns, needs and/or hardships.
Focus To achieve its mission, the Commission seeks: · greater coordination among the state agencies ser ving women, · maximization of existing resources for women, and · use of new and existing resources where they will have the greatest impact on eliminating the economic disparity between women in Louisiana, relative to women nationally, and to men in Louisiana.
4
The State of Louisiana spends nearly $550 million
2002 Members WOMEN'S POLICY AND RESEARCH COMMISSION Paul Arceneaux Executive Director Office of Elderly Affairs Office of the Governor Diana Bajoie State Senator, District 5 Susan T. Beal Director Center for Business and Economic Research Louisiana State University, Shreveport Linda Brassette Operations Director Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals Dr. Bridgett Brown Attorney Alexandria, Louisiana Jacquelyn Brechtel Clarkson State Representative, District 102 Vera Clay Executive Director Office of Women's Ser vices Office of the Governor Dr. Constance L. Casente, RN University of Phoenix- Louisiana Campus Carla Blanchard Dartez State Representative, District 51 Helen C. Godfrey President and CEO Shreveport Federal Credit Union Gwendolyn P. Hamilton Secretar y Department of Social Ser vices Helena Henderson Executive Director New Orleans Bar Association Don J. Hutchinson Secretar y Louisiana Department of Economics Paulette R. Irons State Senator, District 4 Dr. Alice Abel Kemp Senior Research Fellow Newcomb College Center for Research on Women Professor of Sociology, Emeritus, University of New Orleans Karen Paterson Louisiana State Demographer Office of Data Base Commission Dr. Janet F. Pope Director School of Human Ecology Louisiana Tech University
a year on social ser vices to the families of teen mothers...and less than $11 million on teen pregnancy prevention.
(Office of Public Health)
5
Louisiana has the highest death rate in the nation of women killed by a partner with a weapon.
(FBI, 2000) Kimberly Rosenberg Deputy Executive Counsel Office of the Governor Dr. Joseph E. Savoie Commissioner of Higher Education Board of Regents Susan H. Smith Director Louisiana Office of Contractual Review Susan W. Sonnier Executive Director Children's Cabinet Dr. J. Jill Suitor Department of Sociology and Director, Women and Gender Studies Louisiana State University Carol Wallin Deputy Superintendent of Education Dr. Melissa S. Waters Department of Economics and Finance University of Louisiana, Lafayette Dawn Romero Watson Deputy Secretar y Louisiana Department of Labor Diane Winston State Representative, District 77 Dr. Beth Willinger Executive Director Newcomb College Center for Research on Women Tulane University
6
Review Of Commission Activities: AUGUST, 2000 TO JULY, 2001 From August to December, 2000, the Commission focused on determining the range of existing ser vices and resources for women's economic, education, and health-related concerns.
The Commission in Januar y, 2001, sought to obtain first-hand accounts of how individual Louisiana women experience and address obstacles to their economic and educational advancement and health care needs.
Hearings were held at seven locations throughout the state.
O ver 350 people attended these hearings and some 250 provided testimony.
The details of these hearings and testimonies were included in the Commission's 2001 "Report to the Governor."
The first report by the Commission was delivered to the Governor on March 15, 2001.
Recommendations were made in the areas of: pay equity, job training, child care, transportation, teenage pregnancy, women entrepreneurs, public assistance, health education, relationship violence, breast and cer vical cancer, and sexually transmitted diseases.
An Executive Summar y of this report is available through the Louisiana librar y system.
A full copy of this report is available for inspection through the Governor's Office or the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus, State Capitol Building, Baton Rouge.
Outcomes from 2001 Report The Louisiana Women's Commission gained significant support and action from the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus and other legislators in advancing the 41 recommendations contained in its first report.
Chair Winston said the greatest progress was made in the areas of domestic violence, improvements to child care, educational and financial supports for working women, and access to health care.
Several bills filed brought about much discussion and attention to the concerns of women, such as improving insurance coverage for prescription drugs, but were defeated.
"Our greatest success however came from raising the debate in both Houses about issues of critical importance to women and their families," said Rep. Winston.
7
The 2001 Legislative Session considered an unprecedented number of bills affecting women and families, many of which were recommendations made by the Commission.
The following is a list of legislation, resolutions, and initiatives to improve utilization of funds designated for Temporar y
Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), and to strengthen programs for women through the Office of Women's Ser vices (OWS) on which progress was made in the 2001 legislative session:
LEGISLATION ACT NO. No. 1180 SUMMARY Supplements the Family Violence Act by including dating partner in the scope of protections Eliminates barriers low-income individuals have in obtaining Temporar y Restraining Orders Strengthened child support provisions STATU TES ENACTED Enacts R.S. 46:2151
No. 430
Enacts Code of Civil Procedure Art.
3603.1(C) and R.S. 46:2134(F) Amends and Reenacts R.S. 9:311, 312, 9:315-315.20, 315.22(C) and 374(A) and (B) and C.C. Art.
142; Repeals R.S. 9:337 Amends and Reenacts R.S. 9:315.40(4), (5), and (8), 315.41, 315.42(B), 315.43, 315.44(A) (intro. para.) and (3), 315.45, and 315.47; Enacts R.S. 9:315.40(9); Repeals R.S. 9:315.48 Enacts R.S. 9:374(E)
No. 1082
No. 612
Suspends fishing and other licenses for non-payment of child support
No. 903
Concerns provisional awards of resources and assets by a judge during a divorce Eliminates the need for a woman to have doctor's written order to get a mammography Protects a mother's ability to breast feed a baby in public Prohibits any health insurance policy from excluding coverage for diagnosis and treatment of a correctable medical condition solely because the condition results in infertility Authorizes local school systems to offer instruction in personal financial management to students
No. 1116
Enacts R.S. 22:215.11(A)(5) and R.S. 1300.172.1-1300.172.3 Enacts R.S. 51:2247.1 Enacts R.S. 22:215.22
No. 576 No. 1045
No. 681
Enacts R.S. 17:282.3
8
IMPROVE U TILIZATION OF TANF F UNDS TO ASSIST POOR WOMEN $4 million for the Office of Women Ser vices for expanded domestic violence initiatives, including training for social ser vice and law enforcement workers, ser vices to children in shelters, and funds to expand outreach into rural areas $2 million for the expansion of teen pregnancy prevention programs administered by the state $10 million to expand vocational education to include adult basic education and literacy $14 million for new drop-out prevention program $2 million for the development of Individual Development Accounts to assist in the purchase of a home, to capitalize a home-based business, or to further education $1 million for creation of a Fatherhood Initiative $9 million to fully fund child care and eliminate a waiting list in the TANF program $10 million for the existing Wrap-Around Child Care Program, providing summer and before/after hour ser vices $5.2 million for additional child care assistance program funds $7.8 million for additional drug court ser vices and the expansion of the juvenile drug court program $15 million for new pre-K programs for at-risk four year olds $3 million for vouchers for at-risk four year olds to attend faith-based early education programs $3.6 million in funding for aiding the formation of two-parent families $17.5 million for energy assistance $3.5 million for expanded transportation supports
9
STRENGTHEN PROGRAMS FOR WOMEN THROUGH THE OFFICE OF WOMEN SERVICES $1 million for a new micro-enterprise development initiative, targeted towards low income women who seek self-employment $65,000 for implementation of a 1-800 toll free Family Violence number
RESOLU TIONS HCR 14 Urges and requests the Louisiana Judicial College to institute mandator y continuing legal education for Judges on child support guidelines and family law
HCR 141 Urges and requests the state to participate fully in any federal grant program beneficial to women with breast cancer HCR 142 Urges the state to extend the time limitation for TANF recipients who need more than two years to complete education or training HCR 96 Proclaims " Take Our Daughters to Work Day" as a state activity; on April 26, it will be the 10th anniversar y of the program
COMMISSION OU TREACH O ver 500 copies of the Executive Summar y of the 2001 "Report to the Governor" were printed and distributed to legislators, libraries, universities, public hearing participants, and citizens throughout the state.
The Executive Summar y also is available on the web at the Louisiana Legislative Women's Caucus site www.legis.state.la.us/llwc/llwc.htm.
In addition, the work of the Commission was publicized through state journals, radio, television, and public appearances by commission members.
10
Focus For Year 2002 From August 2001 to March 2002, the Commission reviewed areas of accomplishment in 2001, sur veyed areas of remaining need for action, analyzed its limited role for legislative activity in the 2002 fiscal-only session*, and began plans for an event marking the 10th anniversar y of Take Our Daughters to Work day, and a state-wide conference scheduled for September 2002.
The Commission invited presentations from a number of state departments in order to monitor and to become more familiar with specific government programs.
In addition to Legislative and Administrative reports, presentations were made by Dana Reichert, TANF Director, Division of Administration; Mike Wang, Office of the Governor; Vera Clay, Executive Director of the Office of Women's Ser vices, Office of the Governor; and Donna Ganey, Assistant Superintendent for the Office of School and Community Support.
LEGISLATIVE STATUS REPORT Mar y Quaid, Executive Director of House Legislative Ser vices, House of Representatives, provided a detailed power point presentation on more than 40 pieces of legislation that came before the 2001 Legislative Session and concerned recommendations made by the Commission in its 2001 Report to the Governor, or were related to the interests and work of the commission.
Recommendations not addressed in the 2001 session were identified for future legislative sessions.
ADMINISTRATIVE REPORT Andy Kopplin, Assistant Chief of Staff, Director of Policy and Planning, and the liaison between Governor Foster and the Commission, reported on the response to the Governor's request for information from state agencies concerning their efforts to achieve equity within their agencies and to institute where possible the recommendations of the Commission.
*Regular sessions of the legislature in even-numbered years are "restricted to the consideration of legislation which provides for the enactment of a general appropriations bill, implementation of a capital budget, for making an appropriation, levying or authorizing a new tax, increasing an existing tax, legislating with regard to tax exemptions, exclusions, deductions, reductions, repeal, or credits, or issuing bonds."
Article III, Section 2(A)(3), of the Louisiana Constitution of 1974, as amended.
11
TAKE OUR DAUGHTERS TO WORK DAY On April 25, 2002, in celebration of the 10th annual Take Our Daughters to Work Day, the Commission will host a picnic on the lawn of the Governor's Mansion for state employees and their daughters.
The purpose of Take Our Daughters to Work Day is to inspire young women to set higher goals and to help them attain them.
By learning from each employee they meet, what the employee does, how he or she got there, and what is meaningful about their job, girls are exposed to new work opportunities, and gain an increased interest and appreciation for education.
Girls who participate in the program say they feel more confident and appreciated.
The Commission will also take this opportunity to celebrate working women throughout the state and to draw attention to the work of women.
F URTHERING RESEARCH AND POLICY ANALYSIS TO BENEFIT LOUISIANA WOMEN September 12-13, 2002, the Commission will host a conference at Tulane University to bring together policy makers, advocates, researchers, practitioners, educators, business and labor leaders to discuss current research findings, policy perspectives, and grassroots efforts relating to the status and the experiences of women living in Louisiana.
The conference, "Facing Facts: Research, Policy and Grassroots Perspectives on Women in Louisiana," aims to identify the trouble spots as well as "best practices" so as to define the goals for women's progress in Louisiana in the areas of the economy, education, health, and politics.
Approximately 35 papers will be presented.
Co-sponsored by The Newcomb College Center for Research on Women, the conference will feature Ann Crittenden, economics journalist and author of The Price of Motherhood: Why the Most Important Job in the World is Still the Least Valued, and Katherine Newman, Har vard professor and author of No Shame in My Game: The Working Poor in the Inner City.
12
Legislative Action Plan For 2002 The Commission set the following priorities for the 2002 Legislative Session: · To create within the Office of Women's Ser vices 1) a clearinghouse of information on women and women's ser vices; and 2) a position of employment for the purpose of staffing the Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission and ser ving as a liaison within the Governor's Office to state departments and agencies on women's concerns and needs; · To analyze factors associated with women's low economic standing, particularly pay equity and educational and health opportunities that affect one's ability to work, and to make recommendations concerning improvements; and · To monitor the impact and the implementation of actions by state agencies relative to the 41 recommendations made in the 2001 "Report to the Governor."
OFFICE OF WOMEN'S SERVICES (OWS) Objective: To publicize to Louisiana women the state ser vices available to assist them and to provide advocacy on their behalf.
Recommendations: Create within the OWS an information clearinghouse to assist Louisiana women in locating and obtaining information on public resources available for their health, economic selfsufficiency, education, training, and employment.
Request state agencies develop internal communications detailing the ser vices available for women through that agency that can be used by the clearinghouse to assist women, and designate a contact person who will form a network with OWS and ser ve as OWS's point of contact in that agency.
Request that OWS work with the web-based Louisiana Ser vices Director y, through INFO Louisiana, to include "women's ser vices" as one of the main categories under which state ser vices for women can be accessed.
Secure funding for an Executive Director of the Louisiana Women's Policy and Research Commission to be housed in the Office of Women's Ser vices, who will report to the Chair of the Commission or her designee, and who will be responsible for conducting research, disseminating information, maintaining a Web Site, planning and staffing Commission meetings, networking with women's groups, etc.
13
PAY EQUITY Objective: To assess the employment patterns and earnings of women and men relative to job classifications and pay equity.
Recommendation: Expand a sur vey of the Department of Labor to include a set of questions regarding employment patterns by race and gender.
Information such as level and field of employment, years in the labor force, wages, job training, and years of schooling is needed to ascertain the extent of occupational segregation and mobility for women and men in the workplace, and earnings by occupation, gender, and race in public and private sector employment.
CHILD CARE Objective: To increase employment possibilities for mothers with dependent children through access to affordable, quality childcare.
Recommendation: Promote legislation relative to tax incentives, grants, or other subsidies for businesses that offer licensed child care and/or other after-school care as an employee benefit or that provide other options such as flexible spending accounts for child or dependent care.
14
TRANSPORTATION Objective: To increase employment opportunities and access to health care for women by increasing access to public transportation systems or private means of transportation, particularly in rural areas.
Recommendations: Promote legislation relative to tax incentives to businesses that offer as an employee benefit transportation to/from work or programs to make car ownership possible, and develop transportation systems in areas where none exist.
Determine what federal funding is available to assist with transportation to school and work for women and children.
Undertake a study to ascer particularly school buses, c needs groups such as rural needing transportation for tain how public owned vehicles, an be used in off-hours for special residents, the elderly, and those health care.
REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN Objective: To increase the representation of women by women as appointed policy leaders and in state government.
Recommendations: Expand the pool of qualified women able to ser ve as top advisors and department heads and make representation of women a priority.
Communicate with all university and college presidents and nominating committees to urge them to include more women candidates for their recommendations to policy boards and commissions.
15
Recommendations for Administrative and Legislative Action by December , 2003 Some of the following recommendations may need a combination of administrative and/or legislative action that cannot be addressed in the Fiscal-only 2002 Legislative Session.
For this reason, the Commission's deadline for action on the following items is December 31, 2003.
These recommendations, along with others that may emerge in 2003, continue the Commission's focus on women's health, education and economic well-being.
PAY EQUITY Recommendations: Promote stricter enforcement of state regulations requiring that agencies and contractors with the State abide by all applicable State and Federal policies regarding employment discrimination and pay equity.
Create public ser vice announcements on workplace issues, specifically on pay equity and wage discrimination, gender and race discrimination, sexual harassment, discrimination in employment benefits, and stereotyping in hiring, firing, and promotion.
Encourage the Department of Labor to emphasize laws regarding discrimination and pay equity in its workshops and printed materials for both public and private entities.
16
JOB TRAINING Recommendations: Request the Louisiana Workforce Commission conduct a sur vey of women participants in all publicly funded job training programs and share the results with the Office of Women's Ser vices and the appropriate state agencies to insure programs are improving the employment outcomes of participants.
Highlight in each congressional district a model training program based on the results of the sur vey that emphasizes women's non-traditional, higher-wage employment, and promote these programs to female constituents.
Request the Workforce Commission review the Unified State Plan for the Workforce Investment Act to strengthen provisions relating to ser vices and programs for Displaced Homemakers and single parent households.
Include in an advisor y capacity the Governor's Office of Women's Ser vices as a representative of the Women's Commission in those efforts.
Review higher education teacher-training strategies to ascertain their effectiveness in encouraging girls and women to pursue non-traditional areas of employment and study, especially in the fields of math, science and technology.
HEALTH Recommendations: Request state public health departments create an Advisor y Council for Women's Health in each parish of Louisiana and include in that Council health care recipients who will help the state identify and direct public and private ser vices to the unmet health needs of women, especially women over the age of 40.
Review the Department of Health and Hospital's "single point of access" plan for women's health ser vices for applicability, comprehensiveness and efficiency.
Evaluate the extent of implementation of RS 17:275, which requires all public junior and senior high schools to provide instruction to all female students in the proper procedure for breast self-exam and the need for an annual Pap test to detect cer vical cancer.
Evaluate the effectiveness of the sex-education curriculum of Louisiana's public and private schools.
Seek and support legislation that allows insurance coverage for all prescribed medical uses of hormones.
17
TRANSPORTATION Recommendations: Convene a task force to study public transportation systems in Louisiana and models in other states so as to quantify the transportation issues and possible solutions for working women.
Utilize the state transportation study to develop a state plan to: Receive appropriate federal and public assistance to address this problem in a comprehensive way; and Encourage the creation of public-private partnerships, especially among small businesses, to meet the transportation needs of working women, women with children, and elderly women.
18
