virginiAVIATION Mar/Apr 2003 VIRGINIA AVIATION j Page Published by THe Virginia Department of Aviation Mar/Apr 2003 Virginia Aviation Safety Week (April 21-24) Education Seminar-Accident Prevention For 25-years, Rod Machado has been speaking to audiences in all 50 of the United States and Europe.
Rod likes to educate with humor and pertinent stories to ensure that learning is a fun experience.
For six years, Rod wrote and co-anchored ABC's Wide World of Flying.
He is AOPA's National CFI spokesman and a National Accident Prevention Counselor appointed by the FAA in Washington, D. C. Rod is the flight instructor voice on Microsoft's Flight Simulator 2000/2002 and he wrote the flight lesson tutorials for the software.
He is AOPA's Flight Instructor Spokesman and also an instructor on Cessna's Computer-Based Private Pilot CD-ROM.
Rod has written for a number of aviation publications and is now a columnist for AOPA Pilot and Flight Training Magazines.
He has produced and authored videos, audio tapes and books including Rod Machado's Private Pilot Handbook and Workbook, and Rod Machado's Instrument Pilot's Survival Manual.
April 21, 2003 - Richmond Virginia Aviation Museum www.vam.smv.org
April 22, 2003 - Washington, D.C.
Fairfax Government Center www.fairfaxcounty.gov
All Seminars are from 7:00 -9:00 p.m.
For Directions to each location, go to the listed website or check the Virginia Department of Aviation website calendar of events at www.doav.state.va.us or contact Jeanie Carter at (804) 236-3639 (ext. 133), for further info.
April 23, 2003 - Hampton Roads Chesapeake Conference Center www.chesapeakeconference.com
April 24, 2003 - Roanoke North Cross School www.flypiedmont.com/roa
Sponsors: Virginia Department of Aviation, Richmond FSDO, Washington FSDO, Av-ed Flight School, Virginia Aviation Museum, Fairfax Government Center, Atlantic Coast Airlines, Chesapeake Regional Airport, Horizon Aviation, FlightQuest, Piedmont Hawthorne Roanoke
Page 2
VIRGINIA AVIATION
mar/Apr 2003
International Art Contest Virginia Winners Announced "100 Years of Powered Flight" was this year's theme The 2003 Virginia winners of the International Aviation Art Contest were chosen in early February by members of the American Society of Aviation Artists.
This year's contest theme, "100 Years of Powered Flight," asked children to illustrate their fantasies and visions of the first 100-years of flight.
In keeping with the theme, entries for the contest contained imaginative depictions of planes, space shuttles, jets, rockets and the Wright Flyer.
Each illustration was unique in perspective.
Winners of the contest were: In Category I (ages 6-9), First place, Robert F. Burke of Annandale; Second place, John Tyler Forrest of Mineral; and Third place, Drew Douglas of Montclair.
In Category II (ages 10-13), First place, Heather Burke of Annandale; Second place, Na'Quesha Mason of Smithfield; and Third place, Quaneisha Baily also from Smithfield.
In Category III (ages 14-17), First place, Russell Perkins of Norfolk; Second place, Emilie Stump of Virginia Beach; and Third place, Nathan Charles A. Ecarma of Quantico.
All winners received a plaque and an aviation related gift.
The Virginia Department of Aviation (DOAV) sponsors the annual contest in support of aviation education and awareness.
The DOAV mails contest entry forms to each public school in the state and makes the form available on their web site.
Every child in the Commonwealth, age 6 to 17, is invited to enter the contest.
Winners of Virginia's contest were sent to Washington D.C. in March to compete with other states at the national level.
Winners of the national contest will go on to the International Aviation Contest.
Last year Virginia had a National winner who went on to win at the International level in the Category I/69 year olds.
All of the winning art work can be viewed via the DOAV's web site, www.doav.state.va.us .
Sponsorship is provided by the National Aeronautic Association, National Association of State Aviation Officials and National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Virginia Aviation Events April 21-24, 2003 Virginia Aviation Safety Week presentation by Rod Machado will take place beginning at 7:00 p.m. each night.
Please see the front page of this issue of Virginia Aviation for more information.
April 23, 2003 Virginia Aviation Board Meeting will be held beginning at 9:00 a.m. at the Massey Building, 5707 Huntsman Road, Richmond International Airport, Virginia.
Schedule and meeting place subject to change for additional information contact Carolyn Toth at 804-236-3637.
May 3-4, 2003 Southside Sky-Fest Air, Car, 
Includes aircraft performances and displays, hot air balloon flights and tethered rides.
Sponsored by Danville Air Show Incorporated and Danville Parks, Recreation, 
May 15, 2003 Aviation Safety Seminar will take place at the Accomack County Airport in the terminal lobby.
The topic will be "Fuel Awareness."
Sponsors include the Federal Aviation Administration, Virginia Department of Aviation, Accomack County Airport Commission, and Carter Crabbe Aviation.
For more info contact Dixie McVey-Jolly, Airport Director, at (757) 787-4600.
Newsletter Editor 5702 Gulfstream Rd Richmond, VA 23250-2422 (804) 236-3631 fax (804) 236-3635 e-mail: sdye@doav.state.va.us Submit upcoming event information to :
Centennial Celebration 1903-2003 WRIGHT AGAIN VIRTUALLY RECREATES DEVELOPMENT OF WRIGHT FLYER ONLINE To celebrate the work and achievements of Wilbur and Orville Wright, the "Wright Again" project invites elementary, middle, and high school students to follow the technical development of the first successful powered airplane, the 1903 Wright Flyer.
Wright Again is available on the Internet at
www.wrightagain.com for all students and teachers to access.
Starting with Wilbur Wright's first documented interest in powered flight on May 30, 1899, Wright Again follows the brothers' successes and setbacks on the path to the first flight on December 17, 1903.
For more information, visit: www.wrightagain.com.
Mar/Apr 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Page 3
General Assembly Passes Aviation Centennial Year Resolution Designating 2003 aviation centennial year in Virginia The year 2003 has a significant place in history, for the United States and the world.
Nearly 100 years ago, great men of vision changed the course of history forever.
The 100th anniversary of man's first powered flight by the Wright Brothers in 1903 will be commemorated all year long with many exhibitions that will be held throughout the United States.
In helping to recognize the 100th anniversary, the Virginia General Assembly recently enacted a resolution that 2003 is designated as Aviation Centennial Year in the Commonwealth.
The resolution was offered by Senator Charles J. Colgan of Manassas.
To indicate the widespread support for aviation, Senator Colgan was able to get every senator and 96 out of 100 delegates to sign-on the resolution as copatrons.
This number of co-patrons is not often coming from the General Assembly.
"Virginia is excited to be honoring the Wright Brothers with this resolution," said Senator Colgan.
"The Commonwealth is committed to preserving their legacy of flight."
Virginia has a stake in the history of the Wright Brothers.
For it was at Fort Myer, Virginia, that the first military flight took place by Orville Wright in September of 1908.
Virginia is home to numerous aviation and aerospace research and development facilities and organizations, including NASA Langley Research Center.
Since 1917, NASA Langley has been the site of much aviation research and development in the United States, and thus is the birthplace of many aeronautical advances enjoyed throughout the world.
Virginia is home to many aviation and aerospace museums.
To help commemorate the Wright Brothers 100year-old achievement, the Smithsonian Institution's Udvar-Hazy Center at Washington Dulles International Airport will observe its grand opening on December 15, 2003.
"Virginia's aviation community is very proud to have such a celebrated year be recognized by the lawmakers of the Commonwealth," said Department of Aviation Director Charles Macfarlane.
"The Wright Brothers have given us one of the most treasured advancements of our time."
In the resolution, the General Assembly encourages all citizens and organizations in the Commonwealth to join together in celebration of the great achievements and cultural improvements to mankind brought about by the advancement and utilization of aviation during the past 100 years.
A copy of General Assembly 2003 Aviation Year Resolution is on the back page of Virginia Aviation and can also be viewed on the DOAV website at www.doav.state.va.us .
Please also visit the U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission's website at www.centennialofflight.gov for information about events and other happenings throughout the United States.
Lynchburg Regional And Delta Prepare For Take-Off Lynchburg Regional Airport and Delta Airlines recently announced that they've worked out an agreement that will bring regional jet service to Lynchburg.
The agreement was made possible by a $500,000 Small Community Air Service Development grant from the U.S. Department of Transportation.
"It is what we were hoping for and what we've been negotiating," Airport Manager Mark Courtney said of the deal.
"We're still working out the final details of the agreement."
He said the upgrade in service could give Lynchburg a leg up in attracting further upgrades or new service from other carriers.
"That has certainly been the case in many instances at other airports in other counties," he said.
"This is the first step in the long road back."
The Lynchburg Regional Chamber of Commerce's Air Service Partnership -- which represents the airport's biggest corporate air travelers -- applied for the air services grant, which required a local match of $100,000 that was collected from various localities in the region.
The grant money allows smaller airports to prove their market to airlines that typically would not take a chance on starting or upgrading service with them by working out a revenue agreement.
For more infomation on Lynchburg Regional Airport, please visit their web site at www.lynchburgva.gov/airport/.
For infoamtion on Delta Airlines, please visit www.delta.com.
Page 4
VIRGINIA AVIATION
mar/Apr 2003
AOPA Announces Airport Watch Program To Protect Nation's General Aviation Airports The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association recently formally unveiled AOPA's Airport Watch, a program to enhance security at general aviation (GA) airports across the country.
Airport Watch is patterned after the highly successful neighborhood watch anticrime programs, which call on community members to note and report suspicious activity.
Some 700,000 pilots and airport workers are being asked to participate in Airport Watch programs at 5,000 GA airports.
The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and AOPA have partnered to deploy this national security-enhancement program.
"General aviation pilots are eager to do their part for national security," said AOPA President Phil Boyer.
"One of the best things we can do is be the eyes and ears for law enforcement in our own neighborhood -- the GA airport.
Who is going to know better than a pilot what looks like normal activity and what doesn't, who belongs and who doesn't?" Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge has called Airport Watch "... a great example of government and the private sector working together to secure the homeland."
"Keeping our airports safe in this free and welcoming nation is an enormous challenge," he said.
"We all must watch out for one another.
Airport Watch can help."
AOPA's Airport Watch was developed in consultation with the Transportation Security Administration and other law enforcement agencies.
And TSA is providing a key element for the success of the program -- a national, toll-free security hotline and centralized reporting system for collecting information from pilots and quickly dispersing it to the appropriate law enforcement agencies.
"We appreciate AOPA's proactive approach to enhance security for the general aviation community," said Transportation Security Administrator Adm. James M. Loy.
"It makes sense that the world's largest civil aviation organization would offer their expertise for the collective effort in the war on terrorism."
Airport Watch is an integrated program to educate and involve pilots in security AOPA's Airport Watch is an integrated program to educate and involve pilots in enhancing general aviation security.
Since the 9/11 attacks, AOPA has used its media outlets to educate pilots about security issues and to encourage pilot vigilance at airports.
AOPA media (AOPA Pilot and AOPA Flight Training magazines, AOPA ePilot email newsletter, and the AOPA Web site, www.aopa.org) reach the vast majority of the nation's pilots.
AOPA is building on that communication base with a series of Airport Watch materials.
To date, AOPA has committed almost half a million dollars to the production and distribution of Airport Watch materials.
Airport Watch brochure sent to every U.S. pilot In December, AOPA sent the Airport Watch brochure to each of its more than 393,000 members.
TSA will send copies to the remaining pilots who are not members of AOPA, while the Professional Aviation Maintenance Association will send it to aviation mechanics and technicians.
Other aviation organizations will be distributing the brochure as well.
The brochure points out some of the things pilots should be on the lookout for at airports.
Among them: pilots who appear to be under the control of others; anyone trying to access an aircraft through force; anyone who seems unfamiliar with aviation procedures trying to rent an aircraft; aircraft with unusual or obviously unauthorized modifications.
It cautions pilots to follow their gut instincts but use common sense.
None of the items listed necessarily indicate terrorist activities.
The brochure includes a tear-out checklist of what pilots should watch for and report.
"The goal here is to raise awareness," said Boyer.
"It's not to spread paranoia."
With the brochure, pilots also received a window decal to display on their planes declaring that this aircraft is part of AOPA's Airport Watch.
Airport Watch video offers examples of what to look for AOPA has produced a videotape to help pilot organizations and other airport groups learn what to watch and listen for.
Phil Boyer introduces a number of scenarios that depict suspicious activities that may warrant a call to authorities.
"The September 11 terrorists were from the Middle East, but the next terrorists could be from anywhere and look like your next-door neighbor," Boyer says on the tape.
"And that's the point.
There is no terrorist `type.'
Terrorists won't always speak with an accent or look a certain way.
It's what they're doing and how they're acting that should make you suspicious."
The videotape was produced in consultation with TSA and with local law enforcement agencies.
To add realism to the training tape, in one of the scenarios police officers and dispatchers enacted their roles as they would in responding to a real call reporting possible terrorist or criminal activity.
Scenarios range from obvious situations like pilots being waylaid and coerced aboard corporate jets, to shady characters trying to force their way into aircraft or hangars, to more subtle situ(see AOPA cont. on pg. 5)
Mar/Apr 2003 ations like someone asking questions that are almost, but not quite, right.
There's even one scenario that appears to be suspicious but is in fact benign.
The video is free upon request and can also be viewed on the AOPA Web site at www.aopa.org/airportwatch/.
It will be distributed to pilot and airport groups across the country, including the 800 local chapters of the Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA).
The video will be shown at the hundreds of FAA and AOPA Air Safety Foundation safety seminars conducted nationwide.
It will also be incorporated into the Air Safety Foundation's Flight Instructor Refresher Clinics, ensuring that flight instructors are spreading the word to the pilot community.
TSA provides 1-866-GA-SECURE: Airport Watch hotline One of the keys to making Airport (AOPA cont. from pg. 4)
VIRGINIA AVIATION Watch work is having an easy way for pilots to report their suspicions, no matter where they may be flying.
At AOPA's request, TSA has provided an easy-toremember nationwide toll-free hotline (866-GA-SECURE or 866-427-3287) for pilots to use.
TSA activated the hotline in earlyDecember.
It is staffed 24/7 by U.S Coast Guard personnel at the National Response Center.
Based on the information a pilot gives them about a possible threat, they are able to contact all the appropriate authorities in that airport's community.
The toll-free hotline number will be displayed prominently on warning signs and posters at thousands of GA airports.
AOPA has distributed kits including the signs, posters, videos, and brochures to AOPA Airport Support Network volunteers at 1,400 airports, to airport managers and directors at an-
Page 5 other 3,500 airports, and to 150 TSA federal security directors, as well as aviation directors in all 50 states.
"The Transportation Security Administration has rightly been focused on the air carrier airports, where large passenger aircraft like the ones used in the September 11 attacks operate," said Boyer.
"We, the general aviation pilots in this country, have an obligation to help secure our airports and our skies.
By keeping our eyes and ears open, we can play a vital role in our national security."
The 393,000 members of AOPA make up the world's largest civil aviation organization.
AOPA is committed to ensuring the continued security, viability, growth, and development of aviation and airports in the United States.
These airports are a vital and critical component of our national transportation system.
Colgan Air Lands At Shenandoah Valley Regional Colgan Air Inc., a regional airline headquartered in Manassas and partially owned by state senator Charles Colgan, D-Manassas, will begin serving Shenandoah Valley Regional Airport (SHD) next month.
He founded the company in 1991.
Colgan Air will replace Air Midwest, a division of Phoenix-based Mesa Air Group (Nasdaq: MESA), as the carrier providing US Airways Express service to Pittsburgh.
But the switch could lead to direct service from SHD to other major hubs.
"This is going to be a good thing for the community," said Dennis Burnett, the airport's deputy executive director.
"In reality, we've landed a new carrier."
The change ended a yearlong campaign by airport officials to land Colgan Air.
They courted the company to bid on the market, then lobbied the U.S. Department of Transportation to approve the change.
In addition to Pittsburgh, Colgan Air flies to airports in Washington, Boston and New York.
It serves New York's LaGuardia International Airport from Charlottesville, Roanoke and Norfolk.
Colgan Air, which takes over service on April 20, will fly the same threeflight schedule as Air Midwest through May 1.
But after that, flight times could change and another daily flight might be added.
Mary Colgan-Finnigan, the company's vice president of administration, says Colgan Air wants to improve the timing of flights to Pittsburgh and intends to add a fourth flight.
But she wouldn't commit to offering service to any other hub.
Burnett believes that proper scheduling, frequency and pricing can make the market profitable again.
"It's getting that schedule that we know is right and working through some pricing issues to make sure we have competitive pricing again," he said.
"We've got to show them that if they give us the right schedules, more people will [use the service]."
He went on to say the switch to Colgan Air increases the chance that service options will improve at SHD.
While Colgan Air serves four hubs from various locations, Pittsburgh is the only East Coast hub Air Midwest serves.
Also, Air Midwest was unlikely to offer service in anything but 19-seat planes because its next smallest aircraft is a 70-seat regional jet.
Colgan Air's fleet includes 30-seat planes, a more likely next step.
Colgan-Finnigan anticipates adding staff at SHD.
Unlike Air Midwest, Colgan Air staffs its counter all day.
The change will mark a return to the Valley for a Charles Colgan company.
Colgan Airways Corp., which was sold in 1986, served SHD in the 1960s and 1970s.
Page 6
VIRGINIA AVIATION
mar/Apr 2003
Aviation Briefs Listing of International Travel Warnings The U.S. Department of State maintains Travel Warnings, Public Announcements, and Consular Information Sheets on its web site at http:// travel.state.gov/travel_warnings.html.
Travel Warnings are issued when the State Department decides to recommend that Americans avoid travel to a certain country.
Public Announcements are a means to disseminate information about terrorist threats and other relatively short-term and/or transnational conditions posing significant risks to the security of American travelers.
Consular Information Sheets are available for every country of the world.
They include such information as location of the U.S. Embassy or Consulate in the subject country, unusual immigration practices, health conditions, political disturbances, unusual currency and entry regulations, crime and security information, and drug penalties.
For more information, contact the NBAA Operations Service Group at info@nbaa.org.
Virginia Aviation Board Allocates Funds To Commonwealth's Airports At its bimonthly meeting held in Richmond, the Virginia Aviation Board (VAB) approved tentative allocations for seven of the Commonwealth's airports from the Commonwealth Airport Fund, totaling $192,743.
Receiving one of the largest allocations was Middle Peninsula Regional Airport, in the amount of $56,000 for Terminal Building (design).
Other airports receiving tentative allocations from the VAB were: · · · · · · Virginia Highlands Airport was awarded $29,418 for West Side Airport Development (design) and for West Side Corporate Hangar Site Prep (design); Blue Ridge Airport was allocated $47,200 for Environmental Assessment for Access Road Relocation and Hangar Apron Expansion (construction); Hummel Field received $30,175 for Airport Layout Plan, Terminal Building Rent and Avigation Easement Acquisition Services; New Kent County Airport was awarded $19,200 for Runway, Taxiway and Apron Rehabilitation (design), Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, and Perimeter Fencing ­ Phase II (design/construction); Dinwiddie County Airport received $2,750 for Fuel System Upgrade (design/construction); Tangier Island Airport was awarded $8,000 for Runway, Taxiway and Apron Rehabilitation (design).
The Virginia Aviation Board has eight members representing seven regions.
The Board approves funding requests brought to it by the Virginia Department of Aviation, a state agency working to support and promote commercial and private aviation interests for the Commonwealth's 67 public-use airports.
Other general aviation aircraft scheduled to be displayed at the Udvar-Hazy GA Aircraft To Be First To Center include a Learjet 23 (serial numMove Into New Air And ber 2), a Falcon 20, a Beech Bonanza and King Air, two Cessna singles and Space Museum three other Piper airplanes.
On March 17, a Piper J-3 Cub is For more information on the Udvarslated to become the first of more than Hazy Center at Dulles, please visit 100 aircraft to be moved to the www.nasm.si.edu/nasm/ext/.
Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum's Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center at Dulles International Airport (IAD) in the Washington, D.C. area.
The new facility is slated to open to the public on December 15, just in time to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Wright brothers' first flight.
Scale model of the Udvar-Hazy Center at Dulles.
BWI Airport Considering Shuttle Service To Richmond Baltimore-Washington International Airport (BWI) is considering starting a shuttle service to Richmond in an effort to lure more Virginia passengers.
BWI officials said the Maryland airport is seeking bids from transit companies interested in running the bus service south to Richmond, where about 6 percent of its passengers originate, according to a recent survey.
BWI estimates that as many as 16 percent of its annual 19 million passengers will come from Virginia this year.
The service could start as soon as June 1.
While this is good news for travelers, Richmond airport officials are not sure it will be reliable or profitable.
Airport spokesman Troy Bell said fares out of Richmond have gotten more competitive recently, and the traffic to and from Baltimore may be too much for travelers to bear.
Mar/Apr 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION Ø FAA's Bill O'Brien is slated to do another forum on the new Sport Pilot rule-making, and fat ultralights.
Ø We are looking forward to getting some new tips from Cal Davis when he puts on his sheet metal workshop again.
Ø Tom Alison, pilot extraordinaire, will do a forum on the SR-71 Blackbird one day and an update on the NASM's move to the Udvar-Hazey Center the other.
Ø At this time there are several presenters that have been contacted, but do not want to commit until a later date.
Follow ups are scheduled.
Ø Welding is not covered yet... if you know of someone who might be willing to put on a couple of primary welding workshops, please give Chuck Shedd a call at (703) 313-0718.
Ø Air Show 1:00 - 3:00 PM both Saturday 
This year's air show includes: Ø Charlie Kulp, the legendary airshow performer and 1997 VA Aviation Hall of Fame inductee, will be performing the Flying Farmer comedy routine in his J-3 Piper Cub.
This will be Charlie's 39th year on the air-show circuit, and we look forward to having him with us again this year.
Ø The Split Image Aerobatic Team features an intricate series of close formation aerobatic maneuvers in the world famous Pitts aircraft.
Flying lead, in a red 260hp Pitts S2S is Ron Saglimbene, and flying wing, in a blue 260hp Pitts S2B is Ron Spencer, both from New Jersey.
Ø Charles Schwenker of Cascade
Page 7
The Seventh Annual Virginia State EAA Fly-In When: September 20 
Ø Butch Walsh will put on a cover ing workshop a couple times each day.
Ø Milt Clary will be presenting a forum on flight testing both days.
Ø Skip Carden will have the latest word about Ercoupes and the Ercoupe Club.
Ø Ken Martin from H
Aerobatics will be flying his Extra 300, and performing a series of crowd-pleasing aerobatic maneuvers.
Ø The radio-controlled, quarterscale, aircraft from the Hardees Air Show Team will be performing at the Virginia State EAA FlyIn for the first time.
This group of pilots is known for their skill in handing their beautiful homebuilt aircraft.
The Hardees Air Show Team has been performing at air shows up and down the East Coast for several years, and when you see them fly, it is hard to believe their aircraft are radiocontrolled.
Other Noteworthy Information: Ø We need VOLUNTEERS!!! Contact Jack Simons at (804) 932-4014 for more information.
Ø We need a volunteer to run the Fly-Mart.
Contact Judy Sparks at (703) 590-9112 if interested.
Ø Tom Tyndall will be conducting a class on "How to Park Airplanes" for any volunteers that are interested in parking airplanes during the Fly-in.
Contact Tom at (804) 261-7501 for more information.
Ø SPONSORS, SPONSORS, SPONSORS!!! We need sponsors! If you, or anyone you know, would like to sponsor part of the fly-in please contact Judy Sparks at (703) 590-9112 for more information.
- VIRGINIA AVIATION Published bi-monthly by the Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Aviation, Public Relations Division in the interest of and for the promotion of aviation.
CHARLES MACFARLANE Director
CHERRY EVANS Manager
SETH DYE Please send material for publication to: Editor, Virginia Aviation newsletter 5702 Gulfstream Road Richmond, VA 23250 or e-mail to sdye@doav.state.va.us Editor
Page 8
VIRGINIA AVIATION
mar/Apr 2003 tion museum in the world, adding to an already impressive list of recognized aviation museums in Virginia; now therefore, be it
Senate Joint Resolution 2003 Aviation Year In Virginia WHEREAS, 2003 is the 100th anniversary of the first powered flight, which was accomplished by Orville and Wilbur Wright on December 17, 1903, in Kitty Hawk, North Carolina; and WHEREAS, the Commonwealth is home to the first military flight at Fort Myer in 1909, and Virginia possesses 10 active military airfields that routinely have played a major role in helping preserve the nation's freedoms; and
RESOLVED by the Senate, the House of Delegates concurring, That the General Assembly designate 2003 as Aviation Centennial Year in Virginia and encourage all citizens and organizations WHEREAS, in honor of this centennial, in the Commonwealth to join together the 105th Congress of the United States WHEREAS, aviation activity, through in celebration of the great achievements has declared 2003 the Aviation Centen- the movement of people and goods on and cultural improvements to mankind nial Year in America; and scheduled and non-scheduled aircraft, brought about by the advancement and provides directly and indirectly for a utilization of aviation during the past WHEREAS, the Commonwealth is significant annual economic impact that 100 years; and, be it home to the NASA Langley Research exceeds $20 billion a year in Virginia; Center in Hampton, which since 1917 and RESOLVED FURTHER, that the Genhas been the site of much of the aviaeral Assembly endorse continued adtion research and development in the WHEREAS, aviation is vital for the vancement and enhancement of aviation United States and is thus the birthplace health, safety and welfare of Virginia through infrastructure development and of many aeronautical advances enjoyed by providing such specific benefits as aeronautical research, so that citizens throughout the world; and emergency medical services, law en- of the Commonwealth may in the fuforcement, agricultural production, en- ture enjoy greater levels of prosperity WHEREAS, aviation.
in the Common- vironmental protection, search and res- from aviation advancement and utilizawealth is a critical component of the cue, and disaster relief; and tion; and, be it transportation network of Virginia, allowing citizens and commerce unpar- WHEREAS, the Smithsonian RESOLVED FINALLY, That the Clerk alleled safe and convenient access, both Institution's Udvar-Hazy Center at of the Senate post the designation of nationally and globally, through its nine Dulles International Airport will open 2003 as Aviation Centennial Year in Vircommercial service airports and 58 gen- on December 17, 2003, becoming the ginia on the General Assembly's eral aviation airports; and largest and most comprehensive avia- website.
If you are interested in learning more about what is going on in the Department of Aviation, please call our office at (804) 236-3624 or our Sponsor Hotline at (800) 292-1034.
Visit our website for updates on future events at: www.doav.state.va.us.
Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Aviation 5702 Gulfstream Road Richmond, VA 23250-2422
Presorted Standard U.S. POSTAGE PAID Richmond, VA Permit No. 949
The Department of Aviation does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age or disability in the employment or the provision of service.
*MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STATE AVIATION OFFICIALS* Purpose: "To foster aviation as an industry, as a mode of transportation for persons and property and as an arm of the national defense; to join with Federal government and other groups in research, development and advancement of aviation; to develop uniform laws and regulations; and to otherwise encourage cooperation and mutual aid among the several states."
