FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE October 2, 2003 Contact: Ed Lawrence Public Information Officer (502) 564-3757 EXT. 4803 1-888-833-ARTS
Performing Arts Showcase Open to the Public
(Frankfort, KY) - Kentucky on Stage, a series of short performances showcasing Kentucky musicians, singers, storytellers, theatre troupes, and dance ensembles selected for artistic excellence will be staged in Lexington, October 7-8, 2003.
Showcases begin each afternoon at 2:00 p.m. at the Downtown Arts Center, 141 E. Main Street, and run through 5:30 p.m.
Additional showcases, billed as the Kentucky Coffeehouse, will combine more great performances with coffees, desserts and the option of a cash bar at the Phoenix Ballroom, in Victorian Square on Main Street, on Tuesday evening, from 7:00-9:30 p.m.
Kentucky on Stage, produced by the Kentucky Arts Council, is primarily a previewing opportunity for performing arts centers and presenting organizations to book talent, but the public is also welcome to experience a sampling of some of Kentucky's best talent for free.
Seating is limited and audience members can attend anytime during the showcase hours but will only be seated between sets.
For more information about Kentucky on Stage, or opportunities for performing artists in Kentucky, contact Individual Artist Program Director, Heather Lyons, toll free at 1-888-833-2787 ext. 4827 or by e-mail at heather.lyons@mail.state.ky.us
The Kentucky Arts Council has been key to creating a thriving environment for artistic creation and making the arts more accessible to the people of Kentucky, through grants and services to arts organizations, schools, community groups, local governments, and individual artists.
The Arts Council is a state agency in the Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet, established in 1965 by the Kentucky General Assembly to develop and promote support for the arts in Kentucky.
-###-
NOTE TO EDITORS: The following is a list of performers scheduled to participate in Kentucky on Stage.
TUESDAY 2:00-5:30 p.m.
Troubadours of Divine Bliss, Louisville Spiced with musical flavors from Kentucky to Louisiana, the eclectic folk music of the Troubadours of Divine Bliss defies categorization and delights audiences.
Debra Tuggle, Louisville This Kentucky native, singer, songwriter and performer writes music celebrating Kentucky's waterways, historic places and natural resources in a mixture of folk and country with a touch of bluegrass.
Lexington Children's Theatre, Lexington Founded in 1983, Lexington Children's Theatre is one of the oldest continuously operating theatres for young people in the country, providing high-quality productions for a variety of age groups.
Hong Shao, Lexington She performs with sophisticated skill on the Pipa, a four-stringed, pear-shaped lute, considered one of the most intricate Chinese instruments.
Lexington Vintage Dance, Lexington This group brings ballroom and social dances of the 19th and early 20th centuries to contemporary audiences with verve and grace.
Steve Wogaman, Louisville Incredibly versatile, Steve Wogman can perform and has performed in any combination from soloist to chamber musician, touring the Eastern United States and abroad.
John Edmonds, Bowling Green John Edmonds' career as a gospel musician has garnered him praise from all over the world, due to his uplifting gospel vocals and fine piano playing.
Orville Hammond, Lexington Orville has received Fellowships and awards from multiple agencies, performed with a number of major artists (including Tony Bennett and Branford Marsalis), and opened the millennium with a debut at Carnegie Hall.
Juneteenth Legacy Theatre, Louisville Developing additional works every season, Juneteenth Legacy Theatre tours with works about outstanding African-Americans, providing enrichment wherever they go.
Southern Sun, Williamsburg Southern Sun has performed at numerous well-known bluegrass festivals, such as The Poppy Mountain Bluegrass Festival, as well as fairs and parks.
Their music is rich, with influence from mountain traditions.
Colin Grant-Adams, Glasgow His music ranges from traditional music of his native Scotland to traditional Bluegrass from his adopted home of Kentucky, as well as his own highly acclaimed original compositions.
Kentucky Ballet Theatre, Lexington This rising young dance company holds a full season in Lexington, but they also tour with traditional favorites, such as Nutcracker, and premiere original works, such as Dracula.
Soulgrass, Horse Cave Soulgrass blends bluegrass, R 
TUESDAY 7:00-9:30 p.m.
Zoe Speaks, Berea This duo performs contemporary Appalachian music, mixing traditional songs and ballads with their own roots-infused originals.
They accompany themselves on guitar, dulcimer and banjo, and perform at such venues as the Kennedy Center in Washington, D.C.
Pale, Stout 
Kentucky Wild Horse, Owenton Made up of fine individual musicians, this band plays and sings traditional old-time, bluegrass and swing music learned directly from earlier generations of amateur and professional Kentucky musicians.
Holland 
Lexington Jazz Project, Lexington This group explores the depths of original music and select covers with two virtuoso keyboard players and a bassist and drummer, creating a sound that is the essence of cutting-edge jazz.
Greg Schaber, Erlanger This award-winning blues singer and guitarist has played classic and original blues for 38 years and studied blues recordings and history for nearly that long.
He moves easily between styles, lacing them all together with anecdotes and humor.
WEDNESDAY 2:00-5:30 p.m.
Dale Ann Bradley 
Art! Art! Barking Dog Dance Company, Crestwood Kentucky's premiere professional modern dance troupe features an eclectic mix of works in its programs, ranging from the absurdly humorous to the starkly dramatic.
Jennifer Rose, Berea Born and raised in Kentucky, Jennifer Rose combines entertainment and education when she sings the emotional music of Appalachia interspersed with humorous and informative stories about the region and its culture.
Lexington Philharmonic Orchestra, Lexington In its 43rd season, the Lexington Philharmonic has a program to please everyone, whether it is an intimate ensemble performance, and interactive education concert, or a pops concert under the stars.
Fernando Moya, Louisville A native of Ecuador, musician and instrument-builder Fernando Moya's music promotes the cultural heritage and preservation of the Andean Mountains.
Cari Norris 
Nada Loutfi, Louisville Educated formally in France, Nada's career has included appearances throughout the United States, Europe and Lebanon.
She boasts an extensive repertoire of both classics and challenging modern works.
Heidi Howe, Louisville A charismatic and versatile performer, Heidi's music blends old-time country with a smattering of bluegrass and a spirited attitude.
She will tailor her show to fit venues large and small and has released three albums to date.
Octavia Sexton, Orlando Octavia's performances uniquely combine personal stories, folk tales, Appalachian history and theater.
She has performed at festivals, community events, and universities and frequently combines her performances with educational programs at schools.
Homer Ledford, Winchester Renowned multi-instrumentalist, instrument-maker and musician, Homer Ledford grew up surrounded by the music he now plays.
Alone or with his band, he performs old standards as well as original compositions.
Kentuckiana African American Arts Series, Louisville The Kentuckiana African American Arts Series has presented drama, dance, drumming, storytelling and music at conferences, theatres, universities and special events for over a decade.
Lorinda Jones, Rineyville She plays a wide range of instruments, including piano, oboe, dulcimer, harp, guitar, and many others.
Lorinda is nationally recognized as an outstanding performer, recording artist and teacher with four CDs and six books to her credit.
Arthur Hatfield 
Known for their tight vocal harmonies, each member of Buck Creek brings individual talent and years of experience to the band.
RETURN TO KAC HOME
RETURN TO IMMEDIATE RELEASE
