events home about Fermilab contacting Fermilab inquiring minds visiting Fermilab education search for physicists Fermilab now public events FermiNews Fermilab at work press pass help/about the site Fermilab Arts Series Presents: fermilogo FERMILAB .
Arts Series .
Gallery Chamber Series .
Lecture Series .
Film Series .
Art Gallery .
Ticket Information .
Seating Chart .
Directions .
Subscribe to FermiCulture .
Cultural Events: Mission Statement .
Current Status of Access to Fermilab
Battlefield Band
November 23, 2002 $19 ($10 ages 18 and under)
[battlefieldBand.jpg]
"The Battlefield Band is turning into a national treasure, and exemplifies the ongoing nature of Scottish musical tradition.
Not seen them yet? Shame on you."
- Edinburgh Evening News
Under the banner "Forward with Scotland's Past," the Battlefield Band plays Scottish music of rare passion and joy.
Inspired by their rich heritage of Celtic music and fired by the strength of today's Scottish cultural scene (which they themselves have done much to create and fuel), the Battlefield Band mixes the old songs with new self-penned material, and performs them on a unique fusion of ancient and modern instruments - bagpipe, fiddle, synthesizer, guitar, cittern, flute, bodhran, and accordion.
This is the gold standard, the band against which all others are measured.
After 30 years they still lead the way for Scottish music - introducing new musicians, new music, always involving their ever-widening audience as they travel the world.
During this tour the band welcomes the return of Pat Kilbride.
A member of the band in the mid-70's, and featured on the classic album At the Front, this will be his second stint on the Battlefield.
Add him to the Battlefield Band mix of experience and musicianship - founding member Alan Reid on keyboards and vocals, fiddle prodigy Alasdair White, bagpipe virtuoso Mike Katz - and they're off again.
A unique blend making a unique band.
Related Links: None at this time.
General Information
All of the Fermilab Arts and Lecture Series programs begin promptly at 8 p.m. in Ramsey Auditorium, in Wilson Hall of Fermilab (approximately 35 miles west of downtown Chicago, near the town of Batavia in the Fox River Valley).
For more information call 630-840-ARTS (630-840-2787), Fax to (630)-840-5501, or email audweb@fnal.gov.
new Subscribe to the FermiCulture email reminder service, or the regular mail distribution list for announcements and reminders of upcoming events.
new
[footerbar.gif] Security, Privacy, Legal Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
