Homework Help [USEMAP:paint-titles.gif] Visual 
Play artist scrabble and art trivia, or view artwork from kids around the world.
You can also find out all about the greatest art theft of the twentieth century: the day the Mona Lisa was stolen! Artcyclopedia: A vast array of articles and online resources in the fine arts.
Explore and Learn: New ways to see and experience the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a timeline of art history.
Sanford: A Lifetime of Color: Drawing activities, techniques, art games, and more are available here.
Back to Top
DANCE Free to Dance: The profound impact of African American dance on the development of modern dance in America, from a PBS documentary.
PBS Online: Search for interesting and interactive sources from public television on the arts.
Sapphire Swan Dance Directory: Links to numerous dance styles from clogging to zydeco.
This Month in Dance History: Important moments in the history of dance, information, and many links to more resources.
Back to Top
MUSIC American Folksong index words and melody: Folksongs arranged by title, sound files too.
Becky's Campfire Songbook: The lyrics to many camp, chant, rounds, silly songs, and links to more song sites.
The Classical Music Site: The history, composers, explanation of terms, and musical periods are shared on this comprehensive site.
Essentials of Music: Discover the major periods, composers, and sounds of classical music.
Heart and Soul: A Celebration of African American Music: World Book has a site that explains the influence of African American culture and rhythms on popular music.
Play Music: Learn about the orchestra, meet young instrumentalists, and link to related sites.
Back to Top
THEATER Aaron Shepard's Reader's Theater: Tips, scripts, multicultural selections, and other resources.
Cinema: How are Hollywood Films Made: The creative process of movie making is covered with interactive projects.
The Costumer's Manifesto: Search for costumes by historical period, occupation, region, and more.
Drama Links: A useful collection of links for storytelling, drama, readers' theater, and more by the ISLMC.
The Puppetry Home page: How to use puppets, their variety, exhibits, performances, stages, and more.
Theatre History on the Web: A comprehensive source for information and links on the history of theater and related sources.
Back to Top
