Visual 
PBS Online: Search for interesting and interactive sources from public television on the arts.
Sapphire Swan Dance Directory: Links to numerous dance styles from clogging to zydeco.
This Month in Dance History: Important moments in the history of dance, information, and many links to more resources.
Back to Top of Page Music American Folksong index words and melody: Folksongs arranged by title, sound files too.
Becky's Campfire Songbook: The lyrics to many camp, chant, rounds, silly songs, and links to more song sites.
The Classical Music Site: The history, composers, explanation of terms, and musical periods are shared on this comprehensive site.
Essentials of Music: Discover the major periods, composers, and sounds of classical music.
Heart and Soul: A Celebration on African American Music: World Book has a site that explains
the influence of African American
culture and rhythms on popular
music.
Jazz Kids: A PBS site that introduces jazz interactively to kids.
New York Philharmonic Kidszone: Learn about the orchestra, composers, and make your own instrument.
Play Music: Learn about the orchestra, meet young instrumentalists, and link to related sites.
San Francisco Kids Fun with Music: This appealing site will help you learn about music from rhythm to the instruments in an orchestra.
Back to Top of Page Theater Aaron Shepard's Reader's Theater: Tips, scripts, multicultural selections, and other resources.
Cinema: How are Hollywood Films Made: The creative process of movie making is covered with interactive projects.
The Costumer's Manifesto: Search for costumes by historical period, occupation, region, and more.
The Puppetry Home page: How to use puppets, their variety, exhibits, performances, stages, and more.
Theatre History on the Web: A comprehensive source for information and links on the history of theater and related sources.
Back to Top of Page Visual Arts @rt Room: Explore art "sparkers"--activities to jump start your brain into its most creative thinking.
Play artist scrabble and art trivia, or view artwork from kids around the world.
You can also find out all about the greatest art theft of the twentieth century: the day the Mona Lisa was stolen! Art Safari: An interactive site from the Museum of Modern Art that invites kids to express what they see.
Artcyclopedia: A vast array of articles and online resources in the fine arts.
Discovering Contemporary Art: A children's guide from the Museum of Contemporary Art in San Diego? Explore and Learn: New ways to see and experience the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art and a timeline of art history.
Hands on Crafts: This highly animated site, a collaboration between a public library and a museum, offers a variety of interactive craft projects.
National Gallery of Art Kids: Learn about famous art and artists, and explore the sculpture garden with Lizzy and Gordon.
Back to Top of Page
