[sqdnpatch.gif] Home Activities Photos Staff Senior Program Cadet Program Schedule About CAP Joining CAP Squadron Info Links Cadet Activities As you may already know, there are many activities in which the cadet may be involved in throughout his or her time in Civil Air Patrol.
This section is designed to cover briefly all of those activities which are open to Civil Air Patrol cadets, as well as give a little deeper background of those activities that cadets from Thomaston-Upson County have been a part of.
Pictures have been provided as available.
Please note that Space Camp and Aviation Challenge are also considered Civil Air Patrol National Cadet Special Activities, but are not strictly Civil Air Patrol activities, and thus are not listed on this page.
Field Training Exercises and Search and Rescue Exercises Basic Summer Wing Encampment National Flight Academy - Glider National Flight Academy - Powered National Blue Beret National Emergency Services Academy Hawk Mountain Ranger School Pararescue Jumpers Orientation Course Cadet Officer School Military Music Academy International Air Cadet Exchange Air Force Space Command Familiarization Course Air Education and Training Command Familiarization Course Jacksonville University/ComAir Aviation Academy Airline Training Track
The activity takes place at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama.
Along with the academic part of it, cadets will be required to participate in volleyball games and team leadership projects.
At the end of the week, cadets will use all they've learned about leadership and apply it to Project X, a team-building obstacle course used by the Air Force to help train its officers.
They are also an excellent way to hone the experienced cadet's skills on those tasks.
SAREXs are usually one-day events designed to keep group personnel qualified to participate in actual emergency services missions.
Both activities are essential to having well-trained, mission-ready ground team.
Emergency services exercises are also open for senior member participation in any one of approximately 15 different roles.
Basic Encampment The basic wing encampment is designed to test the motivation and drive of the Civil Air Patrol cadet, and teach him or her how to work with others as a team.
All cadets are required to attend a basic encampment before attending any national cadet special activities.
It is highly recommended that cadets attend a basic encampment the summer after they join so that they will have ample opportunity to take advantage of everything CAP has to offer.
National Flight Academy - Glider Track (NFAG) There are several locations across the U.S. that have glider academies.
While attending, cadets age 14 and up have the opportunity to learn to fly gliders for much less that normal lessons would cost.
Throughout the week cadets work towards their solo, and if they have acquired sufficient skills to do so, take part in a supervised solo.
The supervised solo is a solo in which the instructor sits in the back seat without communicating or taking any control of the aircraft away from the cadet.
If the supervised solo is satisfactorily completed, the cadet will receive his "pre-solo" wings at the end of the encampment.
Those cadets who have received previous instruction or attended a previous flight academy may have the opportunity to make a legitimate solo flight.
National Flight Academy - Powered Track (NFA) Several locations across the U.S. also offer powered flight academies.
These are similar to the glider academies in operation, except cadets age 16 and up will learn to fly Cessna 172s.
All flights are towards the cadet's private pilot's license.
At the end of the encampment, cadets are also able to take part in a supervised solo if they have enough experience.
National Blue Beret (NBB)
National Blue Beret is open to all cadets age 16 and up.
It is a physically demanding activity that involves cadets working communications, crowd control, and aircraft marshalling roles in order to help the EAA's AirVenture Fly-in run smoothly.
The event takes place in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, and is located at the single busiest airport in the world during the time of the air show.
At the completion of the training phase of NBB, cadets will receive their coveted blue beret, the sign of those who have worked the air show.
While attending, cadets have the opportunity and are encouraged to explore the air show grounds and buy souvenirs, and take advantage of any opportunities that they might have.
Attendees must have a CAPF 101 General Emergency Services Rated and a 101T annotated for ground team member.
CAPF 76 (Radio Operator Authorization) and a standard first aid card are also highly desirable.
National Emergency Services Academy
The National Emergency Services Academy is a joint venture of the Cadet Programs and Operations Directorate of Civil Air Patrol.
The academy offers several courses during the summer.
The National Ground Search and Rescue course consists of ground team training.
During the course of the week, participants spend most of their time in the field, and are required to sleep in tents or survival shelter.
At the end of the week, participants are fully qualified to serve on ground teams.
The Mission Base Staff School is for those interested in becoming mission base staff, including jobs such as radio operator, staff assistant, unit leader, and branch director.
NGSAR participants must be at least 13 years old, while MBSS participants must be 15 years of age or older.
Hawk Mountain Ranger School
The Hawk Mountain Ranger School is another special activity that deals with emergency services.
Cadet who wish to participate must have graduated the 7th grade or be 13 years of age.
The school is operated in the Pennsylvania mountains and is physically demanding.
Although the application process is not handled by Civil Air Patrol National Headquarters, the NCSA ribbon is awarded to those who complete Hawk Mountain, however, Ranger patches will not be worn outside of Pennsylvania Wing.
Look in the November issue of Civil Air Patrol News for information on the application process.
The Hawk Mountain website is located at http://www.voicenet.com/~richluce/hawk.html
Pararescue Jumpers Orientation Course (PJOC 
The course is offered in New Mexico, Virginia, and Kentucky for cadets age 15 and above.
All three courses are physically demanding, and instructors will send home any cadets not capable of meeting the demands of the course.
Advanced PJOC (Mountaineering or Navigation) is available to those who complete the basic course.
Both advanced courses introduce pararescue medical training and require current CPR and first aid cards.
Cadet Officer School (COS)
Cadet Officer School is an academically challenging course open to all cadet officers age 16 and up.
During the eight days of the event, cadets will be expected to read materials pertaining to leadership and air power.
The cadet will be responsible for writing several essays and speeches as well.
The activity takes place at Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama.
Along with the academic part of it, cadets will be required to participate in volleyball games and team leadership projects.
At the end of the week, cadets will use all they've learned about leadership and apply it to Project X, a team-building obstacle course used by the Air Force to help train its officers.
Military Music Academy (MMA) Although not currently an NCSA, the MMA is working to become such.
MMA provides a military-style music program to cadets and seniors who enjoy making music.
MMA takes place in Maryland during the wing encampment.
Participants will perform in the Washington, D.C. area and participate in a CAP-hosted military tattoo with other service and local bands.
National Headquarters does not handle application for this activity.
For more information, contact the activity director, James H. Steinmeier, at jsteinme@erols.com to express interest.
International Air Cadet Exchange (IACE) International Air Cadet Exchange is designed to allow cadets from around the world learn about cultures and nations other than their own.
Countries from Europe, Asia, and North America participate in the program.
Australia is also a destination for cadets.
Only cadets who have earned the Earhart award and who are 17 are eligible to participate in IACE.
For more information, go to http://www.capnhq.gov/cp/cpp/iace/iaceindex.html
Air Force Space Command Familiarization Course (AFSCFC)
Air Education Training Command Familiarization Course (AETC FC)
Jacksonville University/ComAir Aviation Academy Airline Track
_________________________________________________________________
Civil Air Patrol is the Official Auxiliary of the U.S. Air Force Semper Vigilans - "Always Vigilant"
[ Activities ] [ Photos ]
[insig.gif] Webmaster [thomhome.gif]
