Summary Shopping for Assisted Living: What Consumers Need to Make the Best Buy The Aging Committee held a hearing Monday, April 26, 1999 at 1 p.m. on the importance of consumer education when selecting assisted living facilities.
The hearing, titled, "Shopping for Assisted Living: What Consumers Need to Make the Best Buy," focused on the growing industry of assisted living.
Senators present at the hearing were Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-IA) and ranking member John Breaux (D-LA), as well as Senators Chuck Hagel (R-NE), Jim Bunning (R-KY), Harry Reid (D-NV), Evan Bayh (D-IN), and Blanche L. Lincoln (D-AR).
The purpose of the hearing was to gain a general understanding of the purpose of assisted living facilities, to examine and raise awareness of quality of care and consumer protection issues, and to learn more about the regulation of assisted living facilities and the challenges of enforcing those regulations.
In his opening statement, Chairman Grassley commented on both the relative youth and explosive growth of the assisted living industry.
The Chairman told of the rising cost and popularity of assisted living facilities, as well as their projected growth in upcoming years.
Grassley explained that he and his committee looked to the General Accounting Office (GAO) for help in understanding certain aspects of this new industry.
Grassley requested that the GAO examine residents needs versus services offered, consumers access to adequate information, state oversight procedures, and the extent of quality of care and consumer protection problems.
Grassley stated that these issues were looked at in order to "understand how assisted living can help meet our nation's skyrocketing long-term care needs."
Following the opening statements of Senators Breaux, Hagel, Bunning, Reid, Bayh, and Lincoln, Ms. Patricia Johnson was the first witness.
Ms. Johnson's father was a resident of an assisted living facility, and had experienced several problems receiving adequate supervision, both on a personal and medical level.
Several incidents exposed a lack of appropriate medical care and supervision provided by the assisted living facility, and failure to correct the problem after it was brought to light by Ms. Johnson.
The second witness, Collette Appolito, had similar complaints regarding her mother's stay in an assisted living facility.
Although pleased with the overall care her mother received at the facility, Ms. Appolito pointed out problems with supervision and medical attention, attributing both to lack of staff.
Another key issue Ms. Appolito brought forward was the link between cost and service levels at these facilities.
Although the idea of price being linked with service levels is understandable, the explanation of these service level evaluations were not readily available.
Ms. Appolito found the bills for her mother's care rising without adequate explanation.
The second panel of witnesses, expert researchers and regulators, started off with Kathryn Allen, Assistant Director, Health Financing System Issues, GAO.
Her report focused on four main issues: 1) Resident's needs and the services provided in assisted living facilities; 2) the extent to which facilities provide consumers with sufficient information for them to choose a facility that is appropriate for their needs; 3) four states' approaches to oversight of assisted living and; 4) types of quality-of-care and consumer protection problems they identify.
The second witness from this panel was Dr. Catherine Hawes, the Principal Investigator and Project Director for a Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) study.
Her study examined questions about assisted living facilities, ranging from a standard definition of these facilities, to information such as average size, age, and number of units nationwide, standard characteristics of these facilities, and whether these facilities were financially feasible to low and moderate-income individuals.
The next witness was Robert Molica, Ed.D. from the National Academy for State Health Policy, Portland, Maine.
Mr. Molica discussed two studies his organization conducted regarding assisted living institutions in four different states.
These studies covered a variety of issues in the field of assisted living, and compared the findings from the states of Florida, California, Oregon, and Ohio.
The last witness for this panel was Cindy Hannum, Assistant Administrator for Senior and Disabled Services of the Department of Human Resources of Oregon.
Ms. Hannum discussed the interaction between the state of Oregon, the federal government, and assisted living facilities within the state.
Her testimony illustrated the interaction between these three entities, in regard to regulation, funding, and education.
The third and final panel was made up of state and industry officials, and the first witness was Mr. Philip Downey, Vice President of Developmental Planning and Regulatory Affairs of the Marriot Senior Living Services.
Mr. Downey went over several different issues in the field of assisted living, including the services and benefits offered by assisted living facilities, facilities involvement with state regulation and oversight, and industry efforts to educate both policymakers and consumers.
The second witness from this panel was Rev. Dean Painter, President and CEO of the Eaton Terrace Group, which owns and operates an assisted living facility in Colorado.
Rev. Painter also serves on the board of the American Association of Homes and Services for the Aging (AAHSA).
On behalf of the AAHSA, Rev. Painter addressed the GAO study conducted on assisted living facilities, pointing out the desire of the assisted living industry to provide support and services in the areas addressed in the GAO report.
Rev. Painter also stressed the importance of regulation from a state, rather than federal, level.
The third witness for the panel was William Lasky, CEO of Alternative Living Services, the country's largest operator of assisted living facilities.
Mr. Lasky also addressed the GAO report, and discussed what the industry was doing in those areas covered in the report.
The final witness for this panel and the hearing was Robert Lohr, founder and president of Peridot Enterprises, which operates several assisted living facilities and nursing homes in Florida and Pennsylvania.
Speaking on behalf of the National Center for Assisted Living (NCAL), Mr. Lohr stressed the importance of state verses federal regulation of assisted living facilities, pointing out the need for flexibility in the industry.
Mr. Lohr discussed the varied needs of patients in different facilities within a state, as well as facilities in different parts of the country.
