Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual 4.1 Site Guidelines 4 4.1.5 Planting Existing Conditions Only a remnant vestige remains of the historic landscape of Sand Point, on Promontory Hill in the southeast portion of the site.
The second growth conifers in this area give a hint of the rolling, forested character of the landscape that existed prior to pioneer settlement.
The second growth canopy is composed of a combination of evergreen trees (Douglas fir, cedar, hemlock, and madrona) and deciduous trees (willow, cottonwood, and vine maple).
The Mud Lake and Pontiac Bay areas previously had wetland shorelines, with small volume streams flowing to Lake Washington.
As the Naval Station was developed, the forest, wetlands and knolls gave way to open, level expanses of airplane runways and Navy facilities.
Within the Naval Station the original street trees were planted in the 1930s and many trees from that era remain, including large trees along Sand Point Way, deodar cedars along 62nd Avenue NE, ornamental trees throughout the residential open space, and other scattered trees throughout the remaining site (Photo 4.1.5.1).
In addition to trees, significant historical plantings and garden areas exist within the Naval Station (Photo 4.1.5.2).
South of Building 26 South, a remnant of a brick lined rose garden remains, and the gardens of the adjacent officer's quarters on the east side of 62nd Avenue NE still evoke the character of the original planting designs.
In 1975, the Navy relinquished the airfields for use as a NOAA facility and a Seattle park.
The character of the new Magnuson Park parcel was founded on a plan prepared by the firm of Jones and Jones in 1975.
This plan aimed to restore a "natural" character to the site.
Discrete areas of the site were designed to convey a particular landscape character (e.g., natural shorelines, grasslands, wetlands, and active recreation fields) in an effort to recall some of the original site features.
In a 1988 plan, Worthy and Associates reinforced this concept and proposed boulevard plantings along site entry roads (not implemented).
One of the major features of both of these plans, and the subsequent EDAW plan from 1993, was the re-establishment of Design Objectives
Photo 4.1.5.1 Deodar cedars in the Sand Point Historic District
Photo 4.1.5.2 Historic landscape at Building 9
Mud Lake and its connecting stream to Lake Washington.
Currently the plantings within Magnuson Park are a mix of ornamental species, native plants, and invasive exotics.
Irrigation within the park is limited to active recreation turf areas.
When looked at from a landscape perspective, there are three major environments at Sand Point/Magnuson Park, based on existing vegetation as well as planned future uses: the proposed Historic District, an active recreation zone, and a passive recreation zone (Figure 4.1.5.1).
The major design objective for the Historic District is to preserve and enhance the existing landscape settings of the Naval Station to maintain the historic 1930s character, by ensuring that new projects and restorations adhere to the stylistic landscape character of this era.
The major objective for the active recreation zone is to 4 - 43
4
4.1 Site Guidelines
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
4 - 44
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
4.1 Site Guidelines
4
create a landscape setting which provides a complementary transition from the historic district to the more naturalized Magnuson Park on the east (Photo 4.1.5.3), while providing planting and turf areas that can accommodate intense group recreation activities and present an efficient, orderly, and low maintenance park setting.
T he principal objective of the passive r ecreation zone is to preserve the open character of the passive recreation areas within Magnuson Park and enhance wildlife habitat.
Design Criteria
· Simplify planting types and layout to ensure moderate maintenance.
· Use planting to assist in organizing facilities to create a sense of setting within the active recreation area.
Passive Recreation · Restore the landscape to a stable naturalized plant community which emphasizes native plants and balances human access and wildlife habitat needs.
· Create informal and naturalistic planting designs which follow the subtleties of existing and proposed topography, drainage, aspect, and soil conditions.
· Maintain the open savanna-like character of Magnuson Park (Photo 4.1.5.4).
Technical Guidelines
Historic District · Preserve 1930s historical landscape character by using plants and design conventions from the era as well as the original design documents of the Naval Station.
· Increase the overall quantity and quality of tree, shrub, and ground cover plantings throughout the proposed Historic District while keeping in mind the limited maintenance budget of the City agencies.
· Allow flexibility in plant type decisions in new landscape designs.
Incorporate a significant number of historic plants and utilize them in an historical planting design manner.
· Preserve existing mature street trees and replant new large-scale trees to ensure the existing character of the street tree canopy.
Active Recreation · Enhance and create active landscape areas that can accommodate intense group recreation use.
The following technical guidelines should be referred to in a variety of situations, from preparing conceptual design ideas to developing planting plans.
They give input ranging from specific techniques to general design treatment.
Historic District · Maintain remnant ornamental plantings such as the historic formal rose gardens, south of Building 26 South (Photo 4.1.5.5).
Use these plantings as the foundation of future plantings design to the degree possible.
· Maintain the tradition of foundation plantings adjacent to the building facades, particularly at entries and along primary walkways (Figure 4.1.5.2).
Photo 4.1.5.3 Looking east into the active recreation zone of Magnuson Park
Photo 4.1.5.4 Viewing east to Lake Washington from Sand Point Head 4 - 45
4
4.1 Site Guidelines
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
Figure 4.1.5.2 Formal entry landscape at former Navy buildings
· Preserve and reinforce view corridors with new plantings and by pruning or removing selected existing plantings.
Thin the existing tightly spaced tree planting to ensure future health of trees.
· Preserve and enhance existing street tree plantings, especially the deodar cedar trees along 62nd Avenue NE.
Plant similar species as individual trees die, except for cottonwoods and poplars which should slowly be replaced by tree species with less aggressive root systems.
Be familiar with original planting plans in archives when specifying plants.
· As and aid to designers, a list of historic plants has been provided, based on archived drawings (see Table 4.1.5.1, or consult the archived historic landscape plans).
Augment this list with plants that are in character with the historic plantings, drought tolerant species when appropriate, and native plants.
Confirm that plants from this historic list perform adequately in the Seattle area.
Suggest reasonable substitutions if similar plants exist which are more suited to Northwest conditions.
· Target specific discrete areas within public rights-ofway for establishment of richer plantings featuring perennials and small shrubs.
These should be associated with high visibility, high use public areas such as seating areas or the traffic islands in front of Buildings 9, 25, and 47, originally planted in turf.
· Select appropriate trees, shrubs, and ground covers with cultural requirements consistent with the setting
Photo 4.1.5.5 Rose garden south of Building 26S 4 - 46
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
4.1 Site Guidelines
4
which will grow to the desired mature size with a reasonable amount of care.
Provide adequate clearance between plant material and building facade to prevent damage to building by plant materials.
· Do not prune trees and shrubs into individual elements.
Allow trees and shrubs to grow into their characteristic form and mature size while forming groves or masses.
Topping shrubs and trees should be avoided.
· Provide permanent sprayhead irrigation systems for each building or area landscape which is restored with new plantings.
If possible, link irrigation systems to a central computerized control system which monitors flow rates, evaporation, and daily rainfall.
· Utilize turf grasses as the predominant ground cover in larger areas accessible via mowers.
Maintain existing turf on steep erodible slopes.
Provide noninvasive ground cover plants such as Periwinkle beneath all shrubs in planting areas.
· Maintain current steep slope turf areas.
Do not utilize turf on new or restored slopes greater than 3:1.
Active Recreation · Design landscape areas to be compatible with intense public use, to hold up under heavy pedestrian traffic, and to withstand short cutting through planting areas and across lawns.
· The landscape character should be defined by tree plantings and lawn areas.
Limit the extent of landscape plantings to accommodate open, flexible circulation, visibility, and to reduce maintenance and irrigation demand.
· Provide shade trees adjacent to all sports field areas and at play areas and site furniture locations to ensure summer shade for users, particularly in the afternoon.
· Plant shade trees adjacent to streets and in parking lots to break up expanses of paving, provide shade, and enhance the pedestrian scale.
· Provide turf in all sports field areas except within the infield of baseball fields.
Underdrain recreation turf in all areas with drainage problems.
Use open swale drainage conveyances between fields for drainage and water quality.
Surface drainage from rainfall and
irrigation systems should be connected to designated wet areas within Magnuson Park.
· Minimize mown turf, other than athletic fields, to avoid attracting geese.
Other deterrents to geese include letting meadows grow tall between fields, and maintaining a tall vegetation buffer between water and turf .
· Utilize a free-draining soil material for turf areas which enhances long-term turf management (e.g., sand).
Field levels will need to be significantly raised from existing elevations for positive drainage in most of Activity Area 4.
· Irrigate all regularly used recreation turf and associated planting areas to ensure these areas are maintained to City Parks standards.
Passive Recreation · Preserve and enhance the five habitat types documented to appear in Magnuson Park (Audubon Society 1997): Forest, Scrub/Shrub, Meadow/Wet Meadow, Managed and Disturbed Areas, and Shoreline.
· Focus plant restoration efforts on preserving and enhancing habitat.
· Maintain the natural character of the Magnuson Park landscape by avoiding formal planting arrangements and encouraging loose, informal, naturalistic landscape treatments.
· Preserve the open, savanna-like character of the central and shoreline sections of Magnuson Park.
Restrict new, existing, and naturalized tree plantings to limited areas which complement and enhance existing open views and view corridors (Figure 4.1.5.3).
· Maintain the forested setting of Promontory Hill in the southeast corner of the park.
· Follow prescriptions for site restoration noted in the recent Magnuson Park habitat report (Audubon Society 1997).
Establish a program to eliminate or control invasive exotic species and promote the introduction of native species (see Table 4.1.5.2 at the end of this section for plant list), particularly in wildlife habitat areas.
Eradicate to the extent possible the following species: Reed-canary grass, Himalayan Blackberry, Scot's Broom, Ivy, Pyracantha, Holly,
4 - 47
4
4.1 Site Guidelines
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
Figure 4.1.5.3 View from Sand Point Head
Clematis, Purple Loosestrife, and Poplar.
While elimination of all exotic species may not be feasible, management of exotic species is a realistic goal.
Focus efforts on mechanical plant removal measures.
Avoid using chemical means to eradicate exotic species, except as a last resort, and then only in clearly defined situations under controlled conditions.
· Survey existing hydrology and soils to determine specific cultural characteristics of the various settings within Magnuson Park.
· Emphasize native plants, drought tolerance, hardiness, vigor, and aesthetic appropriateness when establishing new plantings.
· Maintenance of new and existing plantings should be minimized by proper selection of species, planting in fall or early spring, deep soil preparation and proper drainage, mulching, weed eradication, and if necessary temporary irrigation.
· Site irrigation should be limited to swimming beach areas and temporary irrigation measures for new plantings or restoration areas.
· Restrict turf irrigation to limited high visibility, high use lawn areas.
Irrigate all recreation turf areas.
Large, informal open space areas of turf should be left 4 - 48
unirrigated.
General Irrigation · Irrigate all new tree and shrub plantings either with permanent irrigation systems, temporary systems, or quick couplers and hose bibbs.
New tree plantings in unirrigated lawn areas, along streets, or otherwise isolated from planting beds should have individual bubbler type irrigation.
· Restrict turf irrigation to limited high visibility, high use lawn areas.
Irrigate all recreation turf areas.
Large, informal open space areas of turf should be left unirrigated.
· Permanent irrigation systems should utilize conventional pop-up sprayhead type irrigation equipment which meets City standards and specifications.
Provide flow metering, electronic controllers, and central control capabilities.
· Irrigation systems should be separated by building, project area, or activity zone and be accompanied by individual irrigation controllers.
· Restrict irrigation on all steep slopes and in planting areas less than 5' wide.
Avoid overspray onto walkways or against building facades.
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
4.1 Site Guidelines
4
Table 4.1.5.1 Sand Point Naval Station Historical Plant List (Compiled from archival landscape plans of the officers facilities at the former Naval Station.
In most cases spellings of the various species were taken verbatim from the 1930s plans.)
Botanical Name Abelia grandiflora Acer atropurpureum dissectum Acerplatanoides Aesculusrubrus Andromedacatesbaei Andromedajaponica Arctostaphylosuva-ursi Aucuba japonica variegata Azaleaaltaclarensis Azalea amoena supurba Azaleacitrinus Azaleahinodioiri Azaleakaempfer Azaleamollis Azaleaoccidentalis Berberisatropurpurea Berberisbuxifolia Berberisdarwin Berberisverruculosa Betulaalba Betula alba laciniata pendula Bignoniaradicans Buxusarborescens Buxussempervirens Camelia japonica - Dbl Red Catalpa speciosa Cedrusdeodar Celastrusscandens Cercis canadensis
Common Name HybridAbelia Red Cutleaf Japanese Maple NorwayMaple RedHorsechestnut Lily-of-the-ValleyBush JapaneseAndromeda KinnKinnick Gold Dust Japanese Laurel Yellow/OrangeAzalea Claret Pink Azelea LemonAzalea ScarletAzalea Torch Azalea ChineseAzalea WesternAzalea PurpleleafBarberry BoxleafBarberry Darwin'sBarberry Leatherleaf Barberry White Birch Cutleaf Weeping Birch TrumpetVine TreeBoxwood Common Boxwood Mrs. Tenny's Camelia Western Catalpa DeodarCedar AmericanBittersweet AmericanRedbud
Botanical Name Cotoneaster microphylla Cotoneaster pannosa Cotoneaster rugosa henryi Crataegus oxycantha pauli Cydoniajaponica Cydonia japonica "Boule d'Feu" Cytissusdragonfly Cytissusandreanus Cytissusatropurpurea Cytissuspraecox Dabolciapurpurla Daphnecneorum Daphneodora Daphneserium Ericahybrida Erica mediteranean hybrid Ericastricta Erica vagans rubra Espalierapple Espalierpear Espalierplum Forsytaiasuspensa Fuchsia - Hardy Bush Type Genistahispanica Gledistia tricanthos Hedera helix conglomerata Hellanthemum "Copper Queen" Hydrangeahortensis Hypericum calycinum Jasminumnudiflorum Juniperuspfitzeriana Juniperustamariscifolia Kalmialatifolia Kerriajaponica Laburnumvulgare
Common Name Small Leaf Cotoneaster Silverleaf Cotoneaster WeepingCotoneaster Paul's Scarlet Hawthorn JapaneseQuince JapaneseQuince-Fireball Garnet Wing Broom RedwingBroom LavenderBroom MoonlightBroom PurpleIrishHeather Dwarf Daphne FragrantDaphne Early Daphne ChristmasHeather ChristmasHeather UprightHeather Red Cornish Heather RedDelicious BartletPear Plum-Flat-Trained Weeping Golden Bell Mrs. Tenny's Fuchsia Dwarf Spanish Gorse HoneyLocust BunchleafIvy Sunrose - "Copper Queen" Red Japanese Hydrangea St. John's Wort WinterJasmine PfitzersJuniper Gray Carpet Juniper MountainLaurel Globe Flower CommonGoldenchain
Chamaecyparislawsoniana LawsonCypress Chamaecyparis lawsonianaalumni Alumni Cypress Choisya ternata Clematisjackmanii Cornus florida rubra Cornusnuttalli Cotoneasterfranchetti MexicanOrange PurpleClematis Red Flowering Dogwood Pacific Dogwood BroadleafCotoneaster
4 - 49
4
4.1 Site Guidelines
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
Table 4.1.5.1 Sand Point Naval Station Historical Plant List (cont'd)
Botanical Name Laurocerasuslusitanica Laurocerasusoffinalis Lavendula spicea Ligustrum japonicum Ligustrumovalifolium Lonicernitida Lycium chinese Magnoliatripetola Mahoniaaquifolium Mahonia nervosa Malusneidwetzkyana Marlicaceachromatelia Morus alba pendula Nandinadomestica Pernettyalilacina Pernettyarosea Pernettyarubra Philadelphus virginal Photiniaserrulata Picea kosteriana-Christmas Tree Pinusthunbergi Populus nigra italica Prunusblirieana Prunuspissardi Prunus serrulata "Kwanzan" Prunus subhirtella pendula Pyracanthalalandi Retinospora pisifera filifera Retinosporasquarrosa
Common Name PortugalLaurel EnglishLaurel DwarfLavender JapanesePrivet CaliforniaPrivet BoxHoneysuckle Chinese Matrimony Vine Mrs. Tenny's Magnolia OregonHollygrape NativeOregongrape RedveinCrab Canary Yellow Waterlily Weeping Mulberry Sacred Japanese Bamboo VioletberryPernettya Pinkberry/RosePernettya RedPernettya Double Mock Orange ToothleafPhotinia Koster's Blue Spruce Japanese Black Pine LombardyPoplar Double Purple Plum PurpleleafPlum Kwanzan Japanese Cherry Weeping Japanese Cherry LalandFirethorn ThreadRetinospora FuzzyRetinospora
Botanical Name Rhododendron "Pink Pearl" Rhododendronponticum Rhus glabra laluniata Rosa kaiserine "Augusta Victoria" Rosa "Paul's Scarlet" Sarcococcoshookeriana Sorbus aucuparia pendula Sorbusaucuparius Spirea "Anthony Waterer" Strandwesiadavidiana Styraxjaponica Syringa "Charles Joly" Syringa "Mme.
Lemqine" Taxusbaccata Taxushibernicus Thuja obtusa aurea Thuja orientalis pyramidalis Tsugahetrophylla Ulmusamericana Ulmusparvifolia Veronicahectori Viburnumdavidianum Viburnumrhytidophyllum Viburnumtinus Vincaminor Weigelia "Eva Rathke" Wisteriachinensis Wisteria sinensis
Common Name "Pink Pearl" Rhododendron LavenderRhododendron CutleafSumac White Climbing Rose Scarlet Climbing Rose Hooker'sSarcococcos Weeping Mountain Ash MountainAsh Deep Rose Bridalwreath David'sStandwesia Mrs. Tenny's Lily-of-theValley Tree Lilac "Charles Joly" Double White Lilac EnglishYew Irish Yew (Green) Gold Hinoki Cypress Pyramidal Arborvitae PacificHemlock American Elm Chinese Elm WhipcordVeronica Dwarf Evergreen Snowball EvergreenSnowball Laurestinus TrailingMyrtle RoseWeigelia PurpleWisteria Chinese Wisteria
4 - 50
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
4.1 Site Guidelines
4
Table 4.1.5.2 Magnuson Park Existing Conditions Plant List
Source: Magnuson Park Habitats Project Survey of Existing Conditions, Sand Point Environmental Stewardship Committee 
Scientific Name Abies concolor Acer macrophyllum Acer palmatum Acer platanoides Achillea millefolium Agropyron repens Agrostis capillaris Agrostis gigantea Agrostis oregonensis Aira caryophylla Alnus rubra Alopecurus aequalis Amelanchier alnifolia Anaphalis margaritacea Anthoxanthum odoratum Anthriacus scandicina Arbutus menziesii Aster sp. Avena sp. Bellis perennis Betula papyrifera Bromus spp. Buddleia davidii Calocedrus decurrens Campanula sp. Carex spp. Carex obnupta Cerastium arvense Chrysanthemum sp. Chrysanthemum leucanthemum Cichorium intybus Cirsium arvense Cirsium vulgare Clematis vitalba Convolvulus arvensis Cornus sericea Corylus cornuta Cotoneaster spp. Crataegus monogyna Cytisus scoparius Dactylis glomerata Daphne laureola Daucus carota Echinochloa crusgallii Eleocharis palustris Epilobium angustifolium Epilobium hirsutum Equisetum arvense Escallonia spp.
Common Name White Fir Big Maple Japanese Maple Norway Maple Yarrow Quackgrass Slender Bentgrass Hair Bentgrass Oregon Bentgrass Silver Hairgrass Alder Shortawn Foxtail Saskatoon Pearly Everlasting Sweet Vernalgrass Bur Chervil Madrone Aster True scots English Lawn Daisy Paper Birch Brome Grass Butterfly Bush Incense Cedar Harebell Sedge Slough Sedge Mouse-ear Chickweed Chrysanthemum Oxeye Daisy Chicory Canada Thistle Bull Thistle Clematis Bindweed Red Osier Dogwood Beaked Hazelnut One Seeded Hawthorne Scot's Broom Orchard Grass Spurge Laurel Wild Carrot/Queen Anne's Lace Large Barnyard Grass Creeping Spikerush Fireweed Hairy Willow herb Horsetail Escallonia 4 - 51
Plant Type Native Native Exotic Exotic Invasive Invasive Exotic Exotic Exotic Invasive Native Exotic Native Invasive Exotic Exotic Native Various Exotic Invasive Exotic Invasive Exotic Native Various Native Native Invasive Various Invasive Exotic Invasive Invasive Invasive Invasive Native Native Exotic Exotic Invasive Exotic Exotic Invasive Invasive
Exotic Exotic
Exotic
Exotic
Exotic Exotic
Exotic Exotic Exotic Exotic Exotic Exotic
Exotic Exotic Exotic
Native Invasive Exotic Native Exotic
4
4.1 Site Guidelines
Sand Point/Magnuson Park Design Guidelines Manual
Table 4.1.5.2 Magnuson Park Existing Conditions Plant List (cont'd)
Scientific Name Euonymous spp. Festuca arundinacea Festuca rubra Fraxnius latifolia Gaultheria shallon Geranium robertianum Glyceria sp. Hedera helix Holcus lanatus Holodiscus discolor Hypericum perforatum Hypochaeris radicata Ilex aquifolium Iris pseudoacorus Juncus acuminatus Juncus effusus Juncus tenuis Lolium multiflora Lolium perenne Lonicera spp.
Lotus corniculatus Lotus spp. Luneria annua Lupinus albicaulis Lupinus micranthus Lythrum salicaria Mahonia nervosa Malus spp. Matricaria matricarioides Melilotus alba Moss Oemleria cerasiformis Orthocarpus castillejoides Parentucellia viscosa Phalaris arundinacea Philadelphus lewisii Phleum pratense Photinia spp. Pinus contorta Plantago lanceolata Plantago ovata Plantanus acerifolia Poa annua Poa palustris Poa pratensis Polygonum cuspidatum Polygonum persicaria Polystichum munitum Populus balsamifera
Common Name Euonymous Tail Fescue Red Fescue Oregon Ash Salal Herb-Robert Mannagrass Englixh Ivy Velvet Grass Oceanspray Common St. John's Wort Cat's Ear English Holly Yellow-Flag Iris Tapered Rush Common Rush Slender Rush Italian Ryegrass Italian Ryegrass Honeysuckle Birds-foot Trefoil Lotus Sickle-keeled Lupine Small-flowered Lupine Purple Loosestrife Dull Oregon-Grape Crabapple Pineapple Weed White Sweet Clover Moss Indian-Plum Paintbrush Owl-clover Yellow Parentucallia Reed Canary Grass Mock-Orange Timothy Shore Pine Plantain London Plane Tree Annual Bluegrass Fowl Bluegrass Kentucky Bluegrass Japanese Knotweed Common Smartweed Western Sword Fern Black Cottonwood
Plant Type Exotic Exotic Exotic Native Native Exotic Various Invasive Exotic Exotic Native Invasive Exotic Invasive Exotic Exotic Exotic Native Exotic Exotic Invasive Exotic Exotic Native Native Invasive Native Exotic Invasive Invasive Various Native Exotic Invasive Invasive Native Exotic Exotic Native Invasive Exotic Native Exotic Invasive Exotic Invasive Exotic Native Native
Exotic Exotic Exotic
Exotic Exotic
Exotic
4 - 52
