&
Spring 2000 Vol. 6, No. 2 c' k Hilda's History Lesson by Carol Ferguson Dr. Emile Gardiner .
Honored by President by Melissa Carlson During the week of May 15, the Southern Research Station and the National Forests of North Carolina hosted Hilda Diaz-Soltero for a history lesson on the Forest Service and natural resource management in North American forests.
Having taken on the newly created position of Associate Chief for natural resources (National Forest System and Research h Development) last summer, Hilda wanted an orientation into the culture of her new agency to add to her extensive experience as an executive in Puerto Rico and the Department of Interior.
And where better to get that orientation than western North Carolina, the birthplace of scientific forestry? The 4-day agenda was packed with presentations by leaders, managers, researchers, scholars and retirees who shared their experiences and their expertise in a variety of settings: .
"History of the land and the agency.. . restoration from 1900 to the present, overcoming obstacles and resentments."
Bill Alexander, Landscape Curator-Biltmore Estate and Pete Steen, Executive Director (retired)-Forest History Society.
Venue: Biltmore Estate.
.
"Early research history, value of experimental forests and long-term data sets."
David Loftis, Project Leader-Ecology and Management of Southern Appalachian Hardwoods; Ron Schmidtling, Research Geneticist-Southern Institute of Forest Genetics; and Steve Boyce, Director (retired) -Southeastern Forest Experiment Station.
Venue: Bent Creek Experimental Forest.
.
"Getting work done on a shoestring...mutual benefits from CCC, YCC, Job Corps, SCEP, Interpretive Associations, and volunteerism."
Harry Hafer, Executive Director-Cradle of Forestry Interpretive Association and Roger Mullins, Director- Schenck Civilian Conservation Center.
Venue: Breakfast meeting at the Schenck Civilian Conservation Center.
(continued on page 4) Dr. Emile Gardiner, Research Forester with the USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station, has been named as one of 60 recipients of the fourth annual Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and Engineers (PECASE).
Dr. Gardiner was recognized for sustained productivity and exceptional promise for significant future achievement from research on oak ecophysiology and the regeneration biology of bottomland hardwood forest ecosystems.
Dr. Gardiner earned his PhD in ForestrylEcophysiology emphasis at Mississippi State University in 1994 and now conducts research at the Forest Service's Center for Bottomland Hardwoods Research in Stoneville, MS.
He has a B.S. in Forestry, and an M.S. in Wildlife Management from Louisiana State University.
Dr. Gardiner has breathed new life into the regeneration research program in MS by establishing new studies, evaluating and revitalizing old ones, and by securing funding and collaborators to maintain them.
In addition to offering solutions to problems found in natural stands, he has shown how over 500,000 acres of economically marginal farmland in the Lower Mississippi Valley may be restored by the year 2005.
The PECASE awards, established by President Clinton in 1996, are the highest honor bestowed by the United States government on young professionals at the outset of their independent research careers.
The awards were presented at a ceremony at the White House on April 12, 2000.
The young scientists and engineers receive up to a five-year research grant to further their study in support of critical government missions.
Page 3...
All-Cultures Festival Highlights Page 5...
USDA Secretary's Honor Awards Page 6 . . .
Station Receives Chief's Customer Service Award Page 7...
New Yankee Workshop visits Bent Creek we 2 Spring 2000 (vol. 6, No. 2) From the Director's Desk: Proposed Piarming Rule Calls for Increased Role of Science in Forest Planning Work in our Washington Office to finalize the new national forest planning regulation continues.
We anticipate the final rule will be issued in the next few weeks.
While some of the details have yet to be resolved, 1 want to discuss with you some of the likely implications for our scientists and our programs.
For background information about the proposed rule, which was out for public comment through this past February, please visit the Internet site at: http://www.fs.fed.us/forum/nepa/rule/ The teams that worked on the rule included a wide cross-section of Forest Service people: wildlife biologists, foresters, research scientists, planners, sale administrators, and administration and S
The proposed rule was driven by recommendations made by a committee of scientists appointed by Secretary Glickman, which included a recommendation to "make effective use of scientific and technical analysis and review."
We anticipate an increased demand for information and assistance from natural resource scientists as this new rule Ts imptenieni- NatioVZitforestplanners in the South will be looking not only to the Station, but also to universities, other agencies, and the private sector for the scientific information necessary to conduct resource planning that makes sustainability the overarching goal of national forest and grassland stewardship.
In particular, we expect the role of science and ,. scientists in national forest planning to be expanded in the following areas: * Participating in broad-scale assessments and local analyses.
l Assisting in the design and evaluation of monitoring activities.
l Participating on national or regional Science Advisory Boards, established by the Deputy Chief for Research and Development at the national level and by the appropriate Station Director(s) at the regional level.
These boards will advise the Chief and the Regional Forester(s) on the applicatian of science in planning and decisionmaking for national forests and grasslands. l Providing independent peer reviews of the full range of planning activities.
l Conducting "science consistency evaluations" to determine if information, evaluations, analyses, or conclusions used in planning are consistent with the best available science.
A science consistency evaluation includes, at a minimum, an .evaluation of whether the responsible official has appropriately: (a) considered relevant physical, biological, and social science information; (b) ensured that projected outcomes of proposed actions are consistent with current scientific understanding; (c) considered uncertainty in estimates of effects of proposed actions; (d) considered the risk associated with achieving objectives, and; (e) demonstrated the consideration of science in applicable planning documents.
Clearly, these are important tasks for the science community, including the Southern Research Station, to embrace.
Less clear, however, is exactly how they will be accomplished and at what cost.
Some have raised fears of negative impacts on scientific productivity as research energy and resources are diverted to planning tasks.
Some fear a loss of credibility of Forest Service science, if agency research is linked too closely with current strategic and operational issues on national forests.
And others fear a reduction of service to non-Federal customers as more scientist attention is being sought by national forest decisionmakers.
I assure you these concerns are being considered in the development of the final rule.
At this time, we do not know how this will all play out.
but we expect that our program and service 3mphasesatthe Southern- -ResearcRz5mRm~ continue to reflect the distribution of forest ownership in the South, and the associated critical policy and management issues.
The Forest Service's research-management partnership in the South-is healthy, a source of great pride for both the Southern Research Station and the Southern Region.
That relationship will only become stronger as we jointly strive to bring the benefits of our research to the public more directly than we have in the past - by engaging in the development of national forest plans that consider the best science available.
1 face the prospect of the new rule as both an opportunity and a challenge.
it is an opportunity because the goal of strengthening the scientific foundatiQns of forest plans is well aligned with our mission to "create the science and technology needed to sustain and enhance southern forest ecosystems and the benefits they provide."
The challenge will be to embrace this new role while maintaining high standards of service to all of our constituents.
With the help of our many research collaborators at universities and other science organizations, I'm confident we will ultimately learn both to seize this opportunity and to meet the service-equity challenge it poses.
Let the learning begin! Spring2000 (Vol. 6, No. 2) page 3 Here's to a Successful A
This year's all-cultures event was planned as a "festival" to celebrate the diversity of cultures that occur in the Western North Carolina area at the National Forests, Southern Station, and Forest Health units.
As with the last two years, the event was held at the North Carolina Arboretum near Bent Creek.
The festival started at 9:00 am with welcoming addresses by the National Forest in North Carolina Forest Supervisor, John Ramey, and Forest Health Field Representative, Bill Carothers.
In keeping with the festive mood, the planners provided indoor "break-out" sessions where attendees could choose from six different cultural speakers for 45minute presentations.
The subjects presented varied from Cherokee storytelling, Hispanic culture in Puerto Rico, Appalachian storytelling, Scottish Highland cultural dress and customs, medicinaf plants, and Korean dress and culture.
A multi-cultural lunch was provided by Schenck Job Corps.
During the lunch break attendees were free to roam the arboretum grounds to interact with the craftspeople presenting handson exhibits of local arts and crafts.
The outdoor experience included interactive displays including genealogy, basketmaking, Cherokee dancing, flintknapping (arrowhead making), leatherworking, blacksmithing, Scottish bagpiping, Scottish Highland games demonstration, and a Mariachi band.
After lunch, the entire afternoon session was dedicated to a living history lesson featuring Ajena Rogers from Valley Forge National Military Park in Pennsylvania who performed as Granny Foster, an African-American woman who invited us onto her porch for a history lesson.
The day concluded with a closing address by Sam Foster, Southern Research Station Assistant Director for Research West.
A special "thank you" to the planning committee: Rodney Kindlund, Mae Lee Hafer, Barry Miller, Nelida Rodriguez, Rob Doudrick, Rodney Snedeker, Laura Lipe and to the many individuals who' assisted in making this event a reality.
Cherokee dancers get the spectators involved in their culture by dancing in the amphitheater at the NC Arboretum.
Steve Wbtts exhibits the techniques projectile point (f?intknapping). making a Judy Quinn, who formerly worked for the Southeastern Station in Asheville, is now a practising artisan in Western North Carolina makingfine baskets in the Appalachian and Cherokee styles.
includes events and employee news from the research laboratories and administrative staffs of the Southern Research Station, which serves Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky.
Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Tennessee.
Texas, and Virginia.
This newsletter is published quarterly by the USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station, Public Affairs Office, P.O. Box 2680.
200 Weaver Boulevard, Asheville, NC 28802.
A popular event at the All-Cultures Festival was the Scottish Highlands Game Demonstration where Bill Carothers tossed many a hammer.
Editor: Rod Kindlund Associate Editor: Ron Coates.
To submit newsworthy stories for future issues, please send complete artitles hard copy, on diskette (MS Word or RTF) or by email to Ron Coates (rcoates@fs.fed.us).
Photographs are encouraged, preferably black and white Mike Harmon, NFsNC Archaeology, working at his anvil and forge as he demonstrates blacksmithing.
page 4 Hilda's .
Spring2000 (Vol. 6.
N O .
2) History Lesson (continued from page 1) "The how-to's of interpretive hikes."
Pat Momich, Interpretive Specialist-National Forests in North Carolina.
Venue: Cradle of Forestry. .
"History of fire suppression.. .a rallying call that may have succeeded too well."
Dale Wade, Research Forester-Disturbance and the Management of Southern Pine Ecosystems.
Venue: Cradle of Forestry. .
`Some things will never be the same.. .impacts of fire, exotics, pollution, climate change on forest ecosystems."
Ed Buckner, Overton Professor Emeritus-Department of -Forestry, Wildlife, and Fisheries at the University of Tennessee.
Venue: Graveyard Fields.
.
"The legal environment...the laws that govern management and research on public land."
Larry Hayden, Director of Planning and Ecosystems and Art Rowe, Pisgah District Ranger-National Forests in North Carolina.
Venue: timber sale at North Mills River.
.
"Understanding the public."
Ken Cordell, Project Leader-Outdoor Recreation and Wilderness Assessment.
Venue: Cradle of Forestry. .
"Forest Service culture through symbols, tokens, and taboos."
Forest Service employees and retirees.
Venue: Thursday evening dinner and social at Cafe on the Square.
.
"Sustainability through ecosystem management, social sciences, and partnerships."
Rob Turner, Executive Director-Southern Appalachian Man and the Biosphere; Pete Roussopoulos, Director, Nancy Herbert, Assistant Director for Research, and Charles Van Sickle, Assistant Director for Research' (retired)Southern Research Station; knotta McNair, Deputy Forest Supervisor, and Terry Seyden, Director of Public Affairs-National Forests in North Carolina.
Venue: Southern Research Station headquarters.
Two sponsored events added to the week's festive atmosphere: On Tuesday afternoon, Bettie McGuire, Southern Research Station Assistant Director for Administration, hosted a social with the Administrative Management Council, also meeting in Asheville that week.
On Friday morning, employees and retirees participated a tree planting and social in honor of retired Station Director Tom McLintock, recently deceased.
A highlight of the week was the stories Hilda shared about her early exposure to the natural resources in Puerto Rico, thanks to her travels with her father, and the gratitude she felt to Frank Wadsworth for encouraging her in aspiring to a leadership position.
Six weeks after her visit ended, Harry Hafer reported that she was still full of praise for the quality and relevance of the information she received as well as the excellence of our Southern hospitality.
Early in the week, Bill Alexander describes early forest management at the Biltmore Estate to Hilda LXazSoltero and (left to right) Pete Steen, Harry Hafer.
and Pete Roussopoulos.
(Photo by Ron Schmidtling) At a ceremony to honor the contributions of linn McLintock, his son Tbtn helps Pete Roussopoulos and Hilda LXaz-Soltero plant a northern red oak donated by the Bent Creek Experimental Forest.
The elder McLintock was active in the western North Carolina forestry community long after his retirement as Director of the Southeastern Forest Experiment Station.
(Photo by Ron Coates) Spring2000 (Vol. 6, No. 2) Page5 Gary DeBarr Retires from the Southern Research Station In June, Gary DeBarr, Research Entomologist, retired from the Insects and Diseases of Southern Forests Research Work Unit in Athens, GA after 34 years with the Forest Service.
Dr. DeBarr began his career in 1966 in Olustee, FL in the Seed Orchard Insect Management Unit.
Managers throughout the South use the effective controls he developed for cone and seed insects, both with insecticides, and later with pheromones to reduce the need for insecticides.
He has been active in the budding research program to develop biological controls for kudzu, collaborating with colleagues in the South and in China.
His career has been significant for his dedication to the health of southern forests.
honor recognized Anne's outstanding customer service to USDA Forest Service employees for domestic and foreign travel and transfers-ofstation.
She has been an employee of the Southern Research Station since 1997, and provides expertise on travel to Forest Service scientists, who must frequently travel within and outside the United States, and to other Forest Service employees at several locations throughout the South.
The USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station Longleaf Pine Ecosystem Restoration Team was recognized by the Secretary of Agriculture for outstanding research leadership in restoring the imperiled longleaf pine ecosystem of the Southeastern United States.
The Longleaf Ecosystem Team was established in late 1993 to plan and conduct high priority longleaf ecosystem research and application projects.
The core team, made up of scientists from the Southern Research Station and a liaison in the USDA Forest Service Southern Region-8 office in Atlanta, and Auburn University, focuses on outcomes that cut across organizational, disciplinary, and functional boundaries.
Members of the team who received this national honor include Forest Service employees: Group Leader Charles McMahon, Auburn, AL; James Barnett, Pineville, LA; David Bramlett, retired, Macon, GA; William Boyer, retired, Auburn, AL; Rodney Busby, New Orleans, LA; Noel Cost, retired, Asheville, NC; James Haywood, Pineville, LA; Kenneth Outcalt, Athens, GA; Donald Tomczak, Atlanta, GA; Dale Wade, Athens, GA; Joan Walker, Clemson, SC; and from the Auburn University School of Forestry and Wildlife Sciences: Dean Gjerstad, Rhett Johnson, John Kush, and Ralph Meldahl.
In its first five years of formal organization, the Longleaf Ecosystem Team has made remark,able progress.
Tangible products included a comprehensive bibliography, a state of the art assessment, a regional resource bulletin and over 75 research posters, abstracts and publications.
Equally important were the formation of long-term conservation stewardship partnerships with other public and private groups interested in longleaf ecosystems.
The most notable partnership is with the Longleaf Alliance, which is a university-based (Auburn University) umbrella organization that fosters education, research, and longleaf pine management on private lands regionwide.
Alliance partners have published user guidebooks and hosted two regional conferences (attended by over 600 ) scientists and managers).
USDA Secretary's Honor Awards The following awards were presented at a ceremony in Washington, DC on June 5, 2000: Rodney Kindlund, of Asheville, USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station, and Louise Wyche, Program Manager for National Multicultural Recruitment at Alabama A
This national honor recognized the "Branching Out to the Youth of America" Team, for organizing teams of college interns who act as role models by bringing an appreciation of natural resources conservation to young people, in summer camps and in urban settings.
For 10 weeks during the summer, several four-person intern teams conduct conservation education activities throughout the South and East at summer schools, day camps, nature centers, and youth activity sites, including the Eliada home in Asheville.
Other Forest Service Team Members included Mary Smith, Gainesville, GA; Elaine McKinney, Newtown Square, PA; Ginger Brown, Nashville, TN; Barbara Forderhase, formerly Milwaukee, WI. Anne Weiskircher, Columbia KY, received a Secretary of Agriculture Honor Award for Outstanding Customer Service.
This national page 6 Spring2000 (Vol. 6, No.2) Station Customer Service Awards for 1999 On June 5, Station Director Pete Roussopoulos attended the Chiefs Honor Awards ceremony where he accepted the 1999 Honor Award for Excellence in Customer Service.
The awards were presented at a semi-formal gathering at the Hyatt Hotel in Arlington, VA hosted by the Chief of the Forest Service, Mike Dombeck and his Staff.
This annual event recognizes excellence within the Forest Service in various categories including heroism and customer service.
Cindy Arnette was awarded the Individual Station Customer Service Award for 1999.
Cindy was recognized for her proactive customer service to all employees participating in the time and attendance program.
She was also recognized for the extra effort in maintaining the high quality workflow of time reports.
The Center for Bottomland Hardwoods Research was awarded the Group Customer Service Award for 1999.
The Research Work Unit was recognized for their proactive commitment to delivering and communicating their product(s) to their-customers.
The monthly project leaders' report has kept internal/external customers informed of the work done at the Research Work Unit.
Both Cindy and the employees of the Center for Bottomland Hardwoods Research will receive a Certificate of Merit and a cash award.
Congratulations to all.
Our thanks to the members of the selection committee for volunteering their time to evaluate all the nominations.
The selection committee included: Erwin Chambliss, Melissa Carlson, Cheryl Jefferson, Rob Doudrick, Wanda Carambot and Stephanie Beach.
Forestry Field Day.on the Crossett Experimental Forest In spite of rain, about 100 foresters and forest landowners converged on the Crossett Experimental Forest in southeastern Arkansas on Wednesday, May 3 to participate in the 1 Yh Crossett Forestry Field Day.
The theme for the day, "Welcome Back to the Crossett Experimental Forest," celebrated the renewal of the event that had last been held on the Experimental Forest in 1994.
Land for the Crossett Experimental Forest was deeded to the USDA Forest Service by the Crossett Lumber Company (now Georgia Pacific Corporation) in 1934.
Since then, it has been used as a research center for loblolly and shortleaf pine by application of low-cost natural regeneration techniques.
For over 65 years, the Experimental Forest has served as an outdoor classroom for private landowners, university students, and visiting foresters seeking to learn more about natural stand management, especially selection silviculture.
Several of the demonstration stands are among the oldest continuously-active silviculture studies in the nation.
The Field Day was sponsored by the Monticello/ Crossett Research Work Unit 4106 (RWU-4106) of the Southern Research Station (SRS), with headquarters in Monticello, AR.
The Forestry Field Day was an annual tradition of the MonticellolCrossett unit from 1983 to 1996.
While it was usually held on the Experimental Forest, there have also been three `on the road' field days-at the Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station in Hope, on the Ouachita NF, and on the Ozark NE Cosponsors of this year's Field Day were the Arkansas Cooperative Extension Service, the Arkansas Forestry Commission, and the School of Forest Resources at the University of Arkansas in Monticello.
In the morning and afternoon, RWU-4106 scientists and support personnel, made presentations at four field stops and one office display.
(1) Good Farm Forestry Forty: Project Leader Jim Guldin reviewed the status of this 40-acre tract of loblolly and shortleaf pines, which has been managed continuously since 1937 using single-tree selection for the production of highquality sawlogs with pulpwood, poles, and pilings as secondary products.
During the last The Staff of the Center for Bottomland Hardwoods Research, Stoneville, MS (continued on page 7) Spring 2000 Vol. 6, No. 2) Forestry Field Day (continuedfrom page 6) 60 years, sawlog growth has averaged 
(2) Natural Area: SRS scientist Marty Spetich described the condition of the 80-acre tract of pines and hardwoods, which has been reserved from management since 1937.
The Natural Area contains some of the largest pines and oaks in southeastern Arkansas and many of the trees are over 100 years old.
The area is currently being considered as the R.R. Reynolds Research Natural Area.
(3) Block and Strip Clearcuts: The newest unit scientist, Don Bragg, discussed the silviculture of these two 40acre tracts, which have been managed using the clearcut reproduction cutting method by harvesting all merchantable trees on 5-acre blocks or strips at 5year intervals and allowing loblolly and shortleaf pines to seed in from bordering stands.
This area is used to demonstrate a proven management technique that can be applied on small forest properties.
(4) Stand Rehabilitation: SRS scientist Mike Shelton discussed this study, in which pine stands were cut in 1980 to residual stocking levels of 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50% of full stocking.
The stands were allowed to grow with the only management being control of hardwood competition at the time of harvest.
Within 15 years, all but the 10 A stocked stands had increased to at least 60 % stocking and were considered rehabilitated.
(5) Competition Control: SRS scientist Mike Cain provided a poster with an update on stand conditions twelve years after applying different methods of competition control in an unevenaged stand on the Experimental Forest.
Pine (continued on page 10) Sedrick Hicks with the Arkansas Land and Farm Development Corporation speaks to Field Day attendees about minority forest land management programs.
BENT CREEK EXPERIMENTAL FOREST STAFF HOSTS "THE NEW YANKEE WORKSHOP" CAMERA CREW Norm Abram and the field production crew of "The New Yankee Workshop" recently visited Bent Creek's 193 1 Buell Plot forest revegetation study.
Norm and friends were interested in how cove hardwood stands respond to disturbance.
After shooting video footage of the 1931 clearcut, Norm had time to greet two of his devoted fans, Nastasha and Natalie Beach.
Nastasha and Natalie (ages 7 and 5) are Rocky and Stephanie Beach's daughters, and Linda Heatherly's granddaughters.
Stephanie is Bent Creek's administrative support assistant and Linda is a computer specialist with FIA in Asheville.
Norm has a true fan in Nastasha-- she would rather watch the "New Yankee Workshop" than Saturday morninlg cartoons! Nastasha loves to work with tools in her grandfather's workshop-perhaps she will be the next "New Yankee" host.
Norm (1.)
with Nastasha (c.) and Natalie (r.) at the SRS post-doctorate scientist Don Bra
North Carolina Arboretum during the "shoot."
Spring2000 Vol. 6, NO. 2) People Profile: New Scientist at CBHR by John Stanturj Check Out Our Revamped Web Site? I by Melissa Carlson We continue to improve our Web presence and service to our customers and encourage your involvement and help in making the SRS Site(s) the best in the Forest Service.
With the help of two summer student volunteers in Asheville, Rusty Davis and Jordan Mitchell, we have recently begun to make several changes and additions.
We will be continuing to bring the pages on our Site into compliance with accessibility guidelines, so more changes will be coming.
(CBHR), starting her position as a Research Fisheries Biologist in Oxford, MS in January.
Susie earned a Ph.D. in Organismal Biology and Ecology from the University of Montana, an MS. in Fisheries Resources from the University of Idaho, and a B.A. in Biology from Carleton College, Minnesota.
Her previous research included work on invasion ecology, population dynamics, fish-habitat relations, interspecific interactions, spawning ecology, fish and amphibian movements, and identifying factors and processes determining fish distribution limits.
Susie is presently analyzing existing data sets collected by the work unit and writing manuscripts from her previous research.
She will soon begin an information needs assessment for anadromous fishes on the National Forests in `.
Mississippi, as well as assisting with a fisheries survey of those forests.
She hopes to establish research projects on ecosystem effects of beaver activity in Coastal Plains streams and riparian areas, and on how land and channel disturbing activities alter spatial variation in dissolved oxygen and thermal regimes and how those changes, in turn, influence fish distributions.
While not working, she is exploring the South with her husband and four year old son, experimenting with gardening in a growing season longer than 3 months, learning about fire ant eradication, and eating lots of shrimp.
We have another person on contract, Ed Mundy, to scan in publications that have our scientists as authors or co-authors.
All publications that are submitted to Clainz Payne for the quarterly catalog (now called the "Compass") are made available in PDF on the Web before the catalogs are mailed out.
If you have publications that you would like to have posted that predate (or somehow missedj this process, please send them to Asheville, attention Randy McCracken, with a "Please Post on Web" note, and we will get them scanned for posting.
You can go to our Publications section at: !X.tp:llwww.srs.fs.fed.usloubsl and search on your name to see what pubs you already have on the site.
We have also started a "Photo Gallery" at http:l/www.srs.fs.fec
If you browse through it and notice file name titles that don't seem to fit the photo very well, please send a note to Melissa Carlson at: mcarlsonO1 @fs.fed.us with a correction (many of them are from our old slide file, and do not have captions on them, so we had to guess).
If you have photos to send in to be posted, 35 mm slides are the preferred format.
As employees come and go, please send in changes to Randy for the employee directories that are on the Web.
Please check your own listing to be sure it is correct, and when there are changes, let Randy know by email at: rdmdsrs.fs.usda.Qov.
All Research Work Units are encouraged to have at least a basic Web Site.
We have a server in Asheville that can host your site, that you can easily access to add material to, and keep updated.
While we have a short intro to each RWU on the main site, it adds a lot if each RWU (continued on page 9) Spring 2000 (Vol. 6, No. 2) Page 9 A Trip Back in Time by Libby Bugwell and Art Rowe "This is what working for the Forest Service is all about!" I thought, as 1 joined my fellow Southern Research Station and National Forests in NC employees on a recent historical hike in the Pisgah National Forest.
In March and April, all employees were invited to hike to the place where the Big Creek Splash Dam had been in operation during Gifford Pinchot and Dr. Carl Schenck's time (188586).
We parked at the water intake dam for the City of Hendersonville's water system.
It had been built about 65 years ago when the water pipes were hauled into the Forest on the logging railroad.
Until a few years ago the watershed had been closed to the public to prevent contamination.
The water at that time was sent out without treatment.
It was a beautiful spot to start our hike.
We were met by Pisgah District Ranger, Art Rowe, who acted as our guide and historian.
He did a wonderful job telling us about the background of the area.
We learned how Gifford Pinchot, while serving as forester for the Biltmore Estate/Pisgah Forest for George Vanderbilt, initiated a logging operation in this area that is now part of the Pisgah National Forest.
When Pinchot left, to eventually become the first Chief of the Forest Service, he was replaced by Dr. Carl Schenck.
Schenck, even though he had major reservations about the use of splash dams as a method for getting logs from the forest to the sawmill, completed the operation.
A large dam was built of logs, lumber, and rock rubble.
Massive amounts of yellow poplar sawlogs were positioned in the creek.
When the water behind the dam was turned loose, the logs were swept down to the French Broad River and then floated on to a sawmill in Asheville.
We imagined the tremendous damage that was done when the river was dammed up, packed with logs, and then allowed to sweep down the mountain and through the valley.
The flooding water, combined with the force of the huge logs, became a massive, moving wall of destruction.
Bridges and farmers' fences were destroyed.
Some logs ended up in the fields along the Mills River.
It was interesting to learn how Pinchot and Schenck, two men we respect today, were (continued on page.101 Learning in the Field: Students Visit Booker's Mill for Environmental Field Day (Reprinted from Brewton Standard, Brewton, AL.)
First-grade students and teachers from schools throughout Escambia County recently visited Booker's Mill in Conecuh County for an Environmental Field Day.
The students enjoyed a day filled with forestry-related activities.
They also benefited from a variety of historical activities, including tours of log cabins and an old general store.
The students were divided into several small groups and were instructed in a variety of activities that were educational and entertaining for the first graders.
The students traveled from station to station on nature trails that transverse the treasure forest and wildlife refuge owned by Don Stinson.
Several organizations helped during the day (continued on page 12) Web Site (continuedflom page 8) has its own also.
You might visit some of the RWU sites that are online to see what the opportunities are for providing access to your work internationally.
Each site should contain links back to the main SRS homepage, the Forest Service and USDA homepages, link to the EEO statement and other legal statements, as well as the info you wish to include.
Randy McCracken will be happy to offer you assistance in getting set up (828 259-0518 or rdm@srs.fs.usda.gov).
If you have ideas about materials that would enhance our Web presence, please let Randy or Melissa know at any time.
A new plaque commemorates planting the McLintock at Headquarters.
(Photo by Ron Coates) Oak page 10 Spring 2000 0401.
6, No. 2) Back in Time (continuedfrom page 9) Forestry Field Day (continuedJ?om page 7) not so popular in their own time, at least not in the minds of the farmers and other landowners who lived downstream.
For the most part, our trail followed the logging railroad grade and Art even pointed out some residual ties, spikes and trestles as we walked.
The hike to the splash dam was 2.7 miles and we went at a leisurely pace that took us about an hour and a half.
I brought the 7 month-old Labrador Retriever, Springer, that I am raising for the Southeastern Guide Dogs Association, on the hike with us.
He was on his leash on the trip to the dam and I was operating with only one arm, having broken my right shoulder several weeks earlier.
He went well over the bridges, but after the first crossing on rocks, we decided he would do better without our help.
I was assisted across and he was held back until I made it to the other side.
Once I was on sure ground, he was released and bounded across as if to say, "What's the big deal? Why are you guys being so careful not to get wet? This is fun!" It was great to have the opportunity to get out and experience the land for which we all labor daily.
It is often much too easy to get wrapped up in telephone calls, paperwork, budgeting and the resultant daily frustrations of our jobs that we forget the reason that our work is important.
Whenever I tell someone I work for the Forest Service, they always say, "Oh, how neat!" I usually respond, "No, I'm not out in the woods, communing with nature.
I spend all of my time on the phone and the computer."
After this trip, though, I will be much more likely to respond, "Yeah, it really is!" regeneration development was successful with all the treatments compared to the check, which had unsuccessful results.
The work emphasizes the need for effective competition control when practicing uneven-aged silviculture on good sites.
During lunch, visitors were able to select reprints of RWU publications, tour historic buildings (including several that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places), and view the many displayed historic photographs of the Experimental Forest over time.
After lunch, Sedrick Hicks of the Arkansas Land and Farm Development Corporation gave a presentation on opportunities for improving management on minority-owned forestland in the Arkansas Delta.
Participants came from Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas, in addition to Arkansas.
Since 1983, the 15 Forestry Field Days sponsored by the Monticello/ Crossett unit have attracted more than 3,500 foresters and private nonindustrial landowners who are interested in low-cost stand management techniques for perpetuating their forest investments.
Ward Honored at UGA Jason Ward, a Master's Degree candidate in hydrology at the University of Georgia's Warnell School of Forest Resources, received the USDA Forest Service Science Award at the School's 69th Annual Spring Awards Banquet.
The award, presented by Kerrie B
Mr. Ward is the son of Donna Davenport of Savannah and Thomas G. Ward of Statesboro.
He graduated magna cum laude last December with a bachelor's degree in forest resources.
Spring2000 (Vol. 6.
No. 2) page 11 Linking Girls To The Land: A Walk In The Urban Forest (Reprintedfiom Georgia Urban Forest Council Newsletter) Excellence in Prescribed Fire Awards Presented by David R. Weise Girl Scouts in the fourteen county jurisdiction of Girl Scouts of Pine Valley Council took `A Walk in the Urban Forest" at two council-wide events held on February 12 in Thomaston, and on February 26 in LaGrange.
The events were a part of Girl Scouts of the USA "Linking Girls to the Land" partnership was developed to encourage joint projects and programs in conservation.
This urban forestry program was designed to give Girl Scouts from ages 5 to 18 hands-on activities and experience with women professionals in urban forestry, city planning, landscape architecture, agronomy, and soil science.
Activities included walks in the community to discover shapes, colors, and urban forestry problems and solutions, a "Building the Urban Forest" activity to develop an understanding of the value and benefits of trees in the urban environment, tree care; soil texture analysis and profiles, urban wildlife games, tree inventories, landscape design, and drainage field surveying and analysis.
Activities were led by Dr. Brenda Allen, Auburn University; Sharon Dolliver, Georgia Forestry Commission; Eunice Graham, Natural Resources Conservation Service; Connie Head, Technical Forestry Services; Susan Kleto, City of Columbus; Carol Oliver, NRCS; Susan Reisch, Georgia Forestry Commission; Ingrid Sather, U.S. Forest Service; Carolyn Toman, NRCS; Sharon Toping, DeKalb College; Carmen Westerfield, NRCS: and Ingrid Whittington, Whittington h Associates.
Sara Nell Langland and Katharine Langland, Girl Scout volunteers from Thomaston, developed and directed the events.
Dudley Hartel, consulting urban forester, acted as liaison with members to the Georgia Urban Forest Council and the Georgia Forestry Commission, and helped coordinate the events.
The Forest Service's Rocky Mountain, Pacific Southwest, and Southern Research Stations, in conjunction with the Vegetation Management Protection Research, nominated three-research foresters for the `Support" awards portion of the "Excellence in Prescribed Fire in Support of Ecosystem Management" awards program.
Jose Cruz, Forest Service Fire and Aviation Director, presented; Dale D. Wade, Stephen S. Sackett, and Steven A. Arno (retired) with these awards at a meeting of the agency and Aviation Management Program directors on May 23, 2000 The combined careers of these three Forest Service scientists represent approximately 100 years of research, examining various questions related to fire and the use of prescribed fire in the southeastern and western Unit States.
Each of the scientists is recognized in his region as an expert in this field.
Collectively, they have produced over 250 publications on fire and prescribed fire.
The three honorees began conducting research related to prescribed burning ten to fifteen years before its official recognition by the Forest Service as an accepted vegetation management tool in the late 1970s.
As a result of efforts, the United States now has unique, long-term research sites available where prescribed fire has been used for periods of up to 40 years.
Their findings have led to wider and wiser use of prescribed fire in the United States.
In addition to their research efforts, these scientists have devoted countless hours to training individuals about prescribed fire and fuels.
In short, these three scientist have provided, and continue to provide, invaluable support and leadership in the areas of science and education to advance the use of prescribed fire in ecosystem management.
page 12 Spring 2000 (Vol. 6, No. 2) Learning in the Field (continuedfrom page 9) including the Zoo from Gulf Breeze, FL., the Poarch Creek Indians, the USDA Forest Service Southern Research Station and several Alabama Forestry Commission personnel from Escambia, Conecuh, Baldwin and Monroe County.
The Environmental Field Day was sponsored by the Escambia County Soil and Water Conservation District, D.W. McMilIan Trust, Gulf Coast Resource Conservation Development Council, Alabama Forestry Commission, State Farm Insurance Company and Kmart of Brewton.
Several associates contributed to the success of the program including Ruth Cardne, Lesley Williford, Madeline Hildreth, Victor Howell, James North, Greg Piland, Robert Knowles, George Bolling, Randy Cannon, Brandy White and Ronnie Tucker.
OOE$ `Xl7 `I.IVAl~d NOd AIlVN3d SSIlNISflfI -IVI3IddO 20882 3N `all!AaWJ pJehaInog JaheaM 00~ uoI3e3s yxeasaM uJaqnos azquas IsaJod 0892 =XI `O'd :unlInoIJ$v JO xiawlJedaa salels palIun
