Y .I .
F.Schedule Winter lay-up is still several months away but it is never too early to start planning! Stock up on propylene glycol antifreeze, as it is much less toxic than ethylene glycol.
Help to avoid problems associated with the disposal of stale gasoline next spring by promoting fuel stabilizers now.
Think about where and how to recycle shrink wrap if you will be wrapping boats for the winter.
If shrink wrap recycling is not available in your area, contact the Marine Trades Association of Maryland at 410-269-0741 about establishing a program for next spring .
Alternatively, investigate manufacturers that provide prepaid shipping bags with their materials.
In the spring , simply stuff the used plastic in the bag and return it to the manufacturer.
Courtesy Clean Boating Inspections.
Reserve Officers with the Maryland Natural Resources Police are available to conduct inspections of Marine Sanitation Devices at your marina.
The inspections are completely voluntary.
If a boat does not pass, the boater will be told what steps to take to bring the vessel into compliance.
No citations or law enforcement actions will be taken.
Call the Natural Resources Police to make arrangements: Central Region - Max Schulte - 410-356-7060 Southern Region - Harry Ruhl - 301-888-1601 Eastern Region - Dallas Reece - 800-269-0245 Western Region - Lester Engel - 301-777-7771 Winterization Tips Mar yland Clean Marinas Under way is a quarterly newsletter published by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative promotes and celebrates voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution from marinas and recreational boats.
The Initiative is coordinated by DNR in partnership with the marine industry.
For additional information, contact: Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Toll Free: 877-620-8DNR, x8770 or: 410-260-8770 Fax: 410-260-8779 Web Site: www.dnr.state.md.us/boating The facilities and the services of the Department of Natural Resources are available to all without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, physical or mental disability.
Graphics from ClickArt Deluxe Image Pack 97.
Printed on recycled paper.
Parris N. Glendening , Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Lt. Governor Sarah Taylor-Rogers, Secretary Elizabeth Fuller Valentine, Editor Randi Molofsky, Layout and design UNDERW 4 Maryland Clean Marinas AY AUGUST 1999 Marylands first six Certified Clean Marinas are announced The first six certified Maryland lar interest was the workshop air filtraClean Marinas were honored at an tion system made of a modified roofawards ceremony held at Anchor top fan.
Bay East Marina in Dundalk on July Notable examples of Clean Marina 14.
Owners and managers of Anpractices from the other certified Clean chor Bay East Marina, Baltimore Marinas are described below: Yacht Club, Haven Harbour Marina, Baltimore Yacht Club in Baltimore Herrington Harbour South Marina, recently upgraded its fueling equipment Port Annapolis Marina, and Spring and changed staff procedures to virtuCove Marina were on hand to really eliminate spills at the fuel dock. ceive certificates and burgees acknowledging their demonstrated Haven Harbour Marina in Rock Hall commitment to environmental stewardship.
Each marina operator Above (L-R): Tina and Art Cox, Trevor Richards, Scott Davis, burns waste oil in a specialized furnace was also presented with a Maryland Steuart Chaney, Jonathan Jones and Dave Gohsman pose with to heat shop buildings during cold Senate Resolution in recognition of their awards.
Below (L-R): Delegate Minnick, Senator Stone, weather.
Deputy Secretary Stan Arthur, Beth Valentine and Delegate his leadership.
Mohorovic congratulate Art and Tina Cox (Anchor Bay East) at Herrington Harbour South in FriendIn his remarks, Deputy Secretary the awards ceremony.
ship has created more than two acres of of the Department of Natural Rewetland habitat and created additional sources Stanley K. Arthur said that wildlife habitat by replacing vertical bulkwe are all beginning to understand heads with either low-profile bulkheads that we cannot expect to govern or or sloped riprap walls.
regulate our way to a healthier environment or a cleaner Chesapeake At Port Annapolis Marina in AnnapoBay.
Any real progress, he noted, lis, Manager Dave Gohsman will bring a will depend on every one of us vacuum sander to any do-it-yourselfer who is not containing paint dust. changing the way we live, andlike the marina owners and managers Boats at Spring Cove Marina in we are recognizing todaychanging Solomons will not be relaunched until the way we do business.
These the areas around the vessels have been six marinas serve as an example for cleaned up by the boaters.
all businesses who want to have a positive impact on our environment.
State Senator Norman R. Stone, Jr. was on hand, INSIDE THIS ISSUE . . . along with Delegates Joseph J. Minnick and Jacob J. Mohorovic, Jr., to extend congratulations to each maLIPPINCOTT MARINE RECEIVES DUSTLESS SANDER rina owner.
SPILL PREVENTION, CONTROL AND COUNTERMEASURE PLANS Following the award presentations, Anchor Bay East NEW GRANT FUNDING FOR WATERSHEDS Manager Art Cox led a tour highlighting some of his MARINAS THAT HAVE TAKEN THE PLEDGE pollution prevention measures.
One item of particu- Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 WINTERIZATION TIPS ...
AND MORE! 1 What is an SPCC Plan . . .
And who needs one ?? As the name suggests, a Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan addresses oil spill avoidance and response.
Federal regulations established in 1973 (40 CFR 112) require that marinas prepare an SPCC plan if they have: an above ground oil storage capacity greater than 660 gallons in a single container, or an aggregate above ground storage capacity greater than 1,320 gallons, or a total underground storage capacity greater than 42,000 gallons.
An SPCC plan is similar to a spill response plan that you may have prepared under the General Permit for Discharges from Marinas with one significant difference: the SPCC plan must be certified by a professional engineer.
Refer to page 41 of the Maryland Clean Marina Guidebook for more details or call the Clean Marina Office at (410) 260-8770.
Lippincott Marine wins dustless sander These marinas meet the rigorous pollution prevention standards established by the Maryland Clean Marina Committee and the Department of Natural Resources.
The operators have voluntarily adopted measures to control pollution associated with marina operations and stand as notable examples of the conservation ethic: individual responsibility for healthy land and water.
Anchor Bay East Marina, Dundalk Baltimore Yacht Club, Baltimore Fort Washington Marina, Fort Washington Haven Harbour Marina, Rock Hall Herrington Harbour South Marina, Friendship Port Annapolis Marina, Annapolis Spring Cove Marina, Solomons Maryland Clean Marinas Fort W ashington Marina became certified a Marina Clean on July 22 The following marinas have taken the Clean Marina Pledge: Anchor Bay East Marina, Dundalk Anchor Yacht Basin, Edgewater Anchorage Marina, Baltimore Annapolis City Dock, Annapolis Baltimore Yacht Club, Baltimore Beacon Light Marina, Baltimore Breezy Point Marina, Inc., Chesapeake Beach Casa Rio Marina, Mayo Chesapeake Yacht Club, Shady Side Coastal Properties Management Inc., Annapolis The Cove, Elkton Crockett Bros. Boatyard, Inc., Oxford Deep Creek Lake Recreation Area, Swanton Dennis Point Marina, Inc., Drayden Drurys Marina, Ridge Elk Point Marina, Elkton Ferry Point Marina 
The first round of funding was designated specifically for boating facilities within Deep Creek Lake, Upper Elk River, Mattawoman Creek, South River, and Isle of Wight Bay watersheds.
Applications for this first round of funding were due to the Clean Marina Office July 23.
Awards will be announced at the end of August.
A proposal seeking additional funds for use in other watersheds has been forwarded to the EPA for consideration.
If successful, this proposal will cover 75 percent of the purchase and installation costs of the following items: 4 fish cleaning stations equipped with garbage disposals and sanitary sewer connections; 4 recycling pressure washing systems; 4 vacuum sanders or grinders; 4 shoreside buffers planted with native plants; 2 oil and antifreeze recycling stations; and 2 high-volume, low-pressure spray guns.
Boating facilities in the Baltimore Harbor, Severn River, West Chesapeake Bay, and Lower Choptank watersheds will be eligible to apply.
We expect EPA to make a decision by January 2000.
If EPA does approve the proposal, application packages will be sent to marinas in the eligible watersheds.
The availability of funds will also be widely advertised.
Call Beth Fuller Valentine for more information.
Also, as a reminder, the Sewage Pumpout Grant Program provides up to $12,500 for the purchase and installation of a pumpout system.
Call Don ONeill for more information.
Phone numbers can be found on page 4.
Richard Lippincott (left), president of Lippincott Marine, gladly accepts a Fein dust-free sander from Maryland Clean Marina Initiative coordinator Beth Valentine.
The Clean Marina Initiative presented Richard Lippincott, president of Lippincott Marine in Grasonville, with a Fein dust-free sander.
This highly effective tool uses a vacuum to collect dust from a work surface as soon as the dust is created.
Vacuum sanders protect the environment by preventing maintenance debris from falling to the ground where it may be carried by stormwater into nearby waterways.
Vacuum sanders also protect worker health by minimizing the amount of airborne particles that workers may inhale.
Still another advantage is that workers can work more quickly with vacuum sanders than they can with conventional equipment.
The dust-free sander, valued at $1,200, was made available to the Maryland Clean Marina Initiative through the generosity of Fein Power Tools Inc. and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Mr. Lippincotts name was drawn at random from entries collected during a series of workshops held during January and February this year to introduce the Maryland Clean Marina Initiative to marina operators.
2 3
