Bullying Prevention Compiled by Kelly Dunn, School Counseling Consultant Office of Student Services, Indiana Department of Education Room 229, State House Indianapolis, Indiana 46204 -9140 (317) 232 -9136/(317) 232- 9140 (fax) kdunn@doe.state.in.us www.doe.state.in.us Dr. Suellen Reed, State Superintendent of Public Instruction Indiana Department of Education 2003
This collection of resources was compiled to give schools a quick, easy-to -access reference of available resources dealing with bullying.
Publication of this collection is not intended to constitute an endorsement by the Indiana Department of Education of any resource or service.
2
Table of Contents Bullying: An Overview ..........................................
..............3 A Bullying Prevention Plan................................................7 Practical Guidelines for Dealing with Bullying ..................12 Instructional Materials and Resources................................17 Books for Students ...................................................20 Books for Adults.......................................................29 Curriculum Resources for Schools...............................31 Videos......................................................................
35 Posters....................................................................
36 Web Sites.................................................................37 Hotline....................................................................
38 School Programs and Contacts ....................................39 Appendix .........................................................................
.41 Classroom Rules.........................................................42 Classroom Meeting Activities.......................................44 3
Student Questionnaire................................................50 Reporting Form.........................................................58 Anti-Bullying Policy.................................................59
4
Bullying: An Overview
5
What is Bullying? Bull ying = Peer Abuse A definition... ?? Intentional, repeated hurtful acts, words or other behavior, such as name -calling, threatening and/or shunning committed by one or more children against another.
?? An imbalance in real or perceived power must exist between bully and victim.
?? Not intentionally provoked by the victims.
?? Includes various forms of hazing ("initiation rites").
"Approximately ¾ of Midwestern school children reported some episodes of bullying, with about 14 percent experiencing severe reactions to abuse."
Hoover, Oliver 
Is it just "part of growing up"? "A look at social development shows this isn't normal, healthy behavior.
Bullying is an indication of poor social development."
Tonja Nansel, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
?? Begins in elementary school, peaks in middle school and tapers off in high school.
?? School size, racial composition, school setting are not factors in predicting the occurrence of bullying.
NOT "part of growing up" or "rite of passage."
Types of Bullying Direct Bullying ?? Teasing ?? Taunting ?? Threatening ?? Hitting ?? Stealing Indirect Bullying ?? Social isolation through intentional exclusion
6
Characteristics of Bullies ??
??
?? ?? ?? ??
?? ?? ?? ?? ?? ??
Can be both male and female, but most often are male.
?? Little research on girls who bully.
Tend to have troubled backgrounds.
?? Family problems.
?? History of physical/emotional abuse.
?? Physical punishment is used at home.
?? Inconsistent discipline at home.
?? Parental involvement and warmth are often missing.
Apt to break rules.
Little anxiety over consequences or potential punishment.
Strong societal self -esteem, but low core self-esteem.
New report shows that bullies are likely to be among the most popular kids in school, admired by peers and teachers alike, especially in middle school years.
Need to feel powerful and in control.
Derive satisfaction from inflicting suffering.
Little to no empathy for victims.
Defend their actions saying the victim provoked them.
Defiant and oppositional toward adults.
Antisocial.
Characteristics of Victims ??Anxious,
insecure, cautious.
??Suffer from low self-esteem.
??May lack social skills and friends.
??Often socially isolated.
??Close to their parents who may be overprotective.
??Physically weaker.
Consequences of Bullying For Bullies: ??Bullies often maintain these behaviors into adulthood. ??Correlation between bullying and legal and/or criminal problems in adulthood. ?? 1 in 4 chance of becoming a criminal by age 30.
?? Develop into adults who are more likely to be convicted of serious crimes, be abusive toward their spo uses/children, and have lower educational and career advancement.
?? Children of bullies often become bullies themselves.
For Victims: ?? Afraid of school ?? Increased social isolation ?? Possible depression, anxiety, and low self -esteem that can continue into adulthood.
7
?? ?? ??
??
Feel unsafe at school.
More likely to have school attendance problems than other students.
May feel compelled to take drastic measures, such as fighting back, weapon-carrying or even suicide.
Bystanders and peers of victims can be distracted from lear ning as well.
"Most if not all of the youth who carried out homicidal acts of violence [in schools] were deeply disturbed by repeated bullying experiences such as being teased, taunted, and rejected by peers."
Dewey Cornell, Director of the Virginia Youth Violence Project "An estimated 160,000 children each day miss school for fear of being picked on."
National Association of School Psychologists
How Students Perceive Bullying in Schools ??Adult
intervention is infrequent and ineffective.
seldom or never talk to their classes about bullying. ??Telling will only lead to more harassment.
??Teachers
Why Bullying Often Persists ??Adults
underestimate the amount of bullying. to become involved.
??Believe it's an inevitable part of childhood.
??May be desens itized to the problem.
??Teachers may feel powerless to do much about it; they don't know how to stop it, or they are afraid they wouldn't be supported by their principals.
??Telling a victim to stand up to the bully and fight back usually leads to more violent bullying. ??Takes place where there's little adult supervision.
??Schools may be overwhelmed with many other problems.
??Lack of resources.
??Reluctance
School Risk Factors ?? ?? ?? ??
Presence of aggressive students in same or slightly higher grade Lack of supervision during breaks Staff have indifferent or accepting attitudes toward bullying Students have indifferent or accepting attitudes toward bullying However... ?? Larger classes may offer an opportunity for all students to connect with someone.
8
A Bullying Prevention Plan
9
The following information is based on the "blueprint" bullying prevention plan evaluated through the Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
This program was modeled after the research of Dan Olweus, Ph.D., at the University of Bergen, Norway.
Core Components There are many components to the Olweus model; however, there are certain program components that are more essential than others.
Olweus calls these "core" components for an effective anti -bullying program, and recommends that they be included in any implementation of a program.
They include: Prerequisite Measures ?? Awareness and involvement on the part of adults Measures at the School Level ?? Questionnaire survey ?? School conference day (in-service training) ?? Better supervision during recess and lunch time Measures at the Class Level ?? Class rules against bullying ?? Class meetings Measures at the Individual Level ?? Serious talks with bullies and victims ?? Serious talks with parents of involved students The Step-by-Step Plan to Help Change Bullying/Harassing Behaviors that follows includes all of the above mentioned core components.
Each one is indicated in bold.
10
A Step -by-Step Plan to Help Change Bullying/Harassing Behaviors (Excerpted from the Kansas Bullying Prevention Program)
FIRST...
1. Make sure you have buy-in from the entire school staff.
The principal really should take the lead in supporting the program.
2.
Survey the staff to find out if they will support such a program.
3.
Involve parents.
NOW YOU'RE READY! Step 1: Identify those adults in the school who are willing to serve on a Bullying Prevention Coordinating committee.
This committee will coordinate and help develop a strategic plan against bullying/harassing behaviors.
Teachers, cafeteria works, janitors, and paraprofessionals should all be asked if they would like to participate.
This group should be representative of your school.
For example, the principal, the counselor, a PTA/PTO member, at least one teacher from grades K-2, 3-4, 5-6, as well as perhaps one cafeteria worker and the building janitor.
Step 2:
Use an anonymous student questionnaire to determine the amount of bullying/harassing problems that are present in your school and where they occur (Core Component).
Create an effective form of documentation of all bullying/harassing behaviors.
Develop a "parental rights" form or other document that is used for parental notification.
Step 3:
Reach a consensus about what student behaviors will no longer be allowed.
These behaviors might include: 1.
Name calling, making faces, noises, or other remarks when a victim walks by.
2.
Telling other children they can't play in a game or on a certain piece of playground equipment.
3.
Aggressive physical contact of any kind.
Reinforce "keep your hands, feet and objects to yourself."
Step 4:
Negotiate a list of grade level appropriate escalating consequences for inappropriate behavior.
All inappropriate behaviors will be documented in school records.
The sequence might be: 1.
Verbal warning, documentation includes parent notification.
2.
Lose one day of recess or lunch with peers, documentation includes parent notification.
3.
Lose one week's recess or lunch with peers, documentation includes parent notification.
4.
Lose two weeks' recess or lunch with peers, documentation includes parent notification.
5.
Lose three weeks' recess or lunch with peers, documentation includes parent notification.
11
6.
Parents are asked to take the child home for school for one day.
You could say: "(Student's name) is not ready to be in school today safely."
Note: These consequences are to be administered uniformly for any violation of the behavior code.
It is crucial that the intervention not involve the examination of the student's reasons for the behavior.
Reinforce that the standard for behavior has been violated.
This uniformity makes it easier for students and parents to accept the consequences, and also sends a clear message to the entire school community that students will be protected.
Positive consequences are developed for people who do not violate the behavior code.
Typically this could be a reward activity once a month.
Step 5:
Expectations and consequences are shared with parents, students, bus drivers, after school care, and any one els e who works in or visits the school community.
This is accomplished by using school newsletters, posting behavior expectations in hallways and in classrooms.
School-wide assemblies and teacher/staff in-service training can also raise awareness and communicate the school's policy (Core Component).
Utilizing a parent meeting about bullying/harassment would be appropriate at this step.
Be sure to encourage parent participation: a request for parent volunteers to assist in recess and/or lunchroom duty may be appropriate.
Step 6: Step 7:
Based on the results of the student survey in step two, increase adult supervision of students in those areas where bullying occurs the most, such as playgrounds, hallways, restrooms, cafeterias, etc.
(Core Component) Develop empathy for victims and empower the 65-70% of students not affected by bullying/harassing behavior to do something to stop it when they see it happen.
This can be accomplished by teaching and modeling good citizenship.
A good citizen does not stand by and allow someone else to be victimized.
Children should be able to identify what a good citizen looks like and then develop posters than can be displayed in school hallways.
Reporting versus tattling should be taught in all grade levels.
Establish a reporting system for students and parents.
Receive and listen receptively to parents who report bullying (Core Component).
Step 8:
Classroom meetings should be lead by the teacher weekly and should stress why it is important not to bully or harass others (Core Component) .
Topics for discussion could be: 1.
How do they feel about being in a safe school? 2.
What should they do if they see others being picked on or excluded? 3.
What is the important of diversity? 4.
How do they resolved conflicts without fighting? Meetings can also be used to develop a classroom action plan to ensure students know what to do when they witness a bully/victim confrontation.
Step 9:
Teaching students problem -solving techniques is the next training technique.
One suggested model is as follows: 1.
Define the problem.
12
2.
Why is this a problem for me right now? 3.
Brainstorm at least three solutions.
4.
Find the positive and negative consequences for each solution.
What will happen next if I do this? 5.
Choose a safe next step--one of the solutions you think will work best.
6.
Try it out and see if it works.
Step 10:
No Bullying/Harassing Rules Throughout your planning process make certain to emphasize three basic rules: 1.
We will not bully or harass others.
2.
If we see someone bullying or harassing another, we will do everything we can to stop it.
3.
If we see someone who is left out, we will invite him or her in.
Involve students when establishing classroom rules against bullying.
Step 11:
Talk individually with bullies, victims and parents of involved students (Core Component).
Confront bullies in private; challenging them in front of peers may enhance their status and lead to further aggression.
Notify parents of both victims and bullies when a confrontation occurs.
Step 12:
Re-evaluate.
Use the same evaluation forms at the end of the year and determine how well your plan is working.
Always re-evaluate your efforts and make changes where needed.
Understand the bullying/harassing behaviors will always follow the flow of least resistance.
NOTE: Many teasing or bullying or harassing interventions give students the responsibility of changing established patterns of behavior.
Law Enforcement has learned that our efforts to reduce sexual harassment, spouse abuse, or any other behavior, in which a stronger person abuses a weaker one, cannot be accomplished by education alone.
The first and most powerful step is to discourage the abuser from continuing the same behavior.
Then it is possible to help the victims, the abusers, and the unmotivated bystanders to internalize this new standard of behavior.
Repeat offenders will need counseling or other support in learning more positive ways to interact with others.
Some may benefit from being charged with assault or battery through the legal system.
Aggressive children will not abandon the excitement of hurting others without consistent, sustained consequences for every incident of aggression.
13
Practical Guidelines for Dealing with Bullying
14
What do I do when... ...I suspect bullying but I'm not sure? 1.
Intensify observations of possible victim.
2.
Confer with colleagues.
3.
Collect information from students.
Ask them: How do students get along in class? How many good friends do you have in this class/at school? Is anyone in this class bullied? 4.
Contact parents.
Ask them: How does your child like school? What kinds of things does s/he say about school/classmates? Does s/he have some good friends at school?
...I need to distinguish bullying from rough play? 1.
Determine the relationship among the parties.
2.
Observe facial expressions and the general atmosphere.
3.
Is there repetition of activities? 4.
Where is the balance of power?
...
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
I discover bullying?
Intervene immediately.
Talk to the bully and victim separately, even if more than one student is bullying.
Ask another adult to be present if necessary.
Talk with bullies separately in rapid sequence (you don't want to give them time to collaborate their stories).
Begin with the "lead bully."
Expect bullies to minimize and deny their actions.
Remind bully about school and classroom rules, reiterate what behavior is expected and sanctions that will be imposed for future bullying behavior.
Follow up and gather bullies for a summary meeting (if needed) Reassure the victim that everything possible will be done to prevent a recurrence.
Make other students aware of consequences of bully behavior; reiterate your school's policy against bullying.
Phone the parents of both the bully and victim as soon as possible.
If possible, invol ve the parents in designing a plan of action.
Continue to monitor behavior of the bully and the safety of the victim.
Consult administrators, teachers, and staff members to alert them to the problem and get a better understanding of it.
Have a follow -up meeting with the bullies in 1-2 weeks.
If the situation doesn't change, remove the bully--not the victim --from the classroom.
...a parent reports bullying? 1.
Receive and listen receptively to parents who report bullying.
2.
Establish and follow procedures whereby such reports are investigated and resolved expeditiously.
15
*Remember:
"It's much easier for the teacher to have these discussions with bullying students if some of the measures previously described [for a bullying prevention program] have already been implemented, for example the class rules against bullying.
Such measures constitute a background for the students' understanding of the problems and there are suitable "tools" for counteracting them, such as sanctions and the class meeting."
Dan Olweus Bullying At School: What We Know and What We Can Do
What do I say... ...to the bully/bullies? 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
We know you have been involved in bullying (name specific behaviors).
Bullying is unacceptable and against school rules.
The bullying must stop immediately.
As a result of your behavior, you will be punished (if necessary).
We will be keeping ourselves informed about your behavior.
We expect it to improve.
If it does not, there may be additional sanctions.
8.
Your parents will be notified (if appropriate).
*Rememb er:
It is crucial that interventions don't involve the examination of the student's reasons for the behavior.
Reinforce that the standard for behavior has been violated.
This uniformity makes it easier for students and parents to accept the consequences, and also sends a clear message to the entire school community that students will be protected.
...to the victim? 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Identify a private location to talk.
Ask a colleague to join you, if appropriate.
Gauge the student's distress and be gentle.
Collect info about the incident.
Encourage the student to express his/her emotions.
Provide support and encouragement.
7.
Inform student of your intended actions with the bully/bullies.
At the end of the meeting with the victim...
1.
Form a safety plan with the student.
2.
Have the student agree to report future bullying.
3.
Arrange a follow -up meeting with the victim within one week.
*Remember:
The victim's safety is the primary focus.
16
Strategies for Parents of Victims
Be careful not to convey to a child who is victimized that something is wrong with him/her or that s/he deserves such treatment.
It is appropriate to call the school if your child is involved in a conflict as either a victim or a bully.
Work collaboratively with school personnel to address the problem.
You may wish to arrange a conference with a teacher, principal or counselor.
They may be able to offer some practical advice to help you and your child.
If you talk with the bully or his parents, be careful in your approach.
Speaking with the parents of a bully may not accomplish anything since lack of parental involvement in the child's life is a typical characteristic of parents of bullies.
Offer support to your child but do not encourage dependence on you.
Do not encourage your child to be aggressive or to strike back.
Teach your child to be assertive.
Search systematically for talents and positive attributes to be developed.
Encourage your child to make contact with friendly student(s) in his/her classes.
Encourage your child to get to know peers in new situations.
Encourage him/her to participate in physical training or sports.
Be patient--conflict between children more than likely will not be resolved overnight.
If the problem persists or escalates, you may need to seek an attorney's help or contact local law enforcement officials.
(excerpted from Preventing Bullying: A Manual for Schools and Communities, US Department of Education, November 3, 1998, http://www.cde.ca.gov/spbranch/ssp/bullymanual.htm )
17
Strategies for Parents of Bullies Watch for signs of bullying.
Don't allow your child to control others through verbal threats and physical actions.
Communicate directly to your child: We know you have been involved in bullying.
Bullying is a serious matter.
We will not tolerate any future bullying behavior.
Enforce family rules and reinforce positive behaviors.
Help your child develop empathy for the problems of the victim.
Apply clear, consistent, escalating consequences for repetitive aggressive behaviors.
Spend more time with your child.
Monitor your child's activities.
Build upon your child's talents.
Help your child find more appropriate behavior patterns.
Don't tolerate revengeful attitudes.
Don't allow your child to have contact with aggressive groups.
Limit your child's exposure to models of aggressive behavior such as violent television, movies and video games.
As a parent, be a good role model for constructively solving problems.
As a parent, be a good role model for getting along with others.
As a parent, help your child develop a healthy physical image.
Watch for the emergence of feelings of power and control.
As a parent, know the whereabouts of your child.
Provide anger management counseling for your child, if necessary.
Seek professional assistance, if necessary.
As a parent, protect your child from physical and emotional abuse at home.
(excerpted from Preventing Bullying: A Manual for Schools and Communities, US Department of Education, November 3, 1998, http://www.cde.ca.gov/spbranch/ssp/bullymanual.htm)
18
Instructional Materials and Resources
19
(What to consider when looking for quality bullying prevention materials) There are many materials available to schools that claim to address bullying.
While many of these materials can be extremely helpful and effective, just as many offer improbable quick fixes and are not research-based.
The Kansas Bullying Prevention Program uses much of the information from the "blueprint" bullying prevention plan evaluated through the Center for the Study and Prevention of Violence at the University of Colorado at Boulder.
This program was modeled after the research of Dan Olweus, Ph.D., at the University of Bergen, Norway.
Schools that follow the blueprint protocol have experienced about a 40% reduction in bullying within the first two years of the program.
(Ordering information about the Blueprint materials is listed below.)
The following is a list excepted from the Kansas Program that outlines those characteristics that distinguish the Olweus model.
This list provides excellent guidelines for what to look for when considering instructional m aterials and curricula addressing bullying: ?? Main responsibility for the program rests with the adults at school (teachers, administrators, and other school staff), though it is important to also involve parents and students in various ways.
Administrative support of the program is important.
It aims to create collective commitment to and involvement with the program among staff.
?? Designed to send the consistent message that bullying is not accepted and will be stopped.
Strongly encourages coordination of a school's "mental" resources: attitudes, behaviors, and routines .
?? Both systems -oriented (restructuring of the social environment) and individualoriented.
Works at school-, class - and individual levels.
Important mechanisms for change: change of opportunity and reward structures for bullying behavior (resulting in fewer opportunities and rewards for such behavior).
?? Both preventive and acutely problem-solving.
Both long-term and short-term goals.
?? Consistently built on research-based knowledge .
Various program components form part of a conceptually integrated system.
Program may be somewhat modified in light of new research findings.
?? Clear focus on measurement of problem behaviors (student questionnaire) and evaluation of processes and results.
Important to create awareness and involvement.
?? Universal, aimed primarily at the whole school population with the goal to create a safe and positive learning environment, and only indirectly at particularly targeted groups of students.
This is likely to increase schools' willingness to "take ownership" of the problems and the intervention program.
?? Designed to permeate the school environment to become part of the every day life of a school--it's not a time -limited campaign.
Although positive results may come
Characteristics of the Olweus Program
20
relatively quickly, systematic efforts over time are needed to maintain program effects.
There is no magic bullet.
?? Broad positive effects of the program on students--both with regard to bully/victim problems and related issues such as antisocial behavior and classroom climate--have been documented in scientific evaluations of the program, both in Norway and countries such as the U.K. and the USA.
Blueprints for Violence Prevention Bullying Prevention Program is available from the Center of the Study and Prevention of Violence, Institute of Behavioral Science, University of Colorado at Boulder, Campus Box 442, Boulder, Colorado 80309-0442, Phone 303-492-8465, FAX 303443-3297.
List price is $10.
Some cautions against the use of Peer Mediation in si tuations of Bullying (Dan Olweus) ?? Bullying is NOT a conflict, but is ABUSE.
To call it a conflict is a distortion and a trivialization of the victimization.
?? There is not "some right" and "some wrong" on both sides.
This thinking places blame on the vic tim and frees the bully from responsibility.
(Only 20% of victims are "provocative victims") ?? Peer mediation assumes that both sides have the same negotiating power, creating further infringements upon the victim.
The "playing field," or balance of power, is not level.
?? Peer mediation is based on the fundamental concept of NOT taking moral stand, or remaining neutral.
We must take a moral stand that bullying is unacceptable.
?? There is far too great a responsibility in instances of bullying to place upon child mediators.
Adults need to claim responsibility.
21
Books for Students Angel Child, Dragon Child M. Surat Scholastic Arthur=s April Fool M. Brown Little Babe the Gallant Pig D. King -Smith RH Bailey the Big Bully Lizi Boyd Viking Kestrel Beating Bully O=Brien Karen Mueller Coombs Avon Being Bullied K. Petty Barrons Benjamin and Tulip R. Wells Dial Books Berenstain Bears 
Bootsie Baker Bites Barbara Bottner Putnam Publishing Bullies Are a Pain in the Brain Trevor Romain Free Spirit Publishing Bully Janine Amos Benchmark Books The Bully J. Needle Hamish Hamilton The Bully of Barkham Street Mary Stolz Harper 
23
Charlotte =s Web E. White Dell Chrysanthemum K. Henkes Greenwillow Books Cliques, Phonies, 
24
Fat, Fat Rose Marie L. Passen Holt Finding the Green Stone Alice Walker Harcourt Brace Jovanovich First Grade King Karen Lynn Williams Clarion Books First Honest Book About Lie J. Kincher Free Spirit Fourth Grade Rats Jerry Spinelli Scholastic Freak the Mighty W. Rodman Philbrick Blue Sky Press Furlie Cat B. Freshet Lothrop The Girl Who Loved Caterpillars J. Merrill Philomel Good Friends are Hard to Find Fred Frankel Perspective Publishing Grouchy Ladybug E. Carle Scholastic Herbie=s Troubles C. Chapman Dutton Children=s Books
25
Hilary 
26
Joshua T. Bates Takes Charge Susan Richards Shreve Alfred A. Knopf Junie B. Jones 
27
Matthew 
28
The Present Takers A. Chambers Harper 
29
Stick Boy Joan T. Zeier Macmillan Stick Up for Yourself! Every Kid=s Guide to Personal and Positive Self-Esteem Gershen Kaufman, Lev Raphael, Pamela Espeland Free Spirit Publishing Swimmy L. Lionni Scholastic Telling Isn=t Tattling K. Hammerseng Parenting PR Thank You Mr. Falker P. Polacco Philomel Third Grade Bullies E. Levy Hyperion Timothy and the Big Bully Jeffrey Dinardo Simon 
Wendy and the Bullies N. Robinson Scholastic What a Wimp! Carol Carrick Clarion Books
30
What Do You Know About Bullying? P. Sanders Gloucester Press What Would You Do? Kids Guide to Tricky 
Books for Adults Before It=s Too Late: Why Some Kids Get Into Trouble and What Parents Can Do About It S. Samenow Random House Breaking the Cycle of Violence: Interventions for Bullying 
31
Bullies and Victims in School V.E. Besag Open University Press Bullying 
Curriculum Resources for Schools The Anti -Bullying Handbook K. Sullivan Oxford University Press The Bully Buster Book John William Yee Outgoing Press The Bully Free Classroom Allan L. Beane Free Spirit Publishing Bullying: A Practical Guide for Schools M. Elliott Longman Bullying: Don=t Suffer in Silence.
An Anti -Bullying Pack for Schools HMSO Publications (England) Bullying in Schools Delwyn Tattum, David A. Lane Trentham Books The Bullying Prevention Handbook: A Guide for Principals, Teachers, and Counselors John H. Hoover, Ronald Oliver National Educational Service Bullying Prevention Program Blueprints for Violence Prevention Series Center for the Study of the Prevention of Violence, Uni versity of Colorado, Boulder Bully and Victim: An Interactive CD-ROM Sunburst Boulden Publishing Bully Proof: A Teacher=s Guide on Teasing and Bullying for Use with Fourth and Fifth Grade Students Nan Stein Wellesley College Center for Research on Wome n Bully-Proofing Your School: A Comprehensive Approach for Elementary Schools Carla Garrity, Kathryn Jens, William Porter, Nancy Sager, Cam Short -Camilli Sopris West 33
Bully-Proofing Your School: A Comprehensive Approach for Middle Schools Marla Bonds, Sally Stoker Sopris West Child Support Through Small Group Counseling Lois Landry KIDSRIGHTS Childhood Bullying and Teasing: What School Personnel, Other Professionals, and Parents Can Do Dorothea Ross American Counseling Association Countering Bullying: Initiatives by Schools and Local Authorities Delwyn Tattum, Graham Herbert Trentham Books (England) Creating the Peaceable School: A Comprehensive Program for Teaching Conflict Resolution Richard L. Bodine, Donna K. Crawford, Fred Schrumpf Research Press Don=t Laugh At Me Operation Respect For Kids Who Are Bullied Teresa M. Schmidt Hazelden For Kids Who Bully Teresa M. Schmidt Hazelden How to Deal with Bullying at School: A Teacher Handbook Dan Olweus University of Bergen (Norway) Olweus@psych.uib.no If You Had to Choose, What Would You Do? S. Humphrey Prometheus Learning the Skills of Peacemaking Naomi Drew Jalmar Press 34
Making a School a Place of Peace Theresa M. Bey, Gwendolyn Y.
Turner Corwin Press No Bullying Johnson Institute No More Bullying Sunburst On Target to Stop Bullying STOP Violence Coalition, Inc.
Sunburst Positive Self-Talk for Children Douglas Bloch with Jon Merritt Bantam Books Preventing Bullying: A Manual for Schools and Communities National School Safety Center U.S. Dept. of Education Quit It! A Teacher=s Guide on Teasing and Bullying for Use with Students in Grades K -3 Merie Frosche Wellesley Center for Research on Women Reducing School Violence through Conflict Resolution David W. Johnson, Roger T. Johnson Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development Second Step The Committee for Children Set Straight on Bullies Stuart Greenbaum, Brenda Turner, Ronald D. Stephens Pepperdine University Press Tackling Bullying in Your School Sonia Sharp, Peter K. Smith (eds) Routeledge Teacher, They Called Me A... D. Byrnes B=Nai B =Rith 35
Teaching Behavioral Self-Control to Students (second edition) Edward Workman, Alan Katz Pro-Ed Teaching Your Kids to Care Deborah Spaide Citadel Press The Tough Kid Book: Practical Classroom Management Strategies Ginger Rhode, William R. Jenson, H. Kenton Reavis Sopris West The Tough Kid Social Skills Book Susan M. Sheridan Sopris West The Tough Kid Tool Box William R. Jenson, Ginger Rhode, H. Kenton Reavis Sopris West Waging Peace in Our Schools Linda Lantieri, Janet Patti Beacon Press Why is Everybody Always Picking on Me: A Guide to Understanding Bullies for Young People Terrence Webster-Doyle Atrium Society Publications Why is Everybody Always Picking on Me: A Special Curriculum for Young People to Help Them Cope with Bullying Terrence Webster-Doyle, Adryan Russ Atrium Society Publications You Can=t Say You Can=t Play Vivian Gussian Paley Harvard University Press
36
Videos Broken Toy Thomas Bro wn Summerhill Productions Bully Breath: How to Tame a Troublemaker National Center for Violence Prevention Bullying South Carolina =s Educational Television in collaboration with the Institute for Families in Society at the University of South Carolina Bully Smart National Center for Violence Prevention Coping with Bullying James Stanfield Co.
Coping with Fighters, Bullies, and Troublemakers National Center for Violence Prevention Dealing with Bullies, Troublemakers and Dangerous Situations, Peacetalks with Michael Pritchard The Bureau for At-Risk Youth Disrespect, Rudeness, and Teasing National Center for Violence Prevention Don=t Pick On Me Sunburst Communications Frustration and Negative Feelings National Center for Violence Prevention Groark L earns About Bullying (Vol.4 in the Prevent Violence with Goark series) Wisconsin Clearinghouse for Prevention Resources How I Learned Not to Be Bullied Sunburst Houghton Mifflin How to Resolve Power Struggles National Center for Violence Prevention
37
Hurting with Words: Understanding Emotional Violence and Abuse National Center for Violence Prevention Keeping Cool: Anger Management Tools National Center for Violence Prevention Michael =s Story: The No Blame Approach Lucky Duck Publishing (England) Molly=s Pilgrim Phoenix/BFA Films Names CRU Institute Names Can Really Hurt Us Anti -Defamation League Nobody Likes A Bully National Center for Violence Prevention No More Teasing National Center for Violence Prevention Real Kids: What We Learned About Bullying Sunburst Houghton Mifflin Respecting Yourself and Others The Bureau for At-Risk Youth Set Straight on Bullies National School Safety Center Stamp Out Bullying Lucky Duck Publishing (England)
Posters Be a Buddy, Not a Bull y Mid-Atlantic Equity Consortium Is Everybody Always Picking on You? Atrium Society 38
Web Sites Stop Bullying -Guidelines for Schools http://www.nobully.org.nz/guidelines.htm Stop Bullying Now http://www.cary-memorial.lib.me.us/bullyweb/index.html Education World -Bullying Interventions That Work http://www.education-world.com/a_issues/issues103.shtml Bullying In Schools 
39
Kansas Bullying Prevention Program http://www.kbpp.org Bully Stoppers.Com http://www.bullys toppers.com ERIC Clearing House for Counseling and Student Services (ERIC/CASS) http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtullib/newlibhome.html Bully B =Ware http://www.bullybeware.com Maine Project Against Bullying http://lincoln.midcoast.com/~wps/against/bullying.html Committee for Children http://www.cfchildren.org/bully.html Nature and Prevention of Bullying http://www.gold.ac.uk/tmr/ Bullying Online http://www.bullying.co.uk/ Bullying.Org http://www.bullying.org Anti -Bullying Network http://antibullying.net/ Colorado Institute for Conflict Resolution and Creative Leadership http://weinholds.org/bullyindex.htm
Hotline Anti -Bullying Hotline toll free 877-443-9943 7:00 a.m.-5:30 p.m. Pacific time M-F 100:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. weekends
40
School Programs and Contacts
Alice Birney Middle School 7750 Pinehurst Street North Charleston, SC 29420 843-764-2212 Phillippe Cunningham, project director Assumption St. Bridget School (Grades K -8) 6220 32nd Avenue N.E. Seattle, WA 98115 Michael Foy, Principal 206-524-7452 mfoy@asbschool.org Steps to Respect Program (pilot) Austin Independent School District AExpect Respect@ program 1111 West 6 th Street Austin, TX 78703 512-414-1700 Caruthersville Middle School ARespect 
41
Liberty Middle School 13496 Liberty School Road Ashland, VA 23005 Marilyn Towsey, Bullying Prevention Committee Member 804-752-6020 mtowsey@hanover.k12.va.us East Elementary School ABully Prevention Program@ Connie Pellman, principal (920) 675-1400 Jefferson Public Schools Jefferson, WI Lebanon School District 485 South Fifth Street Lebanon, OR 97355 Kerry Luber, Director of Student Services 541-451-8511 x 241 Maine Project Against Bullying Chuck Saufler, Director 207-443-9145 csaufler@westbath.u47.k12.me.us Http://lincoln.midcoast.com/~wps/agains t/bullying.html Rocky Mountain Middle School 3443 North Ammon Road Idaho Falls, ID 83401 Lori Wickham or Jim Veazey, Bullying Prevention Coordinators 208-525-4403 wickham@d93.k12.id.us Stony Creek Elementary School 1350 Greenfield Drive Noblesville, IN 4 6060 (317) 773-0582 Bob McDaniel bobmcdaniel@mail.nobl.k12.in.us Willow Creek Elementary School ABully-Proofing Your School@ 7855 South Willow Way Englewood, CO 80112 720-554-3900 42
Appendix
43
Sample Classroom Rules
44
Sample Rules Against Bullying We do not bully others.
We help students who are bullied.
We include students who are left out.
We tell an adult at school and an adult at home when somebody is being bullied.
from Family- Child Resources, Inc., York, PA
45
Classroom Meeting Activities
46
Student Questionnaire
50
Reporting Form
57
Anti-Bullying Policy
59
