socioeconomic benefit would be the long-term restoration of anadromous fish in Battle Creek (the project purpose).
I. Project Schedule and Estimated Costs 1.
Development of Construction Logic and Durations A preliminary bar chart indicating principal construction activities, estimated durations, proposed sequence, and associated schedules for partial dam removal is provided in Appendix C.
The schedules assume initial work in the stream channel begins on July 1 at Wildcat Dam, and proceeds through August at Eagle Canyon Dam, until completion at Coleman Dam in mid-September.
Removal of all features at the dams would increase the estimated durations shown.
Pipeline and flume removal activities are assumed to be essentially independent of the dam removal (stream channel) work, with the lone requirement that removal of the Eagle Canyon Canal flume cannot commence until after Wildcat Dam has been removed, due to streamflow diversion requirements.
It is assumed that a single helicopter would perform both the Wildcat Canal pipeline and the Eagle Canyon Canal flume removal activities.
A larger helicopter, or Skycrane, would be used for equipment mobilization to both canyon sites.
Preconstruction activities include the collection of design data, the preparation of final designs and specifications, and issuance of the specifications package for the dam removal project, which is estimated to take approximately 9 months.
The bidding process is assumed to take 4 to 6 weeks, at which time the bids would be opened.
Concurrent environmental protection and permitting activities may require 2 to 3 months to get agreement and approvals on the action to take, 3 months to prepare an Environmental Assessment (EA) and receive the expected Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI), and between 1 and 3 months to get the necessary 404 and 401 permits required for construction to begin.
Administrative activities include an estimated 30 calendar days for contract award and notice to proceed following the bid opening.
It is assumed that construction access and demolition plans will be required to be submitted, for approval, by the contractor, which may require 30 calendar days to prepare and 20 calendar days to approve.
These activities need to be completed in time to permit site mobilization by about June 24.
Dam removal activities at Wildcat Dam would begin with site mobilization and reservoir drawdown to approximately elevation 1073.2, or the lowest level possible, which requires the disconnection of the Wildcat pipeline at the dam, and operation of the canal intake and sluice gates full open to pass streamflow.
A Cat 311 excavator, or equivalent, would be delivered to the canyon site using a large helicopter, or Skycrane, to facilitate streamflow diversion and begin demolition of the masonry dam.
Demolition of the dam section using a hoe-ram attachment on the excavator, and final spreading of the masonry rubble using a bucket attachment, would require 7 to 10 working days, based on an average production rate of about 1 cubic yard per hour.
Demolition of the fish ladder structure, and removal of the waste concrete and mechanical items from the site, would require an additional 3 to 5 working days.
This translates to 3 weeks for river channel 26
activities.
Demobilization of the heavy equipment would occur around July 23, with an additional duration of from 2 to 5 days for site cleanup.
(Removal of the canal intake structure under the full removal plan would add another week to this schedule.)
Site mobilization at Eagle Canyon Dam would be concurrent with dam removal activities at Wildcat Dam, but would not be completed until the Cat 311 excavator could be airlifted from the Wildcat site to the Eagle Canyon site, around July 23 (or later, if full removal of Wildcat Dam is required).
Reservoir drawdown to approximately elevation 1406.2, or the lowest level possible using the existing radial sluice gate, would expose large portions of the masonry dam and weir crest structure for demolition using the hoe-ram and jackhammers.
Excavating a notch through the dam would permit further lowering of the reservoir level for demolition of remaining portions of the structure above the original streambed.
Demolition of the dam and weir crest, and placement of the masonry rubble within the canal section and/or river channel at the site, would require about 20 working days, based on an average production rate of about 1 cubic yard per hour.
Demolition of the fish ladder structure, and removal of the waste concrete and mechanical items from the site, would require an additional 3 to 5 working days.
This translates to about one month for river channel activities.
Demobilization of the heavy equipment would occur around August 23, with an additional duration of from 2 to 5 days for site cleanup.
(Removal of the canal wall and gate winch block under the full removal plan would add another 2 weeks to this schedule.)
Removal of 5,530 feet of pipeline from the Wildcat Canal would be accomplished by airlifting out 10- to 20-foot-long sections of pipe, depending upon equipment capacity, with an estimated weight of about 100 pounds per foot of length.
Pipe supports spaced on approximate 20-foot-centers, and miscellaneous metalwork, are assumed to increase the total weight by about 30 percent.
Concrete footings for pipe supports are assumed to average about 1 cubic yard for each support.
For cost estimating purposes, the pipeline is assumed to be removed at a rate of 20 feet per hour, for a total duration of between 6 and 8 weeks.
Concrete footing removal, required under the full removal plan, would likely follow right behind the pipeline removal activities and would use the same helicopter to haul out about 2 yd3 (8,000 pounds) of waste concrete every 4 hours, for a total duration of up to 15 weeks.
Backfilling of the Wildcat Canal channel sections and removal of the county bridge would be performed concurrently with pipeline removal activities, using conventional earthmoving and paving equipment.
Removal of 3,385 feet of metal flume from the Eagle Canyon Canal would be accomplished by airlifting out bundled materials, with two 20-foot spans removed about every 3 hours, for a total duration of between 6 and 8 weeks.
The metal flume is assumed to weigh approximately 100 pounds per foot of length, with supports and miscellaneous metalwork assumed to increase the total weight by about 30 percent.
Concrete footings for flume supports are assumed to average about 1 cubic yard for each support spaced on 20-foot centers.
Concrete footing removal, required under the full removal plan, would likely follow right behind the flume removal activities and would use the same helicopter to haul out about 2 yd3 (8,000 pounds) of waste concrete every 4 hours, for a total duration of up to 12 weeks.
It is assumed the flume would be removed after removal of the Wildcat
27
pipeline, which would be more than a month after removal of Wildcat Dam, when the flume would no longer be needed for streamflow diversion purposes.
Dam removal activities at Coleman Dam are assumed to occur following completion of the Inskip Powerhouse tailrace direct connection pipe to the Coleman Canal, in order to permit streamflow diversion around the damsite.
No construction schedule for the direct connection pipe was available for this study; however, an August 2 date has been assumed for contractor mobilization to the Coleman site for demolition.
No diversions are assumed from North Fork Battle Creek.
The reservoir would be drawn down to approximate elevation 996.2 (depending upon streamflow) using the existing radial sluice gate, exposing a significant portion of the masonry dam structure.
Excavation of a notch through the dam to the original streambed grade would permit further lowering of the reservoir.
Due to the good access to the site, larger equipment and a much better production rate for demolition of the masonry dam structure was assumed, or about 4 cubic yards per hour (compared to 1 cubic yard per hour at the canyon sites), using two or more excavators or dozers, for a duration of about 12 working days (or about 3 weeks).
Contractor demobilization and site restoration activities are assumed to begin around September 10, with a duration from 2 to 5 days.
(Removal of the masonry weir structure and concrete fish ladder under the full removal plan would add another week to this schedule.
Full removal of the features at all three dams would add about 4 weeks to the overall schedule, resulting in a completion date of around mid-October.)
If all stream channel activities at Coleman Dam are required to be completed by September 1, completion of the tailrace direct connection pipe would have to be planned for no later than mid-July for the partial removal plan, or Coleman Dam would have to be removed the following year.
(Full removal of all features would probably delay the removal of Coleman Dam until the following year.)
2.
Field Cost Estimates for Dam Removal Field cost estimates prepared for this study are summarized below.
Detailed estimate worksheets are provided in Appendix D. a.
Wildcat Diversion Dam. - The estimated field cost for removal of all features associated with Wildcat Dam, including a 25 percent allowance for contract contingencies, is $2,100,000.
The estimated field cost for partial removal of Wildcat Dam, which would retain the canal intake structure, some mechanical items and miscellaneous metalwork, and concrete footings along the canal pipeline alignment, is $1,150,000.
b. Eagle Canyon Diversion Dam. - The estimated field cost for removal of all features associated with Eagle Canyon Dam, including a 25 percent allowance for contract contingencies, is $2,000,000.
(This estimate assumes portions of the Eagle Canyon canal channel would be retained for passage of spring flows.)
28
The estimated field cost for partial removal of Eagle Canyon Dam, which would retain the masonry canal wall, gate winch block, some miscellaneous metalwork, and concrete footings along the canal flume alignment, is $1,300,000.
c. Coleman Diversion Dam. - The estimated field cost for removal of all features associated with Coleman Diversion Dam, including a 25 percent allowance for contract contingencies, is $650,000.
(This estimate retains all canal features except for the intake weir structure, and includes excavation of an upstream channel through the existing sediments.)
The estimated field cost for partial removal of Coleman Diversion Dam, which would retain the existing concrete steppool fish ladder on the left abutment, and the masonry intake weir structure on the right abutment, is $600,000.
Costs for removal or modification of the existing masonry canal wall should be included in cost estimates for the Inskip Powerhouse tailrace direct connection pipe.
3.
Design and Construction Management Costs For the reconnaissance-level estimates and for comparison purposes, non-contract costs are assumed to represent an additional allowance of 20 percent for engineering designs, 15 percent for construction management, 5 percent for contract administration, and 3 percent for environmental mitigation, or a total of 43 percent of the estimated total field cost (including contingencies).
Total estimated costs for each dam are summarized in table 6 for full removal, and in table 7 for partial removal.
Real estate costs are not included in these estimates.
Table 6.
- Total Estimated Costs for Full Removal of Each Dam Feature Wildcat Dam Eagle Canyon Dam Coleman Dam Totals Field Cost $ 2,100,000 2,000,000 650,000 $ 4,750,000 Non-Contract Cost $ 900,000 900,000 280,000 $ 2,080,000 Total Project Cost $ 3,000,000 2,900,000 930,000 $ 6,830,000
Table 7.
- Total Estimated Costs for Partial Removal of Each Dam Feature Field Cost Non-Contract Total Project Cost
29
Cost Wildcat Dam Eagle Canyon Dam Coleman Dam Totals $ 1,150,000 1,300,000 600,000 $ 3,050,000 $ 450,000 600,000 260,000 $ 1,310,000 $ 1,600,000 1,900,000 860,000 $ 4,360,000
J. Conclusions Removal of Wildcat, Eagle Canyon, and Coleman Diversion Dams is technically feasible, and would require durations between 4 and 6 months to accomplish in the field, for a total project cost between $4,360,000 and $6,830,000 (including contingencies and noncontract costs), depending upon the final removal requirements for the concrete footings along the canal pipeline and flume alignments for Wildcat and Eagle Canyon Dams, and the retention of any other features at the dams.
Preliminary construction schedules for partial dam removal, and reconnaissance-level field cost estimates for both full and partial dam removal, are provided in Appendix C and Appendix D, respectively.
Construction schedules for full dam removal may require a second construction season.
Dam removal would provide unobstructed passage in both North Fork and South Fork Battle Creek for anadromous fish, without the need for special fish passage structures at each damsite.
Minimal adverse environmental impacts would be expected.
The masonry structures would be demolished in place, with the rubble spread across the downstream channel, or removed if necessary to prevent ponding.
All associated waste concrete, reinforcing steel, mechanical items, and miscellaneous metalwork would be removed from the sites, including 3,385 lin ft of metal flume and 5,530 lin ft of steel pipeline.
The reservoir sediments would be removed by natural stream erosion and by mechanical removal (at Coleman Dam), with associated turbidity expected to be within acceptable limits.
Some mechanical removal of reservoir sediments may be required at all three sites to facilitate streamflow diversion and/or for removal of the dam structures to the original streambed elevations.
Selected structural features could be retained at each damsite to permit interpretation of the historic sites, and to minimize dam removal costs.
Conceptual photographs of each damsite, reflecting the anticipated appearance following partial dam removal, are provided in Appendix E. K. Additional Investigations for Future Studies The following items should be completed for any future dam removal studies for the project: 1.
Prepare site topography for Wildcat and Coleman damsites (by DWR).
2.
Develop detailed drawings of existing facilities, for use in estimating quantities and for inclusion in the HAER needed to document each damsite.
Provide pertinent construction drawings, correspondence, and photographs, if available.
30
