Special Article Assessing Economic Impacts of Liberalizing WTO Sugar Tariff Rates and Minimum Access Commitments by the United States Stephen Haley 1 Abstract: The
U.S. sugar loan program supports prices of domestically produced sugar, and the sugar tariff-rate quota (TRQ) system helps support domestic sugar prices by restricting imports of sugar.U.S. commitments under international trade agreements, including the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), affect the level and allocation of the TRQs and also imports of high-tier tariff sugar outside the TRQ system.
Increased market access resulting from U.S. sugar trade liberalization would imply changes in the U.S. sugar program.
If the present loan rate program were to be retained, the loan rate would have to be reduced substantially in order to prevent large forfeitures to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Research suggests that a sugar loan rate of 14 cents a pound, 4 cents less than the current loan rate, would be necessary to prevent sugar forfeitures to the USDA if the U.S. WTO minimum access commitment were to increase 50 percent.
Keywords: Baseline, economic model, NAFTA, sugar, Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture, WTO.
The Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture (URAA), completed in 1994, was a first step in the process of global agricultural policy reform.
The URAA included a provision for a resumption of negotiations on agriculture by December 31, 1999.
Although the November 1999 World Trade Organization (WTO) Seattle conference did not successfully initiate a new round, agricultural negotiations began in March 2000.
These negotiations are being conducted as special sessions of the WTO Committee on Agriculture in Geneva, Switzerland.
This article analyzes the effects of possible changes in U.S. sugar policy resulting from upcoming trade liberalization negotiations.
Specifically, it examines the loosening of existing commitments made by the United States as part of the URAA.
These include a lowering of high-tier tariffs for U.S. sugar imports and an increase in the minimum import access commitments agreed to by the United States.
These actions are analyzed as possible outcomes of WTO negotiations.
The analysis is based on modifying key U.S. policy assumptions underlying the sugar baseline of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
The main components of the U.S. sugar program modeled in the baseline are the tariff-rate quota (TRQ) import system, price support loan program, and the Agricultural economist in the Market and Trade Economics Division, Economic Research Service, USDA.
1 sweetener provisions of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
The sugar loan rate program and the TRQ system help to support the domestic price of sugar, but their effectiveness has been challenged by provisions in the URAA and the NAFTA.
These elements are discussed below, and a theoretical structure for predicting outcomes of possible trade liberalization measures is developed.
The sugar baseline model is used to analyze a 50-percent increase in the WTO minimum access at various levels of price support from the sugar loan rate program.
It is also argued that reductions in the high-tier sugar tariff are unlikely to have any measurable effect on U.S. sugar imports.
U.S. Sugar Imports and the WTO In the URAA, the United States agreed to import a minimum quantity of raw and refined sugar of 1.256 million short tons, raw value (STRV) each marketing year (October/September).
Included in this amount is a commitment to import at least 24,251 STRV of refined sugar.
The raw cane sugar tariff-rate quota (TRQ) is allocated to 40 quota-holding countries based on a representative period (1975-81) when trade was relatively unrestricted.
A duty of 0.625 cent a pound, raw value, is applied to quota imports.
In the Harmonized Trade System, chapter 17 specifies the low-tier tariff at 1.46066 cents per kilogram less .0206686 cents per kilogram for each degree of polarization under 100 degrees.
12 n Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
Between 95 and 98 percent of the raw cane sugar TRQ fills each year, and the refined sugar TRQ is filled almost as soon as it opens.
The high-tier sugar tariff applies to sugar imports above the level of the sugar TRQ.
The Uruguay Round specified base rates for raw cane sugar of 18.08 cents a pound and for refined sugar of 19.08 cents a pound.
Starting in 1995, the rates were to be cut by 0.45 cent a pound each year for raw sugar and 0.48 cent a pound for refined sugar.
The yearly reductions were to take place until 2000, when the raw sugar high-tier tariff was to be 15.36 cents a pound and the refined sugar high-tier tariff rate was to be 16.21 cents a pound.
North American Free Trade Agreement Low-tier Tariff NAFTA Imports The NAFTA went into effect on January 1, 1994.
Although the original agreement contained provisions that related to trade in sugar, they were modified by the terms of a side letter in November 1993 that altered the sugar provisions of the original NAFTA text.
Although Mexico has since rejected the validity of the side-letter agreement, the United States maintains that the side letter provisions supersede those of the original NAFTA.
According to the NAFTA side letter, Mexican sugar low-tier tariff exports to the United States are restricted by Mexico's `net surplus production' of sugar.
The net surplus is defined as Mexico's production of sugar less its consumption of sugar and high fructose corn syrup.
From FY 2001 through 2007, Mexico is to have duty-free access to the U.S. market for the amount of its surplus as measured by the formula, up to a maximum of 250,000 metric tons, raw value (MTRV).
Beginning in FY 2008, Mexico is to have duty-free access with no quantitative limit.
Sugar Loan Rate Program and Minimum Prices To Avoid Forfeiture The 1996 Farm Act provides for the USDA to make loans available to processors of domestically grown sugarcane at a rate of 18 cents per pound and to processors of domestically grown sugarbeets at a rate of 22.9 cents per pound for refined beet sugar.
Although the 1996 Farm Act required that the sugar TRQ be established higher than 1.5 million STRV as a condition for nonrecourse loans to processors, the FY 2001 Agricultural Appropriations Act eliminated the TRQ trigger for nonrecourse loans and all references to recourse loans.
Loans are taken for a maximum term of 9 months and are repaid along with interest charges before September 30.
In order to forestall forfeiture, the sugar price must be high enough to cover the interest expenses.
Cane processors share interest expenses with their growers, but beet processors do not and must therefore recover the entire interest expense of loan repayment in their share of the sugar's selling price.
Cane processors incur transportation and distribution costs in moving sugar to the refiner and also face location discounts required by some refiners.
These additional costs must be included in the minimum price to avoid forfeiture calculation.
Because beet sugar is refined sugar requiring no further processing, the minimum price does not include transport adjustments.
However, because beet sugar is normally sold subject to a 2-percent cash discount, this amount must be added to arrive at the minimum price.
Also, the 1996 Farm Act required that processors who forfeit sugar pledged as collateral for a nonrecourse loan face a penalty of 1 cent a pound for raw cane sugar and 1.072 cents a pound for refined beet sugar.
Processors would have to consider these penalties when deciding whether to forfeit sugar to the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC).
For the sugar baseline, the minimum raw sugar market price to discourage forfeitures is calculated at 19.86 cents a pound, while the corresponding minimum refined beet sugar price is calculated at 24.78 cents a pound.
High-tier Tariff NAFTA Imports The NAFTA specifies a declining high-tier tariff schedule for raw and refined sugar over the transition period to dutyfree sugar trade in 2008.
For 2001, the raw sugar tariff is 10.58 cents a pound, and the refined sugar tariff is 11.21 cents a pound.
The raw sugar tariff drops about 1.5 cents each year, and the refined sugar tariff drops about 1.6 cents a year.
Both rates reach zero in FY 2008.
The U.S. Sugar Baseline: Theoretical Framework for Analysis Supply and Demand for U.S. Sugar The components of U.S. sugar supply are: (1) beginning stocks held by cane processors, cane refiners, and beet processors; (2) U.S. cane and beet sugar production; (3) the raw and refined sugar TRQ whose minimum allocation levels have been bound in the WTO; (4) duty-free sugar from Mexico whose maximum levels have been bound by the side letter agreement to the NAFTA through FY 2007; (5) imports of sugar syrups entering under HTS 1702.90.4000 from which the sugar is extracted; (6) high-tier tariff sugar; and (7) sugar imports entering under the Refined Sugar and Sugar-Containing Products Re-export Programs, and under the Polyhydric Alcohol Program.
Figure A-1 isolates several supply components important for analysis.
The U.S. price of sugar is measured on the vertical axis and sugar quantity on the horizontal.
Production represents the largest source of U.S. sugar supply.
It is shown as the right-most curve in the left panel.
Except in the low price range, the production curve is drawn as very inelastic, Economic Research Service/USDA Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
The upward shape of the production curve in the low price range allows for sugar prices that are sufficiently low such that producers' and/or processors' variable costs cannot be covered, and less sugar is produced through acreage abandonment or reduced factory activity.
The sugar TRQ and duty-free sugar from Mexico are shown as relatively inelastic curves defined above the world price.
Sugar syrup imports from which the sugar is recovered are shown as a price elastic curve.
Because the syrups are profitable to import only because of high domestic prices relative to world levels, the curve is defined only in the region of high domestic prices.
Sugar entering under the Re-export and Polyhydric Programs are omitted because they do not consistently affect domestic U.S. prices.
The U.S. sugar supply curve is shown in the right panel as the horizontal summation of the individual curves in the left panel.
Except at prices close to world levels, the supply curve is very inelastic, i.e., unresponsive in the short run to changes in same-period prices.
The supply curve is redrawn in the left panel of figure A-2, simplifying somewhat the contour by emphasizing the price-inelastic nature above the world price.
Added to the left panel in figure A-2 is a downward sloping demand curve.
This curve represents the aggregation of sugar demand by end users, including food processors, beverage industries, non-food sugar users, and non-industrial users.
Market for High-tier Tariff Imports The demand for high-tier tariff imports is shown in the right panel of figure A-2.
It is the excess of demand over supply at prices lower than the price associated with the intersection of the supply and demand curves in the left panel.
In figure A-3, excess supply of NAFTA sugar is shown in the middle panel, along with the U.S. excess demand for hightier tariff sugar.
The excess supply is perfectly elastic up to the point where all exportable NAFTA supply is being shipped to the U.S. market.
At that point, the curve becomes perfectly inelastic.
The elastic portion of the curve corresponds to the pricing threshold where it is more profitable for Mexico to ship sugar to the U.S. market rather than the world market.
The threshold is equal to the world price plus the NAFTA tariff, marketing costs, and price premiums.
Because the NAFTA tariff rate is declining each year until 2008, the curve is shifting downward.
With sufficiently high tariffs and/or high world prices, the excess supply and excess demand curves need not intersect.
In this case, there are no high-tier imports.
Over time, however, the curve shifts down as the tariff is reduced and the intersection becomes very likely.
The market for high-tier tariff world sugar is shown in the third panel of figure A-3.
World supply is perfectly elastic at Figure A-1 Supply of sugar in the United States Price of Sugar syrup sugar Duty-Free NAFTA TRQ Price of sugar U.S. Production U.S. sugar supply Pvcost Pmin Pworld Sugar supplied to the market Sugar supplied to the market 14 n Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
(It is assumed that the NAFTA tariff rate is always lower than or equal to the WTO tariff rate, and that marketing costs of shipping Mexican sugar to the U.S. market are low.)
The U.S. excess demand for world high-tier tariff sugar is derived from the differencing of NAFTA excess demand and excess supply.
In figure A-3, this excess demand is a perfectly elastic line positioned at the NAFTA threshold price.
Unless lower world marketing costs compensate for a WTO tariff rate higher than the NAFTA tariff rate (not likely), then there is no intersection of curves in the high-tier world sugar market and hence no high-tier imports are indicated.
Figure A-4 shows the case where the availability of NAFTA high-tier tariff imports is constrained.
With no high-tier tariff world imports, the U.S. price (Pus) is higher than the NAFTA threshold (Pthr).
The differencing of the excess demand and supply curves define an excess demand in the third panel which is downward sloping from Pus to Pthr, where it once again becomes perfectly elastic.
With a sufficiently low WTO tariff, it is possible for a perfectly elastic world excess supply curve to intersect excess demand within the downward sloping range, thus indicating imports of high-tier tariff sugar.
Figure A-5 shows the case of a U.S. price floor at Plr.
U.S. excess demand for NAFTA high-tier tariff sugar is downward sloping until Plr where it becomes perfectly elastic.
Unless the NAFTA excess supply curve intersects the excess demand along its downward sloping portion, U.S. excess demand for world high-tier tariff sugar is perfectly elastic at Plr.
Analysis of Reduction in WTO Tariff Rates Any cut in the WTO tariff rate would likely be made ineffective by the lower NAFTA tariff rate.
For raw sugar in 2001, the NAFTA tariff rate is 4.78 cents a pound lower than the corresponding WTO tariff.
The gap grows at the rate by which the NAFTA tariff rate declines, or 1.51 cents a pound per year until 2008 when the NAFTA tariff becomes zero (fig.
A-6).
For refined sugar in 2001, the NAFTA tariff rate is 5.00 cents a pound lower than the corresponding WTO tariff rate.
The gap grows each year by 1.6 cents a pound until 2008.
Entry of high-tier tariff sugar from third countries would be in addition to amounts that could be supplied from Mexico.
This situation would correspond to case B.
A lowering of the high-tier tariff could lead to emergent imports or an increase if NAFTA supplies were sufficiently constrained.
Any increase in imports would cause the U.S. price to fall to Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
In case C, world high-tier tariff imports could emerge if Pwto fell below Plr, but the U.S. price would fall no lower than Plr.
Analysis of Increase in WTO Minimum Access In figures A-3, A-4, and A-5, an increase in the WTO minimum access is represented as a rightward shift of the U.S. sugar supply curve in the left panel.
Because the middle panel's excess demand for high-tier tariff sugar is derived by differencing domestic demand and supply, there is less excess demand than formerly.
This reduced excess demand is shown as a leftward movement of the excess demand curve.
In case A, an increase in the minimum access reduces NAFTA high-tier tariff imports on a one-to-one basis, with no effect on sugar pricing.
However, if the minimum access increase were sufficiently large, NAFTA high-tier imports could be totally displaced, with the U.S. price falling below Pthr.
At that point, a higher return for NAFTA sugar would be in the world market rather than the U.S. market.
Case B has all of the NAFTA sugar surplus entering the U.S. market at a price higher than the threshold level.
The increase in minimum access reduces U.S. excess demand for high-tier tariff sugar.
The excess demand curves in both the middle and right panels shift down.
The initial effect is to lower the purchase price with no effect on the amount of NAFTA imports.
If there are high-tier tariff sugar imports from the world market, these imports decrease, potentially to zero.
If the increase in minimum access is sufficiently large, the purchase price can decrease to the NAFTA threshold level (Pthr) and NAFTA high-tier tariff imports may decrease.
Case C incorporates a price floor.
In the figure, an increase in minimum access shifts the middle panel's excess demand leftward.
High-tier tariff imports do not change, but the price falls to the floor level.
At the price floor, greater minimum access imports do not add to consumption because the price cannot fall in order to stimulate increased consumption.
Stocks withheld from the market accumulate, thus causing the government higher budget expense through processors' forfeiting sugar and storage payment expense.
Figure A-3 Case A--Unconstrained NAFTA supply at Pthr U.S. sugar market Market for high-tier NAFTA sugar Market for high-tier world sugar Supply (incl.
TRQ) Demand Excess NAFTA supply Pwto Pthr Pw Excess demand Pw Excess demand Pus = Pthr Pthr = Pw + T_nafta Pwto = Pw + T_mfn T_mfn 
TRQ) Demand Excess NAFTA supply Pus Pthr Pw Excess demand Pwto Pw Pus 
The U.S. Sugar Baseline: Modeling Framework The USDA releases its U.S. sugar baseline projections at the Agricultural Outlook Forum in February.
Baseline projections are a conditional scenario based on specific assumptions about macroeconomics, agricultural policy, weather, and international developments.
All commodity baselines incorporate provisions of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (1996 Farm Act) and assume that its provisions remain in effect throughout the projections period.
Additionally, the U.S. sugar baseline incorporates the provisions of the URAA and the NAFTA.
The USDA sugar baseline model currently projects supply, use, and prices out through 2011.
The production sector includes sugarcane producing areas of Florida, Louisiana, Texas, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico.
The sugarbeet producing areas include the Great Lakes region (Michigan and Ohio), the Red River Valley (Minnesota and eastern North Dakota), the Upper Great Plains (Montana, northwestern Wyoming, and western North Dakota), the Central Great Plains (Colorado, Nebraska, southeastern Wyoming), the Northwest (Idaho, Washington State, eastern Oregon), and the Far West (California, central Oregon).
Acreage allocation decisions are modeled as functions of grower prices relative to alternative crop prices.3 Crop yield projections are based on observed trends.
Regional sugar yield per-acre projections are based on econometric analysis of the relationship between sugar yields and crop yield developments and yearly trend improvements that capture technical improvements in each of the regions.
Sugar production differs from other field crops in that it requires extensive processing to be put in a form that is marketable.
Unless processing facilities are close to cropping acreage, it is uneconomical to grow sugar crops.
In the baseline model, adjustments to processing capacity are a function of the margin between predicted sugar prices and the 3 See `Calculation of Real Price Indices for U.S. Sugar Crops,' in Sugar and Sweetener Situation and Outlook.
SSS-229, Sept. 2000.
Economic Research Service/USDA Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
TRQ) Demand Excess NAFTA supply Excess world supply Market for high-tier NAFTA sugar Market for high-tier world sugar Pwto Excess demand Plr Excess demand Pthr Pw Pw Pus = Pir 
Within a producing region, it is assumed that there is a normal distribution of costs about point estimates reported by the USDA.4 If the margin drops to zero, the modeling specification indicates the exit of one-half of processing capacity from that region.
It is further assumed that capacity reductions are irreversible; that is, there is a very high cost of reopening closed facilities.
Sweetener demand is composed of end-use demands by the beverage and food processing industries, by non-food demanders, and by households or non-industrial users.
Commodity coverage includes not only sugar but also high fructose corn syrup (HFCS).
In recognition of the importance of NAFTA, the USDA sugar baseline model includes a Mexican sweetener component.
Particular attention is placed 4 Source: U.S. Consums Service.
See www.ers.usda.gov/farmincome/ for costs of processing for cane and beet sugar.
18 n Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
2/ NAFTA threshold price = world price + high-tier NAFTA tariff + marketing margins; also: WTO threshold price = world price + high-tier WTO tariff + marketing margins.
Increase in level of minimum WTO access U.S. price High-tier NAFTA impor ts High-tier world impor ts U.S. price High-tier world impor ts none zero impor ts, regardless none reduction on oneto-one basis zero impor ts, regardless none decreases if potential decrease decrease, potentially to zero decrease, potentially to NAFTA threshold there is increase if U.S. price in high-tier world falls to NAFTA impor ts threshold price none none none none (although there would be a decrease if initial U.S. price were above floor) on modeling how much exportable sugar surplus Mexico possesses throughout the projections period.
Substitution trade-offs in Mexico between sugar and HFCS are of particular modeling concern because of the potential of HFCS to displace sugar, especially in beverage end-uses.
Scenario Analysis Analyzing the effect of increasing sugar import minimum access commitments by the United States involves crafting of scenarios that differ from the published baseline.
A thesis explored in the theoretical section of this paper is that sugar policy developments are interrelated.
Increased market access would have to be fitted with NAFTA provisions and the sugar loan rate program.
Although Mexico and the United States differ in the interpretation of the NAFTA sideletter modification to the original agreement, it is clear that the sugar sectors of both countries are moving toward becoming unified.
Also, if policymakers decide to retain the current structure of the U.S. sugar loan rate program, increased minimum access will likely increase the probability of loan forfeitures to the CCC at the current loan rate of 18 cents a pound for raw cane sugar.
This suggests an analysis of increased minimum access commitments in the context of alternative loan rates.
There are six scenarios selected for analysis (table A-2).
The base assumes the current loan rate of 18 cents a pound and minimum access close to the URAA commitment level.
The alternative to the current level of minimum access is a 50percent increase.
Two other loan rate levels are considered as alternatives: 16 cents a pound (2-cent reduction), and 14 cents a pound (4-cent reduction).
The Base Scenario Table A-3 shows scenario results for selected variables.
In the base scenario, the raw sugar price drops to the minimum Table A-2--Modeling Scenarios: Alternatives to the U.S. sugar baseline Name Raw sugar loan rate Cents/pound Minimum access commitment 1,000 shor t tons, raw value 1,256 1,884 1,256 1,884 1,256 1,884 Base LR18TL50 LR16TL00 LR16TL50 LR14TL00 LR14TL50 Source: Economic Research Ser vice.
18 18 16 16 14 14 Economic Research Service/USDA Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
lr18tl50 - loan rate = 18 cents/lb lr16tl00 - loan rate = 16 cents/lb lr16tl50 - loan rate = 16 cents/lb lr14tl00 - loan rate = 14 cents/lb lr14tl50 - loan rate = 14 cents/lb and total expor ts, 2008-11 (1,000 STRV) 784 821 853 1,152 784 821 853 1,152 584 821 853 1,152 0 821 853 1,152 584 821 853 1,152 0 192 853 1,152 and and and and and WTO WTO WTO WTO WTO minimum minimum minimum minimum minimum access access access access access increased by 50 percent.
at bound level.
increased by 50 percent.
at bound level.
increased by 50 percent.
Source: Economic Research Service, USDA.
20 n Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
In 2004, the raw sugar high-tier NAFTA tariff rate will be 6.04 cents a pound.
If the world price is 10 cents a pound, then the price at which Mexico would find it attractive to ship exportable supplies of sugar into the U.S. market (the `threshold price') would be 19.50 cents a pound.
(This assumes a marketing cost of 1.1 cents a pound, a desired price premium of 1.36 cents a pound, and a 1-cent-a-pound discount from the No. 14 New York contract for delivery into Louisiana.)
Because the threshold is below the minimum price to avoid forfeitures (19.86 cents a pound), all exportable sugar from Mexico (744,000 STRV) would find its way into the U.S. market because forfeitures to the CCC would act to keep raw sugar prices at the minimum level.
Government-owned stocks increase by 321,000 STRV in 2004 and continue to accumulate.
The ending stocks-to-use ratio increases to 37.9 percent in 2011.
Because of downward price protection for U.S. sugar producers from the non-recourse loan program, the level of production remains steady throughout the projections period.5 tion.
The ending stocks-to-use ratio reaches 79.8 percent in 2011.
The initial effect in 2004 when the loan rate is 16 cents a pound is to decrease the U.S. raw sugar price to 18.95 cents a pound.
Because this price is below the NAFTA threshold price of 19.50 cents a pound, there are no high-tier imports from Mexico; thus increased minimum access imports are initially partially offset.
In 2005, however, the reduction in the NAFTA high-tier tariff causes the U.S. price to reach the new threshold level of 17.99 cents a pound.
Notwithstanding, NAFTA imports are still lower than the base by 638,000 STRV.
In 2006, the reduction in the NAFTA high-tier tariff drives the U.S. price to the minimum price to avoid forfeiture at 17.86 cents a pound.
Because the NAFTA threshold price is 16.48 cents a pound (i.e., lower than the minimum price by 1.38 cents), all of Mexico's exportable surplus reaches the U.S. market, and CCC-owned inventories start to accumulate.
By 2011, CCC-owned inventory is projected at 2.439 million STRV.
Although high, it is still 849,000 STRV less than the base level.
In 2011, production is 485,000 STRV less than the base.
The ending stocks-to-use ratio equals 34.9 percent.
Increasing minimum access imports when the loan rate has been lowered to 14 cents a pound produces a pattern similar to the 16 cents loan rate scenario for the first 2 years.
The raw sugar price in 2004 is above the NAFTA threshold (hence, no high-tier tariff imports), and in 2005 the price is at the 17.99 cents a pound threshold level (NAFTA high-tier imports equal 146,000 STRV in both loan rate scenarios).
In 2006, the price drops by the amount of the NAFTA hightier tariff reduction to 16.48 cents a pound, whereas in the 16 cents loan rate scenario it could not fall below the 17.86 cents a pound price floor.
Imports are 137,000 STRV less, compared with the 16 cents loan rate scenario; and, more markedly, U.S. sugar production in 2007 is 887,000 STRV less.
In contrast to higher loan rate scenarios, the lower, unbreached price floor associated with the 14 cents a pound loan rate implies a greater reduction in cane and beet sugar processing capacity.
Capacity reductions of 7 percentage points for beet sugar processing and 11 percentage points for cane sugar milling represent a permanent reduction in the ability to produce domestic sugar.
Compared with the base in 2007, production is 1.325 million STRV less--split between 486,000 STRV of beet sugar and 840,000 STRV of cane sugar.
A chief consequence of lower domestic production is an increase in those prices after the bottoming out in 2006.
Increasing prices are a result of a TRQ system still placing an upper constraint on third-country imports and a limited Mexican exportable surplus.
Increased sugar prices imply a higher real return for growing sugarcane and sugarbeets.
Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
Significant high-tier imports from Mexico commence in 2004, and the U.S. price decreases to the 19.50 cents a pound threshold level.
Because the minimum price to avoid forfeiture is lower than the threshold (17.86 cents a pound for a 16-cent loan rate, and 15.86 cents a pound for a 14-cent loan rate), not all of Mexico's exportable surplus is attracted into the U.S. market, as was the case in the base.
With greater downward price flexibility, U.S. sugar production decreases as more sugar from Mexico enters.
In 2005, production is 86,000 STRV less than the base; and in 2006, production is 382,000 STRV less than the base.
Cumulative reductions in production avoid pricing outcomes where the new minimum price levels to avoid forfeiture to the CCC are reached.
As a result, CCC-owned stocks do not grow as in the base.
In 2011, the U.S. raw sugar price is projected at about 20 cents a pound.
Increasing Minimum Access Import Commitments The effect of increasing minimum access imports depends on the loan rate level.
The primary effect when the loan rate is 18 cents is to increase CCC-owned stocks on a one-to-one basis.
The minimum price of 19.86 cents a pound is reached in 2004 even in the base with no increase in minimum access imports.
The high price floor prevents offsetting reductions in either NAFTA imports or in domestic produc- 5 It is assumed that CCC-owned sugar inventories do not affect sugar pricing.
Economic Research Service/USDA Sugar crop acreage increases and sugar to grow 2.5 percent relative to 2007 (or 2011.
The ending stocks-to-use ratio in 14.3 percent, and the raw sugar price is cents a pound.
production manages 189,000 STRV) by 2011 is projected at projected at 21.3 would be necessary to prevent sugar forfeitures to the CCC if the U.S. minimum access sugar import commitment were to increase 50 percent.
The narrowing of the margin between the U.S. and world prices may limit high-tier tariff imports from Mexico and put pressure on high-cost quota suppliers.
To make the sugar TRQ viable, the current system of allocating shares based on historical trade patterns would likely have to be modified, eliminating countries for whom the world-U.S. price margins are no longer sufficiently wide to make exports viable.
A larger portion of U.S. supplies would be sourced from low cost producers such as Brazil and Australia, as well as Mexico.
Conclusion Increased market access resulting from U.S. sugar trade liberalization would imply changes in the U.S. sugar program.
If the present loan rate program were to be retained, the loan rate would have to be reduced substantially in order to prevent large forfeitures to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Baseline analysis suggests that a sugar loan rate of 14 cents a pound, 4 cents less than the current loan rate, 22 n Sugar and Sweetener Situation 
