Nongame Working Group 2nd Draft Strategic Plan 20 August 2001 Group Members Peter Bente, Herman Griese (co-chair), Grant Hildebrand, Rich Lowell, Tom Rothe, Gay Sheffield, Jack Whitman, and John Wright (co-chair) Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The Nongame Working Group identified 8 major goals to expand and enhance the Wildlife Diversity (Nongame) Program and the Division of Wildlife Conservation: · Increase public ownership and support through broad public involvement; · Establish a diverse and stable source of funding (esp. matching funds for CARA); · Provide for a wide range of public uses of nongame wildlife, as long as those uses are not detrimental to wildlife populations or their habitats; · Establish a strong base of political support for nongame wildlife programs; · Collaborate with other agencies and organizations to maximize the effectiveness and efficiency of nongame research and management; · Gather basic inventory, monitoring and life history data needed for early detection of declines and to maintain sustainable populations of wildlife and their biological communities; · Protect wildlife populations and their habitats from significant losses in abundance and distribution due to development and other human activities; · Develop integrated community research and management programs.
IAFWA's model for enhanced wildlife programs was recognized as an excellent functional framework for development of a wildlife diversity program.
Recommended for the first wave of implementation of a new/expanded Wildlife Diversity Program are 1.
Find out what products and services the public wants 2.
Involve the public, and internal and external stakeholders in planning the wildlife diversity program 3.
Prepare a public report on the current status and future opportunities of the Alaska Wildlife Diversity Program 4.
Evaluate networking and partnership options available to jumpstart the program 5.
Develop and implement a public and legislative outreach strategy 6.
Hire a Wildlife Diversity Program coordinator 7.
Contract/hire a `matching funds' coordinator 8.
Contract for planning and human dimensions expertise to accomplish #1 and 2 above 9.
Pick 2-4 high profile projects across the state to implement right away (e.g., Neotropical migrants in the Boreal forest; identifying Important Bird Areas; support shorebird festivals; small mammal, marine mammal, or amphibian project) 10.
Hire GIS expertise to develop data management system in anticipation of inventory and monitoring program.
The Working Group recommends that as new programs are initiated, their responsibilities should be integrated with existing programs -- so that wildlife work, be it "game" or "nongame", is done as much as possible by all staff.
Recognizing that current staff are already overworked, new hires are needed to share existing and new work.
Expertise in program development and organization is needed to assist in design of the "new, integrated division".
As additional funding becomes available, we suggest that the functions of a full Wildlife Diversity Program will require significant staffing (35-50 new positions), including positions distributed throughout the State.
Progressive, dynamic planning will be required as this large program develops and integrates all wildlife programs as completely as possible; with sensitivity to traditional customers, and work loads of existing staff.
2
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Table of Contents Composition of Group .................................................................................................
3 Review of Public Interest Scoping Session, June 27, 2001 ........................................
3 Development of Stategic Issues ......................................................................................
4 Review of IAFWA Functional Model, Program Functions ............................................
4 Refinement of Strategic Issues, Problems, Goals, and Action Items ..............................
5 Specific Projects:...............................................................................................................
10 Prioritization of Action Items ............................................................................................
14 Integration of New Program within DWC ....................................................................
14 Discussion of Scale and Organization of Wildlife Diversity Program .........................
15 Conclusions and Recommendations..................................................................................
16 Pacific seals populations ........................................................................................
18 Audubon, Regional and local chapters ......................................................................
19
Composition of Group The Nongame Working Group was composed of 3 area biologists, 1 regional management biologist, 2 biologists from statewide programs (marine mammals and waterfowl), 1 research biologist, and 1 nongame biologist/refuge coordinator.
All regions were represented, 2 from Region 1, 3 from Region II (including 1 statewide position stationed in Anchorage), 2 from Region III (including 1 statewide position stationed in Fairbanks), and 1 from Region V.
Two DMT members participated, both regional supervisors.
The weeklong session was facilitated by Mike Fraidenburg of DSG, and a computer record was kept by Margo Matthews.
Process Used The group was presented with a charter, and took its charge directly from the charter: 1.
To identify and prioritize needs and resources relative to accomplishing nongame research and management; 2.
Outline strategies for providing them; and 3.
Estimate human and monetary costs associated with providing them.
The facilitator suggested a top-down approach like that recommended for all of the planning groups, starting with identification of problems/issues, proceeding to goal statements, and finishing with action items.
Shortly into this process the group desired something more concrete, so specific projects/actions were brainstormed to provide examples of end products.
For the next 4 days, the group followed an erratic path.
Record of that path is found in the "Notes on Nongame Work Session" (available on request).
Review of Public Interest Scoping Session, June 27, 2001 The group felt that the recent public scoping effort focussed little attention on nongame issues, and provided little guidance.
Habitat conservation in general was strongly supported, as was use of traditional knowledge.
Predator control, subsistence and access issues dominated the sessions.
3
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
More human dimension work is needed to assess expectations and desires regarding a nongame program.
Development of Stategic Issues The group brainstormed 21 specific issues and needs, and developed potential strategies to address them [additional needs were added during the session, see Appendix A.].
These strategic issues were consolidated from the list of needs/issues following the lead of the facilitator: · Baseline information gaps · Public demand for access to decision making · Customer diversity, increasing demand for nongame information and use · Funding diversity and stability · Resource development, habitat loss or alteration, disturbance, contaminants, bycatch · DWC program orientation, single species, community analysis, scope (plants, invertebrates, non-game fish, amphibians, birds, small mammals, marine mammals) · Collaboration in data/knowledge collection · Climate change.
Review of IAFWA Functional Model, Program Functions The group reviewed the IAFWA model and considered the following list of program functions taken directly from the model:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
Mission Authorities Planning Strategies for collaboration Information management Inventory and monitoring Research Natural resource management and protection Recreation Public outreach Education Law enforcement Training and human resources 14.
Promotion, marketing and public relations.
Initially, the group assumed that #s 4-8 were most applicable to our needs, but by the end of the week realized that the entire process, #s1-14, is essential to properly develop and gain public support for a complete program.
4
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Refinement of Strategic Issues, Problems, Goals, and Action Items Over the next 2 days, the strategic issues were refined and then filled out with problem statements, goals and action items.
In the anticipated order of implementation:
Strategic Issue #1 ­ Public Involvement Problem: ­ Inadequate public involvement in planning and implementation of wildlife diversity programs creates problems with eroded agency credibility, inefficiencies in policy making, diverts staff, and erodes political support resulting in lack of funding.
Goal: Increase public ownership and support of the wildlife diversity program.
Objective 1: Incorporate human dimensions data in planning design and implementation phase of wildlife diversity program.
Action Item a: Establish human dimension mechanism for assessing customer values, needs and expectations of wildlife diversity program goals, objectives, actions and accomplishments.
Action Item b: Ensure that human dimensions addresses the full spectrum of customers.
Objective 2: Involve public in collaboration in all phases of wildlife diversity program.
Action Item a: Inform and involve through workshops, meetings, surveys and questionnaires (human dimensions).
Action Item b: Take Advisory Committee approach/focus group involvement in challenges to identify solutions in strategic and program design.
Objective 3: Establish a comprehensive public outreach program that highlights the wildlife diversity program by end of second year.
Action Item a: Increase staff ability to use public involvement.
Action Item b: Establish and recognize volunteer programs.
Action Item c: Report accomplishments widely in a timely manner.
Action Item d: Focus outreach efforts on important challenges.
Action Item e: Incorporate methods to evaluate outreach effectiveness.
5
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Objective 4: Adopt strong promotional, marketing and public relations programs by end of the first year of the wildlife diversity program.
Action Item a: Ensure agency-wide buy-in of program.
Action Item b: Use professional marketing expertise and all available tools to inform public (customers) of need for and benefits of a wildlife diversity program.
Action Item c: Assess public interest and develop programs and materials to meet customer demands.
Objective 5: Integrate wildlife diversity program education in Division's education program.
(referral to Education Work Group) Action Item a: Project Wildlife ­ curriculum-based approach.
Action Item b: Workshops/clinics.
Action Item c: Multi-media tools ­ magazines, TV, radio, web site, etc.
Strategic Issue #2 ­ Funding Diversity and Stability Problem: DWC does not have adequate matching or stable funding for a viable Wildlife Diversity Program Goal: Solicit and develop expertise to acquire funding Action Items: · Build an agency-wide (in-house) expertise necessary to take advantage of existing grants or opportunities such as grant writing · Establish procedures/hire personnel for soliciting and reviewing proposals, contract/grant development and administration, and ensuring contractor/grantee compliance in meeting their obligations · Establish a procedure for soliciting grants, grant administration, and compliance · Re-address the need for an Administrative Support group in the strategic planning process · Look toward turning some threats into $$ for CARA matching Sources etc.: · Increased human use pressures (expansion, growing tourism) · Tourist tax/tourism management that includes acquiring funding to support a Wildlife Diversity Program · Resource development (oil/gas/coal/urbanization/wildlife for viewing)... solicit funds...tax? · Register and charge Wildlife Watching Guides (especially the high volume guides like Princess, Gray Line etc.)
6
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
· · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Cooperative funding Co-management funding Federal funding Collaboration with Federal/State agencies, Citizen committees, and conservation and Native groups Lack of Public (urban and rural) access/involvement to our processes [or Voluntary Public Funding Initiatives] (no decision recorded on which) Assess the public interest and develop a method to solicit contributions Establish a wildlife stamp/tax type program Assess feasibility or initiate a process for PFD check-off contributions Develop a national constituency for funding Develop and market and sell for cash what we currently give away.
Develop and market nature-based tourism materials i.e. magazine, books, guidebooks, checklists, movies/videos Training/courses/workshops ­ BOW program, trapping Auction a few Permits to some of the State's premier wildlife viewing i.e. McNeil River Inform, educate, and guide user groups toward common shared viewpoints.
Thereby 1) changing our "limited POV" image and 2) creating a more cohesive group from which to solicit funds to establish/continue diverse management.
Inform and guide Congress/interest groups re. Funding for diverse wildlife uses and the unique practices of Alaskans
·
·
Strategic Issue #3 ­ Increasing Customer Diversity Problem: Increasing Customer Diversity creates two problems for DWC: 1) Increasing demands for nongame products and services we presently do not provide, and 2) increasing need to minimize conflict between user groups.
Goal: DWC will provide for uses of nongame resources that do not adversely impact these resources for the greatest number of Alaskans.
Action Items: · Planning for Wildlife Diversity ­ The DWC must determine public expectations and desire for nongame products and services.
Appropriate customer assessment tools should be used as soon as possible.
The results of this effort will also provide insight into potential conflicts.
· Outreach and Information and Education ­ The DWC must determine what scope of public services and education identified by those two respective strategic working groups address the expectations and desires identified in the customer 7
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
·
·
·
·
assessment project.
A significant component of public education should be designed to address potential user conflict issues.
Data Management and GIS Consolidation (Form a data management group with GIS capability).
For analysis of population status and program planning, and to support education and services, establish and future expansion of the nongame program will increase data management needs, including GIS components.
Commensurate with growth of this new program, appropriate and adequate expansion of the IM function must be provided either in the IM office or as wellintegrated components of the IM office.
Roles of DWC and Habitat Division (Reexamine and clearly define roles of DWC and Habitat Division program review (audit)).
The implementation of a nongame program will include an emphasis on ecological community-level work including a focus on habitat.
The DWC will need to reexamine its role relative to the role of the Division of Habitat to identify potential inter-divisional conflicts and opportunities for collaboration to ensure overall coordination.
Habitat Acquisition and Enhancement.
Habitat acquisition and enhancement are likely to become important components of the nongame program in terms of wildlife viewing as well as other services expected and desired by the public.
This function should be built into the budgeting process.
Develop Strategies for Tourism Management Based on Sound Research/Data Collection.
Two key aspects of "tourist management" will be 1) providing products and services to enhance the quality of the tourism experience, which in some cases may result in an expansion of tourism, and 2) conducting management and research projects to ensure that tourism does not negatively impact nongame resources, which in some cases may result in a contraction of tourism
Strategic Issue #4 ­ DWC requires more political support to fully implement nongame management and research.
Problem: Without support, or at least tacit consent from politicians the program may not succeed Goal: Establish strong base of support, and grudging consent from detractors.
Actions: · Develop strong base among supporters.
· Work to gain informed consent to assure progam is not torpedoed Strategic Issue #5 ­ Collaboration in Data Collection/Knowledge Problem: Many agencies, organizations and individuals are involved in various projects relating to nongame.
Without coordination, there is potential for much overlap and wasted effort, and gaps.
8
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Goal: Participate in organizing collaborative research and management programs to maximize effectiveness and efficiency (both internally and externally).
Action Items: · Opportunities for partnerships, outside funding, and general overall coordination with external entities should be a way of doing business incorporated at all levels of the nongame program.
See example of groups identified as collaborators in Strategic Issue #6.
· Nongame project leaders should have the freedom to enter formal agreements with external entities to share data collected under joint project agreements.
· Entering into partnerships should include the ability for DWC to provide limited administrative support to the partners.
· Project proposals for which external funding has already been identified should receive special consideration when setting priorities for internal funding.
· Integrate ADFG "game" and "nongame" programs and projects as much as possible.
Strategic Issue #6 ­ Baseline Information Gaps are Routine Problem: Basic Inventory and monitoring information required for determining the status and risk of populations is inadequate for the majority of Alaska's wildlife and habitat.
Goal: To obtain necessary distribution, abundance, trend, habitat, and natural history information on wildlife, plants, and natural communities to maintain sustainable populations and communities.
Action Items: · From the broad community or ecosystems view, establish a GIS-based data system for nongame wildlife and habitat, while incorporating existing data sets into one accessible location.
A gap analysis of these programs from the ecosystems approach will identify species or groups which need further investigation for understanding biotic communities.
· Develop effective and efficient methods, and set statistically sound standards and guidelines.
· Inventory and develop monitoring programs on lands important for nongame wildlife.
· Collaborate in development and implementation of standard protocols for state- or continent-wide atlas and monitoring programs for native plants, invertebrates, amphibians (especially wood frogs), and reptiles (PARC), small mammals (?any coordinating organizations?), loons (Alaska Loon Working Group), raptors (Alaska Raptor Working Group), shorebirds (NASCP), seabirds and marsh birds (NAWCP), birds including neotropical migrants and other landbirds (PIF), birds
9
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
· · · · · · · · ·
in general (NABCI and NAWMP), bats (NABCP), northern (ice) seals, walrus, polar bears, and other marine mammals.
When necessary and feasible, inventory and monitor species groups, such as colonial seabirds, shorebirds, passerines, small mammals, and natural communities through coordinated, broad-scale efforts.
Emphasize volunteer participation in programs such as BBS, CBC, atlases, feeder counts, urban migration banding stations, and "citizen science" programs.
Inventory concentration areas and key land features such as wetlands, unique and/or natural communities, caves, etc.
Develop strong partnership with the Natural Heritage Program, UAF Museum, and others to collaborate on integration of data.
Establish GIS-based data system for nongame wildlife and habitat.
Identify and incorporate existing data sets into one accessible location.
Gap analysis of these programs vs. what we know (cross-reference to list of species and groups of immediate concern; see "Activities" section below).
Risk analysis of species or groups of immediate concern.
Evaluate existing community assessments.
Specific Projects: 1.
The current distribution and population status of northern spotted frogs, roughskinned newts, and boreal toads is not well understood.
Alaska's NG program will become an active partner and take the lead in establishing a working group of the national Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation program.
Initially, efforts will focus on establishing survey routes, collating occurrence data, and providing record-keeping protocols and a repository for information.
2.
Globally, amphibians have been recognized as indicators of environmental contaminants or climate change, and protocols have been established for various species in an effort to monitor rate and extent of deformities and population declines.
Alaska currently lacks any organized effort to monitor amphibians.
The NG program will establish a wood frog monitoring program in an effort to obtain baseline data on distribution and current status, and may indicate areas where subpopulations may have deformed individuals.
Partnerships with other agencies, schools, or other interested parties should be established.
3.
A paucity of data currently exists on land bird distribution and abundance in Alaska.
Increased NG Program participation in the Partners in Flight Program, breeding bird surveys, feeder station surveys, and Christmas bird counts throughout the state will be developed.
Increased efforts will be made to measure impacts of land use practices on identified high priority species.
4.
Small mammal populations (including, but not limited to, microtines, soricids, and northern flying squirrels) should be monitored.
The NG Program will partner with the UAF museum and major landowners to expand statewide monitoring.
10
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
5.
Because of their position at the apex of the food chain and value as indicator species, the NG Program should seek to implement a statewide raptor management plan.
Inventory and monitoring programs should be established for those species capable of serving as indicators of community health.
The distribution and abundance of several raptor species (including owls) is not well documented in Alaska.
6.
The State NG Program will participate in developing a statewide and national program for monitoring shorebirds, and will partner with the Alaska Shorebird Working Group.
Identified species of special concern or status will receive additional effort.
7.
The State NG Program will participate in the US Waterbird program to evaluate current status and trends in sea birds and marshbirds.
8.
The State NG Program will take the lead in forming protocols for participation in the Oceans Initiative program to gather population information and status of northern seals (bearded, ringed, spotted, ribbon), walrus, polar bears, and cetaceans.
The needs of subsistence users of marine mammals will be addressed such as harvest levels, as well as the health and status of utilized marine mammal populations.
9.
The distribution, abundance and general ecology of bat species has not been well documented in Alaska.
Recommended actions for the NG Program include the initiation of a basic monitoring program in the SE region, research on urbanization and pest control in Southcentral, and the development of a statewide conservation strategy.
Partnerships should be established with other organizations interested in bat ecology, conservation and management 10.
For loons, the state NG Program will maintain its leadership in Loon Watch and cooperate in the US Waterbird Program and adopt its protocols for monitoring.
11.
For great blue herons, the state NG Program will be a cooperator in the US Waterbird Program and adopt its protocols for monitoring.
12.
Non-commercial fish and marine invertebrates in Northern Alaska are an important component of the ecosystem in terms of forage species for certain marine mammals.
The state NG Program will formulate a monitoring program for arctic cod (because of its importance as a bio-indicator species) 13.
Polar Bear viewing guidelines will be formulated and disseminated by the State NG. 14.
A comprehensive management plan for the Walrus Islands State Game Sanctuary will be written.
15.
Pioneer species (including mountain lions and fishers in SE Alaska) need a management plan, which will be produced by the NG Program.
11
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
16.
Status of populations of sea lions and North Pacific seals will be investigated by the State NG Program.
Conflicts with commercial fishing interests will need resolution, as well as with subsistence users of the resource.
17.
Currently, it is unclear what conservation entity has jurisdiction over terrestrial invertebrates.
Because of their larger role in ecosystems, the state NG program will initiate monitoring and status projects to better understand this group.
18.
Baseline information on terrestrial plants will be gathered by the State NG Program in relation to climate change and development pressures.
Strategic Issue #7 ­ Development and Other Human Activities Issue: Nongame wildlife and their habitats are impacted by development, resources extraction and other human activities.
Goal: Protect nongame wildlife populations and their habitats from significant declines in abundance and distribution due to development and other human activities.
Action Items: Objective 1 ­ Ensure consideration of nongame species in Habitat Division and other agency and organization's land use plans.
· Develop GIS capability to monitor and conserve habitats of species of concern, rare habitats, species concentration areas, and to maintain adequate habitats of each type by region.
· Use GIS in collaboration with Habitat Division and others to review land use proposals and minimize impacts.
· Use a variety of habitat protection tools, such as conservation easements, stewardship programs, landowner incentives, to conserve habitats.
· Develop and implement management guidelines in collaboration with Habitat Division and others (following research).
(E.g., best management practices for foresters.)
· Evaluate the effectiveness of environmental review and mitigation/management guideline compliance, regulatory authority.
Objective 2 ­ Research suspected impacts and develop management guidelines.
· Research impacts on nongame wildlife and their habitats of: a) Resource extraction activities such as logging, mining, oil and gas, and gravel, b) Developments, such as construction of roads, transmission lines, urban and suburban sprawl, (transportation corridors), c) Other human activities, such as high-speed ferries, tourism, outdoor recreation (e.g., large cetaceans), d) Commercial fisheries, especially on sea birds and marine mammals,
12
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
and develop management guidelines to minimize or mitigate impacts.
Objective 3 ­ Monitor nongame populations and habitats (abundance and distribution) to detect declining trends.
· Monitor levels of contaminants in key species such as raptors, seabirds, marine mammals, amphibians.
· Monitor indicator species in areas of concern.
Objective 4 ­ Public outreach to minimize impacts (develop and implement) · Programs for industries (e.g. logging, oil and gas, mining) · Public impacts on birds and small mammals by cats and other domestic pets.
· Public on backyard wildlife, etc., to mitigate loss of habitat to sprawl.
Strategic Issue #8 ­ Integrated Community Research and Management Issue: Without incorporating wildlife diversity species in integrated community research and management, DWC cannot understand system processes, and cannot anticipate and avert population declines.
Goal: DWC should develop integrated community research and management for nongame species.
Action Items: · Develop process to select the natural communities and habitats to be studied (likely by risk, presence of species of concern, etc.)
· Coordinate studies of natural communities/habitats of concern drawing on experts and outside partners.
· Develop predictive models of natural communities/habitats for use in anticipating tends in populations of concern and identifying other declining populations.
· Use community models to select indicator species for monitoring on a broad geographic scale.
· Incorporate and emphasize nongame wildlife, invertebrates, plants, noncommercial/sport fish, marine mammals, game, waterfowl, in integrated community studies.
· Coordinate expertise by partner, collaborate, contact/grant/graduate student, cooperative agreements
13
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Prioritization of Action Items The group identified 10 action items for the first wave of implementation of CARA Litefunded programs.
These actions should be initiated within one year.
1.
Find out what products and services the public wants from a nongame program.
2.
Involve the public, internal and external stakeholders in planning the wildlife diversity program.
3.
Prepare a white paper on status and opportunities in an Alaskan wildlife diversity program.
4.
Evaluate network and partnership options available to us.
5.
Develop a public and legislative outreach strategy (e.g., by publishing a newsletter, TV, radio, web site, e-mail, etc.) and implement it.
6.
Hire/appoint a wildlife diversity program coordinator (oriented to program development) 7.
Hire/appoint a matching fund coordinator.
8.
Contract for planning and human dimensions expertise to accomplish #1 and #2.
9.
Pick 2-4 high-profile projects across the state to implement right away (e.g., neotropical migrants in the Boreal forest; identifying important bird areas; shore bird festivals; small mammals, marine mammals, amphibians).
10.
Hire GIS expertise for wildlife diversity program, to establish foundation for data collection and management.
Integration of New Program within DWC Integration of the Wildlife Diversity Program with existing programs is vitally important.
The group suggests a blended hierarchy, definitely not a specialized, parallel program.
Expertise in organizational planning and development is needed.
Issues to Consider in Development of New Program · · · · · We're going to have to have new positions ­ AB's can't handle new work on top of all their existing workload.
Support staff needs will also need to be provided for.
Can't add too much new supervisory load to AB's or coordinators, either, so may need to consider supervising new positions by region, statewide or hybrid idea.
There is synergy from having staff together in one office rather than spread out in area offices.
Find a way to make the program functions and area office functions intersect.
Decision making reconciliation process between regions and programs (negotiation process).
There is a negotiation process between the Regional
14
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
· · · · · · · · · · ·
Supervisors and Statewide Program Coordinators to determine what projects and work will get done.
Don't force any single organizational model on every region.
Need to avoid multiple supervisors for any employee.
It would be nice to avoid increasing the number of "middle managers", but it may not be possible.
Don't want to create hard feelings in the Division ­ want to encourage team work.
Could hire for functional skills or generalists rather than for game or nongame biologist skills.
New nongame biologist staff can't be overshadowed by traditional game biologist duties.
Must provide the existing AB with some benefit to make the integration occur smoothly.
Most AB's would be opposed to having a separate nongame staff.
Important to have equal priorities for game and nongame functions in each region.
Integration is a complex issue and we can't address it ourselves.
May need additional information and expertise before it can be answered.
There may be an optimal size for a region ­ maybe it's time to add a new region or two.
Would this add an efficiency that would make these programs more effective on the ground? Consistent with movement toward community/ecosystem management it could make sense.
Recommendations ­ Do not structure nongame totally along specialized disciplines.
Have a blended hierarchy.
Need organizational development consultation to help.
Discussion of Scale and Organization of Wildlife Diversity Program A potential staffing scenario was presented to illustrate the scale of an integrated nongame program needed to address the functions described in the development of strategic issues.
This proposal included 1 state-wide coordinator with program assistant; 5 regional coordinators with 5 administrative assistants; 10 research biologists (2 per region) and 5 technicians, 1 GIS manager, 1 analyst programmer, 1 biometrician, and 5 planners/human dimension specialists; and 25 area biologists with 18 half-time support staff.
Many, if not most, of these postions will perform traditional "game" as well as new "nongame" funtions.
A rough ratio of 75% salary:25% operating expenses was suggested.
Discussion of this proposal identified the following: · · Scale of staffing required (larger than anticipated) Geographic distribution of positions/sensitivity to local needs
15
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
· · · · ·
Consider adding a 5th Region, so that supervisory responsibilities are kept manageable and geographic regions are properly represented Progressive, dynamic planning is needed Concern with potential for nongame program to be inundated with traditional work (existing overload with game work) Concern with reactions/political repercussions from traditional constituents Important to ensure integration of nongame program.
Conclusions and Recommendations The group felt that the IAFWA "Functional Model for an Enhanced Wildlife Conservation, Education, and Recreation Program" provides an excellent design for the development of a nongame (wildlife diversity) program for Alaska.
The first step is to involve the public -- so we understand their desires and values, and so they feel ownership and provide support for the program.
A state-wide coordinator, using program development expertise (contracted?), a funding coordinator (contracted?) working on developing matching funds for CARA, and human dimension and planning expertise (contracted?) are essential from the start.
A GIS position is critical to inventory and monitoring programs, and should be hired early on to establish a useful data management system.
As the program planning and development proceeds with continued public participation, we suggest that 2-4 high profile projects be initiated, involving all regions of the state.
Regional and/or area biologist positions will be required to conduct those projects.
Over the subsequent 3-10 years, with full CARA funding, the program should be developed progressively to address the 8 strategic issues, using the IAFWA functional model.
Organizational and program development expertise will be critical to the development and integration of this growing program.
16
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Appendix A. Needs and Issues, brainstorm list Species 
Amphibians (including northern spotted frog, roughskinned newt and boreal toad, in priority order) 2.
Wood frogs 3.
Land birds 4.
Small mammals 5.
Raptors (including owls) 6.
Shorebirds 7.
Sea birds 8.
Northern seals (bearded, ringed, spotted, ribbon) 9.
Bats Potential strategies: Become an active partner and take the lead in establishing an Alaska working group of the national Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation program Same as for amphibians plus incorporate a monitoring program into area biologists' responsibility Increase participation in Partners in Flight program; increase/start monitoring measure impact of land use practices on high priority species Partner with UAF to expand statewide monitoring Implement statewide raptor management plan Participate in the developing statewide and national monitoring plan ­ Alaska Shorebird Working Group Participate in the U.S. waterbird plan Participate in the Oceans Initiative.
Transfer this issue to Existing Game Management and Research group/nongame monitoring/climate change??? Start a basic monitoring program in SE, research on urbanization and pest control in Southcentral, develop a statewide conservation strategy; develop partnerships with other organizations Participate in the U.S. waterbird plan Participate in the U.S. waterbird plan Add to marine mammals; baseline data gaps Start arctic cod monitoring, as an indicator species Add harvest aspects to marine mammals; develop viewing guidelines; refer to Watchable Wildlife group Refer harvest aspects to marine mammal recommendations; develop best management practices for Round Island; baseline data gaps; impacts of harvest and viewing, climate change Develop a conservation strategy Develop a policy for establishment of seasons when numbers get high enough (emerging harvest opportunities) Excessive tourism pressure; baseline data gaps Conflict with commercial fisheries; declining
10.
11.
12.
13.
Loons Herons Small cetaceans Non-commercial fish and marine invertebrates in Northern AK 14.
Polar bears 15.
Walrus
16.
Cook Inlet belugas 17.
Pioneer species (natural expansion of ranges such as mountain lions and fishers in SE) 18.
Large cetaceans 19.
Sea lions and North
17
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Pacific seals 20.
Invertebrates 21.
Plants 22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
populations Baseline information gaps; climate change Baseline information gaps; climate change; development pressures
Planning for wildlife diversity Outreach and information and education Grant funding for public to do DWC projects (Combine with #24) Take advantage of present grant opportunities (e.g., a central grant writer) Develop inventory and monitoring program specifically for wildlife diversity Form a data management group with GIS capability Re-examine and clearly define roles of DWC and Habitat Division program review (audit) Habitat acquisition and enhancement Integrate DWC GIS capacity with all land and marine uses in the state.
Goal = habitat conservation/improvement for wildlife Develop strategies to appropriately manage tourism and research to improve our tourism management Conduct a review of public involvement Increase staff ability to do public involvement Marketing nongame values to legislature Start agency publication (e.g. magazine) Public education on impacts (predation) of their pets on wildlife Market nongame to general public Identify CARA match sources Collaborate with game program to develop urban wildlife plans Elevate and strengthen the species of concern program Domestic pets, especially cats, and their impacts on wildlife Marketing nongame values to the legislature Start an agency publication, magazine Conduct a review of existing public involvement from Board of Game to Advisory Committees
18
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Appendix B. List of External Sources for Public Involvement Audubon, Regional and local chapters Native organizations State Parks citizen advisory boards General public Chambers of Commerce Advisory Committees Pacific Coast Joint Venture Ducks Unlimited Nature Conservancy Natural Heritage Program U.S. Fish 
North Slope Borough, Department of Wildlife Management Boroughs: Mat-Su Fairbanks North Star Kenai Kodiak Anchorage North Slope Sea Otter Commission Harbor Seal Commission The Wildlife Society Tribal governments Alaska Falconer's Association TVSA
19
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Friends of McNeil River Native non-profits Native regional corporations UA Museum UAF Prince William Science Center College of the North Land trusts Alaska Trapper's Association Northern Alaska Environmental Center Alaskan corporation Cook Inlet Beluga Whale Committee Habitat Division Matanuska Valley Sportsmen Internal employees Other divisions Federal Aid office Bob Weeden Dave Klein Dave Cline Jack Lentfer John Burns Bill Martin Environmental consulting firms National Wildlife Federation Nation conservation organizations CARA working coalition Alaska Wildlife Alliance IAFWA ­ Terry Johnson Alaska Waterfowl Association Biodiversity Legal Defense Board of Game Alaska Conservation Alliance Alaska Conservation Foundation Mat-Su Motor Mushers SEAC Rainbow Conservation Coalition Alaska Boaters Association
20
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Appendix C. List of Brainstorm ideas for Funding · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · New vehicle registration fee.
Tourist "head" tax.
Percent of recreational vehicle registration Tour business/guide registration fee General fund $$ PFD Percent of state park fee Hit the high volume operator Fish and game fund National appeal for handout Civil fines and damages Sales tax Extra box on hunting/trapping/fishing license for wildlife diversity check-off with $10 fee Tax/fee on wildlife tour operators Tax on "recreation" gear Corporate donations Chamber of Commerce donations Resource extraction tax State refuge user fee Natural resource "golden passport" Construction/building tax Biologist for a day (for a fee) Auction "exotic" hunts: polar bear, walrus, etc.
Look toward turning some threats into $$ for CARA matching Sources etc.: o Increased human use pressures (expansion, growing tourism) · Tourist tax/tourism management that includes acquiring funding to support a Wildlife Diversity Program · Resource development (oil/gas/coal/urbanization/wildlife for viewing)... solicit funds...tax? · Register and charge Wildlife Watching Guides (especially the high volume guides like Princess, Gray Line etc.)
· Cooperative funding · Co-management funding · Federal $$ available? · Collaboration with Federal/State agencies, Citizen committees, and conservation and Native groups · Voluntary Public Funding Initiatives · Assess the public interest and develop a method to solicit contributions · Establish a wildlife stamp/tax type program
21
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Assess feasibility or initiate a process for PFD check-off contributions · Inform, educate, and guide user groups toward common shared viewpoints.
Thereby 1) changing our "limited POV" image and 2) creating a more cohesive group from which to solicit funds to establish/continue diverse management.
· Develop a national constituency for funding · Inform and guide Congress/interest groups re. Funding for diverse wildlife uses and the unique practices of Alaskans Other sources of funding: · Develop and market and sell for cash what we currently give away.
· Develop and market nature-based tourism materials i.e. magazine, books, guidebooks, checklists, movies/videos · Training/courses/workshops ­ BOW program, trapping · Auction a few Permits to some of the State's premier wildlife viewing i.e. McNeil River, Round Island etc.
·
22
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Appendix D. Cooperative Wildlife Conservation Plans/Organizations, Potential for Collaboration Partners In Flight (migratory land birds, neotropical migrants) Partners in Amphibian and Reptile Conservation (PARC) Alaska Shorebird Working Group US Shorebird Conservation Plan North American Waterfowl Management Plan North American Bird Conservation Initiative (NABCI) Alaska Raptors Working Group Alaska Loon Working Group North American Waterbird Conservation Plan (seabirds, colonial nesting waterbirds, ?marsh birds) Oceans Initiative Pacific Coast Joint Venture Natural Heritage Program, The Nature Conservancy Eskimo Whaling Commission Quayassiq Walrus Commission Alaska Beluga Whale Committee Sea Otter Commission Harbor Seal Commission North Slope Borough National Marine Fisheries Service National Marine Mammal Laboratory UAF Museum UAF UAA UAJ
23
Nongame Working Group Report, 2nd Draft, 11 Aug 2001
Referrals 1.
Marine Mammals.
Ask the DMT to revisit marine mammals to develop a policy that identifies what the State's interest is, what the Division's interest is, how to influence decision making, where marine mammals fit structurally in our Division, etc.
This came up particularly in reference to Northern phocids, that are important subsistence foods, yet receive very little attention.
2.
Grant programs.
Develop with Division of Administration a well-defined, streamlined process for disbursing grants for research, management, education, and watchable wildlife (e.g., festivals) projects.
3.
Cooperative agreements, collaboration, partnerships.
Develop with Division of Administration a well-defined and streamlined process to allow the Division to enter cooperative projects and programs, pay for grad students, work with non-profits, etc. 4.
Education.
Integrate wildlife diversity program education in Division's education program.
Curriculum-based, workshops/clinics, multi-media tools, etc. 5.
Outreach.
Integrate wildlife diversity program outreach needs (everything from magazine to politicians) in with Division and Departmental efforts.
24
