Social Studies Standards STANDARD 1: HISTORY PROFICIENCY (Grades 9-12) Students know and are able to do all of the above and the following: · 1SS-P1.
Apply chronological and spatial thinking to understand the meaning, implications, and import of historical and current events.
(Note: Historical research skills and analytical skills.
These skills are to be learned and applied to the content standards for grades 9-12.)
PO 1.
Compare the present with the past, evaluating the consequences of past events and decisions and determining the lessons learned and analyze how change occurs PO 2.
Analyze how change occurs PO 3. Use a variety of maps and documents to interpret human movement and the diffusion of ideas, technological innovations, and goods · 1SS-P2.
Demonstrate knowledge of research sources and apply appropriate research methods, including framing open-ended questions, gathering pertinent information, and evaluating the evidence and point of view contained within primary and secondary sources.
(Note: Historical research skills and analytical skills.
These skills are to be learned and applied to the content standards for grades 9-12) PO 1.
Identify community resources that preserve historical information--such as libraries, museums, historical societies, a courthouse, the world wide web, family records, elders--and explain how to access this knowledge PO 2.
Identify an author's argument, viewpoint, or perspective in an historical account PO 3.
Distinguish "facts" from author's opinions, and evaluate an author's implicit and explicit philosophical assumptions, beliefs, or biases about a subject PO 4.
Compare and contrast different accounts of the same event, including hypothesizing reasons for differences and similarities, authors' use of evidence, and distinctions between sound generalizations and misleading oversimplifications · 1SS-P3.
Develop historical interpretations in terms of the complexity of cause and effect and in the context in which ideas and past events unfolded.
(Note: Historical research skills and analytical skills.
These skills are to be learned and applied to the content standards for grades 9-12.)
PO 1.
Show connections between particular events and larger social, economic, and political trends and developments ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 1 Approved 6.30.03 PO 2.
Interpret past events and issues within the context in which an event unfolded rather than solely in terms of present day norms and values PO 3.
Hypothesize how events could have taken different directions FOCUS: World History (Ancient Greece to Modern Age) State standards require the instruction of World History at both the Essentials level and the Proficiency level.
Due to the chronological structure of the content, the concepts addressed at the Essentials level provide the foundation for the understanding and appreciation of the concepts presented at the Proficiency level.
The following Proficiency concepts are to be taught so as to bridge the time elapsed between the periods of study and to allow students an opportunity to gain deeper understanding of previously studied events in World History.
· 1SS-P4(1SS-E12).
Describe the geographic, political, economic, and social characteristics of the Ancient Greek and Roman civilizations and their enduring impact on later civilizations, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the influence of the geography of the Mediterranean on the development and expansion of the civilizations PO 2.
the development of concepts of government and citizenship, specifically democracy, republics, and codification of law PO 3.
scientific and cultural advancements, including networks of roads, aqueducts, art and architecture, literature and theatre, mathematics, and philosophy PO 4.
the contributions and roles of key figures, including Socrates, Alexander the Great, Cleopatra, Julius Caesar, and Augustus · 1SS-P4(1SS-E13).
Describe the political and economic events and the social and geographic characteristics of Medieval European life and their enduring impacts on later civilizations, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the creation and expansion of the Byzantine empire and the reasons for the fall of Rome PO 2.
the new forms of government, feudalism, and the beginning of limited government with the Magna Carta PO 3.
the role of the Roman Catholic church and its monasteries, including the affect on education and the arts PO 4.
the Crusades, including how they helped to introduce Muslim ideas and products to Europe PO 5.
the impact of the Black Plague, including how it contributed to an end to the feudal system PO 6.
contributions and roles of key figures, including Charlemagne, Joan of Arc, and Marco Polo ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 2 Approved 6.30.03 · 1SS-P4.
Describe the democratic and scientific revolutions as they evolved throughout the Enlightenment and their enduring effects on political, economic, and cultural institutions, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the Copernican view of the universe and Newton's natural laws PO 2.
conflict between religion and the new scientific discoveries, including the impact of Galileo's ideas and the introduction of the scientific method as a means of understanding the universe PO 3.
ideas that led to parliamentary government and the rights of Englishmen through the Puritan revolt and the Glorious Revolution PO 4.
the worldwide spread of the ideas of the American Revolution PO 5.
challenges to absolute monarchy, including the French Revolution PO 6.
the Napoleonic Era, including the codification of law PO 7.
Latin America's wars of independence, including Simon Bolivar · 1SS-P5.
Explain the causes and effects of the Industrial Revolution, with emphasis on: PO 1.
how scientific and technological changes promoted industrialization in the textile industry in England PO 2.
the impact of the growth of population, rural-to-urban migrations, growth of industrial cities, and emigration out of Europe PO 3.
the evolution of work and the role of labor, including the demise of slavery, division of labor, union movement, and impact of immigration PO 4.
the political and economic theories of capitalism and socialism, including Adam Smith and Karl Marx · 1SS-P6.
Analyze patterns of change during the nineteenth century era of imperialism from varied perspectives, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the clash between cultures, including the Zulu wars in Africa, the Sepoy Rebellion in India, and the Boxer Rebellion in China PO 2.
the development of the British Empire around the world PO 3.
the nationalism that led to conflict between European nations as they competed for raw materials and markets, including the rush for colonies in Africa and Asia PO 4.
the immediate and long-term responses by people under colonial rule · 1SS-P7.
Trace the causes, effects and events of World War I, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the rise of nationalism, including the unification of Germany and Otto Von Bismarck's leadership ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 3 Approved 6.30.03 PO 2.
the rise of ethnic and ideological conflicts, including the Balkans, AustriaHungary, and the decline of the Ottoman Empire PO 3.
the importance of geographic factors in military decisions and outcomes PO 4.
the human costs of the mechanization of war such as the machine gun, airplane, gasoline, submarine, trench warfare, and tanks PO 5.
the effects of the Russian Revolution and the implementation of communist rule PO 6.
the conditions and failures of the Treaty of Versailles and the League of Nations · 1SS-P8.
Analyze the causes and events of World War II, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the rise of totalitarianism and militarism in Japan and Germany PO 2.
Nazi Germany's attempts to eliminate the Jews and other minorities through the Holocaust PO 3.
influence of world conflicts prior to World War II, including the Spanish Civil War, Italian invasion of Ethiopia, and the Japanese invasion of Manchuria PO 4.
Germany's aggression that led to the war, including England's attempts at appeasement PO 5.
the Stalin-Hitler Pact of 1939 and the invasion of Poland PO 6.
the political, diplomatic and military leadership, including Winston Churchill, Joseph Stalin, Franklin Roosevelt, Emperor Hirohito, Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini, George Patton, and Rommel PO 7.
the principal theaters of battle, major turning points, and geographic factors in military decisions and outcomes, including Pearl Harbor, D day invasion, the use of the atomic bomb, and the reasons for the Allied victory · 1SS-P9.
Analyze the international developments after World War II and during the Cold War, with emphasis on: PO 1.
war crimes trials, including the Nuremberg Trials PO 2.
the creation of the modern state of Israel and conflicts in the Middle East PO 3.
the rebuilding of Western Europe, including the Marshall Plan and NATO PO 4.
Soviet control of Eastern Europe, including the Warsaw Pact and Hungarian Revolt PO 5.
the creation and role of the United Nations, including the Security Council PO 6.
Mao Tse-tung and the Chinese Revolution, including the Long March, Taiwan, and the Cultural Revolution PO 7.
the legacy of genocide from totalitarian regimes, including Stalin, Hitler, Mao, and Pol Pot ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 4 Approved 6.30.03 PO 8.
the reasons for the collapse of the Soviet Union and end of communism in Europe · 1SS-P10.
Evaluate the ideologies and outcomes of independence movements in the developing world, with emphasis on: PO 1.
French Indochina and the Vietnam War, including the role of Ho Chi Minh PO 2.
Gandhi's non-violence movement for India's independence PO 3.
the fight against apartheid in South Africa and evolution from white minority government, including the role of Nelson Mandela PO 4.
the struggle for democracy in Latin America PO 5.
the Mexican Revolution, including land and labor reforms FOCUS: United States/Arizona Modern History (American Revolution to Current Issues) State standards require the instruction of U.S. History at both the Essentials level and the Proficiency level.
Due to the chronological structure of the content, the concepts addressed at the Essentials level provide the foundation for the understanding and appreciation of the concepts presented at the Proficiency level.
The following Proficiency concepts are to be taught so as to bridge the time elapsed between the periods of study and to allow students an opportunity to gain deeper understanding of previously studied events in U.S. History.
· 1SS-P11(1SS-E16).
Explain the economic and political reasons for the American Revolution, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the attempts to regulate colonial trade, including the Tea Act, Stamp Act, and Intolerable Acts PO 2.
the colonists' reaction to British policy, including the boycotts, the Sons of Liberty, and petitions and appeals to Parliament PO 3.
the ideas expressed in the Declaration of Independence · 1SS-P11(1SS-E17).
Describe the aspirations, ideals, and events that served as the foundation for the creation of a new national government, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the Articles of Confederation and the Constitution, and the success of each in implementing the ideals of the Declaration of Independence PO 2.
the major debates of the Constitutional Convention and their resolution PO 3.
the contributions and roles of major individuals in the writing and ratification of the Constitution, including George Washington, James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, and John Jay PO 4.
Struggles over ratification of the Constitution and the creation of the Bill of Rights ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 5 Approved 6.30.03 · 1SS-P11(1SS-E18).
Describe the actions taken to build one nation from thirteen states, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the precedents established by George Washington, including the cabinet and two terms of the presidency PO 2.
Alexander Hamilton's actions to create a financially strong nation, including the creation of a National Bank and payment of debts PO 3.
the creation of political parties, including the ideals of the Democratic Republicans and the Federalists · 1SS-P11(1SS-E21).
Explain how sectionalism caused the Civil War, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the different natures of the economies of the North, South, and West PO 2.
the addition of new states to the Union and the balance of power in the Senate, including the Missouri and 1850 Compromises PO 3.
the extension of slavery into the territories, including the Dred Scott Decision, the Kansas-Nebraska Act, and the role of abolitionists such as Frederick Douglass and John Brown PO 4.
the emergence of Abraham Lincoln as a national figure in the Lincoln-Douglas debates PO 5.
the presidential election of 1860, Lincoln's victory, and the South's secession · 1SS-P11(1SS-E22).
Explain the course and consequences of the Civil War and how it divided the American people, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the unique nature of the Civil War, including the impact of Americans fighting Americans, the high casualties caused by disease and the type of warfare, and the widespread destruction of American property PO 2.
contributions and significance of key individuals, including Abraham Lincoln, Robert E. Lee, William Tecumseh Sherman, and Ulysses S. Grant PO 3.
the major turning points of the Civil War, including Gettysburg PO 4.
the role of African-Americans PO 5.
the purpose and effect of the Emancipation Proclamation PO 6.
the strategic importance of the Southwest as both sides attempted to secure a route to California · 1SS-P11(1SS-E23).
Analyze the character and lasting consequences of Reconstruction, with emphasis on: PO 1.
Lincoln's plans for reconstruction of the South PO 2.
Lincoln's assassination and the ensuing struggle for control of Reconstruction, including the impeachment of Andrew Johnson ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 6 Approved 6.30.03 PO 3.
attempts to protect the rights of, and enhance opportunities for, the freedmen, including the basic provisions of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution PO 4.
the rise of the Ku Klux Klan and the development of Jim Crow laws following Reconstruction · 1SS-P11.
Analyze the transformation of the American economy and the changing social and political conditions in the United States in response to the Industrial Revolution, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the forces behind the quick and successful growth of the United States, including geographic security, abundant natural resources, heavy foreign investment, individual and economic freedoms, skilled but cheap and mobile labor, and use of tariffs and subsidies PO 2.
innovations in technology, evolution of marketing techniques, and changes to the standard of living PO 3.
the development of monopolies and their impact on economic and political policies, including laissez faire economics and the ideas of Social Darwinism PO 4.
the growth of cities created by the influx of immigrants and rural-to-urban migrations of Americans and the racial and ethnic conflicts that resulted PO 5.
the efforts of workers to improve working conditions, including organizing labor unions and strikes, and the reaction of business, including strikebreakers, and the Bisbee Deportation PO 6.
Populism and William Jennings Bryan, Jane Addams, muckrakers, and the economic problems faced by farmers PO 7.
Theodore Roosevelt's reforms in trustbusting and conservation of natural resources such as national parks like the Grand Canyon and reclamation projects like the Salt River Project PO 8.
progressive reforms, including the national income tax, direct election of Senators, women's Suffrage, Prohibition, and Arizona's Constitution · 1SS-P12.
Analyze the development of the American West and specifically Arizona, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the availability of cheap land and transportation, including the role of the railroads and the use of immigrant Chinese and Irish labor PO 2.
the development of resources and the resulting population and economic patterns, including mining, ranching, and agriculture PO 3.
the effects of development on American Indians and Mexican Americans, including Indian Wars, establishment of reservations, and land displacement ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 7 Approved 6.30.03 · 1SS-P13.
Analyze the United States' expanding role in the world during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the causes for a change in foreign policy from isolationism to intervention PO 2.
the debate between pro- and anti-imperialists over taking the Philippines PO 3.
the results of the Spanish American War PO 4.
the expanding influence in the Western hemisphere, including the Panama Canal PO 5.
the events that led to United States involvement in World War I and the United States' impact on the outcome PO 6.
the impact of World War I on the United States, including the Red Scare PO 7.
Wilson's involvement in the peace process and the United States rejection of the League of Nations · 1SS-P14.
Analyze the major political, economic, and social developments that occurred between World War I and World War II, including the causes and effects of the Great Depression, with emphasis on: PO 1.
social liberation and conservative reaction during the 1920's, including flappers, Prohibition, Harlem Renaissance, and the Scopes trial PO 2.
the rise of mass production techniques and the impact of the automobile and appliances on the prosperity and standard of living for many Americans PO 3.
the causes of the Great Depression, including unequal distribution of income, weaknesses in the farm sector, and the policies of the Federal Reserve Bank PO 4.
the human and natural crises of the Great Depression, including unemployment, food lines, Dust Bowl, and the western migration of Midwest farmers PO 5.
the policies and controversies that emerged from the New Deal, including the works programs, farm supports, social security, advances in organized labor, challenges to the Supreme Court, and impacts in Arizona such as the Navajo Livestock Reduction · 1SS-P15.
Analyze the role of the United States in World War II, with emphasis on: PO 1.
reasons the United States moved from a policy of isolationism to international involvement, including Pearl Harbor PO 2.
events on the home front to support the war effort, including war bond drives, the mobilization of the war industry, women and minorities in the work force, including Rosie the Riveter; the internment of Japanese-Americans, including the camps in Poston and on the Gila River Indian Reservation, Arizona PO 3.
Arizona contributions to the war effort, including the Navajo Code Talkers, Ira Hayes, and local training bases ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 8 Approved 6.30.03 PO 4.
postwar prosperity and the reasons for it · 1SS-P16.
Analyze the impact of World War II and the Cold War on United States foreign policy, with emphasis on: PO 1.
the implementation of the foreign policy of containment, including the Truman Doctrine, the Berlin Blockade, Berlin Wall, Bay of Pigs, Korea, and Vietnam PO 2.
the Red Scare, including McCarthyism and the House Un-American Activities Committee PO 3.
nuclear weapons and the arms race PO 4.
Sputnik and the space race PO 5.
Arizona's industrial development, movement to the suburbs, and growth in the "Sunbelt" · 1SS-P17.
Analyze the development of voting and civil rights in the United States, with emphasis on: PO 1.
intent and impact of the Thirteenth, Fourteenth, and Fifteenth Amendments to the Constitution PO 2.
segregation as enforced by Jim Crow laws PO 3.
the use of the judicial system to secure civil rights, including key court cases such as Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka PO 4.
the role and methods of civil rights advocates, including Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, Rosa Parks, and Cesar Chávez PO 5.
the passage and effect of voting rights legislation, including 1964 Civil Rights Act, Voting Act of 1965, and the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution PO 6.
the effects of the women's rights movement · 1SS-P18.
Apply the skills of historical analysis to current social, political, geographic, and economic issues facing the United States, with emphasis on: PO 1.
impact of changing technology on America's living patterns, popular culture, and the environment, including the impact of automobiles, dams, and air-conditioning to Arizona's development PO 2.
reasons for, and impact of, the nation's changing immigration policy, including Mexico-United States border issues PO 3.
the persistence of poverty, and the Great Society's attempt to alleviate it PO 4.
the "Watergate Scandal" and its impact on American attitudes about government ADE Research, Standards and Accountability 9 Approved 6.30.03
