Vol. 27:1
ISSN 0160-8460
March 1999
Commission Recommends Grants Totaling $3,819,431, Changes Schedule of Future Meetings At its meeting on February 24, the National Historical Publications and Records Commission recommended that the Archivist of the United States make grants totaling $3,819,431 for 62 projects and changed the schedule of its future meetings.
NHPRC Chairman John W. Carlin noted that the President's proposed budget for fiscal year 2000 includes $6 million for NHPRC grants, the same amount as in fiscal year 1999.
Chairman Carlin also welcomed new Commissioner Mary Maples Dunn, Director of Radcliffe College's Schlesinger Library, representing the American Historical Association, to her first Commission meeting, and announced that the American Association for State and Local History has named Brent D. Glass, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, as its new representative on the Commission.
With the implementation of the Commission's new strategic plan and application deadlines, no proposals will be eligible for review at a June 1999 meeting.
The Commission consequently resolved not to hold a meeting this June.
It further resolved that, beginning in fiscal year 2000, the Commission will meet twice, in November and in May.
The November meetings will last two days, in order to allow the Commission time for policy deliberations.
At its November 1999 meeting, the Commission will approve one-time bridge grants for ongoing documentary publication projects affected by the schedule change.
For the present, deadlines for proposals remain as listed in NHPRC's Guidelines: June 1 for consideration at the November meeting, and October 1 for consideration at the May meeting.
Continued on page 10
The World War II Letters of American Women Project by Judy Barrett Litoff and David C. Smith Most historians are voyeurs who like nothing better than to read other people's mail.
Fortunately, the taboo about private life being sacrosanct is discarded when historic mail is concerned.
In recent years, in fact, historians have adeptly used private correspondence to reveal new realms of knowledge about life and society in America.
We certainly plead guilty to the charge of reading other people's mail.
For more than a decade, we have been involved in a nationwide search to locate letters written by American women during World War II.
Our collection now consists of some 30,000 letters written by 1,500 women representing diverse social, economic, ethnic, and geographic circumstances.
We have letters written by mothers, daughters, sisters, cousins, aunts, grandmothers, stepmothers, wives, sweethearts, and friends on the home front.
Complementing these letters is the correspondence of many pioneering women who served in the military both at home and abroad.
A sociologist colleague assayed our collection and found it to be representative of the population of the United States during the 1940s.
Locating and obtaining our cache of mail originally occurred as an act of serendipity.
It began in the early 1980s as we conducted research for a book, Miss You: The World War II Letters of Barbara Wooddall Taylor and Charles E. Taylor (1990), which was based on thousands of pages of correspondence between a young war bride and her soldier husband.
Their letters dramatically told the story of the vicissitudes of their war: courtship by mail, marriage on the move, traveling cross country with a baby, life on the Continued on page 9
U.S. Army Signal Corps photograph
1
The Executive Director's Column They have been called the Greatest Generation, the men and women who in their youth weathered the privations of the Great Depression and then as young adults fought and won World War II.
They then returned home, married with astonishing speed, sired the Baby Boom generation, worked hard, and retired.
Too many now have left us.
As a group, they were notable for their reticence, their lack of inclination to dwell upon their experiences in the war.
This certainly was true of my own father, who served in the China-Burma-India theater as a glider pilot with an Army Air Corps group known as the First Air Commandoes.
I knew that he had won the Distinguished Flying Cross--several times--but such was his attitude toward this that I formed the impression that it was a common achievement.
I knew that, at the time, the First Air Commandoes were famous: that they were the basis of a comic strip called "Terry and the Pirates."
Yet it wasn't until 1994, when I went with him to Coventry, England, for a reunion of the "Chindits", the combined British and American Force in Burma, that I learned the full extent of his and his compatriots' persistent bravery.
Upon my arrival at NHPRC, it was a source of great satisfaction to me to learn that there were several projects focusing upon this period, this generation.
And it is a source of great satisfaction to present this issue of Annotation.
Sadly, my father will not see it, for he died this past Christmas Eve.
But I hope you will read and enjoy it.
And visit these projects; research the documents; read the editions.
And remember the Greatest Generation.
Brent D. Glass Joins Commission The American Association for State and Local History has chosen Brent D. Glass, Executive Director of the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission, to be its representative on the the National Historical Publications and Records Commission.
Dr. Glass will join the Commission at its November 1999 meeting.
He succeeds David H. Hoober, Arizona State Archivist, who served three four-year terms as a member of the Commission.
Dr. Glass, who has held his current position since 1987, also serves as Pennsylvania's State Historic Preservation Officer.
He previously worked for several public and non-profit organizations in the fields of historic preservation, neighborhood revitalization, and humanities education.
He received his B.A. degree from Lafayette College, his M.A. from New York University, and a Ph.D. in history from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Dr. Glass has written several books, book reviews, and articles on a wide range of topics, including industrial history, historic preservation, and public history policy.
In Memoriam: Mr. Justice Blackmun NHPRC members and staff were saddened to learn of the passing of Supreme Court Justice Harry A. Blackmun, a longtime member of the Commission.
He had great respect for the Commission, he said many times, and the NHPRC benefited immensely from his active and influential participation.
Of quiet dignity and a sharp sense of humor, much of it self-deprecatory, Justice Blackmun was a man of numerous interests, many of them related to history, the sifting of evidence, the uncertainty of truth, and the excitement of discovery.
In 1997, DreamWorks released Steven Spielberg's film Amistad.
Based loosely on an actual historical event, the film portrays a slave revolt on a Spanish ship.
Captured off the coast of Connecticut when their desperate attempt to sail home failed, 53 Africans were forced to stand trial for murdering the crew that had held them prisoner.
In their fight for freedom, the Africans were aided by abolitionists and former president John Quincy Adams, who took their battle all the way to the U.S. Continued on page 4
3
Editing the Wartime Papers of General George C. Marshall by Larry I. Bland The George C. Marshall papers project originated in the collections at the Library of Congress and the Roosevelt, Truman, late 1970s as a result of the NHPRC's decision to encourage Eisenhower, and MacArthur Libraries. editing projects for "second tier" historical figures.
The Marshall Four things have saved the project from drowning in this Foundation of Lexington, Virginia, decided to do a project, and sea of paper.
First, Marshall's official biographer, Forrest Pogue, the NHPRC held a place open at Camp Edit that year for the had an office and a small staff in the stacks of what is now person chosen to be the project's editor.
It turned out to be me.
Archives I; for nearly two decades Pogue located, copied, and (Associate editor Sharon Ritenour Stevens later would also make indexed documents.
By the time the Marshall Papers project the pilgrimage to Madison, Wisconsin.)
Johns Hopkins began, Pogue and his staff had collected about one million pages.
University press agreed to publish the volumes.
Second, the Marshall Foundation had assembled a collection of I quickly discovered that, due to the massive number of published materials on the U.S. Army and World War II.
Third, records involved, it would be impossible to organize the whole the Center of Military History and its predecessors had published project more than superficially prior to the start of serious editing.
scores of volumes on all aspects of World War II; particularly General Marshall's papers at the valuable was its eighty-oddMarshall Library were already volume "green series," the "U.S. organized, but the World War II Army in World War II."
Based period occupied only about one almost entirely on documents, hundred Hollinger boxes.
green series books are one of the Marshall did not believe in few secondary sources that we saving documents for future cite in Marshall Papers annoself-justification or lucrative tation.
Fourth, the wartime memoir writing.
Those hundred volumes of the Papers of Dwight boxes represented onl y David Eisenhower have eased "personal" papers: generally our research efforts.
speaking, these were materials What years should the his secretaries thought essential Marshall volumes cover? One to running his post-retirement might begin with Pearl Harbor, office, plus his correspondence which is when most Americans with friends, colleagues, and think the war began.
This was superiors.
clearly too late, since it skipped "Official" papers--about the 27-month mobilization General Marshall was always pleased to meet troops in the half of the potentially publishperiod between September 1939 field.
Here he is shaking hands with men at the Normandy able Marshall documents--were and December 1941, when the beachhead on June 12, 1944.
Photo courtesy of the George C. retained in various agencies' framework of America's Marshall Foundation.
files.
Unfortunately, the line participation in the war was between personal and official materials was rather fuzzy, causing constructed and basic decisions made (e.g., the need for a large us to spend a good bit of time searching for incoming documents, ground army and a Germany-first strategy).
The mobilization replies, and ancillary papers generated by the enormous military period was one of Marshall's, although not the nation's, finest and civilian bureaucracies.
Moreover, as head of the Army and hours.
Army Air Forces and first among equals on the Joint and Alternatively, one could begin with September 1, 1939, the Combined Chiefs of Staff, Marshall concerned himself with day Germany invaded Poland and the day General Marshall was nearly every aspect of the war effort, international diplomacy, sworn in as U.S. Army Chief of Staff.
But Marshall was fiftyand, after 1943, postwar planning.
eight years old then, and many of his key military and managerial The amount of World War II records is daunting.
The crucial ideas and values had already been established, particularly as a National Archives Record Group 165 (War Department General result of his long experience with the National Guard and the and Special Staffs) contains over ten thousand cubic feet of Reserves and the lessons he had learned during World War I. textual records.
In addition, there are a dozen other important Consequently, the first Marshall volume covers his military military record groups (#18, Army Air Forces; #38, Office of career between 1901 and 1939, and the second the mobilization the Chief of Naval Operations; #107, Office of the Secretary of period.
Pearl Harbor opens volume three.
War; #218 Joint Chiefs of Staff, etc.), and at least a score of Editorial decisions made for the first two volumes were other civilian and military agencies with which General Marshall retained for the war years.
These included rarely publishing routinely dealt (#147, Selective Service System; #208, Office of incoming correspondence, vigilant efforts to contain the quantity War Information; #211, War Manpower Commission; #253, of annotation, generally limiting our annotation citations to Petroleum Administrator for War; and #457, National Security primary sources, and including lots of illustrations.
Of these Agency, to name but a few).
In addition, there are important decisions, the most difficult standard to maintain is the one on
5
From World War II to the U-2: Editing Eisenhower's Papers by Daun van Ee controversial airborne operation designed to seize bridgeheads The heroes of World War II continue to fascinate us.
The across the Lower Rhine.
Our annotation indicated that Field recent popularity of such cinematic efforts as Stephen Spielberg's Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery had proposed the assault, Saving Private Ryan and Terence Malick's The Thin Red Line and that Eisenhower and his headquarters simply acquiesced.
has Americans once again talking about The Last Good War, The General disagreed: "I not only approved Market Garden, I and those who fought in it are receiving some much-deserved, if insisted upon it.
What we needed was a bridgehead over the belated, recognition.
Interest began to swell in June of 1994, Rhine.
If that could be accomplished I was quite willing to wait when the media focused attention upon the aging veterans of Don all other operations."
(One wonders whether the editors of Day on the occasion of the great invasion's 50th anniversary.
other historical editions have ever envied us the ability to consult Last January NBC television news anchor Tom Brokaw our subject about such matters.
What would the historians editing presented a prime-time special tribute to remind us of the warriors George Washington's papers make of an opportunity to ask him who had saved democracy from the Axis powers.
Today about Alexander Hamilton or shopping-mall bookstores across his motivations in the Yorktown the country feature shelves filled campaign?) with histories of the war, including a number of bestsellers Unfortunately, Eisenhower by Stephen E. Ambrose. did not live to see the results of our efforts; the first five-volume One of the war's bestset of papers, entitled The War known figures, however, has Years and published by the never been forgotten by the Johns Hopkins University Press, American public.
The multiappeared in 1970, one year after volume selective edition of The his death.
Although no startling Papers of Dwight David or "smoking gun" surprises Eisenhower, a project of The came to light, the overall Johns Hopkins Universit y impression that remained with supported by the NHPRC, the readers was somewhat novel.
National Endowment for the Political economist John Humanities, and the Eisenhower Kenneth Galbraith, certainly no World Affairs Institute, has friend of Eisenhower's helped sustain that interest and General Henry H. "Hap" Arnold, Commander in Chief, U.S. conservative political philohas carried the Eisenhower story Army Air Forces, chats with General Eisenhower during their sophy, was surprised to find the forward to his remarkabl y visit to the U.S. Seventh Army command post, April 5, 1945.
documents "irresistible," in part eventful presidency.
Today the Photo courtesy of NARA. because they were, in his project is close to finishing a task opinion, "firmly and unpretentiously literate."
In a Washington begun 35 years ago.
Post review he took the opportunity to contrast Eisenhower with Eisenhower, a supremely confident man who from boyhood Presidents Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon, who, Galbraith had a strong interest in military history, believed in making felt, had not demonstrated the requisite Eisenhoverian qualities available the fullest possible historical record as soon as possible.
in their conduct of the then-raging Vietnam War.
He and other He had been dismayed at the one-sided, opinionated accounts reviewers observed that the published papers revealed a personal of the war that had appeared after 1945.
Many of these books leadership style that emphasized teamwork rather than and memoirs, he felt, were inaccurate and served little purpose intimidation, as well as an awareness of political realities and beyond safeguarding reputation and venting spleen.
With the the constraints under which every commander, even the most goal of an accurate historical record in mind, Eisenhower powerful, must operate.
It was also noted that the volumes carefully had saved his own wartime papers and had told his demonstrated the degree to which Eisenhower involved himself own story (in Crusade in Europe) by relying on documentation in selecting courses of action from the range of available strategic rather than memory.
When the Johns Hopkins history department options.
Eisenhower's letters were not the product of a mere proposed a scholarly edition of his papers, Eisenhower readily "chairman of the board," as some critics had charged.
agreed and worked to get both the U.S. government and his wartime associates to assist in the effort.
He met with the first Work on the next books in the series (Occupation 1945 and editors, Alfred D. Chandler, Jr., and Stephen Ambrose, and made The Chief of Staff, volumes 6-9) continued throughout much of available his comprehensive collection of personal correthe 1970s under the direction of Dr. Chandler's successors, Louis spondence.
Once the endeavor was fairly underway, Eisenhower Galambos, Daun van Ee, and Elizabeth S. Hughes.
The editors carefully read the selected documents and draft annotations. discovered that covering the postwar era was at least as difficult His occasional comments on the events and personalities of as documenting World War II.
Few secondary sources dealt with the war were often helpful.
In 1966, for example, Eisenhower the pre-Korean War military, and the amount of material to be read the notes to a document concerning Market-Garden, the screened in search of usable material was almost as large.
Many
7
correspondence captures the complexity and essence of the Continued from page 1 experience of war for women better than any available source.
home front and the western front, and, thankfully, a safe and Women's wartime letters are honest accounts written "at loving reunion.
As we read their correspondence, we were the scene" for a limited audience and with little idea that historians especially caught up in the strength and power exhibited by the would one day be interested in their content.
This voluminous letters of Barbara Taylor and what they told us about being a correspondence takes on even greater significance when we young woman who "grew up" during the wartime years.
remember that letter writing is rapidly becoming a lost art.
New Where were the letters of other American wartime women? information technologies have What would they tell us? Why hadn't largely supplanted the need for pen they been published? These were just and paper--even in wartime.
a few of the perplexing matters we During the early stages of our began to ponder.
As we completed our work, the NHPRC encouraged us to work on Miss You, we searched for produce a microfilm edition of all of answers to these questions and the letters in our collection.
In the launched our quest for the "missing spring of 1990, we signed a contract letters."
with Scholarly Resources, Inc., to With the support of our assemble such an edition.
The universities, we undertook a following spring, 1991, the NHPRC nationwide search for women's officially endorsed our project.
In the wartime correspondence.
A careful meantime, we began to seek funding scrutiny of the vast World War II for the microfilm edition.
While our literature produced only a scattering This War Department Bureau of Public Relations universities had been munificent in of missives.
We then moved beyond photograph, taken June 4, 1945, shows Private First supporting our work with course traditional academic venues and, in Class Neven R. George of San Bernardino, California, releases, summer stipends, and the spring of 1988, devised a brief taking a break from his duties with a 60mm mortar as clerical help, the substantial costs of author's query that we sent to every he reads a letter from home.
George was serving with publishing a microfilm edition of daily newspaper in the countr y the 307th Regiment, 77th Infantry Division, on such magnitude was beyond their asking for information about Okinawa at the time.
Photo courtesy of NARA. capabilities.
women's wartime correspondence.
By this time, the 50th anniversary commemorations of the Much to our delight, hundreds of these requests were published Second World War were well underway, and we were in great on the letters to the editor page.
We broadened our scope by sending letters of inquiry to magazines and newsletters that demand as speakers and authors.
An unexpected public role had specialized in issues of concern to women, veterans, and been thrust upon us, and we did not want to lose the opportunity minorities.
We dispatched a special appeal to to tell the stories of ordinary women as recorded in their wartime letters to a wider 500 predominately black churches around the audience.
So, for five years we literally "took nation.
In total, we sent out over 2,500 to the road." requests.
Within days of the publication of the first With the letters as our framework, we author's query, letters began to pour into our published four books and more than twenty offices.
Individual collections ranged in size articles on American women and their from one post card to over 3,000 letters.
We experience of war.
One article received the even received a collection of letters in a World 1994 James Madison Prize of The Society for War II ammunition box.
History in the Federal Government.
Currently, we are preparing a fifth book on As we marveled at our treasure trove, we women and postwar planning.
continued our pursuit of the "missing letters" by traveling to distant archives, airing appeals We have been heartened by the on radio and television, writing feature articles overwhelming response to our work from the about the project, delivering scholarly papers, public and the academic community.
In recent and never turning down a speaking request.
years, we have had the opportunity to share To keep in touch with our many new friends, our findings with audiences in England, we began publishing a "V-Mail" newsletter.
Canada, Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, and Estonia.
The vast majority of the 30,000 letters in The 1991 endorsement and counsel of the our collection came to us from the writers, the Wartime V-Mail advertisement, NHPRC continues to serve the women and recipients, or their heirs.
These donors wanted from the authors'collection. letter writing project well.
World War II their letters preserved because they felt that provided a crucible in which American women were brought to the experience of war for America's women had not been a test that they passed superlatively.
These letters are a precious adequately conveyed.
Our reading of these letters suggests that legacy from that world.
the donors were correct.
We are convinced that women's wartime Continued on page 12
9
· University of North Carolina at Greensboro, Greensboro, NC: A grant of $25,464 for Race, Slavery and Free Blacks: Petitions to Southern Legislatures and County Courts, 17761867.
· Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Indiana, PA: A grant of $10,513 for The Papers of Joseph Trimble Rothrock, M.D. · University of Arizona, Arizona State Museum, Tucson, AZ: A grant of up to $50,383 for Documentary Relations of the Southwest: Civil/Military.
· Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ: A grant for $43,000 for The Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony.
· Kent State University, Kent, OH: A grant of up to $39,396 for The Robert A. Taft Papers.
· Morehouse College, Atlanta, GA: A grant of up to $62,937 for The Howard Thurman Papers.
· The University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM: A grant of up to $41,511 for The Journals of don Diego de Vargas.
· East Stroudsburg University, East Stroudsburg, PA: A conditional grant of $105,000 for The Papers of the War Department, 1784-1800.
· Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ: A subvention grant of $10,000 for The Papers of Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Antony, Vol. 2.
· University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC: A subvention grant of $10,000 for The Papers of John Marshall, Vol. 10.
· University of Illinois Press, Urbana and Chicago, IL: A subvention grant of $10,000 for The Samuel Gompers Papers, Vol. 8.
· University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA: A subvention grant of $10,000 for The Papers of George Washington: Diaries Abridgement, 1 vol.
Projects to Improve Documentary Editing · Wisconsin History Foundation, Inc., Madison, WI: A grant of $23,200 to support the 28th Institute for the Editing of Historical Documents.
Records Access Projects · The Catholic University of America, Washington, DC: A 22-month grant of $54,112 to arrange, describe, undertake conservation work on, and prepare guides for five collections which document the labor movement and religious activism in the New Deal era.
· The Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, IL: An 18-month grant of $37,500, contingent upon the availability of FY 99 funds, to process the records of architect Bruce Goff (1904-1982).
· Maine Historical Society, Portland, ME: A 2-year grant of $82,536 for a project to gain physical and intellectual control over three collections of architectural records.
· William Woods University, Fulton, MO: A six-month grant of up to $5,850 for an archival consultancy to help the University, Westminister College, and the Winston Churchill Memorial and Library develop plans to manage historically significant materials and to establish archival and records management programs.
· University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC: A two-year grant of $91,425 for a project to arrange and describe the University's African-American archival and
manuscript holdings and those of North Carolina Central University.
· New Jersey Historical Society, Newark, NJ: A two-year grant of up to $188,220 to arrange, describe, and catalog 435 manuscript collections documenting the state's economic and social transformation, 1750-1860.
· Clerk's Office, County of Santa Fe, Santa Fe, NM: A sixmonth grant of $9,157 to microfilm 73 deed books dating from the American occupation in 1847 to around 1893.
· The Brooklyn Historical Society, Brooklyn, NY: A 15month grant of $57,308 for a project to prepare more detailed descriptive information for five collections, create a trial finding aid for one of the collections using Encoded Archival Description, and develop a pilot curriculum package for high school students based on another of the collections.
· Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York, New York, NY: A one-year grant of $43,308, contingent upon the availability of FY 99 funds, for a project to rehouse and provide access to over 27,000 images in three collections, create descriptive tools, and scan 5,500 campus views for placement on 55 CD ROMs.
· The Dayton Art Institute, Dayton, OH: A one-year grant of $30,940 for a project to establish an archival program.
· Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma, Perkins, OK: A one-year grant of $49,011 for a project to arrange and describe records relating to the Iowa Tribal Business Committee.
· Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, Pawnee, OK: A one-year grant of $14,422 for a project to conduct a repository survey to identify photographs relating to the Pawnee Nation, obtain copies of appropriate photographs, and arrange and describe them for use at the nation's archival facility.
· The Historical Society of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA: A two-year grant of up to $77,873 for a project to arrange, describe, rehouse, and catalog the records of Coxe Mining Company, an independent coal producer that played a key role in the development of anthracite mining in the state.
· The African American Museum of Dallas, Dallas, TX: A 16-month grant of $24,507 ($10,000 matching) for a project to arrange, describe, and provide housing for five Dallas-area photographic and manuscript collections.
· Fairbanks Museum and Planetarium, St. Johnsbury, VT: A three-year grant of $143,191 for a project to arrange, describe, and catalog the documentary holdings of the Fairbanks Museum, the St. Johnsbury Athenaeum, the Town of St. Johnsbury, St. Johnsbury Academy, and St. Johnsbury Historical Society.
· The Museum of Flight, Seattle, WA: A six-month grant of up to $13,076 for a project to preserve and make available a collection of Douglas Aircraft Company drawings that date from the company's founding.
Congressionally Directed Grant · The Center for Jewish History, New York, NY: A oneyear grant of $199,900 for a collaborative planning project to develop a management and operational plan for the Center that maximizes public services and the preservation of collections, and to develop a detailed plan for the Center's Integrated Collections Access and Management System.
11
Visions of World War II in the Wild Blue Yonder by Frances Morgan In July 1998, the Central Arkansas Library System (CALS) has published over 30 books and some 1,000 aviation magazine completed a one-year project grant from the National Historical and newspaper articles for a number of noteworthy aerospace Publications and Records Commission.
The grant provided publications.
Early on, he realized that photographs were part partial funding for the processing of photographs, transparencies, and parcel of a good aviation monograph, and so became a and negatives from the Jay Miller Aviation History Collection. competent aviation photographer as well.
Cooperative efforts with other aviation writers, photographers, and enthusiasts The Miller Collection consists of approximately 21 tons of worked in his favor, and his collection grew rapidly.
As his information-laden material, the primary focus of which is aircraft reputation as an aviation writer spread, his ability to access identification.
Its various components include books, journals, aircraft for photography increased dramatically.
Military aircraft newspapers, photographs, broadsides, technical drawings, in particular, historically more difficult to access than aircraft in blueprints, scrapbooks, postcards, videos, audio recordings, film, the civilian sector, became not difficult to access at all. microfiche, pamphlets, manuscripts, and regalia.
Among the more significant items are a complete original first-edition set Eventually Miller was given the opportunity to acquire some of Jane's All the World's of the world's finest aviation Aircraft (1909 to the present); a photograph collections, inclunumber of pre-Wright Brothers ding those of David Anderton, (1903) titles, such as the very Erwin "Pete" Bulban, Joseph rare St. Fond volume (1784) Nieto (who had assembled one describing the first balloon of the world's finest collections experiments of the Montgolfier of World War I images), and brothers; a first edition of Astra numerous others.
These collecCastra (1865); a large philatelic tions he combined with his own, collection of aeronautical items and they became the photofrom most of the countries of the graphic component of the Jay world; complete runs of many Miller Aviation History Collecof the world's most important tion.
The total photographic aviation periodicals, including collection now consists of the only complete set of Air approximately 300,000 images, Pictorial known to exist in the of which approximately 20% are United States; space memoWorld War II aircraft reprerabilia, including Soyuz-related senting all of the major materials; original artwork and combatants.
The Supermarine Spitfire, one of the most famous aircraft of World War II.
With the Hawker Hurricane and the Spitfire, photographs signed by virtually In 1992, Miller decided that assisted by early radar technology, RAF pilots defeated their every significant aviation his collection had outgrown his counterparts in the Luftwaffe during the Battle of Britain in personality of the twentieth physical and financial resources, 1940.
Photo from the Miller Collection. century; and full-scale hardand contacted potential buyers.
ware, examples of which are a Convair B-58 encapsulated Serious interest in purchasing the Miller Collection came from ejection seat, a Norden bombsight, and the exhaust nozzle and as far away as Tokyo and as near as Little Rock, Arkansas.
Miller combustion chamber of the Thiokol XLR99 rocket engine from sold to the first group that offered him a check.
The collection the North American X-15.
was bought by the Arkansas Aviation Historical Society, and The photograph portion of the Miller Collection contains became the reference library of the Aerospace Education Center prints, transparencies, and/or negatives of commercial, military, (AEC) in Little Rock.
A contingent circumstance of keeping the and civil aircraft; missiles and spacecraft; experimental aircraft; collection so close to Texas is that Miller is easily able to add helicopters; vertical take-off and landing craft; home-built materials to it, and is available to CALS and AEC for consultation aircraft; and restored historic aircraft.
It also includes images of when necessary.
For instance, he served as a coordinating board air museums, air crashes, and aviators.
By the close of the grant member, ex-officio, for the NHPRC grant.
period, airframes from over 500 aircraft manufacturers had been The collaboration of CALS and AEC regarding the ownership, identified and processed.
Since that time, the number of administration, and management of the Jay Miller Aviation History manufacturers identified has risen to over 520! Collection has made it possible for the collection to be used by Jay Niessen Miller of Arlington, Texas, began collecting local patrons and by any researcher who has Internet and/or OCLC information and artifacts relating to airplanes and aviation over access.
Neither agency has money enough to both purchase supplies 40 years ago.
A Christmas gift given to him by his father was and maintain staff to properly process the collection, but together the catalyst; the gift was a 1957 edition of The Observer's Book the two agencies can and do both.
of Aircraft.
Miller's interest in the field grew, and ultimately CALS is a city-county agency which operates a full-service resulted in his becoming an aviation author of some repute.
He public library that serves seventeen counties in central Arkansas.
13
Documenting Lutherans' Response to World War II by Ellen D. Swain "The Christian front is not broken.
War has surged against By 1964, NLC Archivist Helen M. Knubel, with the its outposts in Asia and Africa, swirled about its congregations assistance of an archives consultant, began the task of arranging and homes in Europe and America, and dislodged many of its and describing these organizations' records, collectively referred members from security.
But the work of the church goes on.... to as the Archives of Cooperative Lutheranism.
Transferred in The Church is rising to the occasion in a manner worthy of its 1967 to the NLC's successor, Lutheran Council in the USA ideals" [Lutheran World Action (LWA) promotional brochure, (LCUSA), the Archives, by 1987, comprised over 730 cubic 1942, found in LWA Correspondence Files, 1939-1978, 1980 feet of agency records documenting inter-Lutheran work in (NLC 4/2, Box 18, "Publicity Material, 1939-1943")]. refugee and emergency war relief, church-state relations, immigration services, European-American church relations, Assuring American Lutherans of the Church's steadfastness global missions, ecumenical and inter-religious dialogues, in the turmoil of war, the National Lutheran Council (NLC), churches in the third world, and social through its fund-raising program welfare in the twentieth century.
Lutheran World Action (LWA), appealed to American Lutherans to support the After the closure of LCUSA in 1987, Council's relief efforts at home and the Archives was transferred again to the abroad.
The NLC, an inter-Lutheran newly established Evangelical Lutheran American agency mandated to direct and Church in America (ELCA), a merger support Lutheran domestic and interchurch formed by inter-Lutheran agency national programs, responded to World participants, with the exception of the War II (WWII) devastation and needs in LCMS.
As a condition of this transfer, strong measure through a number of the ELCA agreed to microfilm certain initiatives.
These relief efforts continued LCUSA records in the collection for the long after the war's end in the form of an LCMS, who had participated in a number ambitious refugee resettlement program of NLC programs and was a partner in and financial support for Lutheran LCUSA.
However, although records orphaned missions and churches around produced before 1967 had received some the world.
archival attention, those produced after this time, including the LCUSA files, Specifically, the NLC established a were not arranged or inventoried, and as Service Commission to minister to the a result, were difficult to access.
spiritual needs of American Lutheran Therefore, before a microfilming project servicemen overseas; administered a could begin, the records first needed to Temporary Communities program to be arranged and described.
provide spiritual care to U.S. communities Lutheran World Action , begun in 1940, was formed by WWII production; and, in the funding arm of the National Lutheran In 1995, NHPRC generously funded cooperation with the Lutheran Church- Council (NLC) for overseas relief.
The armthe Helen M. Knubel Archives of Missouri Synod, founded the Lutheran and-cross symbol was familiar to American Cooperative Lutheranism Project, a twoCommission for Prisoners of War to Lutherans during the war.
Here it is year project to arrange, describe, and minister to prisoners of war in the United superimposed on a photograph of a ruined catalog the records in the Archives of church to represent the devastation caused by States.
To finance these endeavors, Cooperative Lutheranism, renamed for LWA and Lutheran World Relie f war.
From NLC News Bureau photo files.
Knubel after her death in 1992.
The grant (LWR), established in 1945 as a material aid companion provided for a project archivist and secretary who would process program to LWA, appealed to American Lutheran the records under the direction of ELCA Director for Archives congregations for support.
These monies also allowed NLC and Chief Archivist Elisabeth Wittman and in cooperation with leaders, serving as the American Section of the Lutheran other ELCA Archives staff members.
World Convention, an international, ecumenical Lutheran Initiated in July 1996, the project involved an estimated 650 body formed in 1923, to support orphaned missions cubic feet of records from the following agencies: National previously administered by the Lutheran churches in Nazi Lutheran Commission for Soldiers' and Sailors' Welfare (1917Germany.
1922), the National Lutheran Council (1918-1966), the Lutheran After the armistice, the NLC devoted its efforts to World Convention (1923-1947), the U.S.A.
National Committee reconstruction and resettlement of war torn countries, again of the Lutheran World Federation (1947-1976), Lutheran World through LWA and LWR appeals.
The NLC's Lutheran Ministries (1977-1987), and Lutheran Council in the USA (1966Resettlement Service (LRS), established to assist refugees 1987).
Smaller agencies and organizations under the Knubel coming to the United States under the Displaced Persons Act Archives purview and all audiovisual material were eliminated of 1948, became the forerunner of a number of inter-Lutheran from the scope of the project due to the two-year time constraint.
resettlement agencies, including Lutheran Immigration and The first nine months of the grant were devoted to records Refugee Service, founded in 1967 and currently in operation.
of the oldest organizations in the Knubel Archives.
Because these
15
World War II Refugees and the Unitarian Service Committee by Timothy Driscoll News of refugee crises caused by early Nazi imperialism prompted numerous modern missionary movements in the midto late 1930s.
By 1938, in an effort to aid European missions undertaken by the American Friends Service Committee (AFSC) and other organizations, American Unitarian Association (AUA) ministers, including Robert Dexter, Waitstill Sharp, Martha Sharp, and AUA president Frederick May Eliot, informally constructed a network of volunteers and supporters to provide assistance to refugees in Czechoslovakia's Sudeten province.
The Sharps agreed in early 1938 to undertake a fact-finding mission to Czechoslovakia, while Eliot, Dexter, and an emerging educational, and medical aid projects to help rebuild dozens of cities and regions left devastated by Nazi occupation and Allied liberation efforts.
The work was urgent and complex, and the dynamics of the institution changed often, according to the attention required to oversee continuing and new projects and specific cases.
The Unitarian and the Universalist denominations merged in 1964 to become the Unitarian Universalists.
The Universalists also had a wartime service committee, and the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee (UUSC) was the successor of the two earlier committees.
The Unitarian Universalists
The city of Bremen after wartime air raids had reduced it to rubble.
National Lutheran Council News Bureau photo.
group of ministers and lay volunteers formed an exploratory commission to seek funding for aid programs that would provide refuge, shelter, clothing, food, and community for the uprooted population.
In May 1939, after the AUA Board of Directors voted to fund the Czech project, and while Czech relief continued and fact-finding missions to Poland and other European nations were undertaken, the Unitarian Service Committee (USC) was formed as an agency independent from AUA governance.
Throughout World War II and in its aftermath, the Unitarian Service Committee acted to counter the ravaging effects of the war throughout Europe, Asia, and North Africa.
The USC implemented emigration, sanitation, economic, agricultural, eventually donated the records of all three committees to Harvard Divinity School.
The UUSC archives contain a rich and comprehensive collection of case files and project files relating to the USC's early role in refugee assistance.
The records document the formation and development of the USC as one agency among dozens working independently and cooperatively during World War II to rescue and help repair millions of lives destabilized by the war.
This summary of the refugee records is a selective description of the vast body of case files and project files in the UUSC archives.
It is an archivist's attempt to shed light on the contents of a collection, and it is by no means an attempt to
17
resistance and subsequently disappeared.
The case appears to have been matched by USC staff with an letter from an American citizen expressing interest in helping "a family of three with a small daughter under two years...."
Documentation of USC staff efforts to connect the need with volunteer interest exists in correspondence between the USC Boston and Toulouse offices, and finally in an exchange of letters between the USC and the donor describing the situation of the fatherless family and the donor's affirmative response, asking for clarification about the gender of the children so that the proper clothes might be donated.
The amount of, and level of detail in, correspondence required to connect one American family with one refugee family, among the tens of thousands of pages documenting similar situations during World War II and the postwar era is impressive.
The energy and efficiency of this handful of people in the USC offices in America and in Europe, tracking and attempting to connect war victims with people who were able to provide some sort of aid, is as impressive as any of the singular stories within the archives.
Many of the case files include anonymous third-person narratives of the situation of the refugee(s).
The purpose of the narratives is unclear, but one can imagine them being used for raising funds, for general USC operations, and for other specific purposes.
The story of a young German couple forced into a refugee camp in Ericeira, Portugal, is powerfully descriptive.
The first document begins with an invitation to imagine a photograph of the family in front of their house.
The narrative then focuses on the present life of the family and describes their paths to Ericeira.
After escaping imprisonment for his role in the Spanish Republican war effort, the man met his future wife, then a war-widow, in Lisbon.
They eventually married.
The man's past soon was exposed, and husband and wife, then with two children, were held incommunicado in prison.
After a month in prison, she attempted suicide.
The narrative then switches perspectives to describe the USC's role in caring for the couple's children while they were imprisoned.
USC staff members acted as observers during the mother's incarceration and subsequent medical treatment, and played a part in her ultimate return to Ericeira and her children.
The narrative ends with the story of the husband, who was finally released in 1946, after spending months in solitary confinement and years in various prisons.
The couple remained separated and their future uncertain.
Like many of the cases documented in the USC archives, this story ends without resolution or conclusion.
Other case files reveal the financial considerations central to USC operations.
Cases required sponsors, but even with sponsors, it was very expensive to adequately resolve a case.
One example is the plight of a man transported from Lisbon to his homeland in
Mexico.
The file includes correspondence with the man's brother in Philadelphia, asking for an additional two hundred dollars to defray the transportation costs.
When the brother wrote USC staff that he could not afford to reimburse the agency for the costs, USC staff worked out an arrangement with another aid agency to cover the expenses.
Despite the constant financial shortcomings in an operation as vast as this, it is clear from these files that the USC worked under the premise that missions were the primary focus, and that the expenses associated with the work were a secondary consideration.
Financial problems were significant and occasionally decisive, however.
Some of the USC case files are organized more as project files.
These files detail cases from the broader perspective of the administration of various field offices in Europe.
One crisis in the Paris field office was dramatically documented in correspondence, reports, and narratives.
The liquidation in 1946 of the National War Fund, a primary financial resource for USC operations, set the stage for a decision at USC headquarters in Boston to close the Paris office and remove the director of European operations.
The correspondence from the European side indicated clear symptoms of stress and fatigue within the Paris office that resulted in inefficiency and low morale.
The correspondence and operational reports are supplemented by detailed accounting and budget records that delineate the expenditures of all Paris operations, including all aid project costs and operational overhead.
The most compelling documentation is found in the final exchange between Boston and the European director.
These letters balance the USC officers' appreciation for the work of the field staff with their practical realism in determining the need to close the Paris office and reorganize the entire European operation.
To date, there are no comprehensive histories of this aspect of the USC's history and work.
The complicated arrangement of the collection begs for intensive and long-term research projects.
Since processing and cataloging were completed in 1995, the collection has been used primarily by individuals tracing the role of the USC and its allied agencies in aiding them and/or their relatives.
Research was also recently undertaken to prepare an overview of the collection as part of a larger project to document the work of relief organizations during World War II.
As contemporary cultural interest in the World War II era continues to grow, these Service Committee records may serve as a major resource documenting the human tragedy of World War II, the heroism and bravery of its victims, and the efforts of those who worked to repair the damaged lives and populations.
(Timothy Driscoll is the Curator of Manuscripts and Archives at Harvard Divinity School's Andover-Harvard Theological Library.)
Annotation is available free of charge! Annotation, the quarterly newsletter of the National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC), the Federal grant agency affiliated with the National Archives and Records Administration, and the only grantmaking agency whose sole concern is the identification, preservation, and accessibility of the nation's historical documentation, whatever its format.
Annotation provides the latest news about the Commission's work and programs.
Each issue explores a different theme or particular subject area which has received Commission support.
To be placed on the Annotation mailing list, please contact Daniel Stokes, NHPRC, National Archives and Records Administration, 700 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20408-0001; (202) 501-5610 (voice); (202) 501-5601 (fax); daniel.stokes@arch1.nara.gov (e-mail).
19
