[aio.gif] [space.gif]
1999 Contact: Micah Swafford (202)225-2132
Istook Questions National Security Impact of Foreign Oil
Washington, D.C.
-- Today, Congressman Ernest Istook (R-OK) asked the U. S. Department of Commerce to investigate the impact of foreign oil imports on America's domestic oil industry and on U.S. national security.
Importing oil from Iraq now the fourth largest source of foreign oil for the U.S. is contrary to America's national security, he says, and should be curtailed.
Under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, the Commerce Department must comply with a Congressman's request for such an investigation.
Istook noted in his letter to the Secretary of Commerce that foreign oil imports have increased dramatically in the last twenty years, while domestic production has declined.
He writes, "Without immediate action by the federal government, more wells will be capped, which will further erode our national security."
Istook proposes that the U.S. help enforce existing agreements which would limit the export of Iraqi oil to the U.S. Istook also advocates federal action such as restricting foreign aid or benefits to foreign countries that are overproducing, enacting a marginal well tax credit, and ridding the domestic oil industry of burdensome regulation.
Istook also points out the inconsistency of Clinton's foreign policy which allows our leading foe Iraq to export oil while U.S. troops simultaneously bomb their country.
"The domestic oil industry crisis does not just affect the oil patch," said Istook.
"It hurts the entire country.
This investigation will help document the very real impact that our increasing dependence on foreign oil imports is having on our national security."
Istook requested that the investigation be completed within 60 days.
The text of the letter is as follows:
March 11, 1999
The Honorable William M. Daley Secretary of Commerce 14th Street and Constitution Ave.
NW Washington DC 20230
Dear Secretary Daley:
I request that you immediately undertake an investigation, under section 232 of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962, of the impact that imported oil is having on the domestic oil industry, as well as on the National Security of our country.
Currently, the domestic oil industry is enduring the longest sustained period of low prices since 1978.
This is having a devastating impact on the domestic oil industry.
While all oil companies have been affected by the low price of oil, those hurt the most are the domestic independent producers.
At the end of 1978, the United States imported 43% of the oil we consumed, whereas today we import about 55%.
Additionally, in 1979 there were 52,204 new wells drilled, whereas in 1998 there were only 22,892 new wells drilled.
Even this number underestimates the problem.
Most of the drilling occurred in the early part of the year; December saw only 1,473 new wells drilled.
In 1979, there were 2,177 rotary rigs in operation, whereas by the end of 1998 there were only 647, 71% less.
The rise in imported oil is most striking when compared to the decline in domestic production.
In 1982 the United States produced 8.6 million barrels of crude oil per day.
By 1998 this had dropped to 6.3 million barrels per day, a decline of more than 27%.
But while domestic production has dropped over 2 million barrels per day, imports increased from 3.4 million barrels per day in 1982 to over 8.5 million barrels per day in 1998, an increase of 250% in just 17 years.
Additionally, the low price of oil has had an impact on the available qualified workforce.
In 1981, 1.9 million people worked in the domestic oil industry.
By 1996 this number had been reduced to 1.4 million.
If oil prices remain at current levels for much longer this number will decrease even more dramatically.
Oil producing states estimate that nearly 11,000 jobs were lost in the oil and gas exploration and production sector in the first three quarters of 1998.
Currently, there are about 573,000 oil wells operating in the United States (excluding Alaska and offshore production).
However, about 436,000 of these wells, or 76%, are marginally economic, called marginal wells.
These marginal wells are the most at risk from the low price of oil.
While marginal wells produce only 2.2 barrels per day on average, they account for about 25% of the total oil produced in the United States.
Further, while marginal wells account for only 25% of total domestic oil production, marginal wells account for about 75% of the oil produced by the small independent oil companies.
For the first six months of 1998 an estimated 48,702 wells were idled or shut in, according to a recent survey of 23 oil producing states.
As low prices continue, more and more marginal wells, that would be economical at $14.00 per barrel, are being capped because oil has been averaging $11.16 for too long to justify operating.
Once an oil well is capped it can never be reopened and would most likely be uneconomical to re-drill.
Thus, what was once an national asset is lost forever.
Many states and localities rely upon revenues raised from the domestic oil patch for their annual budget.
In the first six months of 1998, Wyoming estimates low oil prices will cost $100 million in lost revenue, Louisiana estimates the direct loss to their treasury at over $98 million, and in Texas oil severance tax revenues fell $94 million.
In Oklahoma gross production tax collections were 57% lower than expected for the first six months of 1998.
In addition to the losses suffered by the state treasuries from low prices, states must pay increased unemployment claims and retraining costs due to the related loss of jobs in the oil patch.
Without the immediate, action by the federal government, more wells will be capped which will further erode our national security.
Without immediate action most of the domestic oil industry will be lost, which will further increase our dependence on imported oil from 55% to over 70%.
Although there are limits to what the federal government can do to increase the security of the domestic oil industry, some remedies can be pursued, such as restricting foreign aid or other benefits to foreign countries that are overproducing in violation of agreed-to limits, enacting a marginal well tax credit, allowing a percentage of loss carryback such as is already allowed for farmers (and which the administration has proposed for the steel industry).
Additionally, the Administration should immediately drop the proposed changes in the valuation of oil by the Minerals Management Service oil and also drop other proposed new burdensome regulations that would further hurt the domestic oil industry.
Additionally, part of the problem is the current administrative policy of allowing Iraq to export oil, which, only further strengthens our leading foe.
In fact, while we were bombing Iraq in December we were importing 486,000 barrels of Iraqi oil per day.
This number increased to 510,000 barrels per day in January.
Importing oil from Iraq -- now the fourth largest source of foreign oil for the U.S.-- is contrary to Americas national security and should be curtailed.
Therefore, I request that you immediately begin an investigation of the impact that imported oil is having on the domestic oil industry and provide a report within 60 days.
If you have any questions about this request you may contact me, or John Albaugh, of my staff, at 225-2132.
Very Truly Yours,
Ernest J. Istook
###
[abottom.gif]
