Dissenting Views to H.R. 4548, the "Agricultural Opportunities Act"
We strongly dissent from H.R. 4548, the so-called "Agricultural Opportunities Act," which constitutes a dangerous step back to the days of the Bracero program when migrant farm workers were little more than indentured servants to agricultural employers.
At a time when there is no evidence of a shortage of U.S. farm workers, the legislation would gut the minimal protections in the current H-2A program (designed to protect domestic and foreign workers) , reduce wages, and result in a substantial increase in illegal immigration.
H.R. 4548 is opposed by the Administration; in fact, the President's senior advisors are recommending that the President veto any legislation including H.R. 4548.^(1) In addition, the bill is opposed by over 170 national, state and local groups with an interest in immigration, labor, civil rights, religious and environmental policy, including the AFL-CIO,^(2) United Farm Workers,^(3) National Council of La Raza,^(4) American Bar Association,^(5) Farmworker Justice Fund, U.S. Catholic Conference, Mexican American Legal Defense and Education Fund,^(6) Asian Pacific American Labor Alliance, League of United Latin American Citizens, National Center for Farmworker Health, Service Employees International Union, Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, and United Methodist Church.^(7)
H.R. 4548 proposes to restructure the farm labor market through the use of a new "guest worker" program that ultimately will replace the current H-2A program.
Directly contrary to this proposal, the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, chaired by the late Barbara Jordan, concluded that a new agricultural guest worker program would be a "grievous mistake."^(8) The Jordan Commission further wrote that:
Even if labor shortages develop, the Commission would be cautious about recommendations for a guestworker program.
Guestworker programs effectively expand rural poverty.
Moreover, guestworker programs are predicated on limitations on the freedom of those who are invited to enter and work.
Experience has shown that such limitations are incompatible with the values of democratic societies worldwide.
For that very reason, 'temporary' guest workers tend to become permanent residents, de facto or even de jure.
We cannot ignore the inconsistency between the stated intent of guestworker programs and their actual consequences.^(9)
In our view, H.R. 4548 creates a guest worker program that realizes the worst fears of the Jordan Commission.
For these and the reasons set forth herein, we strongly reject the legislation.
Background and Description of the Current Guest Worker Program and H.R. 4548
United States agricultural employers, since the end of the Civil War, have repeatedly sought ways to hire foreign workers as a significant part of their seasonal workforce.
The present legislative effort may be seen in that context.
Between 1942 and 1964, many Mexican farm workers worked legally in the United States under the U.S.-Mexico agreement known as the Bracero program, a temporary foreign agricultural worker program that was established initially to meet World War II labor shortages.
When this program peaked in the last half of the 1950s, it employed more than 400,000 workers a year.
Many guest workers received less than the minimum wage, were housed in dilapidated shacks and were dismissed and shipped home if they spoke up for their rights.
After employers deducted for food, housing and transportation, some braceros netted less than $100 for a season's work.
The Bracero program was repealed in 1964, after an Edward R. Murrow documentary called "Harvest of Shame" exposed abuses by the growers, including unpaid wages, poor housing, and the physical toll of "stoop labor."
^Since that time, the only legal temporary foreign agricultural worker program in the United States has been the permanent H-2/H-2A program.^(10) The current H-2A program permits the admission of foreign agricultural workers to perform work that is temporary in nature, provided that U.S. workers are not available.
It is administered by the Department of Labor's Employment and Training Administration ("DOL/ETA") and the Department of Justice's ("DOJ") Immigration and Naturalization Service ("INS").
The H-2A program requires an affirmative search for available U.S. workers and a determination that admitting foreign workers will not adversely affect the wages and working conditions of similarly-employed U.S. workers.
To ensure that U.S. workers' wages and conditions are not undermined by the availability of foreign workers, and to avoid exploitation of the foreign guest workers, the H-2A program includes minimum standards regarding wages, housing, reimbursement of travel costs, and a minimum work guarantee for all workers - foreign and domestic.
H.R. 4548 establishes a new guest worker pilot program (known as H-2C),^(11) and significantly alters worker protections applicable to foreign and domestic workers.
H-2C eliminates positive recruitment and preference requirements relating to U.S. workers and instead allows employers to hire an unlimited number of foreign guest workers if they are unable to retain a sufficient number of domestic workers through a proposed new job registry.^(12) The bill pares back on worker protections currently provided under the H-2A program.
Among other things, H.R. 4548 creates a complex new wage formula that will result in lower wages than current law,^(13) allows employers to in many cases substitute a housing allowance for actual housing,^(14) and reduces employee travel reimbursement requirements.^(15) Finally, the bill includes some modest enforcement requirements^(16) and establishes several studies to consider the problems involved in housing migrant agricultural workers, issues related to the adequacy of education and day care for the children of migrant agricultural workers, the problem of field sanitation standards, and to evaluate the implementation of the pilot program.
* There Is No Shortage of Agricultural Workers
As a threshold matter, we would note that there is no shortage of domestic agricultural workers that would justify this drastic legislation.
Indeed, the evidence points precisely to the opposite conclusion - there is a continuing glut of agricultural workers, who earn below poverty level wages while enduring inordinately difficult work under arduous working conditions.
The conditions of agricultural workers in this country continue to be characterized as a "harvest of shame" forty years after that phrase was made famous by Edward R. Murrow's documentary.^(17)
Recent and reliable information from the National Agricultural Workers Survey shows that the situation of farm workers has continued to decline: wages have stagnated, annual earnings remain beneath the poverty level, and farm workers face chronic unemployment.
Consider the following: * In 1997-98, most farm workers held only one farm job per year and were employed in agriculture for less than half a year.
* Even in July, when demand for farm labor peaks in many parts of the country, just over half of the total farm workforce held agricultural jobs.
* Since 1990-92, the average work year in agriculture has decreased from 26 to 24 weeks; while the number of weeks in nonagricultural employment has fallen from eight to five.
Basically, another month of unemployment has been added to the farm worker misery index.
At the same time, despite a strong economy and record prosperity, farm worker wages have lost ground relative to those of workers in the private, nonfarm sector.
Adjusted for inflation, the average real hourly wage of farm workers has dropped from $6.89 to $6.18.
Consequently, farm workers have lost 11 percent of their purchasing power over the last decade.
In addition, a 1998 General Accounting Office study found that unemployment in twenty counties accounting for about half of the fruits, tree nuts and vegetables grown in the United States was so high that they either qualified for a Food Stamp waiver or were designated as a labor surplus area.
In California, the unemployment rates in eighteen agricultural counties continue to be nearly double the statewide average even during peak harvest months.^(18)
The California Rural Legal Assistant Foundation (CRLAF) has conducted surveys of farm workers in certain raisin and grape producing counties during harvests in the last three years.
These surveys have consistently found that there are available farm workers who are not being recruited by employers.
In fact, employers are doing a poor job of making their work opportunities known.
Unfortunately, H.R. 4548 does not offer solutions to reducing farm worker unemployment and poverty; instead, it guarantees a perpetuation of these severe problems.
* The Legislation Would Harm all Workers by Weakening Protections Relating to Wages, Housing, and Travel Reimbursements
H.R. 4548 would harm domestic and foreign migrant farm workers in a number of respects.
Most significantly, it would reduce their wages, it would deny them fair and adequate housing, and it would cause them to bear increased travel expenses.
We believe that, at a time when several hundred thousand farm workers already earn less than the poverty level, and face poor housing and working conditions, it is wholly inappropriate to reduce these critical worker protections.
Wages
In terms of wages, the legislation adopts a formula that permits employers to pay substantially less than under the H-2A program, and then creates loopholes to offer an even lower wage.
Under the current H-2A program, employers must offer and pay U.S. and foreign workers the highest of three wage rates: (1) the state or federal minimum hourly wage, (2) the local prevailing wage for the particular job, and (3) the adverse effect wage rate or "AEWR" (the "adverse effect" concept is based on the principal that foreign workers should not be permitted to depress the wage rates of U.S. workers -- i.e., citizens and legal immigrants).
H.R. 4548 weakens these core wage protections available under current law in several important and significant ways.
First, the bill alters the definition of "adverse effect" wage so that it equals the prevailing wage (or, in some limited circumstances, the prevailing wage plus 5%).
Since the adverse effect wage is typically higher than local prevailing wages paid by H-2A employers, eliminating this standard will depress wages for agricultural workers generally.
Second, H.R. 4548 permits employers to determine prevailing wages by relying on an employer-generated prevailing wage survey.
In an industry known for its informal record keeping and "off the books" employment, it is questionable whether it is appropriate to allow the employers to conduct the surveys that determine the prevailing wage.^(19)
Third, H.R. 4548 contains a large "loophole" that permits employers to show that their employees, as a group, on average, earned the same level of earnings that they would have earned if they had been paid the actual prevailing wage.
Under current H-2A law, if the prevailing wage is $6.50 per hour, all workers must be offered the prevailing wage of $6.50 per hour or the AEWR, whichever is higher.
By contrast, an H-2C employer could pay some workers less than $6.50 per hour, as long as the group of employees averaged at least $6.50 per hour.
In other words, under the proposed H-2C system, many individual workers will not be entitled to the prevailing wage or its equivalent.
It is because of these concerns that the AFL-CIO has observed:
With the disparity between pay requirements in current law and the proposed agricultural guestworker program, tens of thousands of farm workers would be very likely to experience pay cuts.
For example, the AFL-CIO has estimated that in North Carolina alone, more than ten thousand farm workers - H-2A and similarly-employed U.S. workers - could experience a nearly 20 percent pay cut under the reduced minimum wage provisions of the proposed H-2C program.
Housing
During the days of the Bracero program, migrant workers slept in fields and ditches because no housing was available.
Though housing guarantees were written into Bracero contracts, the requirements were poorly enforced and routinely circumvented.^(20) If the Committee-reported bill is enacted into law, we risk returning to these horrors and abuses.
This is because, under H.R. 4548, if the Governor certifies that adequate housing exists within the area of employment, the employer once again will not need to provide workers with housing.
Instead, the employer can provide either housing or a housing allowance to the migrant farm workers.^(21) Though the certification may assist in having employers provide housing where none exists, it remains possible that such a certification will be issued even though particular parts of an area have adequate housing while other parts covered by the certification do not.
Certainly, providing workers with a housing allowance when no housing exists is a hollow gesture.
Moreover, assuming affordable housing does exist, few landlords will be willing to offer the short-term rentals needed by farm workers.
Of even greater concern is that the amount of the housing allowance required in H.R. 4548 often will be completely inadequate because it is based on a formula that yields less than the actual cost of housing in the areas where farm workers will be employed.
The bill states that the allowance will be equal to the "statewide average fair market rental for existing housing for non-metropolitan counties for the State in which the employment occurs."^(22) Several major agricultural production counties, such as Fresno County, California, are categorized by HUD as "metropolitan" even though they are largely rural.
These "metropolitan" counties often have much higher rental costs than the non-metropolitan counties.
As a result, housing allowances are based on rental costs in non-metropolitan counties even though much of the available housing is in the more expensive metropolitan counties.
In practical terms, workers in such areas would receive about $4 per day toward housing, an unacceptably low amount.
Travel Expenses
Currently, the H-2A program requires employers to reimburse workers for their costs of transportation to the place of employment once they complete one-half the season, and to pay the workers' transportation to their homeland upon completion of the entire season.
In addition, the H-2A regulations require employers to advance to U.S. workers the costs of transportation to the place of employment if such advances are made to foreign workers.
These provisions offer financial assistance to workers who are traveling long distances to accept low-paying jobs, help ensure that temporary foreign workers will return home, and prevent employers from discriminating against U.S. workers and in favor of foreign workers regarding transportation benefits.
H.R. 4548 would require employers to reimburse costs of transportation to the place of employment after the first half of the season and payment of the costs of transportation home at the end of the season, but only for foreign workers and for U.S. workers who were referred through a job registry.^(23) Those U.S. workers who obtained the job by applying directly to the employer or through other methods outside a job registry would not be entitled to the transportation benefit.
Further, H.R. 4548 does not address the issue of transportation cost advances.
Moreover, employers would be free to offer transportation benefits to foreign workers that are not offered to U.S. workers.
Because many employers prefer to hire foreign workers, such discriminatory benefits are likely to be used to recruit foreign workers and avoid U.S. workers.
Other problems include the amount of the transportation cost payment.
H.R. 4548 creates the fiction that the workers' "residence shall be deemed to be the place where the alien was issued the visa."^(24) Because the workers in Mexico receive the H-2C visa at the U.S.-Mexican border, but can live very far from the border, they will be denied the actual costs of their transportation, making it more unlikely that they will return to Mexico.
Illustrating the concerns with this provision, United Farm Workers has testified: "Under [H.R. 4548] a worker can be recruited in his home in southern Mexico, told to report to the U.S. consulate in Calexico to be issued his visa and then travel to the Imperial Valley, a journey of hundreds of miles and not receive any transportation reimbursement (the Imperial Valley is less than 100 miles from Calexico).
Moreover, there is nothing in [H.R. 4548] that prevents the employer from actually charging the worker for this transportation."^(25)
III The Legislation Would Harm Domestic Workers in Particular by Eliminating Affirmative Recruitment and Preference Rules
The legislation also would do particular and marked harm to domestic agricultural workers.
This is because it would eliminate critical safeguards for U.S. workers, such as affirmative recruitment and job preference rules, and undermine employee negotiating rights.
Elimination of Affirmative Recruitment
Guestworker programs are intended to fill labor shortages.
Consequently, the current H-2A statute requires employers to engage in "positive recruitment" of U.S. workers.
This requires that employers attempt to locate job applicants and hire them - and use the federal-state Employment Service, before hiring foreign guest workers.
H.R. 4548, however, would not require such recruitment inside the United States.
Instead, the bill calls for the establishment of a new government bureaucracy, a federal-state system of "job registries" devoted solely to the agricultural industry.
This would allow all agricultural employers in the United States to hire foreign migrants if an insufficient number of U.S. workers are available in the job registry.
There are numerous problems with this approach.
First and foremost, under the bill, all agricultural employers could reject qualified U.S. workers who applied for a job directly to the employer, or through a nonprofit group, a union, or a labor contractor.
Moreover, the job registry could have as little as 14 days to recruit U.S. migrant workers before the employer would get access to guestworker visas.
Yet, growers could recruit guestworkers for months.
This core concern was noted by the Department of Labor, when they testified that under H.R. 4548:
for the first time, and in contrast to all other employment situations in the country - would shift the burden of finding workers from the employer to the government.
Agricultural employers desiring to hire foreign guestworker would have no obligation to find U.S. workers on their own behalf except to apply to the government-operated registry, advertise (on behalf of the registry) in a local publication, and make "reasonable efforts" to contact workers employed in the previous season.
Under H.R. 4548, the government would only have 14 days to find an employer's workers, may only search for such workers registered in the state where the work is to be performed, and must contact each potentially qualified worker to obtain a commitment to accept the offered job.
Failure to overcome the obstacles to effectively operating an electronic job matching service in the agricultural labor market would allow the employer to obtain its workforce abroad.^(26)
Second, the bill's intention to have farm workers referred to jobs through computer databases is impractical.
Farm workers generally do not possess computers or access to the Internet, often are isolated from places where computers and modems are available, and usually do not have the knowledge, education or skills to utilize a computer-based job referral system even if they obtained access to a computer and the Internet.^(27) As Rep. Howard Berman (D-CA) has noted, "the registry would work only if every domestic farm worker who desperately seeks these jobs had a laptop computer to receive messages about employers seeking workers in the very short turnaround time allotted for the registry referral."
In addition, assuming the resources were assigned to establish and maintain the job registries, it would take several years for the system to become operational.
In the meantime, the failure of the job registries to send workers to these employers would trigger the obligation of the INS to deliver visas to the employers.
The issuance of visas should be based on the failure of bona fide recruitment efforts, not on the failure to establish these new job registries.
Job Preferences
H.R. 4548 also weakens provisions in current law that guarantee that U.S. workers have an opportunity to fill jobs before they are 50% complete.
Under the H-2A program, an employer must employ a U.S. worker if the worker applies for a position held by a guest worker before 50% of the total time period for the job has elapsed.
The so-called "50% rule" is the primary method of ensuring that U.S. workers are given a job preference in the hiring process.
In 1986, Congress ordered the Secretary of Labor to study this protection to determine whether the benefits of it outweighed the costs.
After conducting a cost-benefit survey of the impact of the rule, the Bush Administration retained the preference in the H-2A program.
Unfortunately, H.R. 4548 does not include a similar provision.^(28)
Indeed, H.R. 4548 contains provisions that are contrary to the 50% rule's job preference.
For example, an employer "shall not be obligated" to offer a job to qualified, eligible U.S. workers who are referred by job registries if the registry is able to refer that qualified U.S. worker to other employers "that offer substantially similar terms and conditions of employment."^(29) Similarly, the Secretary will be obligated to "make all reasonable efforts" to refer a U.S. farm worker to a job other than the H-2C employer's job if the employer has already "committed to" hiring a foreign worker.^(30) Due to these "employer" protections, employers can establish recruitment networks in foreign countries to avoid hiring migrant workers from inside the United States.
General Impact on Employee Rights
Beyond weakening specific worker protections, as a general matter, it seems clear that by making it easier and less expensive for employers to retain large pools of migrant farm workers, this will further reduce the negotiating leverage, and wages and benefits available to U.S. workers.
The bill does this first by increasing the supply of workers and reducing their wages.
This puts American workers in an almost impossible position in terms of seeking to enhance their own wages and benefits.
Second, the bill makes it that much more difficult for workers to organize and negotiate collectively.
This is because guest workers, and, as a result, U.S. workers, lack the bargaining power to improve wages and working conditions.
During the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims hearing on the bill, United Farm Workers explained that:
The fundamental flaw in [guest worker] programs is that workers are not free to change employers and offer their labor in a free labor market.
Without union representation, the best protection that most farm workers have from abusive working conditions is the right to walk away from a bad employer and find work elsewhere.
Guest workers don't have that right.
This is really the underlying issue here.
In some ways, guest workers are in a worse position to protect their rights even than undocumented workers."^(31)
Many guest workers fear that if they demand better wages or working conditions, they will be fired and deported, or that the employers will not request a visa for them in the following year.
As workers with limited education, English-language capacity or job skills, their economic bargaining power is limited.
This in turn has a negative impact on the bargaining power of their U.S. counterparts.
* The Legislation Will Lead to Increased Illegal Immigration
Although proponents would argue that the legislation will encourage legal entry, it is far more likely that it will lead to a massive increase in illegal immigration as hundreds of thousands of persons choose to overstay their temporary visas.
This was the case with the Bracero program.
For example, historian Otey M. Scruggs observed in a study covering the years 1942 to 1947: "the Bracero program, instead of diverting the flow of [illegal aliens] into legal channels, as Mexican officials had hoped, actually stimulated unlawful emigration."
The Department of Labor agrees with this analysis, having testified:
Experts and academics who study migration flows generally agree that guestworker programs establish migratory networks and paths that increase illegal immigration.
Guestworkers tend to come and stay in the receiving country.
The program resulting from H.R. 4548 would be no different.
And it would make it easier for foreign agricultural workers admitted under the program to become illegal workers by overstaying in this country.^(32)
We need not look any further than our country's own experience to conclude that illegal immigration results from guest worker programs.^(33) The reasons why foreign guest workers do not return home are numerous.
Some unauthorized immigrants do not wish to face the risk of returning home and having to cross the border again.
Others would be barred for up to ten years from reentering the country legally under an H-2C program because they currently have been in the United States unlawfully.
Further, law enforcement makes little effort to identify farm workers here unlawfully and employers under the H-2C program would have no obligation to ensure that guest workers returned abroad upon completion of the work.^(34) Though the working conditions of farm workers are poor by any standard, foreign workers often are eager to accept jobs in the United States in an effort to reach our country.
Such an eagerness to live in the United States merely suggests the underlying truth that foreign agricultural will not return to their home country.
The modest enforcement provisions included in the bill will be of little use in stemming the flow of illegal immigration.
Under current law, in addition to paying return transportation costs, H-2A employers must notify the government when their guest workers leave the grower to return to their country of origin.
H.R. 4548, however, would put the employer under no obligation to ensure the workers it imported leave the U.S. upon completion of the work.
To address concerns regarding illegal immigration, Rep. Berman offered an amendment to cap the number of new guest workers at 100,000 per year.
This resulted in a stunning admission by the Subcommittee Chair that the actual expected flow of aliens could be one million persons per year:
Rep. Smith: The pilot program without a numerical cap provides an opportunity to accurately gauge the United States' need for foreign agricultural labor, and I urge my colleagues to oppose this amendment.
The 100,000 cap in the amendment is not nearly enough to meet the demand which is estimated at closer to 1 million .
* * *
Rep. Berman: One of the arguments we have for immigration laws is that we want to protect American jobs.
I thought that included farm workers, who are the lowest-paid workers in America today . . . ; let's have the cap.
The Chairman of the Subcommittee [Smith] indicates that the cap is inadequate, that we may need up to a million new guest workers to come into the country to do agricultural work, notwithstanding the fact that there is no serious evidence that any substantial number of those new guest workers will return to the home country; notwithstanding that there is no evidence that the undocumented workers now in this country will leave and notwithstanding the fact that employer sanctions is a farce because of the presence of forged documents.
So I'll conclude my comments with those and urge adoption of the amendment.
Rep. Berman's realistic and modest amendment unfortunately was defeated.
Therefore, our concerns with the likelihood of illegal immigration resulting from the new H-2C guest worker program remain.
Conclusion
We are in favor of protecting the migrant farm workers who perform back-breaking work to harvest our Nation's crops and believe that foreign and domestic workers must be treated fairly and with dignity.
We also recognize a need to address the concerns of agricultural employers and workers with the current program.
A new guest worker program that threatens to return us to the horrors of the discredited Bracero program is not the answer.
The program proposed in H.R. 4548 would increase vastly the number of undocumented workers in the United States, depress the wages of migrant workers, eliminate the employer-provided housing requirement and remove other worker protections that exist under current law.
For these reasons, we must oppose H.R. 4548.
John Conyers
Barney Frank
Howard L. Berman
Jerrold Nadler
Robert C. Scott
Melvin L. Watt
Zoe Lofgren
Sheila Jackson Lee
Maxine Waters
Martin T. Meehan
William D. Delahunt
Steven R. Rothman
Tammy Baldwin
Anthony D. Weiner
1.
Letter to Rep. John Conyers, Jr., from Jacob J. Lew, Director, Office of Management and Budget, Executive Office of the President (Sept. 13, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee); Letter to Rep. Lamar Smith from Alexis M. Herman, Secretary, U.S. Dept. of Labor (July 27, 2000)(letter on file with the Committee).
2.
Letter to Chairman Henry Hyde from Peggy Taylor, Director, AFL-CIO Department of Legislation (Sept. 11, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee).
3.
Letter to Rep. John Conyers from Arturo Rodriguez, President, United Farm Workers of America (Sept. 18, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee).
4.
Letter to House Judiciary Committee Member from Raul Yzaguirre, President and CEO, National Council of La Raza (Sept. 11, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee).
5.
Letter to Chairman Henry Hyde from Robert D. Evans, Director, American Bar Assoc.
Governmental Affairs Office (Sept. 11, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee).
6.
Letter to Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Bruce Goldstein, Co-Executive Director, Farmworker Justice Fund, Inc.
(July 21, 2000) (letter on file with the Committee).
7.
Letter to Speaker Dennis Hastert (Feb. 15, 2000) (letter from national, state and local organizations opposing a new temporary foreign agricultural worker program) (letter on file with the Committee).
8.
U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, Legal Immigration: Setting Priorities, p. 173 (1995); see also U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, Becoming an American: Immigration and Immigrant Policy, pp. 94-95 (1997).
The Commission on Agricultural Workers, in its final report in 1992, also recommended against a new guestworker program.
Instead, it made recommendations to stabilize the agricultural work force by improving wages and working conditions to attract and retain farm workers and sustain improvements in productivity.
9.
U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, Legal Immigration: Setting Priorities, p. 173.
10.
^10The program began during World War II on the East Coast, was designated as an "H-2" program in 1952, and then as an "H-2A" program in the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA).
Section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, 8 U.S.C § 1101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(A).
The substantive terms appear primarily in section 218 of the INA, 8 U.S.C. § 1188.
In 1986, IRCA contained a "special agricultural worker" (SAW) program, negotiated between agricultural worker and employer representatives, that granted legal immigration status to 1.1 million formerly undocumented workers who could prove that they had performed farm work.
11.
H.R. 4548 establishes a new nonimmigrant visa (H-2C) category for foreign agricultural workers under a three-year pilot program.
H.R. 4548, § 205.
To be eligible for the H-2C visa category, a person must be seeking a temporary position as a seasonal agricultural worker in the United States.
Id. § 205(a).
The foreign worker must demonstrate that he has a permanent residence abroad and that he has no intention of abandoning his foreign residence.
Id. § 205(a).
12.
H.R. 4548 requires DOL to establish a computer database of registries (by state or region of United States) for U.S. workers who are available for temporary seasonal agricultural work.
Id. § 101(b).
Workers apply for inclusion in the registry of the state where they reside and then ask that their names be submitted to any additional states where they intend to seek employment.
Id. § 101(a).
DOL then verifies with DOJ that workers included in the registries are authorized to be employed in the United States.
Id. § 101(b).
Agricultural employers are able to apply to DOL for the referral of eligible U.S. workers.
Id. § 201(a)(1).
DOL then conducts a search of the appropriate registries to identify qualified U.S. workers and determines whether such U.S. workers are interested in the open position.
Id. § 202(a).
Within 21 days, DOL must notify the employer of any U.S. workers who are willing to accept the position.
Id. § 202(b).
No positive recruitment (i.e., the advertising of open positions or other effort to find workers) is required of the employer.
Further, agricultural employers may refuse to hire qualified U.S. workers if the applicant fails to register with a job registry.
Id. § 101(b)(6).
The bill removes certain protections for U.S. workers that exist in current law.
In particular, in some cases employers who apply for registered workers do not need to offer employment to qualified U.S. workers if the worker applies before 50 percent of the anticipated period of employment has elapsed.
Id. §204(e)(2).
Moreover, DOL is required to make "all reasonable efforts" to find an opening for a registered worker before making a referral to an employer that puts the employer in the position of hiring a U.S. worker for a position already filled by a foreign worker.
Id. § 204(e)(3).
A U.S. employer is immediately eligible to hire foreign guest workers if DOL is unable to refer sufficient number of U.S. workers from the job registry.
Id. § 203.
In such cases, DOL submits a report to the employer and the State Department indicating the number of additional workers needed by the U.S. employer.
In turn, the State Department issues H-2C visas to qualified foreign agricultural workers to fill the employers' remaining job opportunities.
Id. § 203.
13.
H.R. 4548 proposes a complicated new wage requirement that substantially differs from current law.
Employers are required to offer and pay the higher of the local "prevailing wage" for the particular job, or the "adverse effect wage rate" ("AEWR").
Id. § 204(a)(1).
The employer cannot pay less than he Federal or state minimum wage.
Under current law, the AEWR generally ensures that the wage being offered to guest workers is not lower than, and thus does not reduce, the prevailing wage rate for U.S. workers.
The bill, however, redefines the term "adverse effect wage rate" to install an arbitrary methodology (at most, 5% above the local prevailing wage formula).
In determining the prevailing wage for a position, an employer may rely on an employer-generated prevailing wage survey.
Id. § 204(a)(3).
Additionally, the bill permits employers to pay the average of the hourly earnings of the workers, taken as a group.
Id. § 204(a)(4)(B).
Thus, an employer may pay individuals below the required wage rate as long as the group of workers on average earns the required rate.
The bill does not guarantee any particular rate of pay to an individual worker.
14.
Employers are required to provide housing or a housing allowance to their agricultural.
The housing shall be at no cost to the worker and must meet Federal, State and local standards, including Federal standards for temporary workers.
Id. § 204(b).
This housing requirement exists under current law.
However, the bill has an additional provision which permits employers to provide workers with a housing allowance in lieu of housing.
If the Governor of the State where the employment is located certifies that housing is available in the area of intended employment, the employer may provide workers with a housing allowance.
Id. § 204(c).
The allowance must be "equal to the statewide average fair market rental for existing housing for nonmetropolitan counties for the States in which the employment occurs . . . based on a 2-bedroom dwelling unit and as assumption of 2 persons per bedroom."
Id. § 204(c)(4).
"Nonmetropolitan counties" are established by the Housing and Urban Development Department.
Id.
15.
A U.S. worker referred by a job registry or foreign guest worker, who travels more than 100 miles to the job, must be reimbursed by the employer for the cost of the worker's transportation from the worker's permanent place of residence or place of last employment.
Id. § 204(d).
The worker is only entitled to reimbursement if he completes 50% of the job's period of employment.
Id.
In the case of the foreign worker, his place of residence is deemed to be the place where he departed the foreign country or where the visa was issued (i.e., the U.S.-Mexican border) rather than his actual place of residence.
Id. § 204(d)(3).
16.
The bill requires that an identification document and identification system be developed to verify the eligibility and identity of nonimmigrant agricultural workers admitted under this program.
The bill also requires DOJ to develop a procedure to verify that H-2C workers depart from the United States when their authorized period of stay expires.
The bill also establishes an administrative complaint mechanism that limits the type and scope of the Secretary's enforcement efforts.
17.
See "Napa Facing Harvest of Shame," S.F. Examiner (Sept. 26, 2000).
18.
State of California, Employment Development Department, Report 400C, 1989-1999.
19.
H.R. 4548, § 204(a)(2).
20.
"As a result of official complacency and employer reluctance rural California was for many years spotted with rundown bracero camps.
In the delta region of the San Joaquin temporary camps were set up among the mosquito-infested sloughs.
Barns and stables were converted to human habitation.
Former Wetback hideouts were fitted with plank bunks, a faucet and other standard equipment.
Empty warehouses and abandoned garages were refurbished for a season."
Ernesto Galarza, Merchants of Labor - The Mexican Bracero Story 194-95 (1964)
21.
H.R. 4548, 204(b)(2).
Under current law, H-2A employers are required to provide housing without charge to those workers who are not reasonably able to return to their residence within the same day.
If provided by the employer, the housing must comply fully with federal standards issued by the Department of Labor for farm labor housing, as well as state housing standards.
The Judiciary Committee adopted an amendment offered by Rep. Gallegly that permitted H-2C employers to provide a housing allowance only when the Governor of their state determined that farm worker housing is available.
22.
H.R. 4548, 204(b)(6)(D).
23.
Id. § 204(c)(1)-(2).
24.
Id. § 204(c)(3)(C).
25.
Hearing on H.R. 4548, the "Agricultural Opportunities Act," Before the Subcomm.
on Immig. and Claims of the House Comm. on the Judiciary, 106th Cong., 2d.
Sess.
(June 15, 2000) (testimony of Marcos Camacho, General Counsel, United Farm Workers).
26.
June 15, 2000 Hearing (testimony of John R. Fraser, Deputy Administrator, Wage and House Division, Employment Standards Admin, Dep't of Labor).
27.
We note that if a worker who is registered turns down 3 job referrals within a 3 month period, then the worker's name is removed from the registry.
101(b)(8).
Thus, a worker who rejects two referrals because he is employed, and rejects a third referral because the wage rate is too low, will be removed from the list.
28.
Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-TX) offered an amendment to include the 50% rule in H.R. 4548 to ensure that some U.S. worker protections are included in the new guest worker program.
The amendment was defeated by the Majority by a vote of 17-12.
29.
H.R. 4548, § 204(d)(2)(C).
30.
Id. § 204(d)(4).
31.
June 15, 2000 Hearing (testimony of Marcos Camacho, General Counsel, United Farm Workers).
32.
Id. (Testimony of John M. Fraser, U.S. Department of Labor).
33.
According to some estimates, approximately 800,000 of the 1.6 million farm workers in the United States are undocumented workers.
34.
Indeed, the GAO concluded that INS enforcement efforts are not likely to significantly reduce the availability of agricultural labor.
GAO -H-2A Guestworker Program, GAO/HEHS-98-20, Dec. 31, 1997 at 30; and GAO followup report in letter to Rep. Howard Berman, September 10, 1998, GAO/HEHS-98-236R, "Employer Experiences with H-2A."
