link to home page Press Releases Jobs Volunteering Contact Us Library Link to Visitor Info Directions Park Programs Exhibits Special Events Photo Tour For Kids! Mogan Center Link to history Lowell History Bibliography Park Brochures Related Links Lowell National Historical Park 
Spinning bees and bounties encouraged the manufacture of homespun cloth as a substitute for English imports.
But manufacturing of cloth outside the household was associated with relief of the poor.
In Boston and Philadelphia, Houses of Industry employed poor families at spinning for their daily bread.
small image of Samuel Slater Samuel Slater
Such practices made many pre-Revolutionary Americans dubious about manufacturing.
After independence there were a number of unsuccessful attempts to establish textile factories.
Americans needed access to the British industrial innovations, but England had passed laws forbidding the export of machinery or the emigration of those who could operate it.
Nevertheless it was an English immigrant, Samuel Slater, who finally introduced British cotton technology to America.
Slater had worked his way up from apprentice to overseer in an English factory using the Arkwright system.
Drawn by American bounties for the introduction of textile technology, he passed as a farmer and sailed for America with details of the Arkwright water frame committed to memory.
In December 1790, working for mill owner Moses Brown, he started up the first permanent American cotton spinning mill in Pawtucket, Rhode Island.
Employing a workforce of nine children between the ages of 7 and 12, Slater successfully mechanized the carding and spinning processes.
A generation of millwrights and textile workers trained under Slater was the catalyst for the rapid proliferation of textile mills in the early 19th century.
From Slater's first mill, the industry spread across New England to places like North Uxbridge, Massachusetts.
For two decades, before Lowell mills and those modeled after them offered competition, the "Rhode Island System" of small, rural spinning mills set the tone for early industrialization.
By 1800 the mill employed more than 100 workers.
A decade later 61 cotton mills turning more than 31,000 spindles were operating in the United States, with Rhode Island and the Philadelphia region the main manufacturing centers.
The textile industry was established, although factory operations were limited to carding and spinning.
It remained for Francis Cabot Lowell to introduce a workable power loom and the integrated factory, in which all textile production steps take place under one roof.
As textile mills proliferated after the turn of the century, a national debate arose over the place of manufacturing in American society.
Thomas Jefferson spoke for those supporting the "yeoman ideal" of a rural Republic, at whose heart was the independent, democratic farmer.
He questioned the spread of factories, worrying about factory workers' loss of economic independence.
Alexander Hamilton led those who promoted manufacturing and saw prosperity growing out of industrial development.
The debate, largely philosophical in the 1790s, grew more urgent after 1830 as textile factories multiplied and increasing numbers of Americans worked in them.
Source: Lowell National Historical Park Handbook 140
Prologue Seeds of Industry Lowell's Southern Connection The Industrial Revolution in England Early American Manufacturing Transportation Canals Making Textiles The Waltham-Lowell System Lowell Machine Shop Lowell's Canal System Waterpower in Lowell Mill Power Drives Power Looms "Mill Girls" Boarding Houses Immigrants Working Conditions Products of the Mills Lowell's Other Industries Decline and Recovery Rebirth of Lowell Jack Kerouac Reading List
Home | Visiting | History | Education | NPS Home "Experience Your America" Email Us!
Celebrating 25 Years!
To Home Page
To Park Visitor Info
To History Section
To Education Pages to Book Store site to Site Index
