Large Capitol Dome The Lewis Letter By U.S. Representative Ron Lewis
Feburary 28, 2003
A Ban on Human Cloning Increases Respect for Life
blue bar
The idea that science research could actually produce cloned humans is something that probably disturbs most of us.
Human lives are not research material, and scientists should not have control over a persons identity and unique characteristics.
The moral and ethical questions raised by cloning, as well as the health risks it poses, are reasons why human cloning should be banned.
This past week in the House of Representatives, we approved a cloning ban by a vote of 241-155.
This cloning ban is the same as the one we passed during the last session of Congress, and this time around, I hope the Senate will be able to act on the legislation as well.
President Bush, in his State of the Union Address, asked that Congress get this legislation to him soon, and Im pleased weve taken the first step.
We need a comprehensive ban of cloning now to stop those who are bent on continuing this unethical and dangerous work.
Scientists tell us cloning is likely to produce children who are stillborn, malformed or have genetic disorders.
In animal cloning, nearly all attempts end in failure, and the cloned embryos are destroyed.
We value human life more than that.
We need to respect life, especially in its earliest stages.
People are not experiments or simply cells that can be created and discarded at will.
During the House debate on cloning, some attempted to water down the bill by allowing human cloning to take place for research purposes while banning it for reproductive purposes.
Their argument that so-called research cloning or therapeutic cloning is different than cloning for reproduction, however, is false.
The same cloning process is used regardless of the purpose for producing the cloned human embryo.
Whether that cloned human embryo is used for reproductive purposes or for research purposes is irrelevant to this debate.
Regardless of whether the process results in a cloned human embryo that is allowed to grow into maturity or a cloned human embryo that is used and destroyed for research purposes, cloning is wrong and dangerous.
Creating human life and then destroying it for research erodes the respect for life and the innate value that each individual possesses.
In order to prevent cloned humans, we have to ban the cloning process, not just outlaw specific purposes that cloned human embryos could be used for.
Cloning for research purposes leads to only one end in the long run: the cloning of humans.
Cloning has produced no medical breakthroughs, but will only produce ethical and legal disaster.
There are researchers out there who claim to have the capability to clone a human and groups who claim they have already done so.
While their claims have not been validated, I dont think we should wait until they show us they have created a human clone.
Then it will be too late to enforce a ban on cloning.
Federal law enforcement agencies tell us that a ban on human cloning is enforceable, and that such a ban is easier to enforce if it applies to all human cloning, not just cloning for specific purposes.
The ban on human cloning is the first step we are taking during this Congress to protect human life.
I expect that we will also vote on legislation to ban partial birth abortion.
I realize there are differences of opinion when it comes to abortion and life issues.
However, I also believe that when it comes to issues such as human cloning and partial birth abortion, a majority in Congress, and of people in Kentucky and around the country, can agree that these actions need to be banned in order to protect life.
Next Previous Lewis Letter Lewis Letter List Lewis Letter
