LONG-TERM CARE TEXT-ONLY SCRIPT July 7, 1999 Whether you're in your 20ies, 30ies, are a baby boomer, or an older adult, the possibility of needing long-term care isn't something most of us like to think about.
Regardless of our age, we hope that as we grow older, we'll be able to continue doing the things we enjoy most whether that means working, volunteering in our communities, making time for family and friends, or enjoying hobbies such as gardening, woodworking or surfing the Internet.
Perhaps of greatest importance is our desire to stay at home and live independently for as long as possible.
What exactly is long-term care anyway? It's a continuum of in-home, community-based, and out-of-home care for people with conditions that require varying levels of nursing care, personal care, or supervision on a routine basis.
Both social and health services are available.
to all ages, though primarily utilized by older adults, and their families.
In other words, it's the kind of help you need if you're unable to care for yourself because of a prolonged illness, or disability, or injury.
It includes a range of services, such as nursing home care and medical services provided in your home.
You may need skilled, intermediate or custodial care, which could be provided in a nursing home, a day care center or in your home.
While the chances of needing long-term care are greater for older adults, children and younger adults can also need it.
The good news is that older adults are living longer, healthier lives thanks, in large part, to advances in medicine.
In spite of this good news, it is expected that 6 out of 10 people living to be 65 years old will need long-term care at some point in their life.
Four in 10 will spend at least some time in a nurising home.
And while the chances of needing long-term care are greater for older persons, children and younger adults can also need long-term care due to illness, injury, or a disabling condition.
Have you thought about what you would do if you, or a family member, needed help with basic daily tasks many of us take for granted? Unfortunately, we don't typically think about what we'd do until there's a crisis, such as suffering from a major stroke.
Often family members can't provide all necessary care, and arrangements have to be made quickly.
Figuring out what service options are available can be difficult enough - but figuring out how you'd pay for the care can be just as difficult.
Whether at home , in a community setting such as or in a residential settingan adult day care center or in a residential facility or nursing home, it can be expensive.
Many older people and their children mistakenly think that Medicare or a Medigap policy will cover home or nursing home care for an extended period of time - the truth is - they don't.
Planning ahead is the answer.
To help you understand your options, we'll tell you about several types of long-term care services that are available in North Carolina and let you hear from people who you have used these services or arranged for them for a family member.
We'll also talk about long-term care payment options.
There are two basic types of long-term care settings: Home 
Home and community based services help you, a family member, or friend stay at home and receive necessary care.
Some of the key services in this category include: * Home delivered meals, for those who are homebound and unable to prepare meals for to cook for themselves,
* Home care services, for those who need help with housekeeping, grocery shopping, preparing meals, and personal care such as dressing, bathing, eating, getting in and out of bed, and going to the bathroom.
This also can include nursing care and therapy services such as physical or speech therapy.
* Medical equipment for the home such as a hospital bed, wheelchairs, walkers, and portable oxygen tanks
* Transportation, for those who need to get from place to place.
Medical appointments are a good exampleetc.
* Adult day care, for those who need supervision, social interaction, and care in a group setting
* Respite care, for those who are cared for primarily by family members.
It which is to provides a break for those caregivers.
This type of help can be provided at home, in an adult day care center or other community center, or in a facility, such as a nursing home, hospital or assisted living facility.
Such Hhelp may maybe provided for just a couple hours, or perhaps for a few days or weeks
.
* Home modifications and home repairs, for those who could use items such as a wheelchair ramp or grab bars in the bathtub to assist in their ability to live independently.
* Hospice, which provides support and care for terminally ill people and their families.
Please note that Hospice services can also be provided at home as well as in in out-of-home settings such as hospitals.
Depending on your needs, one or more of these services can be arranged.
To give you an idea of some of these services, we'll visit someone receiving in-home health care.
After that, we'll go to an adult day care.
Services are typically provided by an agency licensed by the state of North Carolina.
After coming home from the hospital, Mr. Jones soon realized that he would not be able to single-handedly provide all care needed by his wife.
That's when he contacted his local in-home care agency to see if there were any other options for providing Mrs. Jones with the necessary care without removing her from their home.
Much to his relief, there was another option.
Adult day services, also known as adult day care, is a growing option for those adults needing long term care.
Almost all of us wishes prefer to stay at home in his or her as opposed to living in a facility setting but not quiteverybody who needs long-term care has family or friends available to give us as much help or the type of care we need.
Many times, family members and friends are willing to provide care - but they have to juggle providing care with a full-time job, raising their children and taking care of other obligations.
as many people have someone in their home that can care for them 24 hours a day.
This is where adult day services can help.
There are two types of settings: Adult Day Care and Adult Day Health Care.
Adult Day Care is a social setting that is more for people needing supervision, some personal care needs, and social interaction.
This can be particularly helpful for those with Alzheimer's Disease.
Adult Day Health Care is provided for those those who whichhave medical needs that need attention during the course of the day..
Frank Goodwin brings his father, Jack, to an adult day care facility four days a week.
The second category of long-term care settings is out-of-home residential care.
Out-of-home care means relocating to a facility or independent living arrangement where, at least, some supportive services are readily available.
Some of the most common types of residential care include: * Elderly apartments, which may provide supportive services, and Assisted living facilities which must provide supportive services.
They can range from transportation and recreational activities to personal care.
Yet, these facilities are designed to allow the resident to live as independently as possible..
There are several types of assisted living facilities including family care homes, adult care homes, group homes for the developmentally disabled, and multi-unit assisted housing with services.
* Nursing homes, which provide nursing care, and
*
Continuing Care Retirement Communities, also known as life care communities, which combine independent living and health care related services for an extended period of time
.
Let's take a look at these facilities.
Assisted living facilities must provide at least one meal per day, housekeeping services, and, as needed, help with personal care for residents.
Many of these facilities provide three meals per day and also offer 24-hour supervision.
differ from other residential facilities in that there is a high level of independence.
Services provided on an "as needed basis" within an assisted living facility include help with bathing, dressing, moving around, using the bathroom, eating, housekeeping, and daily medications.
Minimal services typically provided by an assisted living facility include 24 hour supervision, personal care, and three meals a day plus snacks.
Other services related to quality of life, may be provided.
They include social services, supervision of people with mental impairments cognitive disabilities, such as Alzheimer's disease, social and religious activities, recreational exercise and educational activities, arrangements for transportation; laundry and linen services, and a hair salon.
and Housekeeping and maintenance
It's important to remember that
Please be aware that aassisted living facilities are available with a large range of amenities - and prices vary widely.
.
For instance, in the most modestly priced facilities - residents may share a bedroom and bathroom, and there may be only a few amenities available Those that are modestly priced may have shared living arrangements and few amenities, while more upscale facilities may have haveprivate apartments with many amenities.
Their prices go from reasonable to very expensive.
When considering an assisted living facility - be sure to ask about services available and cost.
It's also important to know, before you or a family member move in, how much more, if any, you'll have to pay for increased levels of help in the future and under what circumstances you might have to move out.
Typically, Nursing homes are an important part of the long-term care continuum.
They offer nursing and other medical care for you when your primary need is nursing or convalescent care.
As well as nursing care, nursing homes can also arrange for specialized care, such as physical and speech therapy, eye care and dental care.
These facilities also provide meals, social services, and activities.
For many people who need nursing care on a daily basis over an extended period of time - nursing homes may be the most appropriate and cost effective long-term care option.
And remember, Medicare and private insurance usually pay for skilled nursing care for a limited amount of time regardless of whether that care is provided at home or in a nursing home.
Meet Mr. Capman.
His wife is a resident of a nursing home.
Custodial care refers to assistance with non-medical needs.
The majority of long term care is custodial.
Continuing care retirement communities, or CCRCs, an attractive living alternative for retirement age individuals and couples.
Also known as continuing care facilities and life-care communities, these communities differ from other retirement options by providing offer both housing and health-related services either for life or for a period of time longer than one year.
Continuing Care" is defined by North Carolina General Statutes as, "...the furnishing to an individual other than an individual by blood, marriage, or adoption to the person furnishing the care, of lodging together with nursing services, medical services, or other health related services pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the individual or for a period in excess of one year."
Generally, residents must be capable of i independent living when they enter the community.
The typical continuing care retirement community provides independent living options accommodations that may include full or efficiency apartments, villas, or cluster homes.
Usually there are community dining, social and recreational areas, and a wide range of services including meals, housekeeping, transportation, and health-related services.
CCRCs also must offer either a nursing home or adult care home, s but and may provide both.
Depending on the communityindividual community, these accommodations, activities, and services may be paid for in a monthly fee or purchased as needed.
Usually a substantial entrance fee is charged in addition to monthly fees.
Entrance fees can be non-refundable, partially refundable, or fully refundable - so it important to understand under what conditions entry fees can be refunded, if any, before making a final decision and signing a contract.
The majority of CCRCs are private pay and some may require you to have long-term care insurance prior to entry.
Meet Dorothy and Bernard Turner, both residents of a CCRC.
Scene 23: Graphic with "Four Types of CCRC Agreements or Contracts".
The bolded words will be the numbered points.
4.
Equity contracts involve an actual real estate purchase, with a transfer of ownership of the unit.
Health-related service arrangements vary.
Now that you've seen the different types of long-term care services available, we need to talk about how you'd pay, should you ever need them.
The important thing is to plan ahead.
Deciding which financing option or options are best for you will depend upon your individual circumstances.
Long-term care insurance is one way to pay for long-term care.The first way to cover the costs of long term care is through the purchase of private long term care insurance You can buy this type of coverage Long term care insurance is a specific type of insurance used to pay, specifically, for long term care.
A common misconception is that Medicare and other insurances pay for these costs, when, in fact, they do not.
on an individual basis through an private insurance agent.
Also, a growing number of employers are making long-term care coverage available to their employees as an optional benefit.
, and sometimes group policies are available through your employer.
Policies offered through an employer may allow you to purchase long-term care coverage for other members of your family.
The younger you are when you buy coverage the less it will cost.
Also, keep in mind that you can be denied coverage or charged increased premiums due to poor health.
Therefore, the longer you delay purchasing long-term care insurance increases the risk that you will develop a medical condition that will prevent you from purchasing a policy.
The annual premium costs shown on the screen are taken from actual policies offered in North Carolina in 1997.
As mentioned, premiums increase as you age.
Unfortunately, this fact can make it prohibitively expensive to buy long-term care coverage if you wait until you are in your late 60's, 70's, or older.
Another factor to consider is the amount of risk you want to coverboth what you feel your long term care needs will be, as well as your financial capabilityies to for paying premiums over time.
You should also know that there is a tax credit for purchasing long-term care insurance.
North Carolina has developed a "Consumer Bill of Rights for Potential Buyers of Long-Term Care Insurance" to help consumers make informed decisions about whether or not to make a purchase.
You can receive information, counseling, or a copy of this Bill of Rights free of charge from the North Carolina Department of Insurance Senior's Health Insurance Information Program, or SHIIP.
Another way to One of the ways for paying for long-term care is to use your personal resources and assetsmeans.
This can include savings and retirement accounts, stocks, bonds, annuities and personal property, just to name a few.
Long-term care can be expensive and it's important to consider how long you could afford to pay for it using your personal funds.
At $40K, $50K or even greater sums per year, very few people could afford to pay out-of-pocket for their long-term care over a period of several years.
Unfortunately, even those with sizeable assets can quickly deplete their funds.
Though it is rare, some adults are able to finance their expenses with savings.
Another possibility is a reverse mortgage.
This may be a good option for older people who can't afford long-term care insurance or don't have significant resources other than the equity in their home.
A reverse mortgage allows you, as a homeowner, they may be able to convert the equity you have in your home to a lump sum of cash or monthly income for the remainder of your life.
It is a type of loan and is n, which is available to adults, age 62 and over and can be used for any purpose.
To learn more about reverse mortgages, contact the North Carolina Housing Finance Agency.
For those who can't afford to pay privately for all their long-term care costs, there is some publicly funded help available.
It's important to know that some forms of public benefits require that you meet certain income and asset levels.
Other programs don't have limits, but, generally, you'll be asked to contribute towards the services you receive.
Call your local information referral line, Council on Aging, or Department of Social Services for more information.
It's everyone's hope that you and your loved ones never do need any type of long term care, but in case you do, wouldn't it be comforting a nice feelingto have a plan in place? Preparation is the key to being able to make informed decisions about service options and how you'll pay for needed care.
not being caught off guard by decisions and costs associated with long term care.
Isn't this peace of mind your comfort worth time dedicated to planning now? There are several agencies in our state that can answer questions regarding long term care.
