PRECISION PRODUCTION OCCUPATIONS 83002 PRECISION INSPECTORS, TESTERS, 
The majority of these workers use precision measuring instruments and complex test equipment and hand tools.
May make minor repairs.
Exclude workers who combine inspection and testing with major repair work.
83005 PRODUCTION INSPECTORS, TESTERS, GRADERS, SORTERS, SAMPLERS, 
Inspect, test, grade, sort, sample, or weigh nonagricultural raw materials or processed, machined, fabricated, or assembled parts or products.
Work may be performed before, during, or after processing.
83099 ALL OTHER INSPECTORS, TESTERS, 
All other inspectors, testers, and related workers not classified separately above.
89123 JEWELERS 
Jewelers: Fabricate, adjust, or repair jewelry.
Silversmiths: Design, assemble, decorate, or repair silver articles.
May specialize in one or more areas of the jewelry field, such as repairing, selling, or appraising.
Exclude workers who perform a specialized operation such as fancy wire drawing.
89108 MACHINISTS
Set up and operate variety of machine tools.
Fit and assemble parts to make or repair machine tools and maintain industrial machines, applying knowledge of mechanics, shop mathematics, metal properties, layout, and machining procedures.
Study specifications, such as blueprints, sketch, or description of part to be replaced, and plan sequence of operations.
89114 PATTERN 
Patternmakers, Metal: Lay out, machine, fit, and assemble castings and parts to metal foundry patterns, core boxes, and match plates using hand and machine tools.
Analyze specifications according to knowledge of patternmaking methods.
Include Plastic Patternmakers.
Model Makers: Set up and operate machines such as model maker's lathe, milling and engraving machines, and jig borers to make working models of metal or plastic objects.
Include Template Makers.
Exclude Jewelry Pattern and Model Makers.
Exclude workers who do not work primarily with metal and plastic but work with other material or a combination of materials.
89911 PRECISION DETAIL DESIGN DECORATORS 
Design or decorate articles such as jewelry, furniture, glassware, pottery, or toys with paints, lacquers, enamels, shellac, or gilt.
Types of processes include painting, carving, printing, drawing, artistic lettering, decorative screen making, advertising layout, and detail design of forms.
Include Screen or Stencil Printers and Setters, Layout Formers, Gilders, Luster Applicators, and Tile Decorators.
Exclude professional Artists and Designers and workers concerned with developing, coloring, and retouching photographs.
89521 PRECISION DYERS
Change or restore the color of articles, such as garments, drapes, and slipcovers, by means of dyes.
Work requires knowledge of the composition of the textiles being dyed or restored; the chemical properties of bleaches and dyes; and their effects upon such textiles.
Include Rug Dyers.
89128 PRECISION ETCHERS 
Engrave or etch flat or curved metal, wood, rubber, or other materials by hand or machine for printing, identification, or decorative purposes.
Include Etchers and Engravers of both hard and soft metals or materials, and Jewelry and Seal Engravers.
Exclude Photoengravers, Pantographers, and Glass Etchers and Engravers.
89902 PRECISION FOUNDRY MOLD 
Make and form wax or sand cores and molds used in the production of metal castings in foundries.
Work involves using hand and power tools and applying knowledge of variables such as metal characteristics, molding sand, contour of patterns, reinforcing, and pouring procedures
89126 PRECISION HAND WORKERS, JEWELRY 
Perform such operations as precision casting and modeling of molds, casting metal in molds, and setting precious and semi-precious stones for jewelry, silverware, plateware, ornamental figurines, trophies, and plaques.
May make gold or silver chains and cut designs or lines in jewelry.
Workers in these categories usually use hand tools or small cutting machines.
Include Pearl Restorers, Jewelry Bench Hands, and Solderers.
89117 PRECISION LAY-OUT WORKERS, METAL
Lay out reference points and dimensions on met-al stock or work pieces, such as sheets, plates, tubes, structural shapes, castings, or machine parts, for further processing, such as machining, fabricating, welding, and assembling.
89905 PRECISION MOLDERS, SHAPERS, CASTERS, 
Mold, shape, cast, or carve products consisting of clay, glass, plaster, concrete, and stone, or combinations of materials into semi-finished or finished products.
89908 PRECISION PATTERNMAKERS, MODEL MAKERS, LAY-OUT WORKERS, 
Construct patterns and models for use in forming products composed of single materials (except metal, plastic, wood, or textiles) or a combination of materials.
Exclude workers who work with metal, plastic, wood, or textiles only.
89132 SHEET METAL WORKERS
Fabricate, assemble, install, and repair sheet metal products and equipment, such as control boxes, drainpipes, and furnace casings.
Work may involve any of the following: Set up and operate fabricating machines to cut, bend, and straighten sheet metal; shape metal over anvils, blocks, or forms using hammer; operate soldering and welding equipment to join sheet metal parts; inspect, assemble, and smooth seams and joints of burred surfaces.
89102 TOOL 
Analyze specifications, lay out metal stock, set up and operate machine tools, and fit and assemble parts to make and repair dies, cutting tools, jigs, fixtures, gauges, and machinist's hand tools.
Include Paper Die Maker and Die Sinker.
Exclude Die Setters.
89111 TOOL GRINDERS, FILERS, SHARPENERS, 
Perform such operations as precision smoothing, sharpening, polishing, and grinding of metal objects by the wearing action of abrasive materials or machine files.
Include Tool, Cylinder, and Card Grinders and Grinder Operators, Saw Filers, and Filer-Finishers.
89199 ALL OTHER PRECISION METAL WORKERS
All other precision metal workers not classified separately above.
89135 BOILERMAKERS
Construct, assemble, maintain, and repair stationary steam boilers and boiler house auxiliaries.
Align structures or plate sections to assemble boiler frame tanks or vats, following blueprints.
Work involves use of hand and power tools, plumb bobs, levels, wedges, dogs, or turnbuckles.
Assist in testing assembled vessels.
Direct cleaning of boilers and boiler furnaces.
Inspect and repair boiler fittings, such as safety valves, regulators, automatic-control mechanisms, water columns, and auxiliary machines.
89311 CABINETMAKERS 
Cut, shape, and assemble wooden articles, such as store fixtures, office equipment, cabinets, and high grade furniture.
Set up and operate variety of machines, such as power saws, jointers, mortisers, tenoners, molders, and shapers, to cut and shape parts from wood stock.
Exclude workers primarily concerned with one or a limited number of machine phases and report them according to their specialty.
89505 CUSTOM TAILORS 
Design and make tailored garments, applying knowledge of garment design, construction, styling, and fabric.
Alter, repair, or fit made-to-measure or ready-to-wear garments, sewing by hand or machine.
89502 FABRIC 
Draw and construct sets of precision master patterns or layouts.
Mark and cut fabrics and apparel according to blueprints or specifications.
89314 FURNITURE FINISHERS
Shape, finish, and refinish damaged, worn, or used furniture or new high-grade furniture to specified color or finish, utilizing knowledge of wood properties, finishes, and furniture style.
89302 PATTERN AND MODEL MAKERS, WOOD
Patternmakers, Wood: Plan, lay out, and construct wooden unit or sectional patterns used in forming sand molds for castings, according to blueprint specifications.
Work involves use of hand and power tools.
Model Makers, Wood: Construct full-size and scale wooden precision models of products such as boats, automobiles, household appliances, aircraft, and machinery, using hand tools, measuring instruments, and woodworking machines.
Include Wood Jig Builders and Loft Workers.
89517 PRESSERS, DELICATE FABRICS
Press dry-cleaned and wet-cleaned silk and synthetic fiber garments by hand or machine, applying knowledge of fabrics and heat to produce high quality finish.
Finish pleated or fancy garments, normally by hand.
89511 SHOE/LEATHER WORKERS 
Construct, decorate, or repair precision leather products, such as luggage, shoes, and saddles, using machines and hand tools.
Include workers who work with leather-like materials when process is similar.
89514 SPOTTERS, DRY-CLEANING
Identify stains in wool, synthetic, and silk garments and household fabrics and apply chemical solutions to remove stain.
Determine spotting procedures on basis of type of fabric and nature of stain.
89508 UPHOLSTERERS
Make, repair, and replace upholstery for household furniture or transportation vehicles, using knowledge of fabrics and methods of upholstery.
Include workers in both manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries.
Exclude workers who perform a specialized operation such as Sewing Machine Operators, Assemblers, and Hand Cutters and Trimmers.
89308 WOOD MACHINISTS
Set up and operate a variety of woodworking machines to surface, cut, and shape lumber, and to fabricate parts for wood products, such as door and window frames, furniture, and sashes, according to specifications.
Exclude workers primarily concerned with one or a limited number of machine phases and report them according to their specialty.
89599 ALL OTHER PRECISION TEXTILE, APPAREL, 
All other precision textile, apparel, and furnishings workers not classified separately above.
89399 ALL OTHER PRECISION WOODWORKERS
All other precision woodworkers not classified separately above.
89721 BOOKBINDERS
Cut, saw, and glue component parts to bind new books.
Perform other finishing operations, such as grooving, decorating, and lettering.
Primarily use hand tools but may also employ other precision processing methods or new technology.
This occupation normally requires an apprenticeship program (usually 2 years or more) or equivalent training and more extensive experience than that of bindery workers.
Exclude Book Repairers.
89713 CAMERA OPERATORS
Operate process, line, halftone, or color separation cameras and related darkroom equipment to photograph and develop negatives of material to be printed.
89707 ELECTRONIC PAGINATION SYSTEM OPERATORS
Using a computer screen, call up type and art elements from computer memory and position them into a completed page, using knowledge of type styles and size and composition patterns.
The composited page is then transmitted for production into film or directly into plates.
89808 FOOD BATCHMAKERS
Set up and operate equipment that mixes, blends, or cooks ingredients used in the manufacturing of food products, according to formulas or recipes.
May modify or reformulate recipes to produce products of specific flavor, texture, and color.
This occupation requires at least 1 year (and often more) of training or experience.
Include Candy Makers, Almond Paste Mixers, Cheese Makers, Flavorings Compounders, and Honey Graders and Blenders.
89702 HAND COMPOSITORS 
Set up and arrange type by hand.
Assemble and lock setup of type, cuts, and headings.
Pull proofs.
Exclude Phototypesetters or other workers concerned with typesetting by electronic or word processing methods.
89705 JOB PRINTERS
Set type according to copy.
Operate cylinder or automatic platen press to print job order.
Read proof for errors and clarity of impression, and correct imperfections.
Job printers are often found in small establishments where work combines several job skills, such as typesetting, printing, reading, and selecting of materials to reproduce copy.
89719 ALL OTHER LITHOGRAPHY 
All other lithography and photoengraving workers not classified separately above.
89923 MEDICAL APPLIANCE MAKERS
Construct, fit, maintain, and repair medical supportive devices, such as braces, artificial limbs, and arch supports, and other surgical and medical appliances, following the prescriptions and specifications of Orthotists, Prosthetists, or Podiatrists.
May instruct patients in the use of the device.
89706 PASTE-UP WORKERS
Arrange and mount typeset material and illustrations into paste-up for printing reproduction, based on artist's or editor's layout.
89712 PHOTOENGRAVERS
Photograph copy, develop negatives, and prepare photosensitized metal plates for use in letterpress and gravure printing.
Include photoengraving specialists such as Printers, Etchers, Finishers, and Proofers.
89718 PLATEMAKERS
Produce printing plates by exposing sensitized metal sheets to special light through a photographic negative.
May operate machines that process plates automatically.
89914 PRECISION PHOTOGRAPHIC PROCESS WORKERS
Perform precision work involved in photographic processing, such as retouching photographic negatives and prints to stress specific features or identifying characteristics of subjects.
Restore damaged and faded photographs.
Color or shade drawings to create photographic likenesses using an airbrush.
May also color photographs using oil colors, to produce natural, lifelike appearances according to specifications.
89799 ALL OTHER PRECISION PRINTING WORKERS
All other precision printing workers not classified separately above.
89917 PRECISION OPTICAL GOODS WORKERS
Cut, grind, and polish eyeglasses, contact lenses, or other precision optical elements according to prescription or other specifications.
Assemble and mount lenses into frames and process other optical elements according to specifications.
Work usually involves the use of precision machines and instruments.
Include Precision Lens Polishers or Grinders, Centerer-Edgers, and Lens Mounters
89921 PRECISION DENTAL LABORATORY TECHNICIANS
Construct and repair full or partial dentures or dental appliances or apparatus, following prescriptions or specifications of Dentists or Orthodontists.
May also provide analytical and diagnostic services.
Include Dental Ceramists, Crown and Bridge Technicians, and Orthodontic Technicians.
Exclude Assistants, Bite-Block Makers, Opaquers, and Denture and Coiler Packers.
89715 SCANNER OPERATORS
Operate electronic or computerized scanning equipment to produce and screen film separations of photographs or art for use in producing lithographic printing plates.
Evaluate and correct for deficiencies in the film.
[This occupation was added in 1989 as a disaggregation of PRECISION LITHOGRAPHY AND PHOTOENGRAVING WORKERS.]
89802 SLAUGHTERERS 
Work in a slaughtering or meat packing establishment to prepare meat for sale by performing precision tasks such as stunning, skinning and trimming; cutting standard cuts of meat for marketing; cleaning and salting hides; making sausage; preparing meats for salting; and wrapping meats.
89717 STRIPPERS
Cut and arrange film into flats (layout sheets resembling a film negative of text in its final form) which are used to make plates.
Prepare separate flat for each color.
89899 ALL OTHER PRECISION FOOD 
All other precision food and tobacco workers not classified separately above.
89999 ALL OTHER PRECISION WORKERS
All other precision workers not classified separately above.
__________________________________________________________________
[LMI Source homepage|IDES homepage |e-mail us] Last revised: 6/24/99
