[seal1.gif] [clear1.GIF]
While this list does not encompass all of our efforts across the State, it highlights HSCSW's recent efforts.
[clear1.GIF] [clear1.GIF]
Women's Health Month
HSCSW sponsors Women's Health Month every September.
Click here for information about events on your island: Oahu Hawaii Lanai Kauai Maui
Na Wahine
The Na Wahine team is an ongoing collaboration of public and private medical and legal services for domestic violence, sexual assault, medical health, and mental health.
Na Wahine has helped pull together front-line services for victims of violence and has created cross-disciplinary training for service professionals.
It is Na Wahine's goal to help every female victim of violence in every community if Hawai'i.
The Na Wahine Team has been recognized by the National Women's Resource Center and the Family Violence Prevention Fund.
Violence Prevention Consortium
The Violence Prevention Consortium consists of a diverse group of individuals, public and private organizations, and community representatives statewide who are dedicated to the prevention of violence in our homes, schools and communities through primary prevention strategies.
They recognize the devastating impact of violence in our communities and the need to emphasize peace education and primary prevention solutions the problem The Consortium evolved from the grassroots Violence Prevention Coordinating Council, spearheaded by the HSCSW, which conducted intense research and provided recommendation to the Legislature in 1995.
The Initiative's integrated violence prevention curriculum approach emphasizes the value of the "Four R's" meaning reading, 'riting, 'rithmetic and relationships.
It integrates relationships skills, knowledge and positive communication modeling into existing curriculum in grades K-12.
It includes outcome measures and evaluation of effectiveness.
It addresses issues of discrimination, racism, cultural equality, gender equity, critical thinking, esteem building, peaceful problem solving, domestic and sexual violence, youth violence, child abuse, bullying, and respect for human differences.
$223,000 for the Initiative is provided through the Department of Health Domestic Violence Prevention Fund, to seed the Initiative in four public school complexes, one in each of Hawaii's four counties.
Kohala Elementary School is the school on the Big Island tht as selected.
Waiau Elementary School was the first school to be awarded the $33,600 grant for the Oahu complex site.
On December 16, 1998, a press conference was held as part ofthe school's assembly and received media coverage in the Honolulu Advertiser, Honolulu Star-Bulletin, KHNL News 8, KITV 4, KGMB 9, KHON TV2, KHPR Public Radio and KCCN.
On November 24, 1998, a Request for Grant Proposal was sent to all public Schools on Kauai, Lanai, Maui and Molokai.
Kohala Elementary School is the Big Island Selection, Kapaa High School is the Kauai Selection, and Baldwin High School is the Maui/Molokai/Lanai selection.
Contact the VPC at preventviolencehawaii.org.
STOP Violence Against Women Planning Committee
The HSCSW has been active for a number of years in the Federal Violence Against Women Act, aimed at reducing violent crimes against adult female victims of sexual assault and domestic violence.
This federally-funded project has developed statewide policies and provided cross-training programs for police and prosecutors to enhance victim safety and increase offender accountability.
Court Monitoring Project
HSCSW, in collaboration with the League of Women Voters, is conducting a long-term project to monitor all domestic-violence related cases in the state court system.
Its first report focussed on O'ahu, and subsequent reports will feature each neighbor island district.
Women's Coalition
The Hawaii Women's Coalition consists of private and professional groups, governmental agencies and individuals interested in legislative issues which impact the lives of women and girls in Hawaii.
It is open to all parties and operates through consensus building.
Every year for the past two decades, members have come together to define common themes which require legislative action.
The HSCSW facilitates and co-chairs the Coalition.
In addition, the HSCSW monitors legislative proposals introduced by other entities, provides tracking reports to Women's Coalition members and others requesting information, develops and disseminates testimony.
The Coalition develops a package of legislative initiatives each year, conducts legislative education related to it, advocating and mobilizing community support for passage of its measures.
The Coalition works together with the Hawaii Women's Caucus, composed of women legislators in the House and Senate.
During the Legislative session, the Coalition acts as a consultant to state departments, the legislature, private organizations and the public at large on policy and program matter; serves as a statewide informational resource, addressing gaps in available data and information; and serves as a legislative "watchdog" group throughout the session.
View the 2003 Women's Coalition Legislative Package and Results
View the 2002 Women's Coalition Legislative Package and Results
View the 2001 Women's Coalition Legislative Package and Results
View the 2000 Women's Coalition Legislative Package and Results
View the 1999 Women's Coalition Legislative Package and Results
This page last updated on September 16, 2003 .
Home page Our Mission and Contact Info Legislation Help Resources Data and Stats County Committees
