Arizona Alzheimer's Research Center Inc.
Location 925 East McDowell Rd. Phoenix, AZ 85006
http://www.alzheimers.sbs.arizona.edu/ Contact Eric Reiman, M.D. Title: Director eric.reiman@bannerhealth.com
Contact Numbers Tel: (602) 239-6999 Fax: (602) 239-6988
Overview The Arizona Alzheimer's Research Center (AARC) is a state-wide laboratory without walls that is comprised of eight biomedical research institutions: Arizona State University, the Barrow Neurological Institute, Banner Health Good Samaritan Medical Center (BGSMC), the Harrington Arthritis Research Center, the Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, Northern Arizona University, the Sun Health Research Institute, and the University of Arizona.
(BGSMC serves as the applicant organization on behalf of the ADCC consortium.)
The AARC is designed to capitalize on Arizona's complementary scientific resources in brain imaging, computer science, the basic and behavioral neurosciences, and clinical and neuropathological research to help in the understanding, early detection, treatment, and prevention of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
By coming together in a 'laboratory without walls', researchers can address scientific problems in a more fundamental way than is typically done by investigators from a single discipline or institution.
Officially established in late 1998, the Center receives a continuing annual appropriation from the state of $1 million and annual matching funds from the eight participating institutions.
The AARC aims to develop one of the best brain imaging research centers in the world and to provide a model of interdisciplinary and inter-institutional collaboration in biomedical research, while maximizing its productivity, viability, and growth through research grants and fund-raising efforts.
In September of 2001, the AARC received an Alzheimer's Disease Cores Center (ADCC) grant award from the National Institute on Aging of the National Institutes of Health.
(The Sun Health Research Institute serves as the applicant organization on behalf of the ADCC consortium.)
With this award, our center joins 28 other centers across the nation devoted to research, clinical care, and education on Alzheimer's Disease.
.
The Center's major theme is the early detection and prevention of AD, and its major goals are: To detect and track AD in patients with dementia and Mental Cognitive Impairment, cognitively normal persons at genetic risk for AD, and laboratory animals using brain imaging techniques and other research methods; To clarify certain AD mechanisms and risk factors; To further characterize the neural systems involved in aspects of memory, language, emotion, and consciousness, the cognitive operations to which they are related, and the extent to which they are preferentially affected by AD and aging; To provide new methods and strategies for the study of AD and aging in humans and laboratory animals; To aid in the identification of treatments to halt the profession and, indeed, prevent the onset of AD; and
(Page 1 of 2)
To establish a truly integrated, scientifically productive "research laboratory without walls," which serves as a model of multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional research.
In addition, the ADCC grant from the NIA provides the funding for a number of activities: o Rigorous, standardized ante-mortem and postmortem assessments of patients with AD, other dementias, mild cognitive impairment and normal control subjects, o A standardized, secure, and user-friendly database for AD researchers o Extension of the Sun Health brain donation program to other clinically and scientifically productive research programs in Arizona, and o An increase in the volume of brain tissue acquired in patients who are annually evaluated and clinically well characterized.
o Educational, outreach, and research activities in Arizona, including its underserved Native American and Hispanic communities.
o Access to subjects and data from a longitudinal clinical, neuropsychological, and brain imaging study of cognitively normal persons with two copies, one copy, and no copies of a common AD susceptibility gene (the APOE 4 allele). o A mechanism to support and monitor the progress of peer-reviewed pilot studies, submitted by new investigators in the field of AD and aging research.
The Center has a distinguished External Scientific Advisory Committee, including Marilyn Albert, PhD, Director of Division of Cognitive Neurosciences, Department of Neurology Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Zaven Khachaturian Ph.D.
Senior Medical / Scientific Advisor, Alzheimer's Association, Former Director, Office of Alzheimer's Research at NIH, Richard Frackowiak, M.D, F.R.C.P.Vice-Provost University College London, Former Dean, Institute of Neurology, UCL, Leon Thal, M.D., Director, UCSD Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, and Allen D. Roses, MD, Senior Vice President, Genetics Research, Glaxo Smith Kline.
The Center's Director is Eric Reiman, MD, Scientific Director, Banner Health Good Samaritan PET Center, Scientific Director of AARC, Principal Investigator of ADCC, and Professor of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, University of Arizona.
Dr. Reiman is an internationally recognized brain imaging researcher.
