PUBLIC NOTICE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION 1919 M STREET, N.W. WASHINGTON, D.C. 20554 News media information 202/418-0500 Fax-On-Demand 202/418-2830 Internet: http://www.fcc.gov ftp.fcc.gov
August 1, 1997
FY 1997 Mass Media Regulatory Fees The Federal Communications Commission issues this Public Notice in order to provide information concerning the payment of regulatory fees in FY 1997.
If you are a licensee in any of the mass media services, you should carefully review this Public Notice.
WHO MUST PAY REGULATORY FEES IN FY 1997 Most licensees and other entities regulated by the Commission must pay regulatory fees in FY 1997.
This Public Notice concerns the following Mass Media licensees: commercial AM 
Noncommercial educational licensees are exempt from regulatory fees as are licensees of auxiliary broadcast services such as low power auxiliary stations, television auxiliary service stations, remote pickup stations and aural broadcast auxiliary stations where such licenses are used in conjunction with commonly owned non-commercial educational stations.
Emergency alert system (EAS) licenses for auxiliary service facilities are also exempt as are Instructional Television Fixed Service (ITFS) licensees.
Governments and nonprofit entities (exempt under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code) are not required to pay regulatory fees and should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
In the event that there has been a change in ownership of a system after the effective date, but before the date payment is due, responsibility for payment of the regulatory fees rests with the owner of record on the effective date noted below.
A regulatee will be relieved of its fee payment requirement if its total fee due, including all categories of fees for which payment is due by the entity, amounts to less than $10.
WHY THE COMMISSION MUST COLLECT REGULATORY FEES The requirement to collect annual regulatory fees is contained in Public Law 103-66, "The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993."
These regulatory fees, which are likely to change each fiscal year, are used to offset costs associated with the Commission's enforcement, public information, international and policy and rulemaking activities.
These fees are in addition to any application processing fees associated with obtaining a license or other authorization from the Commission.
WHEN FEES WILL BE DUE Fee payments must be received by the Commission during the period beginning September 15, 1997, and ending September 19, 1997, in order to avoid a 25% late payment penalty.
FCC FORM 159 Regulatory fee payments must be accompanied by FCC FORM 159 ("FCC Remittance Advice").
This form has been revised and you must use the version dated July 1997.
A copy of this form, with specific instructions, is attached to this Public Notice and may be used to submit fees.
Reproduced forms are acceptable.
Please see "Special Instructions for Completing FCC FORMs 159 and 159-C" for detailed information on how to correctly complete these forms.
WHERE TO SEND REGULATORY FEE PAYMENTS If sending your regulatory fee payment by mail , please address your envelope as follows: Federal Communications Commission Regulatory Fees P.O. Box 358835 Pittsburgh, PA 15251-5835 If you prefer to send your regulatory fee payment by courier to our lockbox bank, you may do so 24 hours per business day (except bank holidays).
Please address your envelope and deliver it to the following address: Federal Communications Commission c/o Mellon Bank Three Mellon Bank Center 525 William Penn Way 27th Floor, Room 153-2713 Pittsburgh, PA 15259-0001 (Attention: FCC Module Supervisor)
2
METHOD OF PAYMENT Regulatory fee payments may be made by check, money order, or by credit card (Visa or Mastercard only).
When paying by credit card, please make sure you complete and sign block 28 of FCC FORM 159.
Payments may also be made by wire transfer, ACH Debit or ACH Credit.
Instructions are provided below.
NOTE: We encourage arrangements to consolidate regulatory fee payments either by a single entity or by different entities into a single payment instrument.
Consolidated fee payments may cover any number of service categories.
Multiple fee payments may be made utilizing any of the methods of payment mentioned above.
Payers who will be making a single payment for a significant number of entities and wish to submit automated payment data in lieu of a large number of FCC FORMs 159-C ("Advice Continuation Sheets") may do so.
Specific instructions regarding automated data submission will be issued separately.
There is no limit to the number of payment items.
WIRE TRANSFER PAYMENT INSTRUCTIONS A wire transfer is a transaction that you initiate via your bank.
It authorizes your bank to wire funds from your account to our lockbox bank, the Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, PA.
All payments made by wire transfer must be supported by a completed FCC Remittance Advice (FCC FORM 159) and Advice Continuation Sheet (FCC FORM 159-C), if required.
The FCC FORM 159 must be faxed to Mellon Bank at (412) 236-5702 at least one hour before the wire transfer on the same business day.
Indicate on the top of the FCC FORM 159 "Wire Transfer - Regulatory Fee Payment."
In Box (1) - Lockbox#, located at the upper left hand corner, indicate "358835."
Failure to submit the completed FCC FORM 159 will result in a delay in crediting your account.
Due to Federal Reserve regulations, wire transfers received after 6:00 p.m. (EDT) will be credited to the next business day.
The following information should be provided to your bank in order to complete the wire transfer: ABA Routing Number 043000261 Receiving Bank: Mellon Pittsburgh BNF: FCC/ACV--9116106 OBI Field: (Skip one space between each information item) "REGULATORYPAY" PAYER TIN (Exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #26) PAYER NAME (Exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #2) Phone: (Daytime Phone #, exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #9) LOCKBOX 358835 ACH DEBIT PAYMENT INSTRUCTIONS This method involves simply calling Mellon Bank's toll-free telephone number, entering your payment via a computer terminal, or sending a CPU-CPU transmission by 8:15 p.m. (EDT) of the business day before your payment is to be processed.
Mellon Bank will electronically 3
process your payments to the FCC the next business day.
Payments must be received no later than September 18, 1997 , to ensure processing no later than September 19, 1997 .
A brief application form must be completed and a personal identification number (PIN) issued by the bank.
Arrangements for using this process must be completed 14 days prior to submitting payment of the fee.
Please contact Reginia Dorsey, Chief, Billings 
ACH CREDIT PAYMENT INSTRUCTIONS This method requires that you contact your bank directly and authorize it to electronically transfer funds from your account directly to Mellon Bank for credit to the FCC.
For specific instructions and charges, please contact your local bank.
The following information should be provided to your bank in order to complete the ACH Credit transaction: ABA Routing Number 043000261 Receiving Bank: Mellon Pittsburgh FCC Bank Account #--9114784 Supplemental Information: (Skip one space between each information item) "REGULATORYPAY" PAYER TIN (Exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #26) PAYER NAME (Exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #2) PHONE: (Daytime phone #, exactly as on FCC FORM 159, Block #9) LOCKBOX 358835 WARNING: ACH Credit Payments normally take one to two days to post to the account of the FCC.
If you elect this method of payment, you must effect your credit transaction in sufficient time to be processed no later than September 19, 1997.
COMPLIANCE Please make sure your total remittance and the amount indicated on the FCC FORM 159 are in agreement.
Failure to do so will delay processing.
Licensees are solely responsible for accurately accounting for all licenses and for paying proper regulatory fees.
Any data omission, erroneous or incomplete data submission, or payment deficiency may result in a 25% monetary penalty, dismissal of pending actions, and/or revocation of any authorization.
You are strongly urged to submit your payments on time and accurately in order to avoid a penalty.
Additionally, the Commission will invoke any lawful authority it may possess under the Debt Collection Act to collect any fees due or outstanding against any licensee failing to meet its regulatory fee payment obligations.
WAIVERS, REDUCTIONS AND DEFERMENTS OF REGULATORY FEES The Commission will consider requests for waivers, reductions or deferments of regulatory fees, in extraordinary and compelling circumstances only , upon a showing that such action overrides the public interest in reimbursing the Commission for its regulatory costs.
Timely submission 4
of the appropriate regulatory fee must accompany requests for waivers or reductions.
This will ensure efficient collection in situations where a waiver or reduction is not warranted and will allow the requestor to avoid a 25% late-payment penalty if its request is denied.
The regulatory fee will be refunded later if the request is granted.
Only in exceptional or compelling instances (where payment of the regulatory fee along with the waiver or reduction request could result in the reduction of service to a community or other financial hardship to the licensee), will the Commission accept a petition to defer payment along with a waiver or reduction request.
All requests for deferments must be received before September 19, 1997 , in order to avoid the 25% late-payment penalty.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION Applicable Public Notices, and FCC FORMs 159 and 159-C are available from the Commission's Office of Public Affairs, Public Service Division and can be downloaded from the Internet (http://www.fcc.gov or ftp@fcc.gov).
Text of the Report and Order including the entire Schedule of Regulatory Fees can be downloaded from the Internet.
Forms may also be obtained by contacting the Forms Hotline at (800) 418-3676 outside the Washington, D.C. area, or (202) 4183676 locally.
For additional information, please contact the Public Service Division at (202) 4180192, or write to: Federal Communications Commission, Office of Public Affairs, ATTN: Public Service Division, 1919 M Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20554.
FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURES FOR COMMERCIAL AM AND FM RADIO STATIONS WHO MUST PAY: Licensees of commercial AM radio stations and holders of construction permits for new stations in the AM service whose license or permit was granted on or before October 1, 1996.
AM radio station licensees who also hold auxiliary broadcast service licenses operated in conjunction with the main AM station (e.g., remote pickup stations, aural broadcast STLs, intercity relay stations and low power auxiliary stations) will also be assessed a regulatory fee for each of these stations.
Licensees of commercial FM radio stations and holders of construction permits for new stations in the FM service whose license or permit was granted on or before October 1, 1996.
FM radio station licensees who also hold auxiliary broadcast service licenses operated in conjunction with the main FM station (e.g., remote pickup stations, aural broadcast STLs, intercity relay stations and low power auxiliary stations) will also be assessed a regulatory fee for each of these stations.
Governments and nonprofit entities (exempt under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code) are not required to pay regulatory fees and should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
AM Conversion Table: For those licensees of AM radio stations who may be unfamiliar with the current station class designations, we provide the following: 5
Old Class Class Class Class Class Class I II 
New Class Class Class Class Class Class A B D D C
Fee Requirement: Fees are assessed for AM and FM radio station licensees based upon class of station and population served.
Determination of class is based upon the station's most recent granted license on or before October 1, 1996.
AM and FM radio stations are divided into 10 fee groups.
A complete listing of all AM and FM stations in call sign order is attached to this notice.
To determine the correct fee to be paid, look for the station's call sign and read across the page to find the city, state, class of station, population served, and the FY 1997 regulatory fee due.
The fee amount may also be obtained by contacting the FCC's National Call Center at 1-888-225-5322 or through a search of the FCC's internet web site http://www.fcc.gov.
If you have a commercial AM or FM radio station which is not listed, please contact Terry Johnson at (202) 418-0445 for assistance.
Regulatory Fee Group or Category Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6 Group 7 Group 8 Group 9 Group 10 Broadcast Auxiliary Station License Construction Permit for New AM Station Construction Permit for New FM Station Regulatory Fee $2,000 $1,800 $1,600 $1,400 $1,200 $1,000 $800 $600 $400 $200 $25 $195 $950 Payment Type Code MGA7 MGB7 MGC7 MGD7 MGE7 MGF7 MGG7 MGH7 MGI7 MGJ7 MUB7 MTA7 MNF7
6
Note that an AM station licensee will be assessed $25 for each auxiliary license it holds.
Holders of construction permits (CPs) for new AM stations for which a license to cover the CP had not been granted as of October 1, 1996, will be assessed a $195 fee for each permit held, regardless of station class or population served.
A commercial FM station licensee will be assessed $25 for each auxiliary license it holds.
Holders of construction permits (CPs) for new FM stations for which a license to cover the CP had not been granted as of October 1, 1996, will be assessed a $950 fee for each permit held, regardless of station class or population served.
FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURES FOR COMMERCIAL VHF/UHF TV STATIONS WHO MUST PAY: Licensees of commercial VHF and commercial UHF television stations and holders of construction permits for new stations whose license or permit was granted on or before October 1, 1996.
Commercial television station licensees who also hold auxiliary broadcast service licenses operated in conjunction with the main TV station (e.g., remote pickup stations, intercity relay stations) will also be assessed a regulatory fee for each of these stations.
Governments and nonprofit entities (exempt under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code) are not required to pay regulatory fees and should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
FEE REQUIREMENT: Fees are assessed commercial television stations licensees based upon the size of the Nielsen Designated Market Area (DMA) in which their stations are listed in the 1996 Edition of the TV 
Fees will be assessed as follows: Commercial VHF Stations: Markets 1-10: Markets 11-25: Markets 26-50: Markets 51-100: Remaining Markets: Broadcast Auxiliary Station Construction Permits: Regulatory Fee $35,025 $28,450 $18,600 $9,850 $2,725 $25 $4,800 Payment Type Code MAV7 MBV7 MEV7 MGV7 MIV7 MUB7 MJV7
7
Commercial UHF Stations: Markets 1-10: Markets 11-25: Markets 26-50: Markets 51-100: Remaining Markets: Broadcast Auxiliary Station Construction Permits:
Regulatory Fee $16,850 $13,475 $8,750 $4,725 $1,350 $25 $2,975
Payment Type Code MCU7 MDU7 MFU7 MHU7 MJU7 MUB7 MKU7
Satellite TV Stations: All Markets: Construction Permits:
Regulatory Fee $950 $345
Payment Type Code MSS7 MCS7
Note that a commercial television station licensee will be assessed $25 for it holds.
Holders of construction permits (CPs) for new television stations cover the CP had not been granted as of October 1, 1996, will be assessed (UHF), or $345 (Satellite TV) for each permit held, regardless of market
each auxiliary license for which a license to $4,800 (VHF), $2,975 size.
FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURES FOR LPTV, TV TRANSLATORS 
Governments and nonprofit entities (exempt under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code) are not required to pay regulatory fees and should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
Also exempted from this fee are noncommercial educational FM and full service television broadcast station licensees that hold low power television, TV translator or TV booster licenses, or FM translator or FM booster licenses issued on or before October 1, 1996, provided those stations operate on a noncommercial educational basis.
We will automatically waive the regulatory fee for the licensee of any translator that: (1) is not licensed to, in whole or in part, 8
and does not have common ownership with, the licensee of a commercial broadcast station; (2) does not derive income from advertising; and (3) is dependent on subscriptions or contributions from the members of the community served for support.
Finally, licensees of low power television, TV translator or TV booster, or FM translator or FM booster stations whose licenses were issued on or before October 1, 1996, and which have obtained a fee refund because of an NTIA facilities grant for their station or a fee waiver because of demonstrated compliance with the eligibility and service requirements of รยง 73.621 of the Commission's Rules, are similarly exempt from payment of this regulatory fee.
Licensees claiming an exemption based on one of these latter criteria should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
FEE REQUIREMENT: Fees are assessed on a per license basis as follows: Type of License Low Power Television Station, TV Translator/TV Booster FM Translator/FM Booster Regulatory Fee $220 $220 Payment Type Code MLP7 MSF7
FEE PAYMENT PROCEDURES FOR MULTIPOINT AND MULTICHANNEL MULIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICES WHO MUST PAY: Holders of multipoint distribution service licenses (including multichannel multipoint distribution service) whose licenses were granted on or before October 1, 1996.
Governments and nonprofit entities (exempt under Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code) are not required to pay regulatory fees and should not submit payment.
However, the Commission is currently considering a proposal which would require that each exempt entity submit, or have on file with the Commission, a current IRS Determination Letter documenting its nonprofit status, a certification of governmental authority, or certification from a governmental authority attesting to its exempt status.
If the Commission decides to adopt the proposal under consideration, the place and date for submission of the required documentation will be announced by a separate Public Notice.
9
FEE REQUIREMENT: Fees are assessed on a per call sign basis as follows: Type of License Multipoint Distribution Service (including Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service) Regulatory Fee $215 Payment Type Code MDS7
SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING FCC FORMS 159 AND 159-C FCC FORM 159 ("FCC Remittance Advice") and, as necessary, FCC FORM 159-C ("Advice Continuation Sheet") must accompany all regulatory fee payments.
FCC FORM 159 allows payers to report information on one or more payment items (e.g., multiple FM or TV station licenses).
Use FCC FORM 159-C to report additional payments.
FCC FORMs 159 and 159-C have been attached to this Public Notice for you to complete and remit with your payment.
You may make additional copies of the forms as required.
In addition to the instructions for FCC FORM 159, the following information applies specifically to mass media fee payers.
Block (19) - "FCC CALL SIGN/OTHER ID" All mass media payers must enter in this block the call sign of the station(s) for which the regulatory fee is being paid.
Block (20) - "PAYMENT TYPE CODE" : Enter the appropriate payment type code as listed below: AM AND FM RADIO STATIONS MGA7: MGB7: MGC7: MGD7: MGE7: MGF7: MGG7: Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 1 radio station ($2,000).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 2 radio station ($1,800).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 3 radio station ($1,600) Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 4 radio station ($1,400).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 5 radio station ($1,200).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 6 radio station ($1,000).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 7 radio station ($800).
10
MGH7: MGI7: MGJ7: MTA7: MNF7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 8 radio station ($600).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 9 radio station ($400).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Group 10 radio station ($200).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a construction permit for an AM radio station ($195).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a construction permit for an FM radio station ($950).
VHF TELEVISION STATIONS MAV7: MBV7: MEV7: MGV7: MIV7: MJV7: Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial VHF television station in Nielsen markets 1-10 ($35,025).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial VHF television station in Nielsen markets 11-25 ($28,450).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial VHF television station in Nielsen markets 26-50 ($18,600).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial VHF television station in Nielsen markets 51-100 ($9,850).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial VHF television station in all other Nielsen markets ($2,725).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a construction permit for a commercial VHF television station ($4,800).
UHF TELEVISION STATIONS MCU7: MDU7: MFU7: MHU7: MJU7: Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial UHF television station in Nielsen markets 1-10 ($16,850).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial UHF television station in Nielsen markets 11-25 ($13,475).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial UHF television station in Nielsen markets 26-50 ($ 8,750).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial UHF television station in Nielsen markets 51-100 ($4,725).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a commercial UHF television station in all other Nielsen markets ($1,350).
11
MKU7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a construction permit for a commercial UHF television station ($2,975).
SATELLITE TELEVISION STATIONS
MSS7: MCS7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a satellite TV station ($950).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a construction permit for a satellite TV station ($345).
LOW POWER TELEVISION STATION, TV TRANSLATOR/BOOSTER, FM TRANSLATOR/BOOSTER
MLP7: MSF7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a Low Power Television station, or a television translator or television booster ($220).
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for an FM translator or FM booster ($220).
BROADCAST AUXILIARY STATION
MUB7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a broadcast auxiliary station ($25).
MULTIPOINT DISTRIBUTION SERVICE STATION
MDS7:
Use this code when paying a regulatory fee for a multipoint distribution service station ($215).
Block (21) - "QUANTITY" : All mass media fee payers must enter "1" in this block.
Block (22) - "FEE DUE" : Enter the dollar amount associated with the corresponding Payment Type Code entered in Block (20).
Block (23) - "FCC CODE 1": If you are paying an AM or FM regulatory fee, enter the authorized frequency shown on your license or permit.
If you are paying a television or Low Power Television station regulatory fee, enter the applicable channel number.
12
If you are paying a TV translator, TV booster, broadcast auxiliary, FM translator, FM booster or a multipoint distribution service station regulatory fee, leave this block blank.
Block (24) - "FCC CODE 2": If you are paying an AM, FM, TV or Low Power Television regulatory fee, enter the name of the state and community (in that order) of licenses for the station for which the regulatory fee is being paid.
Please note that this block is for state and community of license, not mailing address.
Please use the appropriate two letter post office abbreviation for the state.
If you are paying a TV translator, TV booster, broadcast auxiliary, FM translator, FM booster or a multipoint distribution service station regulatory fee, leave this block blank.
Block (25) - "CERTIFICATION": Provide the printed name and signature of an individual owner/licensee or officer attesting to the accuracy and completeness of the information supplied.
Block (26) - "PAYER TIN": Enter the fee payer's nine digit Taxpayer Identification Number.
Block (27) - "APPLICANT TIN" : If different from payer, enter the applicant's nine digit Taxpayer Identification Number.
- FCC -
13
