virginiAVIATION nov/dec 2003 VIRGINIA AVIATION j Page Published by THe Virginia Department of Aviation Nov/Dec 2003 Centennial Celebration of Flight: The Wright Way Wind, sand, and the dream of flight brought Wilbur and Orville Wright to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, where they achieved the first successful airplane flights on December 17, 1903.
With courage and perseverance these self taught engineers relied on teamwork and the application of scientific process.
What they achieved changed the world forever! They had seemingly settled into respectability as proprietors of a small business.
But the Wright brothers of Dayton, Ohio nurtured a barely respectable dream; the possibility of flight.
Wilbur, four years older, quiet and intense, a dreamer who could lose himself in books.
Orville was outgoing, talkative, and an immaculate dresser.
Both combined intuitive mechanical ability with analytical intelligence.
In 1892 they opened a bicycle shop and prospered, but they were restless, especially Wilbur.
Their energies were focused by two events of 1896; the death in a flying accident of Otto Lilienthal, the celebrated experimenter with gliders, and the successful launching of powered models by Samuel Langley.
The Wright's serious work in aeronautics began in 1899 when Wilbur wrote the Smithsonian for literature.
Dismayed that so many great minds had made so little progress, the brothers were also exhilarated by the realization that they had as much chance as anyone of succeeding.
Wilbur took the lead in the early stages of their work, but Orville was soon drawn in as an equal collaborator.
They quickly developed their own theories, and for the next four years devoted themselves to the goal of human flight.
glider mostly as a kite, working the control surfaces from the ground.
Wilbur's time aloft in free flight totaled only 10 seconds.
They went home somewhat discouraged, but convinced they had achieved lateral and longitudinal control.
1899 The Wrights knew that the solutions to lift and propulsion needed only refining, but no one had achieved lateral control.
Rejecting the principle of inherent stability -- the conventional wisdom - they wanted control to depend on the pilot.
Wilbur hit upon the idea of warping the wings - sparked by his observation of birds and the idle twisting of a box - to rotate the wings and stabilize flight.
They tested wing-warping the forerunner of ailerons - on a 5-foot biplane kite.
1901 This was the year the Wrights sharpened their focus.Trying to overcome the lift problem, they increased the camber of the 1901 glider.
They also lengthened its wingspan to 22 feet, making it the largest glider anyone had attempted to fly.
But, at their new Kill Devil Hills camp, lift was still only a third of that predicted by the Lilienthal data upon which the wing design was based.
And the glider pitched wildly, climbing into stalls.
When they returned to the earlier camber, they achieved longitudinal control and eventually glided 335 feet.
But the machine was still unpredictable.
When the pilot raised the (see Centennial cont. on Pg. 2)
1900 Confident their design was sound, the Wrights built a 17-foot glider with an unusual forward elevator.
They went to Kitty Hawk hoping to gain flying experience, but the wings generated less lift than expected, and they flew the
Page 2 (Centennial cont. from Pg. 1)
VIRGINIA AVIATION and elevators.
The engine drove two pusher propellers with chains, one crossed to make the props rotate in opposite directions to counteract a twisting tendency in flight.
A balky engine and broken propeller shaft slowed them, until they were finally ready on December 14.
Wilbur won the coin toss, but lost his chance to be the first to fly when he oversteered with the elevator after leaving the launching rail.
The flyer, climbed too steeply, stalled, and dove into the sand.
The first flight would have to wait on repairs.
Nov/dec 2003
left wing to initiate the expected right turn, the machine instead tended to slip to the left (adverse yaw).
This failure, and the realization that their work had relied on false data, brought them to the point of quitting.
Instead they built a wind tunnel and produced their own data.
Virginia Aviation Events December 15, 2003 Opening of Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Chantilly, Virginia (Dulles Airport).
For more information call (202) 3572700 or visit www.nasm.si.edu/ museum/udvarhazy.
December 17, 2003 100th Anniversary of Powered Flight.
For information on centennial events visit the Wright Brothers Memorial web site or the First Flight Centennial web site.
February 19, 2004 FAA Safety Seminar at New River Valley Airport will include Pilot Safety Seminar and Wings Program.
For more information contact Bob Atkins at (540) 6744141.
March 20, 2004 Virginia Ultralight Safety Seminar will be held from 8:30 a.m. until 3:30 p.m. at the Virginia Aviation Museum on Richmond International Airport.
For more information contact Carolyn Toth at (804) 236-3637.
Submit upcoming event information to :
1902 The 1902 machine embodies the Wrights' research.
They gave it efficient 32-foot wings and added vertical tails to counteract adverse yaw.
The pilot moved a hip cradle to warp the wings.
Some 400 glides proved the design workable, but still flawed.
Sometimes, when the pilot tried to raise the lowered wing to come out of a turn, the machine instead slid sideways toward the wing and spun into the ground.
Orville suggested a movable tail to counteract this tendency.
After Wilbur thought to link the tail movement to the warping mechanism, the plane could be turned and stabilized smoothly.
If others had thought about steering at all, it was by rudder - a marine analogy unworkable in the air.
The Wrights saw that control and stability were related, that a plane turned by rolling.
Six hundred more glides that year satisfied them that they had the first working airplane.
December 17, 1903
Three days later, they were ready for the second attempt.
The 27-mph wind was harder than they would have liked, since their predicted cruising speed was only 30-35 mph.
The headwind would slow their groundspeed to a crawl, but they proceeded anyway.
With a sheet they signaled the volunteers from the nearby lifesaving station that they were about to try again.
Now it was Orville's turn.
Remembering Wilbur's experience, he positioned himself and tested the controls.
The stick that moved the horizontal elevator controlled climb and descent.
The cradle that he swung with his hips warped with wings and swung the vertical tails, which in combination 1903 turned the machine.
A lever controlled Now the Wrights had to power their the gas flow and airspeed recorder.
The aircraft.
Gasoline engine technology controls were simple and few, but had recently advanced to where its use Orville knew it would take all his fiin airplanes was feasible.
Unable to find nesse to handle the new and heavier aira suitable lightweight commercial en- craft.
gine, the brothers designed their own.
At 10:35 he released the restrainIt was cruder and less powerful than ing wire.
The flyer moved down the rail Samuel Langley's, but the Wrights un- as Wilbur steadied the wings.
Just as derstood that relatively little power was Orville left the ground, John Daniels needed with efficient lifting surfaces from the lifesaving station snapped the and propellers.
Such propellers were not shutter on a preset camera, capturing the available, however, scant relevant data historic image of the airborne aircraft could be derived from marine propel- with Wilbur running alongside.
Again, ler theory.
Using their air tunnel data the flyer was unruly, pitching up and they designed the first effective airplane down as Orville overcompensated with propeller, one of their most original and the controls.
But he kept it aloft until it purely scientific achievements.
hit the sand about 120 feet from the rail.
Returning to the Kill Devil Hills, Into the 27-mph wind the groundspeed they mounted the engine on the new 40- had been 6.8 mph, for a total airspeed foot, 605-pound Flyer with double tails of 34 mph.
The brothers took turns fly-
Newsletter Editor 5702 Gulfstream Rd Richmond, VA 23250-2422 (804) 236-3631 fax (804) 236-3635 e-mail: seth.dye@doav.virginia.gov
ing three more times that day, getting a feel for the controls and increasing their distance with each flight.
Wilbur's second flight - the fourth and last of the day - was an impressive 852 feet in 59 seconds.
This was the real thing, transcending the powered hops and glides others had achieved.
The Wright machine had flown.
But it would not fly again, after the last flight it was caught by a gust of wind, rolled over, and damaged beyond easy repair.
With their flying season over, the Wrights sent their father a matter-of-fact telegram reporting the modest numbers behind their epochal achievement.
(source: National Park Service)
nov/dec 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Page 3
Introducing: Independence Air ACA To Transition Washington Dulles Operation Into America's Largest Low-Fare Hub Preview of Airline's New Website Now Available at www.flyi.com Atlantic Coast Airlines, the Dulles, VA-based carrier (ACA) (NASDAQ/ NM: ACAI) recently revealed the name and brand identity of its upcoming lowfare airline at a ceremony attended by over 2,000 airport and government officials, stockholders, media, company partners and employees at Washington Dulles International Airport.
The airline will be known as Independence Air.
Atlantic Coast Airlines Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Kerry Skeen said, "We are very excited that Independence Air at Washington Dulles will create America's largest low-fare hub, in terms of total departures-in the fifth largest air travel market in the U.S.
We remain solidly convinced that by using the right aircraft sized for the right markets, Independence Air will take its place as the natural next step in the evolution of the highly successful low-fare airline model."
Mr. Skeen added, "Every detail of Independence Air is being designed to offer travelers in the Washington metropolitan area-as well as 50 other communities-exactly what they have been asking for: low, simple fares, excellent service, a faster, easier travel experience and a convenient, flexible schedule of flights to business and leisure destinations all across the country."
Independence Air will operate a fleet of at least 112 jets, including 25 Airbus A320/A319 aircraft as well as 87 CRJs.
Richmond International adopts free parking policy in hourly lot First 30-minutes to be free Richmond International Airport (RIC) will adopt a "30-Minute Free Parking" policy in the airport's Hourly Lot, as resolved by the Capital Region Airport Commission at its regular monthly meeting today.
"The policy adjustment is intended to encourage greater use of the airport's Hourly parking facilities by those picking up and dropping off travelers," stated Commission chairman John E. Mazza, Jr.
"Setting aside the anticipated drop in revenue, the Commission strongly feels that this is a prudent move to encourage our customers to use convenient, close-in parking as we approach the busy holiday travel season."
The "30-Minute Free Parking" policy will offer the following charge structure: 0 to 30 minutes Free Parking in Hourly Lot 31 to 60 minutes $2.00; 61 to 120 minutes $4.00; $2.00 per each additional hour, maximum of $24.00 per day.
Parking rates will remain unchanged for all other lots at Richmond International Airport, and are as follows: Economy Parking: $1 per hour, maximum $6.00 per day.
Shuttle Lots A
Daily Parking: $3.00 per hour, maximum $10.00 per day.
Valet Parking: $20 first day, $15 each additional day.
The Hourly Lot policy changes are anticipated to go into effect by December 1, 2003.
The net annual revenue decrease is estimated to approach $200,000.
Hourly parking at RIC consists of 280 spaces located in the mid-terminal areas of the first floor of the North and South parking garages at Richmond International.
US Airways checked baggage notice US Airways recently released a notice to customers concerning checked bags.
Each customer is allowed to check (2) two bags free of charge.
Each bag must be 50 pounds or less.
Baggage: 0 - 50 lbs 51 - 70 lbs 71 - 100 lbs Free $25.00 $80.00
Each additional checked bag is subject to an excess baggage charge: 1 - 3 bags $80.00 per bag 4 - 6 bags $105.00 per bag
7 or more in excess $180.00 per bag Size and excessive weight restrictions also apply.
Bags that exceed the size and weight limitations are also subject to additional charges.
International baggage requirements may vary.
Please contact US Airways for further details.
Page 4
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Nov/dec 2003
Space Shuttle Columbia Astronaut and Three Airport Development Advocates are Inducted into the Virginia Aviation Hall of Fame at the Virginia Aviation Museum The Virginia Aeronautical Historical Society recently inducted four Virginians into the Virginia Aviation Hall of Fame.
They are the late NASA Mission Specialist and Navy Captain David M. Brown, retired Navy Rear Admiral Dewitt L. Freeman, Jeanne H. Pedigo and the late Frank R. Marshall.
ing research and scientific experiments.
Unfortunately, the STS-107 mission ended abruptly on February 1, 2003 when the Space Shuttle Columbia and her crew perished during re-entry 16 minutes before scheduled landing.
Captain Brown was the International Association of Military Flight Surgeon Pilots' president in 1996 and the Navy's Operational Flight Surgeon of the Year NASA Astronaut David M. Brown - in 1986.
He logged over 2,700 flying hours, and 15 days, 22 hours and 20 Arlington, Virginia Inducted in 2003, David M. Brown minutes in space.
received his Bachelor of Science in biology from the College of William and Rear Admiral Dewitt L. Freeman, USN Mary in 1982 and earned his private Retired - Louisa, Virginia Inducted in 2003, Dewitt "Witt" pilot license at the Williamsburg Airport in the summer of 1982.
He received Freeman earned his gold Naval Aviator his Doctorate in Medicine from East- Wings in 1944 through the V-5 Aviaern Virginia Medical School and en- tion Cadet Program.
He flew the FM-2 listed in the US Navy as Flight Surgeon until the end of WWII and then in 1984.
In 1988, he was selected to at- transitioned into the F-6F and F-8F.
His tend the US Navy flight-training pro- first jet assignment was in the P-80 at gram.
After receiving his gold Naval Edwards AFB where he became the first aviator wings in 1990, he flew the A6E, FA-18 and T-38 while continuing to serve as a flight surgeon.
While assigned as a flight surgeon to the US Navy Test Pilot School, he was selected to join the NASA astronaut-training program.
In 1996, he reported to Johnson Space Center for training as a Mission Specialist.
For two years he went Dawn Pickhardt, Whitt Freeman and through rigorous academic and handsJerry Jackson at the VAHF induction.
on training.
He was then assigned to STS-107 aboard the Space Shuttle Co- Navy pilot to remotely control the Regulus missile.
He commanded the F-4B lumbia.
On January 16, 2002 Brown and his Phantom equipped squadron VF-41, fellow astronauts blasted off and orbited which was one of the first units to dethe earth for the next 16-days conduct- ploy in response to the Russians' stationing nuclear-armed medium range ballistic missiles in Cuba.
Other commands included VF-IOI, USS Truckee (AO-147), USS Saratoga (CV-60) and Carrier Division Four (USS Saratoga, USS America, USS Independence and USS John F. Kennedy).
After retiring as a Rear Admiral in 1975 he became a fixed base operator at Orange County Airport where he was successful in getting the runway extended.
This effectiveness led the Industrial Development Authority in Louisa County to enlist Freeman to help develop an airport for Louisa County.
As the Chairman of the new Airport Committee he led the successful effort to build the Louisa County Airport, which was dedicated in May 1984 as Freeman Field.
Freeman is a long time member of the EAA and VAHS.
He oversaw the moving of the Shannon collection to the Virginia Aviation Museum in 1986-87.
As the Chairman of the VAHS Board he oversaw the creation of the highly successful chapter program.
Jeanne H. Pedigo ­ Roanoke, Virginia Jeanne H. Pedigo went to work for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NASA forerunner) in 1950.
Soon thereafter she earned an advanced degree in aeronautical engineering and was recruited by North American Aviation as a Thermodynamics Engineer on the F-86 Sabre jet and F-100 Super Sabre jet aircraft.
In 1970, Governor Linwood Holton appointed her to the Virginia Airport Authority where she continued to serve for Governors Mills Godwin and John Dalton.
In 1981, Governor Dalton appointed Pedigo as the first, and to date, only woman Chairman of the Virginia Aviation Board.
In 1986, she left the board to work for Campbell 
In 1998, (see VAHF cont. on Pg. 5)
nov/dec 2003 (VAHF cont. from Pg. 4)
VIRGINIA AVIATION the number of based airplanes soared from four to over 50 and the number of hangars grew from four to 10.
However, for a variety of reasons, the old airport could not be expanded any more and was destined to be closed.
Marshall successfully led the fight to build a new Manassas Municipal Airport, which was dedicated in 1964.
He was also instrumental in the development of the Warrenton-Fauquier Airport and in the operation of the Winchester Municipal Airport.
Marshall was a significant promoter of aviation in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
He owned and operated a major
Page 5 Piper Aircraft Dealership, Marshall Aviation, and was an active member in the Virginia Aviation Trades Association for many years.
He was honored by the Flying Circus as an Air Pioneer of Manassas, and the City of Manassas and the Manassas Airport Commission named an airport road in his honorFrank Marshall Lane.
The Virginia Aviation Hall of Fame is located at the Virginia Aviation Museum and administered by the Virginia Aeronautical Historical Society.
For Aviation Museum information call (804) 236-3622.
To access the Aviation Museum website, log on to vam.smv.org.
VAHF members pose for a group photo during the recent induction ceremony at the Virginia Aviation Museum.
Photo by Jerry Jackson
she was recruited by Governor Gilmore to serve another four-years on the Virginia Aviation Board.
Throughout her 20-year tenure she was a strong advocate for both air carrier and general aviation facilities.
She continues to actively participate in many national aviationoriented organizations such as the American Association of Airport Executives, Airports Council International and the Southeastern Airport Managers Association.
Frank R. Marshall - Manassas, Virginia Inducted in 2003, Frank R. Marshall played an important role in the founding and development of the Manassas Municipal Airport.
In 1959, he began operating the old Manassas Airport.
Under his leadership
Danville Regional chosen for SATS demonstration in 2005 Members of NASA and the National Consortium for Aviation Mobility (NCAM) recently announced Danville Regional Airport will be the site of the Small Aircraft Transportation System (SATS) project demonstration in 2005.
The plan is to develop four to eight passenger jets that would service suburban and rural communities at low rates, thereby relieving problems associated with highway gridlock and airport delays.
The jets under development will be fuel efficient and carry a relatively low $850,000 price tag.
The aircraft, which would be flown by a single pilot, will take off and land from short runways at small airports.
The end result is to eventually build aircraft that will be simple enough for the average person to own and operate.
Virginia Tech, Old Dominion University, Ohio University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will join Averett University as research partners in the Virginia SATS Lab.
There also are SATS labs located in North Carolina, Maryland and Michigan with other states taking interest in the concept.
For more information on SATS please visit www.sats.nasa.gov.
Corporate Angel Network Pilot Volunteers Needed Going their way? Give a cancer patient a lift Do your corporate jets ever fly an empty leg? Do your planes ever takeoff with a seat or seats to spare? How about volunteering those seats to cancer patients traveling to or from treatment centers, if you happen to be going their way? Five hundred top corporations have already answered "Yes!" to these questions.
They became participants in Corporate Angel Network (CAN), and you can too.
CAN makes it easy.
Using a proprietary and secure computer program, CAN volunteers match flights to patient requests, do all the paperwork and make all the arrangements.
Call (914) 3281313 for more information.
For a current list of patient "rides needed," please visit: www.corpangelnetwork.org/corporate/seats.
Page 6
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Nov/dec 2003
NASA installs `Centennial of Flight' exhibit at Charlottesville-Albemarle Airport To commemorate the 100th anniversary of powered flight, NASA Langley Research Center has created an exhibit for the CharlottesvilleAlbemarle Airport that clearly defines the impact of the Wright Brother's first flight in 1903 on aviation.
tory and the science of flight.
The exhibit will also include a continuously running documentary of the Wright Brother's historical quest, courtesy of the Discovery Channel entitled, "The Wright Stuff".
The `Centennial of Flight' exhibit features five unique showcases, each depicting a significant era of time that shaped the aviation industry.
Two other features of this exhibit include the "Future of Flight" display and the "Women of NASA" panel exhibit.
The "Future of Flight" panel exhibit is being seen for the first time at the Charlottesville-Albemarle Airport.
It is a brand new addition to NASA's traveling exhibitions.
The exhibit pays homage to the past, present programs and accomplishments, and highlights research developments that will drastically change the future of aerospace.
Women's contributions to the aviation industry are highlighted in the "Women of NASA" panel exhibit.
Although women have flown since 1908, nearly all of them were restricted to general aviation, i.e., private planes, or support jobs.
By 1958, women had already made their mark, not just in support roles, but as pioneering engineers, mathematicians, scientists, and technicians.
The "Women of NASA" panel exhibit is a celebration of their contributions to the aviation industry.
The "Centennial of Flight" exhibition will be on display at the Charlottesville-Albemarle Airport from now until the end of January 2004.
From the Wright Flyer to the Space Shuttle, visitors to the CharlottesvilleAlbemarle Airport will explore the his-
18th Annual Aviation Career Day held at Richmond International Airport The 18th Annual Aviation Career Day was held recently at Richmond Jet Center at Richmond International Airport, drawing high school students from across the region including the city of Richmond and the counties of Charles City, Chesterfield, Hanover, Henrico, and New Kent.
The event has been organized annually over the last 18 years by the Sandston, Henrico East, and New Kent Rotary Clubs.
Attending students were exposed to aviation career opportunities ranging from commercial passenger and cargo airlines and military aviation, to law enforcement and college-level aviation programs.
Students toured facilities at RIC, visited static displays of aircraft such as an F16 and a Blackhawk helicopter, and had the opportunity to hear speakers including Dr. William J. Bosher, Jr., Distinguished Professor at Virginia Commonwealth University's School of Education and Center for Public Policy.
Exhibitors included Averett College, the Aviation Institute of Maintenance, Delta Airline Consultants, Dominion Aviation Services, Ethyl Aviation, Falwell Aviation Services, the FAA's Richmond Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), the Florida Institute of Technology, Helo Air, Henrico County Police Department, Martinair, Million Air Richmond, the National Weather Service, Petersburg Radio Control A/C, Richmond International Airport (Human Resources Dept.), Sundance Aviation, the Virginia Air National Guard, the Virginia Army National Guard, and the Virginia Department of Aviation.
nov/dec 2003
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Page 7
Virginia Aviation Board Allocates Funds To State Airports At its bimonthly meeting held in Building Furniture (Public-Use), (Construction) ­ Increase; Land Acquisition ­ Increase # 2, · Mecklenburg/Brunswick ReRichmond recently, the Virginia Aviation Board (VAB) approved tentative alApron Expansion - South (design) gional Airport in the amount of and T-Hangar Site Preparation ­ $7,617 for Parallel Taxiway (conlocations for 13 of the Commonwealth's Demolition ­ Phase 1 (design); struction) ­ Increase; airports from the Commonwealth Airport Fund, totaling $599,946.
· Luray Caverns Airport received · Accomack County Airport re$16,960 for Apron Expansion (conceived $21,296 for Partial Parallel Receiving one of the largest allocations was Hampton Roads Execustruction) ­ Increase; Taxiway South (construction) ­ In· Stafford Regional Airport in the crease. tive Airport, in the amount of amount of $163,200 for Terminal $171,500 for fuel farm replacement The Virginia Aviation Board has ­ Jet A/AVGAS (Design), Hangar Site Building Utilities (design) and Tereight members representing seven reminal Building (design); Preparation (Construction) and Airport Entrance Sign (Design/Con- · Winchester Regional Airport was gions.
The Board approves funding reawarded $4,000 for Land Acquisi- quests brought to it by the Virginia Destruction).
Other airports receiving alpartment of Aviation, a state agency tion ­ Parcel 49; locations from the VAB were: · Tappahannock-Essex Airport re- working to support and promote comceived $20,000 for Fueling System mercial and private aviation interests for · Lee County Airport in the amount the Commonwealth's 67 public-use airof $6,400 for Terminal Building (design); · Falwell Airport was awarded ports.
Study; $10,510 for Taxiway Rehabilitation · Blue Ridge Airport was awarded $28,000 for Clear Span Hangar Site Preparation (design); · Twin County Airport received $22,213 for Fueling System (Jet A) 
lines, a Pennsylvania-based affiliate of Allegheny Airlines' new morning US Airways Express, has added a sec- nonstop to New York uses a 37-passen- VIRGINIA AVIATION - ond nonstop flight from Roanoke to ger turboprop aircraft.
It leaves New York's LaGuardia Airport.
Roanoke at 6:40 a.m. and arrives at Published bi-monthly by the The new flight will depart Roanoke LaGuardia at 8:39 a.m.
A round trip, Commonwealth of Virginia, Department of Aviation, at 6:40 a.m.
The other nonstop to New weekday ticket, with the return flight Public Relations Division in the York leaves at 4 p.m. Adding a morn- arriving in Roanoke at 8:34 p.m. the interest of and for the promotion ing component is a plus for business same day, is listed at $994.50 online. of aviation.
travelers.
Roanoke travelers have had "Leisure" fares, which typically are CHARLES MACFARLANE inconsistent options for New York non- booked further in advance and include Director stop flights over the years.
Several car- a weekend stay, are much cheaper.
US CHERRY EVANS riers have added and deleted flights to Airways' site, for example, listed one Manager the city during the past decade.
special seasonal fare for $128 round SETH DYE Overall passenger traffic at trip.
Editor New York-bound passengers have Please send material for publication to: Roanoke Regional Airport through SepVirginia Aviation Newsletter, Editor tember is down about five percent com- a number of additional daily flights out 5702 Gulfstream Road pared to the same period last year.
In- of Roanoke if they don't mind stopping Richmond, VA 23250 or e-mail to cluding departing and arriving passen- in another city along the way. seth.dye@doav.virginia.gov gers, 421,515 passengers used the
Roanoke airport adds morning nonstop flight to New York
Page 8
VIRGINIA AVIATION
Nov/dec 2003
Additional flights added at RIC Travelers can now choose from additional non-stop flight options with new service underway or soon to start at Richmond International Airport to three top destinations, Chicago, Houston, and Minneapolis/St.
Paul.
United/United Express now operates six daily departures to its hub at Chicago O'Hare (ORD).
Its latest addition ­ starting in November ­ has the following schedule: Richmond to Chicago (United/United Express) Flight Departure Arrival Equipment UA7847 6:00am 7:15am CRJ Chicago to Richmond (United/United Express) Flight Departure Arrival Equipment UA7332 9:00pm 11:54pm CRJ Completed 1903 Wright Flyer.
Continental/Continental Express now flies (IAH).
The newest flight offers this schedule: Richmond to Flight CO3261 three daily departures to its hub at Houston's Bush Intercontinental Airport Houston (Continental/Continental Express) Departure Arrival Equipment 6:25am 8:40am ERJ
Houston to Richmond (Continental/Continental Express) Flight Departure Arrival Equipment CO3260 3:45pm 7:30pm ERJ Northwest/Northwest Airlink currently flies adding a third flight effective January 6, 2004.
Richmond to Flight NW5692 two daily departures to its hub at Minneapolis/St.
Paul (MSP), and is The third daily flight will offer a schedule as follows: Minneapolis/St.
Paul (Northwest/Northwest Airlink, effective 1/6/04) Departure Arrival Equipment 2:10pm 4:10pm CRJ Airlink, effective 1/6/04)
Engine Placement on the 1903 Minneapolis/St.
Paul to Richmond (Northwest/Northwest Wright Flyer.
Flight Departure Arrival Equipment
NW5628
10:10am
1:42pm
CRJ
If you are interested in learning more about what is going on in the Department of Aviation, please call our office at (804) 236-3624 or our Sponsor Hotline at (800) 292-1034.
Visit our website for updates on future events at: www.doav.virginia.gov.
Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Aviation 5702 Gulfstream Road Richmond, VA 23250-2422
Presorted Standard U.S. POSTAGE PAID Richmond, VA Permit No. 949
The Department of Aviation does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age or disability in the employment or the provision of service.
*MEMBER OF THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF STATE AVIATION OFFICIALS* Purpose: "To foster aviation as an industry, as a mode of transportation for persons and property and as an arm of the national defense; to join with Federal government and other groups in research, development and advancement of aviation; to develop uniform laws and regulations; and to otherwise encourage cooperation and mutual aid among the several states."
