Site Navigation reclaimclr.gif (32261 bytes) Healing the Land and Water Pennsylvania's Abandoned Mine Reclamation Program INTRODUCTION Coal mining began in Pennsylvania in the mid-1700s to support the colonial iron industry.
By the 1800s, Pennsylvania coal was fueling the industrial growth of the country and was the primary fuel source for Western Pennsylvania's steel industry.
Anthracite and bituminous coal production peaked in 1918 with a combined production of 276 million tons.
Coal's importance continued well into the twentieth century as it provided the energy to fight both World Wars.
When the steel industry declined in the late-1940s, coal use was redirected into electricity generation.
Today, coal supplies the majority of fuel for electric power generation in Pennsylvania and the nation.
For the first 200 years, coal was mined with little thought of environmental consequences and without formal regulation.
When all available coal was extracted from a mine site, operators would move to another and leave the original mine abandoned, failing to return the earth to its previous condition.
Over 15 billion tons of coal were removed from Pennsylvania's ground and 250,000 acres of mine lands were left abandoned.
Pennsylvania's abandoned mine lands memorialize a period of great economic and industrial growth in our state and country.
However, these acres scar Pennsylvania's landscape with environmental and safety hazards.
The state's waterways are polluted from mine drainage and many people have suffered from lives lost and property damaged from unsafe and unstable abandoned mine lands.
Abandoned mine reclamation refers to the process of cleaning up environmental pollutants and safety hazards associated with a site and returning the land to a productive condition.
Since the 1960s, Pennsylvania has been a national leader in establishing mining laws and regulations to ensure reclamation occurs after active mining is completed.
During the same time, Pennsylvania began an aggressive clean up of abandoned mine sites.
Pennsylvania still has one-third of the national abandoned mine land problem.
An estimated $15 billion is needed to eliminate all known environmental and safety problems associated with abandoned coal mines.
ABANDONED COAL MINES: THE LEGACY
Abandoned surface and deep mines are scattered in the Northeastern anthracite and Western bituminous fields.
Anthracite coal, or hard coal, is characterized by steeply sloping, sometimes vertical coal seams.
Bituminous coal, or soft coal, lies in flat horizontal seams making coal extraction easier but the associated environmental and safety problems are similar to those in the anthracite fields.
Map 1 shows Pennsylvania's coal fields.
As previously mentioned, 250,000 acres of abandoned mines dot Pennsylvania's landscape.
Dangerous highwalls and water filled pits, remnants of abandoned surface mines, have been the scenes of many deaths due to falling or drowning.
Old underground mines can have open shafts hundreds of feet deep camouflaged by overgrown brush.
Unstable and hazardous mine buildings and equipment can attract curious visitors.
Polluted, acidic soil has rendered the land unsuitable to support substantial vegetation.
Abandoned surface and deep mines may discharge water containing heavy metals, sulfates and/or acid into many Pennsylvania watersheds.
About 2,400 miles of streams have difficulty supporting aquatic life and many private water supplies do not meet current water quality standards because of mine drainage, one of Pennsylvania's largest water pollutants.
Subsidence occurs when wooden beams or coal pillars used to support the earth above the deep mines decay, weaken and crumble.
Surface structures, like homes or roads, shift, crack or even collapse when subsidence takes place.
Subsurface utility lines can also be adversely affected.
Mine fires are another legacy of coal mining.
Exposed coal seams ignite when material, like garbage or brush dumped in abandoned pits, catch fire.
Fires can form dangerous gases which can seep into people's homes or deteriorate deep mine support structures that collapse causing subsidence.
Mine fires frequently start in abandoned strip pits and spread to underground mines.
Currently, 44 underground mine fires and 34 surface fires are burning.
During coal processing, coal rock and other materials are separated from the pure coal.
Before current mining laws, operators removed these materials and disposed of them in massive piles near the mine site.
These piles, some resembling mountains and stretching over several acres, erode causing sedimentation in streams, leach acid mine water, can catch fire and rarely can support vegetation.
Pennsylvania maintains an inventory of abandoned mine land problems and revises it, as new problems are uncovered.
Abandoned mine problem areas have been identified in 43 of Pennsylvania's 67 counties, as shown on Map 2.
Over 2,400 documented health and safety hazards still need to be eliminated.
More than half are highwalls and deep mine openings.
The summary of hazards in Table 1 is compiled from a database maintained by the federal Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSM), and includes only a portion of the total sites documented in Pennsylvania's inventory.
This table represents only top priority health and safety hazards currently eligible for funding by the federal government.
FIXING THE PAST: THE NEW PARADIGM
TOWARD ENVIRONMENTAL MINING
Pennsylvania experienced its last bituminous boom during World War II when coal was needed to power the production of steel used for war materials.
During the 1950s, natural gas and oil replaced anthracite as the first choice for home heating fuel.
As Pennsylvania's dependence on coal waned, a concern for the environmental impacts of mining swelled.
The awareness was probably due in part to the enhanced domestic consciousness and economic prosperity following the war.
In 1945, Pennsylvania passed an act to address reclamation of surface mines for the first time.
The Bituminous Coal Open Pit Mining Conservation Act required coal operators to register their mines, post a bond of $400 per acre, cover exposed coal to a depth of five feet above the seam, round off refuse banks and revegetate, if reasonable.
The anthracite region adopted a $200 bonding rate and similar reclamation standards in 1947.
Bonding was created to ensure money was available for the state to complete reclamation if the mine operator did not as required by the laws.
The Clean Streams Law of 1937 also was amended in 1945 to declare discharging mine drainage into clean waters devoted to public use unlawful and to require mine operators to submit a mine drainage plan prior to mining.
Previously, mine drainage was exempt from "clean waters" laws including the Purity of Waters Act of 1905 and the Purity of Public Waters Act of 1923.
Both the bituminous and anthracite surface mining laws were amended in 1963.
Under the amendments, bituminous mine operators needed to obtain a license and permit before mining and anthracite operators were required to completely backfill all pits less than 100 feet deep and all pits within 100 feet of a road and 250 feet of a building.
Bonding rates for each region increased to $500-$1,000 per acre.
The Clean Streams Law was once again amended in 1965.
With the amendment, the law now focused on both pollution prevention and polluted water restoration.
Specifically, the amendment allowed for mine drainage to be classified as an industrial waste product.
Mine operators were required to obtain a permit from the Sanitary Water Board to operate a coal mine.
A permit would not be issued if pollution was expected to occur.
A 1970 amendment made post-mining discharges subject to the law as well.
THE AWAKENING
The revision of Pennsylvania's mining laws to incorporate pollution prevention reflected the national environmental awakening of the 1960s.
However, Pennsylvania realized that in order to truly clean up its water and land, it would be necessary to eliminate old, abandoned mines and the problems associated with them.
In keeping with the direction of the newly amended Clean Streams Law, Pennsylvania passed the Land and Water Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1968.
This law was the first to address the reclamation of abandoned mine lands and remediation of mine drainage.
To that end, Pennsylvania initiated the single largest state effort to eliminate the health, safety and environmental problems associated with abandoned mines.
OPERATION SCARLIFT
In 1968, the state legislature authorized $200 million for the reclamation of problems associated with abandoned mines.
Specifically, the authorization set aside $120 million for the prevention and control of coal mine drainage, $20 million for the elimination of air pollution from burning refuse banks and $60 million to control mine subsidence and to extinguish underground mine fires.
In total, the program completed 200 engineering studies to collect data to design and manage the construction of 781 projects statewide including 524 mine drainage projects, 28 air pollution projects, 76 mine fire projects and 153 subsidence control projects.
Operation Scarlift was the first recognition Pennsylvania gave to its abandoned mine land problems.
Scarlift was the forerunner of Pennsylvania's modern abandoned mine reclamation program.
The money appropriated to Operation Scarlift lasted 25 years.
The last dollars were spent in 1995 for the construction of Toby Creek Mine Drainage Treatment Facility in Elk County.
ACID MINE DRAINAGE TREATMENT FACILITIES
A notable accomplishment of Operation Scarlift was the construction of the mine water treatment plants at Rausch Creek in 1974 and Toby Creek in 1995.
The Rausch Creek plant, Schuylkill County, uses a lime solution for neutralization.
The plant treats an average of 10 million gallons of mine drainage each day and protects 27 miles of Rausch Creek, Pine Creek and Mahantango Creek, a prolific trout fishery.
Each year, the Commonwealth contributes $350,000 to the clean up efforts at Rausch Creek.
The Toby Creek plant in Elk County treats an average of 1.5 million gallons per day of acid polluted water and contributes needed alkalinity to Little Toby Creek.
The plant uses water-powered rotating drums to crush limestone into small reactive particles for neutralization.
The added alkalinity is helping restore Little Toby Creek and the Clarion River.
The Consulting Engineering Council of Pennsylvania awarded its "Honor Award for Engineering Excellence for Special Projects" to the Toby Creek facility.
The plant is maintained through state appropriations of $150,000 annually.
Both the Rausch Creek and Toby Creek treatment plants are staffed facilities.
Three other mine water treatment plants, with no personnel, are maintained statewide for an annual combined cost of $122,000.
Aylesworth Creek Treatment Plant, Lackawanna County; Swamp Creek Treatment Plant, Elk County; and Wildwood Treatment Plant, Allegheny County, are frequently monitored by DEP staff.
THE ADVENT OF MODERN MINING AND RECLAMATION
In 1971, Pennsylvania established the Department of Environmental Resources (DER) to manage the enforcement of environmental laws and to oversee environmental and conservation issues in the state.
DER had the authority over Pennsylvania's mining and reclamation program.
[In 1995, the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) was formed from DER and manages mining and reclamation issues.]
See Appendix A for an organizational chart of DEP's Mineral Resources Management deputate.
In the same year, Pennsylvania's Bituminous Coal Open Pit Mining Conservation Act was renamed the Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act and amended to include anthracite mining.
The amendment required backfilling strip pits to approximate original contour, segregation and replacement of topsoil and revegetation.
In 1992, this act was further amended to provide incentives for the active coal industry to "remine" abandoned mine lands.
Modeled after Pennsylvania's Surface Mining Conservation and Reclamation Act of 1971, Congress introduced the federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) in 1977.
As a result, coal-producing states were required to update their mining regulations to be consistent with the federal act if they wished to retain primary responsibility (primacy) for regulating their coal mining industry.
Pennsylvania achieved primacy in 1982.
Between 1977 and 1982, the federal Office of Surface Mining and Enforcement (OSM), established by SMCRA, and DER shared the enforcement of mining and reclamation in Pennsylvania.
SMCRA mandated that all active coal operators must return the lands they mine back to their original contour and post bonds to guarantee the work will be done within a specific amount of time after active mining ceases.
Should an operator fail to do reclamation, the state would then use the bond money to pay a contractor to do it.
In addition, the act established the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund by imposing a fee on active mine operators of 35 cents per ton for surface mined coal and 15 cents per ton for deep mined coal.
The trust fund, administered by OSM, is used to reclaim mine lands abandoned prior to 1977.
An amendment to SMCRA also allows states to put aside grant money specifically for treating mine drainage.
DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation actively designs reclamation projects and contracts for their construction using federal grants and forfeited bonds.
DEP's bureaus of District Mining Operations and Mining and Reclamation enforce mining laws and work with industry to reclaim abandoned mines at no cost to taxpayers.
But DEP certainly does not act alone.
In fact, local grassroots efforts by people who care about their environment are Pennsylvania's most important reclamation tool.
Many watershed groups have formed to clean up the mine drainage in their areas.
County Conservation districts work to identify abandoned mine land problems and ways to reclaim them.
The Western and Eastern Pennsylvania coalitions for Abandoned Mine Reclamation have organized to advise watershed groups, environmental organizations and government about reclamation projects.
These groups work with DEP to secure funding and technical support for their local projects.
Appendix B lists contact numbers and addresses for DEP mining and reclamation offices and local groups interested in mine reclamation and mine drainage clean up.
The Mining and Reclamation Advisory Board, created in 1984 by an amendment to the Pennsylvania Mine Conservation and Reclamation Act, also assists DEP by objectively reviewing and commenting on Pennsylvania's active mining regulations and reclamation initiatives.
Their perspective is critical to DEP's policy-making and regulation revising because the board's membership represents most mining stakeholders, specifically the coal mining industry, DEP's Citizens Advisory Council, County Conservation Districts and the General Assembly.
The group meets at least four times a year.
HEALING THE LAND AND WATER: CURRENT RECLAMATION INITIATIVES
FEDERAL GRANT PROGRAM
Operation Scarlift, the genesis of Pennsylvania's abandoned mine reclamation program, was the sole source of funding for reclamation projects for 10 years.
Following the enactment of the federal SMCRA in 1977, the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Trust Fund became the primary source of funding for the Pennsylvania program.
Pennsylvania has received about $470 million from the trust fund to date and completed about 1,400 reclamation projects with the money.
Annually, Pennsylvania receives about $21 million from the trust fund and completes about 100 projects by contract or through DEP's in-house construction crews.
It should be noted that the major portion of the federal grant goes toward eliminating health and safety hazards.
In 1997, 670 acres were reclaimed using trust fund monies.
The 110 projects construction costs totaled over $12.6 million.
Chart 1 shows the expenditure of the federal grant money by the type of problem.
Mine hazards include deep mine openings, burning refuse piles, highwalls, water-filled pits, hazardous equipment, etc.
Map 3 shows the trust fund expenditures by county and the problem areas plus those addressed.
Unfortunately, the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund is a finite funding source.
Pennsylvania's abandoned mine land program is in jeopardy when the trust fund stops collecting revenues from active coal operators in 2004.
Currently, the trust fund has a balance of over 1.2 billion.
As the deadline approaches, Pennsylvania, along with other coal mining states, is actively petitioning the federal government for the release of more annual funds and for an extension of the deadline.
MINE DRAINAGE SET-ASIDE PROGRAM
The Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund provides for each state to set aside 10 percent of its annual grant for the treatment or abatement of acid mine drainage.
The program is unique because the money is deposited into a state trust fund that accrues interest for state use.
Congress authorized the Set-Aside Program in 1990 with withdrawals beginning in fiscal year 1992.
Through fiscal year 1998, Pennsylvania has set aside $14.4 million and the fund has earned $2 million in interest.
At the end of 1997, three passive treatment systems, constructed using set-aside funds, were in operation.
Four additional systems, worth $1.6 million, are in construction and will be completed during 1998.
Nine projects are in the design phase and will be bid in 1998.
About $8 million will be spent on these 16 projects.
DEP is evaluating 22 more watersheds for possible projects.
The Set-Aside Program enhanced DEP's initiative to develop lasting partnerships with other groups committed to acid mine drainage abatement.
Partnerships exist with local watershed groups, conservation districts, sportsmen's organizations and local governments.
For example, the Loyalhanna Watershed Association, along with DEP and the Western Pennsylvania Coalition for Abandoned Mine Reclamation, spearheaded an effort to abate several sources of acid mine drainage restoring 2.4 miles of Laurel Run, Westmoreland County.
The Woodduck Chapter of Trout Unlimited is working with DEP to restore one mile of Cold Stream in Clearfield County.
The Huntington County Conservation District and DEP are attempting to eliminate acid discharges that impact 4.5 miles of Roaring Run.
DEP contributed set-aside funds for each of these projects.
OSM EMERGENCY RECLAMATION PROGRAM
Pennsylvania also benefits from the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund through emergency funding provided to eliminate an immediate health and safety hazard caused by abandoned mines.
OSM, through its offices in Pittsburgh and Wilkes-Barre, initiates this emergency reclamation program.
An emergency is defined as a sudden danger or impairment that presents a high probability of substantial physical harm to the health, safety or general welfare of people.
OSM steps in when DEP's normal reclamation procedures cannot be completed quickly enough to abate the danger.
Emergencies can involve any type of health threat caused by subsidence, mine fires, mine gas, mine water and highwalls.
Pennsylvania's most common types of emergency problems are subsidence and mine openings.
In recent years, OSM has generally addressed between 100 and 200 emergencies in Pennsylvania annually.
Program expenditures have generally been between $1 million-$8 million.
In 1997, OSM declared 150 emergencies and spent approximately $5 million on emergency reclamation in the state.
BOND FORFEITURE PROGRAM
In one respect, bond forfeitures represent a failure--a failure by mine operators to meet their reclamation responsibilities.
Bond forfeiture is the final enforcement action against an operator who is unwilling or unable to complete the reclamation.
When a forfeiture occurs, the government assumes the chore of reclaiming the abandoned mine.
Additionally, operators (including company owners) who fail to reclaim their mines can never receive another mining permit not only in Pennsylvania, but in the United States.
Over the years as reclamation standards and bonding requirements improved, the role of the government in reclaiming forfeited sites changed.
The state took responsibility to ensure sites are reclaimed instead of just doing what could be done with limited money.
The result of this change is a redirected focus on "primacy forfeitures" to guarantee reclamation responsibilities are met.
Bond rates are sufficient to ensure money is available for this purpose.
To date, over 117 primacy forfeiture projects covering over 1,900 acres are completed.
Total cost for the projects was $10.8 million.
For "Pre-primacy Forfeitures," sufficient bond money is seldom available.
In fiscal years 1986 through 1990 and again in 1995, the legislature provided $2 million to address these abandoned mines.
DEP, on occasion, also is able to combine the bonds from two or three forfeited sites where the bonds are insufficient and to use the money to reclaim one of them.
Since 1979, DEP reclaimed over 8,600 pre-primacy acres.
The 302 projects cost over $65.4 million.
In 1997, 260 primacy and pre-primacy acres were reclaimed under the bond forfeiture program.
The sum of the 20 projects was over $2 million.
MINE SUBSIDENCE INSURANCE FUND
As abandoned deep mines grow older, the risk of subsidence increases.
Over one million homes throughout both coal fields sit above abandoned underground mines.
Millions of dollars worth of damage are caused each year as homes crack, tilt or collapse as underground mine workings give way.
Standard homeowner's insurance does not cover damage caused by subsiding mines.
The Mine Subsidence Insurance (MSI) fund, administered by DEP, provides insurance to those who own property above abandoned underground coal or clay mines.
Property owners can receive $150,000 worth of coverage for about $135 annually.
This nonprofit insurance fund, established in 1961, is sustained by its policyholders' premiums and has no waiting period for coverage to begin.
Currently, the MSI fund underwrites over $3.6 billion worth of coverage.
Almost 45,000 property owners hold policies.
Nearly half are in Allegheny County.
Approximately $689,000 was paid for 33 claims in 1997.
For more information about MSI, see appendix B.
REMINING
Actively "remining" previously abandoned surface or deep mines is the most efficient way to reclaim abandoned mine lands at no cost to taxpayers.
In recent years, remining has reclaimed three acres for every one acre reclaimed at public expense.
Mine operators who mine abandoned areas must then reclaim the land to current reclamation standards.
DEP offers many incentives to mine operators who engage in remining.
For example, subchapters F and G, additions to Pennsylvania's mining regulations made in the mid-1980s, remove the liability associated with pre-existing mine discharges from operators who wish to remine the site.
Under the incentive, remining cannot degrade water quality.
However, the operator is not responsible for improving the water quality impaired by past mining although water quality improvements are common.
DEP also approves the beneficial use of environmentally safe by-products to enhance mine reclamation of remined sites.
Alkaline rich materials like coal ash and lime dust are combined with mine spoil to prevent the formation and production of acid mine drainage.
Biosolids are used to supplement topsoil on previously affected areas unable to support revegetation.
DEP also provides financial assistance to operators who are applying for remining permits through the Remining Operator's Assistance Program (ROAP).
Each year 1,500-3,500 acres of abandoned mine lands are permitted to be remined.
The annual reclamation value of remining has reached more than $7 million in recent years.
During 1997, 75 remining permits were issued covering over 3,400 acres and worth just over $7 million.
Most permits issued in the anthracite region contain remining of abandoned mines.
RECLAMATION-IN-LIEU OF CIVIL PENALTIES
Since the early 1980s, DEP has routinely allowed operators to perform reclamation instead of paying civil penalties assessed for active permit violations.
The reclamation performed is always more valuable than the actual assessed civil penalty and the activity cannot address the operator's legal responsibility.
DEP's District Mining offices have used this program to facilitate many types of abandoned mine reclamation, including abandoned surface mine reclamation, deep mine sealing and reclamation, mine drainage remediation projects and control of surface subsidence due to abandoned deep mine operations.
In the last 15 years, 93 sites covering 568 acres have been reclaimed under the Reclamation-In-Lieu of Civil Penalties Program, including 9 projects in 1997 covering 20 acres and worth $233,000.
The sum of these projects is valued at $2.5 million.
In addition, DEP has addressed several mine drainage remediation projects in cooperation with local watershed organizations using this concept.
GOVERNMENT FINANCED CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
DEP developed Government Financed Construction Contracts to facilitate the removal and reclamation of abandoned coal refuse piles statewide.
The development of cogeneration facilities that produce electricity by burning coal waste from these abandoned piles has led to a market for coal refuse.
Those who wish to remove refuse piles and then use the alkaline bi-product ash created by the cogeneration facility, for mine drainage remediation purposes on the site can do so under this agreement with DEP.
Since 1994, DEP has entered into approximately 15 contracts covering 150 acres with those wishing to remove coal refuse piles for sale to co-generation facilities.
The total reclamation value of all sites exceeds $1 million.
Two contracts were initiated in 1997 worth $138,000.
SURETY RECLAMATION
When mine sites are abandoned and reclamation bonds are forfeited by an operator, a third party, usually the surety company who provided the reclamation bond, may contact DEP and propose to complete the necessary reclamation in exchange for the return of the bond.
Under one of Pennsylvania's mining laws, Act 43, the surety company has the additional opportunity to complete reclamation after the bond is actually both forfeited and collected.
The largest surety reclamation agreement was initiated in 1994 to reclaim 63 of Adobe/Darmac Mining Company's abandoned mine sites in Armstrong, Butler, Lawrence, Mercer and Venago counties.
Amerikohl Mining Company was contracted by several surety companies to complete the reclamation of the sites.
Since the late 1970s, more than 55,000 acres have been reclaimed or are currently being reclaimed at an estimated value of $38 million through surety reclamation.
In 1997, two surety reclamation projects worth more than $600,000 and covering 70 acres got underway.
LANDOWNER RECLAMATION PROGRAM
The Landowner Reclamation Program was initiated in 1984 as a means to allow interested landowners to reclaim low-priority, bond forfeiture, abandoned mine sites on their property.
These low priority abandoned mine sites are many, many years away from being reclaimed, if ever, under DEP's reclamation program based on current reclamation priorities and funding availability.
Landowners participating in this program are allowed to reclaim their property for a dollar amount not to exceed the forfeited bond amount.
The dollar amount offered the landowner is set by DEP after it has initially investigated the abandoned mine site.
Under this program, the landowner receives the benefit of land that can serve a useful purpose after reclamation.
There is no monetary gain for the landowner because DEP sets the maximum reclamation cost it will reimburse a landowner.
All projects that have been completed or are being considered for landowner reclamation to date are located in the bituminous coal fields.
The following conservation districts are participating in the program: Armstrong, Butler, Clarion, Clearfield, Elk, Fayette, Greene, Indiana, Jefferson, Somerset, Venango, Washington and Westmoreland.
The anthracite coal region has not been excluded from this program, but to date no landowners from this region have shown interest in landowner reclamation.
Under the Landowner Reclamation Program, 34 projects have been completed totaling 649 acres at a total reclamation cost of $1,094,699 since 1984.
In 1997, 60 acres were reclaimed in one project totaling $179,000.
EPA SECTION 104(b)(3) GRANTS
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has provided funding from the Clean Water Act, Section 104(b)(3) to the states since 1994.
This grant money, administered through DEP to watershed organizations, is to be used on a watershed basis to fund projects that involve watershed assessments, demonstrations of AMD remediation technologies and promotion of environmental education in Pennsylvania's watersheds.
These projects must relate to the causes, effects, extent, prevention, reduction or elimination of water pollution from abandoned coal mines or related facilities.
Research, demonstrations and experimental abatement projects should have potential for statewide application if successful.
Seven watersheds are currently benefiting from projects completed using 104(b)(3) funding.
They include Slippery Rock Creek, Butler County; Little Toby Creek, Elk County; Babb Creek, Tioga County; Tangascootack Creek, Clinton County; Sulphur Creek, Cambria County; Swatara Creek, Lebanon and Schuylkill Counties; and Nescopeck Creek, Luzerne County.
Approximately $1 million was spent on projects in these watersheds.
In 1997, one mine drainage clean up project began using $109,000 from a 104(b)(3) grant.
Beginning in fiscal year 1998, DEP will include additional watersheds for 104(b)(3) funding due to the success in the initial watersheds.
NONPOINT SOURCE MANAGEMENT SECTION 319 GRANTS
EPA also provides states with funding that is to be used to address nonpoint source pollution problems.
Nonpoint source pollution is pollution that comes from the general drainage of the land that cannot be traced to a specific, end-of-the-pipe source.
Funds are administered to groups interested in doing watershed cleanup work through grants from DEP's Bureau of Watershed Conservation.
The 319 Program funds watershed assessments, watershed restoration projects and projects with statewide application.
A minimum of 25 percent of the construction costs of projects implemented on private land must come from non-federal sources.
In-kind services donated towards the project can qualify for this match requirement.
The state must match the grant by 40 percent through a state or local grant like 104(b)(3) or set-aside money.
Since 1991, 15 organizations or individuals that are attempting to remediate mine drainage in Pennsylvania have received a total of $3.2 million in 319 grants.
Eight projects got underway in 1997 totaling $561,000.
NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE PL-566 GRANTS
The Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), a part of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, has funds under PL-566, the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act, for planning and carrying out watershed projects.
The act defines its purpose to be watershed protection, flood prevention and agricultural and nonagricultural water management.
Conservation land treatment, structural and non structural measures are used to address these purposes.
DEP has teamed up with NRCS to abate many mine discharges through passive treatment.
NRCS provides 50 percent of the project construction costs while the other 50 percent is provided through the EPA 319 grant or DEP's trust fund grant.
Two excellent examples of the work of this partnership are the passive treatment wetlands constructed at Oven Run in Somerset County and Monastery Run in Westmoreland County.
In 1997, NRCS funded one project worth $296,000.
In total, NRCS has contributed more than $590,000 to four projects covering 41 acres in Pennsylvania.
RURAL ABANDONED MINE PROGRAM
The Rural Abandoned Mine Program (RAMP), administered by NRCS and funded through the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Trust Fund, provides technical and financial assistance to landowners and landusers who voluntarily enter into 5-10 year contracts to reclaim abandoned coal mines or treat water polluted with mine drainage.
NRCS field staff, with cooperation from DEP, helps landowners prepare a reclamation plan that outlines the reclamation or treatment and the costs.
Although the RAMP program has not been active in Pennsylvania since 1993, over $23 million from the fund was used to complete 228 projects in Pennsylvania covering more than 2,400 acres since 1978.
ENTERING 2000
The face of coal mining and abandoned mine reclamation has changed significantly in the last four decades.
From a time when mine drainage was not recognized as an environmental pollutant through today when mining cannot begin if pollution is predicted to occur, Pennsylvania has become a leader among states in developing innovative ways to combat the problems associated with abandoned mines.
RECLAIM PA
With an eye on the future, Pennsylvania is striving for complete reclamation of its abandoned mines.
Realizing this task is no small order, DEP developed concepts to make abandoned mine reclamation easier.
These concepts, collectively called Reclaim PA, include legislative, policy and management initiatives designed to enhance mine operator, volunteer and DEP reclamation efforts.
Reclaim PA has the following four objectives.
* To encourage private and public participation in abandoned mine reclamation efforts * To improve reclamation efficiency through better communication between reclamation partners * To increase reclamation by reducing remining risks * To maximize reclamation funding by expanding existing sources and exploring new sources
For example, remining is a major focus of Reclaim PA. Several of the initiatives touch on ways to make it easier for mine operators to mine and reclaim previously mined land at no cost to taxpayers.
DEP is taking steps to provide financial incentives to operators who do remining, reduce the legal risks connected with remining and cut down on paperwork needed for operators to begin remining.
Another component of Reclaim PA is citizen involvement.
DEP hopes to engage many more partners in its efforts to clean up mine drainage and abandoned mine lands.
Through "Good Samaritan" legislation, a volunteer group can attempt cleaning up mine drainage in their watershed or reclaiming abandoned lands without fearing the environmental and legal liabilities connected to the pollution on the site.
A Reclaim PA initiative is also focused on securing more money from the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Trust Fund.
As stated before, Pennsylvania receives the bulk of its reclamation money from the trust fund.
As the trust fund collection deadline draws near, Pennsylvania is seeking more money from the trust fund and better management of the trust fund balance.
Ultimately, Pennsylvania would like to see the trust fund's income collection deadline extended.
Reclaim PA has many more initiatives targeted at making reclamation easier.
One is the development of a database and mapping system that will pinpoint sites suitable for remining, abandoned mine sites and streams polluted by mine drainage.
Two other initiatives included in Reclaim PA are DEP's Comprehensive Plan for Abandoned Mine Reclamation and the development of innovative reclamation technologies.
Both are discussed further below.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION
A Comprehensive Plan for Abandoned Mine Reclamation was developed in 1996 as a framework for organizing reclamation efforts, coordinating those involved in reclamation activities, prioritizing expenditures and decision-making.
The plan is intended to help those involved in reclamation activities focus on similar, achievable goals.
The guiding principles of the plan call for partnerships between DEP and local watersheds, conservation districts, government bodies, mine operators and any groups who have an interest in abandoned mine reclamation.
The goal of the plan is to select projects on a watershed basis that have the most worth, based on the benefits to be derived and the cost of reclamation.
As the plan is fully implemented, DEP will be able to plan reclamation projects for five or more years into the future.
NEW RECLAMATION TECHNOLOGIES
DEP is also actively exploring new technologies for more effective mine reclamation.
Research and demonstration projects, conducted in cooperation with other public and private entities, are proving that several different materials and processes enhance existing reclamation and mine drainage remediation projects.
DEP's Bark Camp Mine Reclamation Laboratory, Clearfield County, is the main stage for many of these projects.
For instance, coal ash from coal-fired electric generating facilities can be mixed with lime or other alkaline material to create a fill for reclaiming dangerous highwalls.
The ash/lime mixture hardens into an impermeable, weak concrete that makes an excellent fill but also prevents air and water from contacting any acid-producing material thereby preventing acid mine drainage.
Dredged materials and tannery and paper mill by-products also have been explored for their beneficial properties important in mine reclamation.
Using limestone's alkaline quality for passive treatment of acid mine drainage is becoming increasingly popular.
For example, systems like anoxic limestone drains and diversion wells that use limestone as a neutralizing agent have been used to improve water quality in Swatara Creek in Lebanon and Schuylkill counties.
Carbon dioxide also is being used along with limestone to treat mine drainage at the Toby Creek Treatment Plant, Elk County.
The U.S. Department of the Interior, United States Geologic Survey is working with DEP to develop this project.
Another passive test project uses microorganisms to treat mine water for manganese.
This process, called the pyrolucite project, has been completed at Laurel Run in Cook Township, Westmoreland County.
Four more sites are being planned for the use of this technology.
CONCLUSION
Land and water are two of Pennsylvania's most important natural resources.
Without abandoned mine reclamation, the state will continue to be deprived of the acres of land and miles of streams negatively impacted by unregulated coal mining of the past.
DEP is finding the answer to Pennsylvania's abandoned mine problems through local level work with watershed groups, conservation districts and other government agencies.
New technology is making it easier to reclaim lands and clean up water.
Current laws have transformed mining into an environmentally conscience industry.
Reclamation initiatives have taken care of many environmental, health and safety hazards.
Through these efforts, abandoned mines are disappearing and streams are coming back to life.
* Appendix A
* Appendix B
Site Navigation
