The Fitness Battlefield: How to Win the War Against Inactivity Date: 082900 Contact: John Wyrosdick Lifelong physical fitness.
It is a concept and lifestyle that can add years and quality to your life.
A workshop, The Fitness Battlefield, was recently held for PE teachers in our area to address lifelong physical fitness for disease prevention in curriculum and instruction in our schools.
Dr. Stu Ryan, Assistant Professor, University West Florida, Division of Health, Leisure and Exercise Science, was the featured speaker on ways to encourage physical activity among young people and continue into adulthood.
Ryan identified the main problems in youth are obesity doubling in the past 20 years and almost half of young people age 12-21 do not participate in vigorous physical activity.
He further stated over 55% of adults is overweight and medical costs connected with obesity are near 100 billion dollars a year.
Ryan identified the following factors as the reason children become overweight: too much TV/video games and snacking, the parents sedentary lifestyle, lack of motivation and the technology revolution.
In addition, fatty foods are readily available such as fast foods and all you can eat deals.
Heredity also plays a part.
The challenge is tremendous for PE teachers.
Physical education has often been put on the back burner in the school system because of the focus on improving reading, writing, and arithmetic.
The result is PE is viewed as less important and often times PE is put on a wheel and large class size.
The main idea behind Dr. Ryans recommendations included to present to the students activities that can be done for a lifetime such as yoga, fishing, orienteering, bicycling, traversing and aerobics.
Placing the emphasis on the individual rather than team sports may be a better method for getting students to adopt an activity for a lifetime.
Providing the students with skill, knowledge and enjoyable participation will prepare students to develop and maintain physical activity.
The idea of integrating PE with other disciplines such a reading, writing and arithmetic can make leaning fun and improve health in the process.
And school is only half the battle; the home environment is the other half of the problem.
Parents are encouraged to become involved in physical activity issues and adopt healthier lifestyles.
Resources are available through several grants to obtain equipment for physical education departments.
The workshop also turned the tables on the teachers with the teachers themselves becoming students participating in interactive activities.
The Tri-County Chronic Disease Program in partnership with the PAEC sponsored the workshop.
(our program paid for the speaker and the school boards for substitute teachers, so the teachers could attend36 attended)
