Alan F. Holmer President and Chief Executive Officer Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America before the Committee on Finance United States Senate March 22, 2000 INTRODUCTION Mr. Chairman, Senator Moynihan, and other members of the Committee.
I'm pleased to be here on behalf of America's innovative pharmaceutical industry to discuss an issue that is vitally important to all of us--prescription drug coverage for seniors and disabled citizens.
Across America, 50,000 scientists in our research labs work day and night in hopes of finding the next cure or the next treatment, to allow individuals to live long, healthy, and productive lives (see Attachment 1).
On average, it takes 12 to 15 years and $500 million to develop a new drug and bring it to market.
Today, industry has more than 1,000 new medicines in development to treat hundreds of serious illnesses including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, cancer, stroke, arthritis, and depression.
We are confident that, in time, we will find the cures for these and other conditions that are so prevalent among our aging population (see Attachment 2).
The 21st Century brings even greater promise.
As the human genome is mapped, many new targets for pharmaceutical innovation will be identified.
Currently about 500 targets for drug interventions are known.
This figure is expected to increase to 3,000 to 10,000 drug targets in the near future.
When these new cures and treatments are brought to market, we want to ensure that seniors have access to them--without discouraging the discovery and development of new medicines.
In our discussions, I hope that we all can begin by agreeing on at least four key points: First, expanded drug coverage for seniors will happen.
At some point in the not-too-distant future, a Congress will pass, and a President will sign, legislation to expand drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries.
It's going to happen, and the pharmaceutical
industry wants to be part of the solution.
Most Medicare beneficiaries have prescription drug coverage either through their (or their spouse's) current or former employer, a Medicare supplemental insurance (or Medigap) policy, a Medicare+Choice plan, or by qualifying for Medicaid or other governmental programs.
But many of those who do not receive the coverage they need through these mechanisms require additional assistance.
Second, expanded drug coverage for seniors will be a positive development.
Prescription drugs are increasingly the most effective and cost-effective therapy with which to treat diseases or conditions.
Some Medicare beneficiaries are in need of prescription drug coverage and our medicines provide extraordinary value to them.
Third, as we expand drug coverage for seniors, we must sustain the American pharmaceutical industry's worldwide leadership.
The industry has developed new medicines that benefit all patients--young and old--and we do not want to harm the environment in the U.S. that has allowed our industry to thrive.
In the1990s alone, 370 prescription drugs, biologics, and vaccines developed by industry were approved for patients' use with a physician's prescription.
Almost half of all new medicines in the world are discovered by the U.S. industry (see Attachment 3).
We are the world's leader in pharmaceutical research and development (see Attachment 4).
As we work together to expand access to prescription drug coverage, we must remember that Medicare beneficiaries want access to new medicines because they were invented.
Finally, we need to always remember to put the interests of patients first.
In an environment where we discuss 10-year forecasts, adverse selection, risk pools, and premium calculations, it is sometimes difficult to remember that the real focus must always be on patients.
In moving forward, we must always focus on what type of expanded Medicare drug coverage will be best for patients, their children, and their grandchildren-who need access to medicines, but who also need the discovery of medicines that today exist only in our dreams.
SUPPORT COMPREHENSIVE MEDICARE REFORM The pharmaceutical industry strongly supports strengthening and modernizing Medicare, including expanding Medicare coverage of prescription medicines (see Attachment 5).
We believe that today's Medicare structure does not effectively meet the health care needs of today's seniors and disabled citizens.
Medicare beneficiaries need high-quality health care, and prescription medicines often offer the most effective therapy for them.
We believe that the best way to expand prescription drug coverage for Medicare beneficiaries is through comprehensive Medicare reform.
The current program is based on a 1960s-style, one-size-fits-all model that relies on centralized price controls and
2
complex regulations.
The result is a program that is confusing for patients and providers, difficult to administer, and inadequate to meet the health care needs of the 21st century.
In his Fiscal Year 2001 budget, the President proposed several initiatives to "reform" the Medicare program.
However, these policy modifications do not modernize Medicare because they would not change the fundamental structure of the Medicare program nor increase the long-term financial stability of the program.
Rather, they would simply institute new centralized payment policies and regulatory authorities.
Likewise, the Administration offered a new prescription drug benefit that it claimed would rely on private market forces to foster competition.
But this plan would offer a onesize-fits-all benefit design and would simply use private entities to administer the program, as they do currently for hospitals, physicians, and other services.
The Administration claims that its proposal contains no price controls and ensures patients' access to medicines.
But we believe that price controls and limits on access to medicine would be the inevitable outcome of any HCFA-administered plan.
We believe that seniors deserve more choices than the "yes" or "no" that characterizes the Administration's plan.
We agree with Sen. Breaux who said that the "competition" the Administration's plan would provide is a "distant second cousin" to real competition.
Allowing private entities to 1) bear the risk, 2) offer a variety of plans, and 3) compete for customers based on quality and cost, would ensure real competition.
Indeed, a reformed Medicare program would use the power of the marketplace to foster competition among private plans, resulting in more choices of high quality for Medicare beneficiaries.
Seniors and disabled Americans could then select a plan that meets their individual needs.
With this market-based approach, the Medicare program would evolve to reflect changes in the medical marketplace.
The right reforms would expand prescription drug access for all, provide special assistance to those in need, and deliver high-quality care.
We do not need to look far for a model that incorporates many good design elements--the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program (FEHBP).
Each year, Members of Congress, 9 million Federal employees (and retirees), and their families choose a comprehensive health insurance plan from the wide range offered by different kinds of competing private entities.
These plans provide both quality care and good value.
Most Federal employees enroll in preferred provider organizations (PPOs); others enroll in health maintenance organizations (HMOs).
Almost all Federal employees are very satisfied with their health care.
Some Medicare beneficiaries already receive their coverage from a private entity, rather than remaining in traditional fee-for-service Medicare.
Beneficiaries who choose a Medicare+Choice plan often find that they have lower out-of-pocket costs, better coordination of care, and receive extra benefits--including prescription drug coverage.
3
Nationwide, 16 percent of Medicare beneficiaries choose this option.
However, participation in Medicare+Choice varies by geographic area--often reflecting trends in the under-65 market.
For example, in parts of northern California, nearly half of the beneficiaries receive their Medicare benefit from a private plan.
In other parts of the country, especially rural areas, beneficiaries have only one option--traditional Medicare.
Today, nearly two-thirds of beneficiaries have access to a Medicare+Choice plan that includes some form of prescription drug coverage.
A modernized Medicare program would foster competition among plans and provide even more private plan options for all beneficiaries that include prescription drugs.
Senators Breaux, Frist, Kerrey, and Hagel recognize the importance of fundamental reform of the Medicare program and introduced the Medicare Preservation and Improvement Act (S. 1895).
This bill represents a commitment to making Medicare financially sound and more responsive to the needs of seniors by using a market-based approach.
Under this plan, all health plans would compete to enroll Medicare beneficiaries.
Consumer choice would drive plans to provide better--and more costeffective--health care.
America's innovative pharmaceutical manufacturers recognize that modernizing Medicare to increase prescription drug coverage, while preserving and protecting these vulnerable populations, is as complex as it is important.
We are committed to comprehensive Medicare reform with private sector delivery, and pledge to work with Congress to achieve this goal.
INCREMENTAL MEASURES TO INCREASE ACCESS If the Congress decides to pursue interim measures pending longer term comprehensive reform, PhRMA would support efforts to increase access to prescription drug coverage, so long as they would improve , rather than impede, opportunities for future comprehensive reform.
We are encouraged by the Seniors Prescription Insurance Coverage Equity Act (SPICE) (S. 1480) introduced by Sens. Snowe and Wyden.
This bill would provide beneficiaries with access to prescription drugs by subsidizing the purchase of a supplemental policy, enrollment in a Medicare+Choice plan, or through an employerprovided group health plan.
It provides opportunities for private market competition and more choices.
With respect to the delivery system for any proposal, policy makers need to ask: · Should the drug benefit be delivered by the government or the private sector? · Should the benefit be a single, one-size-fits-all program, or should seniors and disabled beneficiaries have a range of choices?
4
We believe several principles are key components of any interim proposal.
As Congress continues to grapple with this complex issue, we will support proposals consistent with these key principles: · All beneficiaries would have the ability to enroll in a private insurance coverage plan of their choosing, ranging from private fee-for-service to HMOs and various private-sector options in between.
Federal subsidies would help low-income beneficiaries afford coverage.
Plans would provide coverage for beneficiaries with high pharmaceutical expenditures.
Beneficiaries would have access to all medicines.
Plans should be overseen by a new, independent government entity.
The new program would be consistent with, and a step toward, needed comprehensive modernization of the Medicare program.
Coverage would be offered through competing, private insurance or health plans that rely on marketplace competition to control costs and improve quality.
· · · · · ·
Government price controls are unacceptable to the industry, because they would inevitably harm our ability to bring new medicines to patients.
We urge you to say "no" to price controls in any form, not direct price controls, not indirect price controls, not by design, not by accident, not by stealth, not by baby steps.
A PRIVATE INSURANCE INCREMENTAL APPROACH The pharmaceutical industry believes that if Congress decides to provide an incremental prescription drug benefit, the best approach would be to provide seniors access to private insurance products.
This approach would fit easily into the current marketplace, since well over 150 million people get their drug coverage through private entities.
In delivering drug coverage, these private entities would do more than simply pay the claims.
They could provide disease management programs, drug utilization review, patient education, and help to reduce medical errors.
We in the researchbased pharmaceutical industry believe that seniors and disabled beneficiaries would benefit greatly by having access to these private insurance products, with the government providing subsidies for those in need.
Skeptics point to complex issues, such as "adverse selection," and claim that a private insurance program will not work.
Adverse selection can occur because individuals purchase insurance only when it is in their best interest.
If an individual could purchase insurance at any time, it would be perfectly rational for them to wait until they were sick.
5
Consequently, insurers often place limits on when individuals can purchase insurance and under what conditions.
Recognizing that adverse selection is an important issue, we asked the experts for assistance.
We turned to leading actuarial and economic firms including Milliman and Robertson, Abt Associates, and Towers-Perrin and commissioned analyses (see Attachments 6, 7, and 8).
These actuaries and economists note that a private prescription drug insurance program can work if designed properly.
They also note that adverse selection is "one of the most difficult issues in designing any insurance program involving individual choice."
Actuaries and economists have several tools to minimize the impact on adverse selection.
These include: · · · · · Limiting election opportunities for enrollment; Providing low-income subsidies for premiums and deductibles; Establishing a high-risk pool for enrollees with very high expenditures; Requiring up-front cost sharing, such as an annual deductible; and Allowing insurers to negotiate with manufacturers and distribution networks to reduce costs.
We believe that a properly designed prescription drug insurance benefit would attract many Medicare purchasers and many private market sellers.
Why are we so confident? In the market today, there are private health insurance policies for cancer, sports accidents, emergency room visits, pregnancy complications, and campers.
There are private insurance products for goats, carriage rides, and the weather on the day of your daughter's wedding (see Attachment 9).
We believe that there are similar opportunities for private-market solutions to increase access to prescription drug coverage for the elderly and disabled Americans.
CONCLUSION In my testimony today, I've tried to highlight the pharmaceutical industry's support for expanded drug coverage for seniors--done the correct way.
Some say that this issue is life or death for the pharmaceutical industry, America's premier high-technology industry.
After the debate is over, and the dust settles, we will still have a pharmaceutical industry, but depending on what you do, the industry could be profoundly different, and the results for patients could be demonstrably less.
As the debate unfolds, I hope you'll remember the millions of Americans, like my children, waiting impatiently for new cures and treatments.
We can provide quality health care for seniors and the disabled, including better prescription drug coverage, but we need to do it the correct way.
If we do it the wrong way, the industry and the patients we serve will undoubtedly suffer the consequences.
6
ATTACHMENT 1 THE RESEARCH-BASED PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY: FACTS AT A GLANCE A Strong Commitment to Research and Development · This year, research-based pharmaceutical companies will invest $26.4 billion in research and development (R
This represents an increase of 10.1 percent over research spending in 1999.
Since 1980, researchbased companies have multiplied their R
Domestic R
R
Over the past two decades, the percentage of sales allocated to pharmaceutical R
The average for all U.S. industries is less than four percent.
Approximately 36 percent of pharmaceutical R
This U.S. industry investment is very efficient.
Of 152 major global drugs developed between 1975 and 1994, 45 percent are of U.S. origin.
· · ·
· ·
Drug Discovery and Development Are High-Risk · During the 1990s, the average time it took to discover, test and develop a single new drug increased to nearly 15 years.
This was almost twice the development time in the 1960s.
Of every 5,000-10,000 compounds tested, only five enter human clinical trials, and only one is approved by the FDA for sale in the U.S.
Of every 10 medicines in the market, on average, only three generate revenues that meet or exceed average R
The Boston Consulting Group estimates that the pre-tax cost of developing a drug introduced in 1990 was $500 million, including the cost of research failures and interest over the period of investment.
·
·
7
Medicines in Development · The research-based pharmaceutical industry currently has more than 1,000 new medicines in development to treat hundreds of serious diseases.
- There are currently 369 biotech medicines in the pipeline to combat over 200 diseases.
Nearly half the medicines - 175 - are for cancer, the second leading killer of Americans.
Biotechnology and new technological tools have revolutionized cancer research.
- Among these drugs and biologics in development are promising new treatments for cancer, heart disease, Alzheimer's, AIDS, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's, stroke, rheumatoid arthritis, and depression.
The Value of Medicines · The estimated life expectancy of an American born in 1920 was 54 years.
By 1965, life expectancy had increased to 70 years.
The average American born today can expect to live more than 76 years, and life expectancy has risen dramatically for all age groups.
Every five years since 1965, roughly one additional year has been added to life expectancy at birth.
These improvements in life expectancy are due advances in medicine and our improved ability to prevent and treat disease: - Antibiotics and vaccines have virtually wiped out such diseases as diptheria, syphilis, whooping cough, measles and polio in the U.S. - The influenza epidemic of 1918 killed more people than all the battles fought during the First World War.
Since that time, medicines have helped reduce the combined U.S. death rate from influenza and pneumonia by 85 percent.
- Over the past 30 years, innovative medicines have helped reduce deaths from heart disease and stroke by half, enabling 4 million Americans to live longer, better lives.
- Since 1965, drugs have helped cut emphysema deaths by 57 percent and ulcer deaths by 72 percent.
· In a year-long disease-management program for about 1,100 patients with congestive heart failure run by Humana Hospitals, pharmacy costs increased by 60 percent, while hospital costs (the largest component of U.S. health care spending) declined 78 percent.
The net savings were $9.3 million.
A National Institutes of Health (NIH) study showed that while it initially costs more to treat stroke patients with a clot-busting drug, the expense is more than offset by 8
·
reduced hospital rehabilitation and nursing home costs.
Treatment with the clot-buster costs an additional $1,700 per patient, but reduced hospital rehabilitation and nursing home costs result in net savings of more than $4,000 per patient.
· According to a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine, the use of ACE inhibitor drugs for patients with congestive heart failure reduced mortality by 16 percent, avoiding $9,000 in hospital costs per patient over a three-year period.
Considering the numbers of people at risk for congestive heart failure, additional use of ACE inhibitors could potentially save $2 billion annually.
According to a study conducted at the University of Maryland Medical Center, patients treated with beta-blockers following a heart attack were up to 40 percent less likely to die in the two-year period following the heart attack than the patients that did not receive the drugs.
According to another study, use of beta-blockers resulted in an annual cost savings of up to $3 billion in preventing second heart attacks and up to $237 million in treating angina.
- Unfortunately, a study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association found that only half the people who could be helped by these medicines are getting them.
· Estrogen-replacement therapy can help aging women avoid osteoporosis and crippling hip fractures, a major cause of nursing home admissions.
Estrogen-replacement therapy costs approximately $3,000 for 15 years of treatment, while a hip fracture costs an estimated $41,000.
The combination of two drugs, at a cost of about $140 can eradicate the bacterial cause of most ulcers.
Ulcer surgery costs upward of $28,000.
·
·
9
Attachment 2
Prevalence, Cost, and Medicines in Development for Selected Major Diseases in the United States Uncured Disease Approximate Prevalence Approximate Number of Annual Medicines in Economic Cost Development* ($billions) $100.0 $54.6 $6.2 $107.0 $20.2 $95.6 $53.0 $98.2 $31.7 $13.8 $23.0 $43.3 23 28 17 316 17 38 17 19 10 24 12 22 Source Alzheimer's Disease Arthritis Asthma Cancer Congestive Heart Failure Coronary Heart Disease Depression Diabetes Hypertensive Disease Osteoporosis Schizophrenia Stroke 4,000,000 40,000,000 14,000,000 8,000,000 4,900,000 13,900,000 17,600,000 15,700,000 50,000,000 10,000,000 1,500,000 4,000,000 National Institute on Aging Arthritis Foundation National Heart Lung and Blood Institute American Cancer Society American Heart Association American Heart Association National Institute on Mental Health National Institute of Diabetes American Heart Association National Osteoporosis Foundation National Institute of Mental Health American Heart Association
*PhRMA data.
Source: Compiled by PhRMA, 2000.
Attachment 3
Development of 152 Global* Drugs by Country of Origin, 1975­1994 United States United Kingdom Switzerland Germany Japan Others Belgium Sweden France 0% 9% 7% 7% 6% 5% 4% 3% 10% 20% 30% Share of global* drugs 40% 50% 14% 45%
*Global drugs: Launched in U.S., Japan, France, Germany, U.K., Italy and Switzerland.
Source: Barral, P.E., 20 Years of Pharmaceutical Research Results Throughout the World, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Foundation, 1996.
Attachment 4 (Part 1)
Company-Financed Pharmaceutical Research 
Sweden 3%
Switzerland 5%
U.K. 7%
Attachment 4 (Part 2)
R
R
3,968.4
22,479.0
5,000
698.9 427.5 1,549.2 1980
0
3,378.7 1985
6,802.9 1990 1995 1998 1999 2000 (estimated) (estimated)
Source: PhRMA Annual Survey, 2000.
PhRMA Medicare Prescription Drug Position The Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) supports pharmaceutical coverage for Medicare beneficiaries.
We believe that the best way to provide pharmaceutical coverage to Medicare beneficiaries is through comprehensive modernization of the Medicare program to provide beneficiaries a choice of health plans that would also provide drug coverage.
If such modernization does not occur this year, PhRMA would support federal legislation that would provide all seniors with access to pharmaceutical insurance coverage, wherever they live and no matter how sick they are.
Such a proposal would have the following elements: 1.
All beneficiaries would have the ability to enroll in a pharmaceutical coverage plan of their choosing.
2.
Federal government subsidies would help low-income beneficiaries afford coverage.
3.
Coverage would be offered through competing, private insurance plans that rely on marketplace competition to control costs and improve quality.
4.
Plans would provide coverage for beneficiaries with high pharmaceutical expenditures.
5.
Beneficiaries would have access to all medicines.
6.
Plans would be overseen by a new, independent government entity.
7.
This new program would be consistent with, and step toward, needed comprehensive modernization of the Medicare program.
Several existing proposals embody these elements in whole or part.
We offer our assistance and support in advancing the goal of enhanced pharmaceutical coverage this year.
January 17, 2000
MANAGING RISK FOR A MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG BENEFIT
BY DALE A. RAYMAN, F.S.A., M.A.A.A., M.H.A The author is a healthcare actuary in Towers Perrin's national pharmacy practice.
INTRODUCTION A variety of proposals have been offered in Congress to increase access to prescription drugs for Medicare enrollees.
Some believe that the pharmacy issue should be addressed only as part of comprehensive Medicare reform.
Others, however, believe that comprehensive Medicare reform may take years to develop and implement, and believe that many seniors may be better served by an incremental approach that addresses the lack of access to prescription drugs with more immediacy.
This paper examines one aspect of an incremental approach by demonstrating how generally accepted actuarial techniques can be used to manage the risk of a prescription drug benefit offered through insurance companies.
We believe these techniques can permit insurance companies to offer seniors financial security against high drug costs, and promote access to effective health care, while avoiding unnecessary or excessive utilization that can result from adverse selection.
FUNDAMENTALS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUG BENEFITS Before designing and pricing a health insurance product, an actuary usually seeks to answer several basic questions: how will health care services be approved and delivered, how much will services cost and what are the key drivers of utilization and cost.
Taking a holistic approach enables the actuary to understand how the risk can be managed and thus improves the ability to predict cost and price the product appropriately (i.e., competitively yet sufficiently).
This is a key step in risk management.
To frame our discussion, we must understand the major stakeholders and the mechanics of delivery for a prescription drug benefit.
The diagram below shows one example of how an insured patient obtains prescription drugs.
Major stakeholders, shown in bold font, include the insured member (i.e., patient), physician, pharmacist, pharmaceutical manufacturer, insurer and pharmaceutical benefit manager (PBM).
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 2
Pharmacy buys drug ingredients from Pharmaceutical Manufacturer Insured Member/ Patient visits physician Physician writes prescription Insured goes to Pharmacy to purchase prescription drugs, paying full cost
Insurer partners with PBM for managing pharmacy benefits
Insured files claims with Insurer
Insurer/PBM adjudicates claim and reimburses insured member
In many large companies that self-fund their benefits (i.e., do not purchase insurance), a PBM administers the pharmacy benefit directly and reimburses the pharmacy once the covered employee or dependent has paid a copayment or coinsurance.
This approach is shown below: Pharmacy buys drug ingredients from Pharmaceutical Manufacturer Member/ Patient visits physician Physician writes prescription Member goes to Pharmacy to purchase prescription drugs Pharmacy records claim in interactive system and collects appropriate copay from Member
PBM receives claim electronically and reimburses pharmacy using funds drawn from Employer bank account
The actuary must also understand the key cost components and what is driving increases in these costs.
Key cost components for a managed pharmacy program are shown below: [(Ingredient Cost + Dispensing Fee ­ Copay + Admin Fee) * Utilization] ­ Rebates + Drug-related Problems + Therapeutic Failures The administrative fee paid to the PBM or insurer generally covers the cost of on-line systems, electronic edits, customer service, pharmacy network contracting and maintenance, eligibility updates, communications, physician prescribing profiling and education, and drug utilization review.
(A detailed discussion of these features is beyond the scope of this paper.)
The actuary is also interested in both short- and long-term cost trends.
Drug expenditures have increased between 14.4 and 18.8 percent annually over the past three years and are expected to continue this level of increase over the next couple of years.
The three major
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 3
components of prescription drug expenditures are: utilization, new products and elements, and price.
According to IMS Health, the main factors contributing to prescription drug spending in 1999 were non-price factors, including increased volume of prescriptions, record sales of new products, and the changing mix of available products being used.
Of the 18.8 percent increase in drug expenditures (1999), 4.2 percent resulted from increased prices for existing drugs.
The remaining growth was due to increased volume (10.8 percent) and new product introductions (3.8 percent).
Drug mix within a therapeutic class can change drastically as new, expensive but very effective drugs enter the market.
Treatment thresholds are also lowered as these new drugs prove effective for larger groups of patients than in the past.
And new drugs are being discovered to treat diseases for which no drug treatment was historically available.
With this basic understanding of prescription drug benefits, we can now begin to examine the risk management process.
FUNDAMENTALS OF RISK CONTROL The objective of risk control is to reduce the frequency, severity or unpredictability of losses.
There are numerous approaches to risk control e.g., risk avoidance, loss prevention, risk/loss reduction, risk separation, risk combination and contractual transfer of risk.
In this paper we assume that most of the risk for prescription drug costs has been transferred to an insurer by purchasing insurance for a predetermined price (i.e., premium).
The insurance company seeks to control or manage the risk using loss prevention and loss reduction techniques.
A key aspect of insurance is the pooling or spreading of risk.
By pooling the risk for a large number of purchasers, the insurance company can improve the predictability of the average loss.
By pooling risks, policyholders who have higher-than-expected losses are offset by those with lower-than-expected losses.
The larger the pool, the better the predictability.
The improved predictability of large risk pools allows the actuary to establish reasonable premiums.
Premium development is a critical function for insurers and involves determining a reasonable, yet sufficient, price for accepting the risk.
In a competitive market, the insurer's rates must be attractive relative to the perceived value obtained by the purchaser.
In the premium development process, the actuary must consider factors that will have an impact on the risk, either positive or negative.
The actuary must also estimate the probability of these factors occurring.
For example, an insurer could reduce the risk of overutilization of hospital services by implementing an inpatient pre-admission certification
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 4
program.
The actuary would reduce the basic premium to reflect the expected reduction in hospital utilization due to this program.
ADVERSE SELECTION Many factors can increase the level of risk for the insurer.
One of the most significant of these is adverse selection.
Adverse selection is defined as the tendency of purchasers, when given a choice of benefits, to choose the plan that will produce the greatest return to them for the price.
When individuals are given choice, they will gravitate to the option that provides what they perceive as the best value for the amount they spend.
Although seniors cannot precisely predict their prescription drug needs for an upcoming year, they often have a good idea of whether these needs will be high or low.
For example, a senior with a complicated heart condition and diabetes is likely to need far more prescription drugs than a senior who has no chronic conditions and exercises regularly.
When an insurer increases health insurance premiums to cover adverse selection, those in good health are likely to drop coverage, thus causing the average cost to increase for remaining members.
If premiums are increased once again, the healthiest of the remaining members will also drop coverage.
This creates an assessment spiral whereby premiums reach such a high level that only members with the worst health status remain.
In designing an insurance product, actuaries view the benefit cost as being composed of utilization multiplied by unit cost.
For example, the cost for a prescription drug benefit would be equal to the number of prescriptions filled multiplied by the average cost per prescription.
In applying risk management approaches, actuaries consider the impact that each will have on utilization, unit cost or both.
Adverse selection is a key factor affecting utilization.
ACTUARIAL APPROACHES FOR MANAGING RISK This section examines several risk management approaches used by actuaries in designing health care products.
These techniques are used to prevent or reduce losses and to ensure the long-term viability of the product.
Law of large numbers ­ A key risk management approach is the spreading of risk using risk pools.
Insurers understand that the average claims cost is significantly more predictable for larger groups of covered lives than for smaller groups since there is a greater probability of obtaining an average cross-section of risks.
This approach is essential for managing the risk of a Medicare prescription drug benefit.
Policies that
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 5
motivate a larger number of Medicare beneficiaries to choose a private insurance product will help to maintain a stable insurance market.
Premium sharing ­ Insurers typically require employers to contribute to the cost of group health insurance.
The larger the percentage of cost contributed by the employer, the greater the participation, thereby reducing adverse selection.
One of the most obvious ways to reduce adverse selection for a prescription drug benefit for Medicare beneficiaries is to have the federal government subsidize the cost for many seniors.
This could be accomplished through direct payments to health insurers (e.g., similar to Medicare + Choice plans), tax credits or tax deductions.
If individuals receive a substantial government subsidy (e.g., 25 percent or more of the cost), participation will be significantly greater than for a benefit that is wholly paid for by the beneficiary.
Risk-sharing ­ Insurers recognize that accepting 100 percent of the risk may eliminate any motivation that insured members have of helping control the risk.
If, however, the insurer assumes 80 percent of the risk while members continue to pay 20 percent of the cost out of their own pockets, the member has significantly more motivation to control utilization and shop around for the best price.
Risk-sharing has been used historically to control risk in health insurance and is applicable for prescription drug benefits as well.
Many prescription drug plans use fixed copayments rather than percentage coinsurance so that members who must use high-cost drugs do not shoulder an inordinate burden.
Copayments can also vary to provide incentives for patients to follow the most costeffective drug therapies (e.g., generic, preferred brand, non-preferred brand).
Benefit design ­ Risk-sharing is one only aspect of benefit design.
In addition to copayments and coinsurance, benefit provisions can also include deductibles, maximum benefit limits, internal limits, exclusions , coordination of benefits (see below), mandatory pre-certification for non-emergency high-cost care, and other cost-control incentives.
The potential for adverse selection with respect to prescription drug benefits requires careful benefit design.
Individual underwriting and substandard premiums ­ The purpose of individual underwriting is to determine whether potential members are good or bad risks for the insurance company.
Individual underwriting protects the insurer from providing coverage to a disproportionate number of unhealthy members.
The worst risks are often declined coverage.
Other potential members in bad health may be charged a substandard premium (i.e., a rate greater than the standard premium level).
Individual underwriting can be performed using a short- or long-form questionnaire or by a physical examination by a physician.
Pre-existing condition limitations ­ Some health insurance policies exclude treatment for conditions that were treated during some time prior to coverage (e.g., six months).
Pre-
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 6
existing condition limitations generally expire after coverage has been in effect for twelve months.
The Medicare program does not currently include any pre-existing condition limitations.
High Risk Pools ­ Individual underwriting, substandard premiums and pre-existing condition limitations are all aimed at ensuring that insurers enroll a fair cross-section of risks.
An alternative approach would be to establish high-risk pools to pick up risk that exceeds certain thresholds.
These pools are essentially a reinsurance mechanism and could operate in several ways.
One approach, commonly used in the auto insurance industry, is to have all insurers pay a certain premium to the pool for each of their enrolled lives.
The pool would then pick up excess claims for any insured.
For example, the government could fund a pool to cover the risk of prescription drug claims in excess of a certain threshold per individual per year.
Eligibility requirements ­ Health insurers often establish eligibility provisions to reduce the potential for adverse selection.
For example, employees covered in a group health plan may need to be actively at work on the effective date of their insurance.
This ensures that individuals are sufficiently healthy to be engaged in gainful employment.
For those not actively at work, the effective date is deferred until they return to work.
Similarly, the Medicare program charges higher premiums for seniors opt out of Medicare Part B upon initial eligibility and then choose to enroll at a later date.
Closed election periods ­ Requiring members to enroll only during a fixed election period each year, rather than having the opportunity to change benefits at any time, reduces adverse selection.
A private insurance prescription drug program for Medicare beneficiaries should limit the frequency with which enrollees can change coverage.
In addition, adverse selection could also be reduced by requiring seniors who opt out of coverage to wait at least two years before re-enrolling or to pay a premium surcharge (e.g., 10 percent) during the first two years after re-enrollment.
Coordination of benefits ­ Insurers typically coordinate coverage with other insurance or government-sponsored coverage such that benefits are reduced if another payor is primary.
Coordination of benefits (COB) provisions would continue to be an effective way for insurers to ensure that seniors are not reimbursed for more than the costs they incur.
COB would also provide some cost savings for insurers.
Premium development ­ Careful premium development with appropriately established risk margins is another approach for controlling risk.
For example, tiered rating might apply for benefits that vary significantly with age or certain other factors (e.g., whether a senior is a smoker or a non-smoker).
Durational rating might be applied to reflect expected select and ultimate claims costs.
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 7
Links to other coverage ­ To reduce adverse selection, some health insurers have packaged together various benefits.
For example, packaging vision benefits with medical benefits avoids the high adverse selection that results when only those who need glasses or contact lenses purchase vision coverage.
Medicare + Choice plans are likely to combine prescription drug options with medical options to reduce adverse selection.
An integrated approach to managing the health care of seniors is significantly more effective than a fragmented approach and can produce significant savings over the long term.
Risk-adjusted premiums ­ Risk adjusters are designed to provide higher payments to those insurers who enroll individuals who are more likely to have higher costs.
For example, HCFA has proposed reimbursing Medicare + Choice plans on a risk-adjusted basis that would pay more to plans that enroll individuals with diagnoses that are projected to produce higher medical costs.
Risk-adjusted premium subsidies from the federal government for prescription drug coverage would be one solution for ensuring that insurance companies that enroll a high proportion of high-cost seniors for the same average premium as competing insurers do not bear an unfair burden.
Reducing the number of options ­ Giving potential enrollees a choice among benefits, options or financial terms can lead to adverse selection.
High benefit users will tend to choose options that provide more generous coverage whereas low benefit users will choose low-cost, less generous coverage.
Insurers can reduce adverse selection by reducing the number of options.
The number of prescription drug options for seniors can be limited (much like Medigap plan options) thereby reducing chances of adverse selection and facilitating comparisons among companies.
Alternatively, an independent Board could be established to certify that plans meet certain minimum criteria.
This would reduce the variability among plan designs and also the potential for adverse selection.
Marketing rules ­ Although Medicare + Choice plans are offered though the private market, the government has instituted uniform rules that level the playing field for competitors.
These rules not only prevent discriminatory marketing but also ensure that all competitors have a fair chance of enrolling an average cross-section of risks.
Similar rules could be considered for prescription drug plans to reduce opportunities for "cherry picking."
SOME FINAL WORDS The actuarial design features described above are used to improve an insurer's ability to manage risk.
Given the potential for adverse selection among insurers and the importance of ensuring the long-term viability of a private market Medicare prescription drug program, these techniques should be carefully considered.
Good and accurate data can also help to
Managing Risk for a Medicare Prescription Drug Benefit March 20, 2000 Page 8
reduce insurance costs.
The impact of each approach used should be continuously monitored to measure its value.
This paper has briefly described some approaches that insurance companies can use to control risk for prescription drug benefit coverage.
While designing a market-based prescription drug benefit would require careful design, there are private-market solutions that work.
ATTACHMENT 9
TYPES OF INSURANCE There are many varying types of insurance coverage available in the United States.
Coverage can range from the typical health and auto insurance, to the more unusual, including insurance for a dancer's legs or a doctor's hands.
If a client is willing to pay, there are few limits to the types of insurance coverage available.
Listed below are a number of insurance products ranging from health to weather conditions.
Health Insurance · · · ·
Critical Illness Insurance Cancer, heart disease, etc.
Critical Security Insurance For those suffering from a critical illness
· · · · ·
Infertility Coverage Pregnancy Complication Insurance Hospital Indemnity Insurance Covers hospital confinement and ICU
· ·
Children's Insurance College Students' Health Insurance Emergency Room Insurance Catastrophic Disability Insurance
Campers Accident 
· · · ·
Pre-Schooler Accident Insurance Sports Accident Insurance Psychiatric Insurance "Natural Health Supplemental Insurance" Covers acupuncture, homeopathy, Oriental medicine, nutritional counseling, biofeedback, colon therapy, etc.
Horse Related Insurance · · All Breeds National and International)/All Disciplines
Animal Mortality* National and International *(Horses, Mules, Donkeys, Dogs, Ostrich, Sheep, Pigs, Goats, Llamas, Exotics, to name a few.)
· · · · · ·
Associations Auto Barns Barrel Racing Bed and Breakfasts (Inns) Blacksmiths
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
Boarding Boats Breeding Business Packages Care, Custody and Control Carriage Rides Clinics Combined Training Commercial Farm Auto Commercial Horse Liability Commercial Packages Cutting
· · · · · · · · · · · ·
Dairy Farms Draft Horses Dressage Drill Teams Driving Dude Ranches English Equine Dentists Equitation Eventing Farm Machinery Farms
ATTACHMENT 9
TYPES OF INSURANCE · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · Farriers Flood Fox Hunters Gaited Horses Gymkhanas Harness Horses Hay Rides Horse Haulers Horse Owners Private Liability
Horse Shows Horse Trailers and Vans Hunters Instructors Liability Jumping Horses Leased Horses Liability, Commercial and Personal Livestock Major Medical Marinas Miniature Horses Mounted Troops
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Orchards Personal Auto Personal Liability Personal Umbrella Pleasure Animals Ponies Pony Party Liability Race Horses Race Horse Liability Reining Horses Restaurants and Taverns Riding Lessons Riding Stables - Public and Private Roping Saddle Shops Saddleseat Sales Barns Shipping Both International and National
· · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · · ·
Stables Public and Private
Steeplechasers Stock Horses Student Accident Coverage Tack Shops Tack and Equipment Team Penning Three Day Eventing Trail Rides Trailers Transport National and International
Sleigh Rides Sport Horses Sports Accident Coverage
Trotters Truckers Truckers General Liability Vans Vaulting Vet Clinics Veterinarians Vineyards Workers Compensation
Weather Insurance (covering hurricane, typhoon, rain, snow, wind, hail, etc.) ·
Special Events: Fairs, Festivals, Airshows, Fourth of July, Chambers of Commerce, Parties, Weddings, Fireworks, Parades, Fundraisers, Company Outings, Conventions, Carnivals, Picnics, Hospitality, Theatrical Productions ·
Concerts: Amphitheater, Promoters, Venues, Concessions, Sheds/Shacks Sports: Racing, Football, Baseball, Mud Racing, Basketball, etc.
·
Entertainment: Commercials, TV Shows, Film/Video Productions, Photo Shoots, Advertising
·
ATTACHMENT 9
TYPES OF INSURANCE ·
Promotions: Car Dealers, Jewelry Stores, etc. ·
·
Weather Sensitive Business: Resorts, Country Clubs, Florists, Ski Resorts, Utilities, Flea Markets, etc.
Snow Removal : Municipal, Towns, School Districts, Airports, Universities, etc.
·
Agricultural : Fruit/Vegetable growers, Packers, Canneries, Juicers, etc.
Marine Insurance · · Private Pleasure Craft Boat Dealers · · Piers, Wharves, and Docks Charterers Legal Liability · · Marina Operators Passenger Vessels
