Kansas Labor Market Information Home Contact us Contents Links to other sites Order paper publications News Releases Monthly Newsletters Labor Force and Unemployment Reports Industry Employment and Wage Reports Occupational Wage and Outlook Reports Affirmative Action Reports Kansas Wage Survey 1996 Occupation Definitions: Production, Construction, Operating, Maintenance, and Material Handling Occupations __________________________________________________________________ * First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors- Production, Construction, Maintenance, and Related Occupations First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors, Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers 81002: Directly supervise and coordinate activities of mechanics, repairers, and installers and their helpers.
Manager/Supervisors are generally found in smaller establishments where they perform both supervisory and management functions, such as accounting, marketing, and personnel work, and may also engage in the same repair work as the workers they supervise.
Excludes work leaders who spend 20 percent or more of their time at tasks similar to those of employees under their supervision.
First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors, Construction Trades and Extractive Workers 81005: Directly supervise and coordinate activities of construction or extractive workers.
Manager/Supervisors are generally found in smaller establishments where they perform both supervisory and management functions, such as accounting, marketing, and personnel work, and may also engage in the same construction work as the workers they supervise.
Excludes work leaders who spend 20 percent or more of their time at tasks similar to those of employees under their supervision.
First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors, Production and Operating Workers 81008: Directly supervise and coordinate activities of production and operating workers, such as testers, precision workers, machine setters and operators, assemblers, fabricators, or plant and system operators.
Manager/Supervisors are generally found in smaller establishments where they perform both supervisory and management functions, such as accounting, marketing, and personnel work, and may also engage in the same production work as the workers they supervise.
Excludes work leaders who spend 20 percent or more of their time at tasks similar to those of employees under their supervision.
First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors, Transportation and Material-Moving Machine and Vehicle Operators 81011: Directly supervise and coordinate activities of transportation and material-moving machine and vehicle operators.
May supervise helpers assigned to these workers.
Manager/Supervisors are generally found in smaller establishments where they perform both supervisory and management functions, such as accounting, marketing, and personnel work, and may also engage in the same work as the workers they supervise.
Excludes work leaders who spend 20 percent or more of their time at tasks similar to those of employees under their supervision.
First-Line Supervisors and Manager/Supervisors, Helpers, Laborers, and Material Movers, Hand 81017: Directly supervise and coordinate activities of helpers, laborers, and material movers.
Manager/Supervisors are generally found in smaller establishments where they perform both supervisory and management functions, such as accounting, marketing, and personnel work, and may also engage in the same hand labor as the workers they supervise.
Excludes work leaders who spend 20 percent or more of their time at tasks similar to those of employees under their supervision.
All Other First-Line Supervisor and Managers/Supervisors -- Production, Construction, Maintenance, and Related Workers 81099: All other first-line supervisors in this category not classified separately above.
* Inspectors and Related Occupations Precision Inspectors, Testers, and Graders 83002: Perform precision inspecting, testing, and grading of parts, products, and equipment for defects, wear, and deviations from specifications.
The majority of these workers use precision measuring instruments and complex test equipment and hand tools.
May make minor repairs.
Excludes workers who combine inspection and testing with major repair work.
Production Inspectors, Testers, Graders, Sorters, Samplers, and Weighers 83005: Inspect, test, grade, sort, sample, or weigh nonagricultural raw materials or processed, machined, fabricated, or assembled parts or products.
Work may be performed before, during, or after processing.
Transportation Inspectors 83008: Inspect equipment or goods in connection with the safe transport of cargo or people.
Includes rail transport inspectors, such as freight inspectors, car inspectors, rail inspectors, and other nonprecision inspectors of other types of transportation vehicles.
Excludes Precision Inspectors.
All Other Inspectors, Testers, and Related Workers 83099: All other inspectors, testers, and related workers not classified separately above.
* Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers Machinery Maintenance Mechanics 85110: Repair and maintain the operating condition of industrial production and processing machinery, printing machinery, and refinery and pipeline distribution systems.
Duties include repairing machinery and mechanical equipment, such as pumps, conveyor systems, and motors, in accordance with diagrams, operating manuals, or manufacturer's specifications.
Excludes Millwrights and Mobile Heavy Equipment Mechanics, such as crane, bulldozer, grader, or conveyor mechanics.
Machinery Maintenance Mechanics, Water or Power Generation Plant 85118: Install, adjust, repair, and maintain machinery in power generating stations and water treatment plants.
Duties include the repair and maintenance of: Mechanical elements of generators, waterwheels, piping, and water- inlet controls in generating stations; steam boilers, condensers, pumps, compressors, and similar equipment in gas manufacturing plants; and equipment used to process and distribute water for human consumption and industrial use.
All Other Machinery Maintenance Mechanics 85119: All other machinery maintenance mechanics not classified separately above.
Millwrights 85123: Install new machinery and heavy equipment according to layout plans, blueprints, and other drawings.
Dismantle and move machinery and heavy equipment when changes in plant layout are required.
Use a variety of hand tools, hoists, dollies, and trucks.
May construct foundations for machines.
Machinery Maintenance Workers 85128: Change parts, lubricate machinery, and perform other routine machinery maintenance.
Excludes workers who repair machinery.
Maintenance Repairers, General Utility 85132: Perform work involving two or more maintenance skills to keep machines, mechanical equipment, or structure of an establishment in repair.
Duties may involve pipefitting, boilermaking, insulating, welding, machining, machine and equipment repairing, carpentry, and electrical work.
May also include planning and laying out of work relating to repairs; repairing electrical and/or mechanical equipment; installing, aligning, and balancing new equipment; and repairing buildings, floors, or stairs.
These workers are generally found in small establishments where specialization in maintenance work is impractical.
Automotive Mechanics 85302: Adjust, repair, and overhaul automotive vehicles.
May be designated according to specialties, such as Brake Repairers, Transmission Mechanics, or Front-end Mechanics.
Excludes Auto Body Repairers, Bus and Truck Mechanics, Diesel Engine Specialists, and Electrical Systems Specialists.
Automotive Body and Related Repairers 85305: Repair, repaint, and refinish automotive vehicle bodies; straighten vehicle frames; and replace damaged vehicle glass.
Motorcycle Repairers 85308: Repair and overhaul motorcycles, motor scooters, mopeds, or similar motorized vehicles.
Bus and Truck Mechanics and Diesel Engine Specialists 85311: Repair and maintain the operating condition of trucks, buses, and all types of diesel engines.
Includes mechanics working primarily with automobile diesel engines.
Mobile Heavy Equipment Mechanics, Except Engines 85314: Repair and maintain mobile mechanical, hydraulic, and pneumatic equipment, such as cranes, bulldozers, graders, and conveyors, used in construction, logging, and surface mining.
Excludes Rail Car Repairers and Diesel Engine Specialists.
Farm Equipment Mechanics 85321: Maintain, repair, and overhaul farm machinery and vehicles, such as tractors, harvesters, and irrigation systems.
Includes repairers of dairy equipment.
Excludes Engine Specialists.
Aircraft Mechanics 85323: Repair and maintain the operating condition of aircraft assemblies, such as hydraulic and pneumatic systems, landing gear, propeller assemblies, fuel tanks, and airframe assemblies.
Inspect, test, modify, and install equipment according to specifications, using tools such as power shears, acetylene welding equipment, rivet guns, and air or electric drills.
Includes Helicopter Repairers.
Excludes Aircraft Engine Specialists and Aircraft Electricians.
Aircraft Engine Specialists 85326: Repair and maintain the operating condition of aircraft engines.
Includes Helicopter Engine Mechanics.
Excludes Electrical Systems Specialists and Aircraft Mechanics whose primary duties do not involve engine repair.
Small Engine Specialists 85328: Repair and maintain the operating condition of nonautomobile gasoline-powered internal combustion engines and the equipment powered by those engines.
Includes repairers of outboard motors, snowmobiles, lawn mowers, and chain saws.
Excludes Motorcycle Repairers.
Central Office and PBX Installers and Repairers 85502: Test, analyze, and repair telephone or telegraph circuits and equipment at a central office location using test meters and hand tools.
Analyze and repair defects in communications equipment on customers' premises using circuit diagrams, polarity probes, meters, and a telephone test set.
May install equipment.
Telephone and Cable Tv Line Installers and Repairers 85702: String and repair telephone and television cable and other equipment for transmitting messages or TV programming.
Duties include locating and repairing defects in existing systems; placing, rearranging, and removing underground or aerial cables; installing supports, insulation, or guy wire systems; and other auxiliary tasks necessary to maintain lines and cables.
Data Processing Equipment Repairers 85705: Repair, maintain, and install electronic computers (mainframes, minis, and micros), peripheral equipment, and word processing systems.
Electronic Home Entertainment Equipment Repairers 85708: Adjust and repair radio and television receivers, phonographs, stereo systems, tape recorders, video systems, and other electronic home entertainment equipment.
Electric Home Appliance and Power Tool Repairers 85711: Repair, adjust, and install all types of electric household appliances, such as refrigerators, washing machines, dishwashers, vacuum cleaners, room air conditioners, and small appliances, including toasters, mixers, and food processors.
Includes repairers of electrical hand and bench tools, such as lathes, drills, saws, grinders, and polishers.
Electric Motor, Transformer, and Related Repairers 85714: Install, repair, and maintain electric motors, batteries, transformers, wiring, and switches, using hand and power tools, gauges, and test instruments.
Electronics Repairers, Commercial and Industrial Equipment 85717: Repair electronic equipment such as industrial controls, telemetering and missile control systems, radar systems, transmitters, and antennae, using hand tools and testing instruments.
Excludes repairers of data processing equipment and home entertainment equipment.
Powerhouse, Substation, and Relay Electricians 85721: Inspect, test, repair, and maintain electrical equipment in generating stations or powerhouses; substation equipment, such as oil circuit breakers and transformers; and in-service relays, to prevent and remedy abnormal behavior of transmission and distribution lines and equipment.
Electrical Power-Line Installers and Repairers 85723: Install and repair cables or wires used in electrical power or distribution systems.
Install insulators, erect wooden poles and light or heavy duty transmission towers.
Includes Cable Splicers and Trouble Shooters.
Excludes repairers of transformers and substation equipment, and telephone and telegraph communications workers.
Electrical Installers and Repairers, Transportation Equipment 85728: Install, adjust, and maintain electrical systems and wiring switches and fixtures on motor vehicles, trains, or aircraft.
All Other Electrical and Electronic Equipment Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers 85799: All other electrical and electronic equipment mechanics, installers, and repairers not classified separately above.
Heating, Air Conditioning, and Refrigeration Mechanics and Installers 85902: Install and repair heating, air conditioning, and refrigerating systems.
Duties include installation and repair of oil burners, hot-air furnaces, heating stoves, and similar equipment in homes and commercial establishments, using hand and pipe threading tools.
Includes the installation and repair of cooling and central air conditioning systems.
Precision Instrument Repairers 85905: Install, test, repair, maintain, and adjust indicating, recording, telemetering, and controlling instruments used to measure and control variables such as pressure, flow, temperature, motion, force, and chemical composition.
Includes instrument repairers who repair, calibrate, and test instruments such as voltmeters, ammeters, and galvanometers.
Electromedical and Biomedical Equipment Repairers 85908: Test, adjust, and repair electromedical equipment using hand tools and meters.
Electric Meter Installers and Repairers 85911: Install electric meters on customers' premises or on pole.
Test meters and perform necessary repairs.
Turn current on/off by connecting/disconnecting service drop.
Office Machine and Cash Register Servicers 85926: Repair and service office machines, such as adding, accounting, calculating, duplicating, and typewriting machines.
Includes the repair of manual, electrical, and electronic office machines.
Excludes the repair of computerized systems and word processing systems.
Installers and Repairers, Manufactured Buildings, Mobile Homes, and Travel Trailers 85938: Install, repair, and maintain units and systems in mobile homes, prefabricated buildings, or travel trailers, using hand tools or power tools.
Gas Appliance Repairers 85944: Repair and install gas appliances and equipment, such as ovens, dryers, and hot water heaters.
Coin and Vending Machine Servicers and Repairers 85947: Install, service, adjust, and repair coin or vending machines placed in establishments on a concessional basis, using hand or power tools.
Excludes repairers of electronic video games and other specialized electronic vending machines.
Bicycle Repairers 85951: Repair and service bicycles using hand tools.
Tire Repairers and Changers 85953: Repair and replace tires, tubes, treads, and related products on automobiles, buses, trucks, and other vehicles.
Duties include mounting tires on wheels, balancing tires and wheels, and testing and repairing damaged tires and inner tubes.
Menders, Garments, Linens, and Related 85956: Repair defects such as tears and holes in garments, linens, curtains, and draperies.
Rebind cleaned blankets by hand or by operating a sewing machine.
All Other Mechanics, Installers, and Repairers 85999: Includes all mechanics, installers, and repairers not classified separately above.
* Construction Trades and Extractive Occupations, Except Material Moving Carpenters 87102: Construct, erect, install and repair structures, fixtures, and equipment of wood, plywood, and wallboard, using carpentry tools and woodworking machines.
Ceiling Tile Installers and Acoustical Carpenters 87105: Apply or mount acoustical tiles or blocks, strips, or sheets of shock-absorbing materials to ceilings and walls of buildings to reduce or reflect sound.
Materials may be of decorative quality.
Excludes carpet, wood, or hard tile installers.
Drywall Installers 87108: Apply plasterboard or other wallboard to ceilings and interior walls of buildings.
Tapers 87111: Seal joints between plasterboard or other wallboard to prepare wall surface for painting or papering.
Electricians 87202: Install, maintain, and repair electrical wiring, equipment, and fixtures.
Insure that work is in accordance with relevant codes.
May read blueprints.
Includes Protective Signal Installers and Repairers and Street Light Servicers.
Brickmasons 87302: Lay building materials, such as brick, structural tile, concrete, cinder, glass, gypsum, and terra cotta block (except stone), to construct or repair walls, partitions, arches, sewers, and other structures.
Includes Refractory Brickmasons.
Stonemasons 87305: Build stone structures, such as piers, walls, and abutments.
Lay walks, curbstones, or special types of masonry for vats, tanks, and floors.
Hard Tile Setters 87308: Apply tile to walls, floors, ceilings, and promenade roof decks following design specifications.
Concrete and Terrazzo Finishers 87311: Apply cement, sand, pigment, or marble chips to floors, stairways, and cabinet fixtures to finish and attain durable and decorative surfaces, according to specifications and drawings.
Finish surfaces to remove imperfections from freshly poured concrete walls, roads, walkways, and ornamental stone facings of concrete structural products.
Includes Concrete Rubbers.
Reinforcing Metal Workers 87314: Position and secure metal bars in concrete forms to reinforce concrete.
Determine number, size, shape, and location of reinforcing rods from blueprints, sketches, or oral instructions.
Plasterers and Stucco Masons 87317: Apply coats of plaster onto interior or exterior walls, ceilings, or partitions of buildings to produce finished surface according to blueprints, architect's drawings, or oral instructions.
Painters and Paperhangers, Construction and Maintenance 87402: Painters: Paint walls, equipment, buildings, bridges, and other structural surfaces, using brushes, rollers, and spray guns.
May mix colors or oils to obtain desired color or consistency.
Paperhangers: Cover interior walls and ceilings of rooms with decorative wallpaper or fabric, or attach advertising posters on surfaces such as walls and billboards.
Duties include removing old materials from surface to be papered.
Plumbers, Pipefitters, and Steamfitters 87502: Assemble, install, alter, and repair pipe systems (metal, plastic, ceramic, composition, etc.) that carry water, steam, air, or other liquids or gases.
Pipelaying Fitters 87505: Align pipeline section in preparation of welding.
Signal tractor driver for placement of pipeline sections in proper alignment.
Insert steel spacer.
Pipelayers 87508: Lay glazed or unglazed clay, concrete, plastic, or cast-iron pipe for storm or sanitation sewers, drains, water mains, and oil or gas lines.
Perform any combination of the following tasks: Grade trenches or culverts, position pipe, or seal joints.
Septic Tank Servicers and Sewer Pipe Cleaners 87511: Clean and repair septic tanks, sewer lines, or drains.
May patch walls and partitions of tank, replace damaged drain tile, or repair breaks in underground piping.
Carpet Installers 87602: Lay carpets or rugs in homes or buildings.
Excludes workers who lay linoleum.
Floor Layers, Except Carpet, Wood, and Hard Tiles 87605: Apply blocks, strips, or sheets of shock-absorbing, sound-deadening, or decorative coverings to floors and cabinets.
Includes soft tile setters.
Excludes Acoustical Carpenters and installers of carpets, wood, or hard tile.
Paving, Surfacing, and Tamping Equipment Operators 87708: Operate equipment used for applying concrete, asphalt, or other materials to road beds, parking lots, or airport runways and taxiways, or equipment used for tamping gravel, dirt, or other materials.
Includes Concrete and Asphalt Paving Machine Operators, Form Tampers, Tamping Machine Operators, and Stone Spreader Operators.
Highway Maintenance Workers 87711: Maintain highways, municipal and rural roads, airport runways, and rights-of-way in safe condition.
Duties include patching broken or eroded pavement, and erecting and repairing guard rails, highway markers, and snow fences using a posthole digger, shovel, axe, saw, hammer and nails, or power tools.
May also clear brush or plant trees along rights-of-way.
Insulation Workers 87802: Cover and line structures with asbestos, cork, canvas, tar paper, magnesia, and related materials using saws, knives, rasps, trowels, and other tools and implements.
May also specialize in providing blown-in insulation.
Sheet Metal Duct Installers 87805: Install prefabricated sheet metal ducts used for heating, air conditioning, or other purposes in buildings and similar structures.
Roofers 87808: Cover roofs of structures with slate, asphalt, aluminum, wood, and related materials using brushes, knives, punches, hammers, and other tools.
May spray roofs, sidings, and walls with material to bind, seal, insulate, or soundproof sections of structures.
Glaziers 87811: Install glass in windows, skylights, store fronts, and display cases, or on surfaces such as building fronts, interior walls, ceilings, and tabletops.
Excludes Glaziers who work primarily on production lines.
Structural Metal Workers 87814: Raise, place, and unite girders, columns, and other structural steel members to form completed structures or structural frameworks.
Includes workers who erect metal storage tanks and assemble prefabricated metal buildings.
Excludes reinforcing metal workers.
Fence Erectors 87817: Erect and repair metal and wooden fences and fence gates around highways, industrial establishments, residences, or farms, using hand and power tools.
All Other Construction Trades Workers 87899: All other construction trades workers not classified separately above.
Earth Drillers, Except Oil and Gas 87902: Operate a variety of drills to tap sub- surface water and salt deposits, to remove core samples during mineral exploration or soil testing, and to facilitate the use of explosives in mining or construction.
Includes Core, Well, and Foundation Drill Operators and Horizontal and Earth Boring Machine Operators.
Excludes Oil Well Drillers.
Blasters and Explosives Workers 87905: Place explosives in holes or other spots and detonate the explosives to demolish structures or to loosen, remove, or displace earth, rock, or other materials.
Includes Tier-Detonator Blasters, Perforator Operators, and Seismograph Shooters.
Rotary Drill Operators, Oil and Gas Extraction 87911: Set up or operate a variety of drills to remove petroleum products from the earth and to remove core samples for testing during oil and gas exploration.
Includes Core and Rotary Drillers and Well and Prospecting Drillers.
Derrick Operators, Oil and Gas Extraction 87914: Rig derrick equipment and operate pumps to circulate mud through drill hole.
Service Unit Operators 87917: Operate equipment to increase oil flow from producing wells or to remove stuck pipe, casing, tools, or other obstructions from drilling wells.
Includes Fishing-Tool Technicians.
Roustabouts 87921: Assemble or repair oil field equipment using hand and power tools.
Perform other tasks as needed.
All Other Construction and Extractive Workers, Except Helpers 87999: All other construction and extractive workers, except helpers, not classified separately above.
* Precision Production Workers Tool and Die Makers 89102: Analyze specifications, lay out metal stock, set up and operate machine tools, and fit and assemble parts to make and repair dies, cutting tools, jigs, fixtures, gauges, and machinist's hand tools.
Includes Paper Die Maker and Die Sinker.
Excludes Die Setters.
Machinists 89108: Set up and operate variety of machine tools.
Fit and assemble parts to make or repair machine tools and maintain industrial machines, applying knowledge of mechanics, shop mathematics, metal properties, layout, and machining procedures.
Study specifications, such as blueprints, sketch, or description of part to be replaced, and plan sequence of operations.
Tool Grinders, Filers, Sharpeners, and Other Precision Grinders 89111: Perform such operations as precision smoothing, sharpening, polishing, and grinding of metal objects by the wearing action of abrasive materials or machine files.
Includes Tool, Cylinder, and Card Grinders and Grinder Operators, Saw Filers, and Filer-Finishers.
Pattern and Model Makers, Metal 89114: Patternmakers, Metal: Lay out, machine, fit, and assemble castings and parts to metal foundry patterns, core boxes, and match plates using hand and machine tools.
Analyze specifications according to knowledge of patternmaking methods.
Includes Plastic Patternmakers.
Model Makers: Set up and operate machines such as model maker's lathe, milling and engraving machines, and jig borers to make working models of metal or plastic objects.
Includes Template Makers.
Excludes Jewelry Pattern and Model Makers.
Excludes workers who do not work primarily with metal and plastic but work with other material or a combination of materials.
Precision Lay-Out Workers, Metal 89117: Lay out reference points and dimensions on metal stock or workpieces, such as sheets, plates, tubes, structural shapes, castings, or machine parts, for further processing, such as machining, fabricating, welding and assembling.
Jewelers and Silversmiths 89123: Jewelers: Fabricate, adjust, or repair jewelry.
Silversmiths: Design, assemble, decorate, or repair silver articles.
May specialize in one or more areas of the jewelry field, such as repairing, selling, or appraising.
Excludes workers who perform a specialized operation such as fancy wire drawing.
Sheet Metal Workers 89132: Fabricate, assemble, install, and repair sheet metal products and equipment, such as control boxes, drainpipes, and furnace casings.
Work may involve any of the following: Set up and operate fabricating machines to cut, bend, and straighten sheet metal; shape metal over anvils, blocks, or forms using hammer; operate soldering and welding equipment to join sheet metal parts; inspect, assemble, and smooth seams and joints of burred surfaces.
Pattern and Model Makers, Wood 89302: Patternmakers, Wood: Plan, lay out, and construct wooden unit or sectional patterns used in forming sand molds for castings, according to blueprint specifications.
Work involves use of hand and power tools.
Model Makers, Wood: Construct full-size and scale wooden precision models of products such as boats, automobiles, household appliances, aircraft, and machinery, using hand tools, measuring instruments, and woodworking machines.
Includes Wood Jig Builders and Loft Workers.
Wood Machinists 89308: Set up and operate a variety of woodworking machines to surface, cut, and shape lumber, and to fabricate parts for wood products, such as door and window frames, furniture, and sashes, according to specifications.
Excludes workers primarily concerned with one or a limited number of machine phases.
Cabinetmakers and Bench Carpenters 89311: Cut, shape, and assemble wooden articles, such as store fixtures, office equipment, cabinets, and high grade furniture.
Set up and operate variety of machines, such as power saws, jointers, mortisers, tenoners, molders, and shapers, to cut and shape parts from wood stock.
Excludes workers primarily concerned with one or a limited number of machine phases.
Furniture Finishers 89314: Shape, finish, and refinish damaged, worn, or used furniture or new high-grade furniture to specified color or finish, utilizing knowledge of wood properties, finishes, and furniture style.
All Other Precision Woodworkers 89399: All other precision woodworkers not classified separately above.
Fabric and Apparel Patternmakers and Lay-Out Workers 89502: Draw and construct sets of precision master patterns or layouts.
Mark and cut fabrics and apparel according to blueprints or specifications.
Custom Tailors and Sewers 89505: Design and make tailored garments, applying knowledge of garment design, construction, styling, and fabric.
Alter, repair, or fit made-to-measure or ready-to-wear garments, sewing by hand or machine.
Upholsterers 89508: Make, repair, and replace upholstery for household furniture or transportation vehicles, using knowledge of fabrics and methods of upholstery.
Includes workers in both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industries.
Excludes workers who perform a specialized operation such as Sewing Machine Operators, Assemblers, and Hand Cutters and Trimmers.
Spotters, Dry Cleaning 89514: Identify stains in wool, synthetic, and silk garments and household fabrics and apply chemical solutions to remove stain.
Determine spotting procedures on basis of type of fabric and nature of stain.
Pressers, Delicate Fabrics 89517: Press dry-cleaned and wet-cleaned silk and synthetic fiber garments by hand or machine, applying knowledge of fabrics and heat to produce high quality finish.
Finish pleated or fancy garments, normally by hand.
All Other Precision Textile, Apparel, and Furnishings Workers 89599: All other precision textile, apparel, and furnishings workers not classified separately above.
Hand Compositors and Typesetters 89702: Set up and arrange type by hand.
Assemble and lock setup of type, cuts, and headings.
Pull proofs.
Excludes Phototypesetters or other workers concerned with typesetting by electronic or word processing methods.
Job Printers 89705: Set type according to copy.
Operate cylinder or automatic platen press to print job order.
Read proof for errors and clarity of impression, and correct imperfections.
Job printers are often found in small establishments where work combines several job skills, such as typesetting, printing, reading, and selecting of materials to reproduce copy.
Paste-Up Workers 89706: Arrange and mount typeset material and illustrations into paste-up for printing, reproduction, based on artist's or editor's layout.
Electronic Pagination System Operators 89707: Using a computer screen, call up type and art elements from computer memory and position them into a completed page, using knowledge of type styles and size and composition patterns.
The composited page is then transmitted for production into film or directly into plates.
Precision Lithography and Photoengraving Workers 89710: Photograph, produce, modify, assemble, and transfer detailed precision images or designs to metal plates for use in printing.
Includes Platemakers, Retouchers, and Strippers.
Excludes workers who primarily lay out copy.
Camera Operators 89713: Operate process camera and related darkroom equipment to photograph and develop negatives of material to be printed.
Scanner Operators 89715: Operate electronic or computerized scanning equipment to produce and screen film separations of photographs or art for use in producing lithographic printing plates.
Evaluate and correct for deficiencies in the film.
Strippers 89717: Cut and arrange film into flats (layout sheets resembling a film negative of text in its final form) which are used to make plates.
Prepare separate flat for each color.
Platemakers 89718: Produce printing plates by exposing sensitized metal sheets to special light through a photographic negative.
May operate machines that process plates automatically.
Bookbinders 89721: Cut, saw, and glue component parts to bind new books.
Perform other finishing operations, such as grooving, decorating, and lettering.
Primarily use hand tools but may also employ other precision processing methods or new technology.
This occupation normally requires an apprenticeship program (usually 2 years or more) or equivalent training and more extensive experience than that of bindery workers.
Excludes Book Repairers.
All Other Precision Printing Workers 89799: All other precision printing workers not classified separately above.
Slaughterers and Butchers 89802: Work in a slaughtering or meat packing establishment to prepare meat for sale by performing precision tasks such as stunning, skinning and trimming; cutting standard cuts of meat for marketing; cleaning and salting hides; making sausage; preparing meats for salting; and wrapping meats.
Bakers, Manufacturing 89805: Mix and bake ingredients according to recipes to produce breads, pastries, and other baked goods.
Goods are produced in large quantities for sale through establishments such as grocery stores.
Generally, high volume production equipment is used.
Food Batchmakers 89808: Set up and operate equipment that mixes, blends, or cooks ingredients used in the manufacturing of food products, according to formulas or recipes.
May modify or reformulate recipes to produce products of specific flavor, texture, and color.
These workers require at least 1 year (and often more) of training or experience.
Includes Candy Makers, Almond Paste Mixers, Cheesemakers, Flavorings Compounders, and Honey Graders and Blenders.
Precision Foundry Mold and Coremakers 89902: Make and form wax or sand cores and molds used in the production of metal castings in foundries.
Work involves using hand and power tools and applying knowledge of variables such as metal characteristics, molding sand, contour of patterns, reinforcing, and pouring procedures.
Precision Molders, Shapers, Casters, and Carvers, Except Jewelry and Foundry 89905: Mold, shape, cast, or carve products consisting of clay, glass, plaster, concrete, and stone, or combinations of materials into semi- finished or finished products.
Precision Patternmakers, Model Makers, Lay-Out Workers, and Cutters 89908: Construct patterns and models for use in forming products composed of single materials (except metal, plastic, wood, or textiles) or a combination of materials.
Excludes workers who work with metal, plastic, wood, or textiles only.
Precision Detail Design Decorators and Painters 89911: Design or decorate articles such as jewelry, furniture, glassware, pottery, or toys with paints, lacquers, enamels, shellac, or gilt.
Types of processes include painting, carving, printing, drawing, artistic lettering, decorative screen making, advertising layout, and detail design of forms.
Includes Screen or Stencil Printers and Setters, Layout Formers, Gilders, Luster Applicators, and Tile Decorators.
Excludes professional Artists and Designers and workers concerned with developing, coloring, and retouching photographs.
Precision Optical Goods Workers 89917: Cut, grind, and polish eyeglasses, contact lenses, or other precision optical elements according to prescription or other specifications.
Assemble and mount lenses into frames and process other optical elements according to specifications.
Work usually involves the use of precision machines and instruments.
Includes Precision Lens Polishers or Grinders, Centerer-Edgers, and Lens Mounters.
Precision Dental Laboratory Technicians 89921: Construct and repair full or partial dentures or dental appliances or apparatus, following prescriptions or specifications of Dentists or Orthodontists.
May also provide analytical and diagnostic services.
Includes Dental Ceramists, Crown and Bridge Technicians, and Orthodontic Technicians.
Excludes Assistants, Bite-Block Makers, Opaquers, and Denture and Coiler Packers.
All Other Precision Workers 89999: All other precision workers not classified separately above.
* Machine Setters, Set-Up Operators, Operators, and Tenders Sawing Machine Tool Setters and Set- Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91102: Set up or Set up and operate metal or plastic sawing machines to cut straight, curved, irregular, or internal patterns in metal or plastic stock or to trim edges of metal or plastic objects.
Involves the use of such machines as band saws, circular saws, friction saws, hacksawing machines, and jigsaws.
Lathe and Turning Machine Tool Setters and Set- Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91105: Set up or set up and operate plastic or metal lathe and turning machines to turn, bore, thread, form, or face plastic or metal materials, such as wire, rod, or bar stock, according to specifications.
Drilling and Boring Machine Tool Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91108: Set up or set up and operate drilling machines to drill, bore, ream, mill, and countersink metal or plastic workpieces according to specifications.
Milling and Planing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91111: Set up or set up and operate milling or planing machines to mill, plane, shape, groove, or profile metal or plastic workpieces according to specifications.
Grinding, Lapping, and Buffing Machine Tool Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91114: Set up or set up and operate grinding and related tools that remove excess material or burrs from internal and external surfaces, sharpen edges or corners, or buff, hone, and polish metal or plastic workpieces according to specifications.
Machine Tool Cutting Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91117: Operate or tend one type of cutting machine tool which has previously been set up.
Excludes workers who operate or tend more than one type of cutting machine.
Types of cutting machine tools include: Sawing Machines, Grinding Machines, Lathe and Turning Machines, Buffing and Polishing Machines, Drilling and Boring Machines, Lapping and Honing Machines, and Milling and Planing Machines.
Punching Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91302: Set up or set up and operate machines to punch, crimp, cut blanks, or notch metal or plastic workpieces between preset dies, according to specifications.
Press and Press-Brake Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91305: Set up or set up and operate power-press machines or power-brake machines to bend, form, stretch, notch, punch, or straighten metal or plastic plate and structural shapes, as specified by work order, blueprints, drawing, templates, or layout.
Shear and Slitter Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91308: Set up or set up and operate power-shear or slitting machines to cut metal or plastic material, such as plates, sheets, slabs, billets or bars, to specified dimensions and angles.
Extruding and Drawing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91311: Set up or set up and operate machines to extrude or draw thermoplastic or metal materials, forming such products as tubes, rods, hoses, or wire; or to shape hot billets into products, such as bars and structural shapes.
Rolling Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91314: Set up or set up and operate machines to roll steel or plastic material, such as strips, bars, and flats, to form bends, beads, knurls, rolls, or plate or to flatten, temper, and reduce gauge of material.
Work involves using measuring instruments and following rolling orders or blueprints.
Forming Machine Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91321: Operate or tend one type of forming machine which has previously been set up.
Excludes workers who operate more than one type of forming machine.
Types of forming machines include: Punching Machines, Shear and Slitter Machines, Rolling Machines, Press and Press Brake Machines, Forging Machines, and Extruding and Drawing Machines.
Numerical Control Machine Tool Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91502: Set up and operate numerical control (magnetic- or punched-tape-controlled) machine tools that automatically mill, drill, broach, and ream metal and plastic parts.
May adjust machine feed and speed, change cutting tools, or adjust machine controls when automatic programming is faulty or if machine malfunctions.
Combination Machine Tool Setters and Set-Up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91505: Set up or set up and operate more than one type of cutting or forming machine tool, such as gear hobbers, lathes, press brakes, shearing, and boring machines.
Excludes workers who set up or set up and operate only one type of metal or plastic working machine.
Combination Machine Tool Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91508: Operate or tend more than one type of cutting or forming machine tool which has been previously set up.
Includes such machine tools as band saws, press brakes, slitting machines, drills, lathes, and boring machines.
Excludes workers who operate or tend only one type of cutting or forming machine.
Welding Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 91702: Set up or set up and operate welding machines that join or bond together components to fabricate metal products or assemblies, according to specifications and blueprints.
Includes workers who set up or set up and operate laser cutters or laser-beam machines.
Welding Machine Operators and Tenders 91705: Operate or tend welding machines that join or bond together components to fabricate metal products and assemblies, according to specifications and blueprints.
Includes laser cutters and laser-beam machine operators.
Metal Fabricators, Structural Metal Products 91714: Fabricate and assemble structural metal products, such as frameworks or shells for machinery, ovens, tanks, and stacks, and metal parts for buildings and bridges, according to job order or blueprints.
Plastic Molding and Casting Machine Operators and Tenders 91905: Operate or tend plastic molding machines, such as compression or injection molding machines, to mold, form, or cast thermoplastic materials to specified shape.
Metal Molding, Coremaking, and Casting Machine Operators and Tenders 91911: Operate or tend metal molding, casting, or coremaking machines to mold or cast metal products, such as pipes, brake drums, and rods, and metal parts, such as automobile trim, carburetor housings, and motor parts.
Machines include centrifugal casting machines, vacuum casting machines, turnover draw-type coremaking machines, conveyor-screw coremaking machines, and die casting machines.
Foundry Mold Assembly and Shake-Out Workers 91914: Prepare molds for pouring.
Duties include: Cleaning and assembling foundry molds, and tending machine that bonds cope and drag together to form completed shell mold.
Electrolytic Plating and Coating Machine Setters and Set-up Operators, Metal and Plastic 91917: Set up or set up and operate electrolytic plating or coating machines, such as continuous multistrand electrogalvanizing machines, to coat metal or plastic products electrolytically with chromium, copper, cadmium, or other metal to provide protective or decorative surfaces or to build up worn surfaces.
Electrolytic Plating and Coating Machine Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91921: Operate or tend electrolytic plating or coating machines, such as zinc-plating machines and anodizing machines, to coat metal or plastic products electrolytically with chromium, zinc, copper, cadmium, or other metal to provide protective or decorative surfaces or to build up worn surfaces.
Heat Treating, Annealing, and Tempering Machine Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic 91932: Operate or tend machines, such as furnaces, baths, flame-hardening machines, and electronic induction machines, to harden, anneal, and heat-treat metal products or metal parts.
Furnace Operators and Tenders 91935: Operate or tend furnaces, such as gas, oil, coal, electric-arc or electric induction, open-hearth, or oxygen furnaces, to melt and refine metal before casting or to produce specified types of steel.
Excludes Heat-Treating and Related Furnace Operators.
Sawing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92302: Set up or set up and operate wood-sawing machines.
Examine blueprints, drawings, work orders, and patterns to determine size and shape of items to be sawed, sawing machines to set up, and sequence of sawing operations.
Sawing Machine Operators and Tenders 92308: Operate or tend wood-sawing machines, such as circular saws, band saws, multiple blade sawing machines, scroll saws, ripsaws, equalizer saws, power saws, and crozer machines.
Duties include: sawing logs to specifications; cutting lumber to specified dimensions; sawing curved or irregular designs; trimming edges and removing defects from lumber; or cutting grooves, bevel, and miter according to specifications or work orders.
Woodworking Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators, Except Sawing 92311: Set up or set up and operate woodworking machines, such as lathes, drill presses, sanders, shapers, and planing machines, to perform woodworking operations.
Excludes Sawing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators.
Woodworking Machine Operators and Tenders, Except Sawing 92314: Operate or tend woodworking machines, such as drill presses, lathes, shapers, routers, sanders, planers, and wood-nailing machines to perform woodworking operations.
Excludes Sawyers.
Printing Press Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92510: Set up or set up and operate various types of printing machines, such as offset lithographic presses, letter or letterset presses, flexographic presses, or gravure presses, to produce printed material such as books, manuals, or pamphlets.
Offset Lithographic Press Setters and Set-Up Operators 92512: Set up or set up and operate offset printing press, either sheet or web fed, to print single and multicolor copy from lithographic plates.
Examine job order to determine press operating time, quantity to be printed, and stock specifications.
Letterpress Setters and Set-Up Operators 92515: Set up or set up and operate direct relief letterpresses, either sheet or roll (web) fed, to produce single or multicolor printed material, such as newspapers, books, and periodicals.
All Other Printing Press Setters and Set-Up Operators 92519: All other printing press setters and set-up operators not classified separately above.
Specialty Materials Printing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92522: Set up or set up and operate machines to print designs or multicolored identification symbols or trademarks on materials (other than published and related printed materials, such as pamphlets, books, magazines, and business cards).
Excludes printers using screen printing techniques.
Screen Printing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92524: Set up or set up and operate screen printing machines to print designs onto articles and materials, such as glass or plasticware, cloth, and paper.
Bindery Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92525: Set up or set up and operate machines that perform some or all of the following functions in order to produce books, magazines, pamphlets, catalogs, and other printed materials: Gathering, folding, cutting, stitching, rounding and backing, supering, casing-in, lining, pressing, and trimming.
Typesetting and Composing Machine Operators and Tenders 92541: Operate or tend typesetting and composing equipment, such as phototypesetters, linotype or monotype keyboard machines, photocomposers, linocasters, and photoletterers.
Excludes Data Entry Keyers of computerized systems.
Printing Press Machine Operators and Tenders 92543: Operate or tend various types of printing machines, such as offset lithographic presses, letter or letterset presses, flexographic or gravure presses, to produce print on paper or other materials such as plastic, cloth, or rubber.
Bindery Machine Operators and Tenders 92546: Operate or tend binding machines that round, back, case, line stitch, press, fold, trim, or perform other binding operations on books and related articles.
Excludes Hand Bindery Workers and Machine Feeders and Offbearers.
All Other Printing, Binding, and Related Machine Operators and Tenders 92549: All other printing, binding, and related machine operators and tenders not classified separately above.
Textile Machine Operators and Tenders, Winding, Twisting, Knitting, Weaving, and Cutting 92705: Operate or tend textile machines that perform textile processing and manufacturing operations, such as winding, twisting, knitting, weaving, and cutting, using knowledge of machine functions.
Excludes Textile Sewing Machine Operators and Tenders.
Extruding and Forming Machine Operators and Tenders, Synthetic or Glass Fibers 92708: Operate or tend machines that extrude and form continuous filaments from synthetic materials, such as liquid polymer, rayon, and fiberglass, preparatory to further processing.
Sewing Machine Operators, Garment 92717: Operate or tend sewing machines to perform garment sewing operations, such as joining, reinforcing, or decorating garments or garment parts.
Includes sewing machine operators and tenders who perform specialized or automatic sewing machine functions, such as buttonhole making or tacking.
Sewing Machine Operators, Nongarment 92721: Operate or tend sewing machines to join together, reinforce, decorate, or perform related sewing operations in the manufacture of nongarment products, such as upholstery, draperies, linens, carpets, and mattresses.
Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Machine Operators and Tenders, Except Pressing 92726: Operate or tend washing or dry-cleaning machines to wash or dry-clean commercial, industrial, or household articles, such as cloth garments, suede, leather, furs, blankets, draperies, fine linens, rugs, and carpets.
Pressing Machine Operators and Tenders, Textile, Garment, and Related Materials 92728: Operate or tend pressing machines, such as hot-head pressing, steam pressing, automatic pressing, ironing, plunger pressing, and hydraulic pressing machines, to press and shape articles such as leather, fur, and cloth garments, drapes, slipcovers, handkerchiefs, and millinery.
Excludes Delicate Fabric (Precision) Pressers.
Motion Picture Projectionists 92905: Set up and operate motion picture projection and sound-reproducing equipment to produce coordinated effects on screen.
Photographic Processing Machine Operators and Tenders 92908: Operate or tend photographic processing machines, such as motion picture film printing machines, photographic printing machines, film developing machines, and mounting presses, according to job specifications.
Paper Goods Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92914: Set up or set up and operate paper goods machines that perform a variety of functions, such as converting, sawing, corrugating, banding, wrapping, boxing, stitching, forming, or sealing paper or paperboard sheets into products, such as toilet tissue, towels, napkins, bags, envelopes, tubing, cartons, wax rolls, and containers.
Furnace, Kiln, Oven, Drier, or Kettle Operators and Tenders 92923: Operate or tend heating equipment other than basic metal or plastic processing equipment.
Oven Operators or Tenders: Bake fiberglass or painted products, fuse glass or enamel to metal products, carbonize coal, or cure rubber or other products.
Furnace Operators or Tenders: Anneal glass, roast sulfur, convert chemicals, or process petroleum.
Kettle Operators and Tenders: Boil soap, or melt antimony or asphalt materials.
Drier Operators and Tenders: Remove moisture from paper, chemicals, ore, clay products, or slurry.
Kiln Operators and Tenders: Heat minerals, dry lumber, fire greenware, anneal glassware, or bake clay products.
Boiler Operators and Tenders, Low Pressure 92926: Operate or tend low pressure stationary steam boilers and auxiliary steam equipment, such as pumps, compressors and air conditioning equipment, to supply steam heat for office buildings, apartment houses, or industrial establishments; to maintain steam at specified pressure aboard marine vessels; or to generate and supply compressed air for operation of pneumatic tools, hoists, and air lances.
Dairy Processing Equipment Operators, Including Setters 92932: Set up, operate, or tend continuous flow or vat-type equipment to process milk, cream, or other dairy products, following specified methods and formulas.
Chemical Equipment Controllers and Operators 92935: Control or operate equipment to control chemical changes or reactions in the processing of industrial or consumer products.
Typical equipment used are: Reaction kettles, catalytic converters, continuous or batch treating equipment, saturator tanks, electrolytic cells, reactor vessels, recovery units, and fermentation chambers.
Cutting and Slicing Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92941: Set up or set up and operate machines that cut or slice materials, such as glass, stone, cork, rubber, crepe, wallboard, and fibrous insulating board, to specified dimensions for further processing.
Excludes Wood Sawyers, Metal or Plastic Sawyers, Shear or Slitter Operators, and Textile Setters and Set-up Operators.
Cutting and Slicing Machine Operators and Tenders 92944: Operate or tend machines to cut or slice any of a wide variety of products or materials, such as tobacco, food, paper, roofing slate, glass, stone, rubber, cork, and insulating material.
Excludes Metal, Wood, and Plastic Sawing Machine Operators and Tenders, and Textile Cutting Machine Operators and Tenders.
Painters, Transportation Equipment 92947: Operate or tend painting machines to paint surfaces of transportation equipment, such as automobiles, buses, trucks, boats, and airplanes.
Coating, Painting, and Spraying Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92951: Set up or set up and operate machines to coat or paint any of a wide variety of products, such as food products, glassware, and cloth, ceramic, metal, plastic, paper, and wood products, with lacquer, silver and copper solution, rubber, paint, varnish, glaze, enamel, oil, or rust-proofing materials.
Excludes setters and set-up operators who coat or plate metal or plastic with metal using electrolytic or nonelectrolytic processes.
Coating, Painting, and Spraying Machine Operators and Tenders 92953: Coating Machine Operators and Tenders: Operate or tend machines to coat any of a wide variety of items: Coating food products with sugar, chocolate, or butter; coat paper and paper products with chemical solutions, wax, or glazes; or coat fabric with rubber or plastic.
Painting and Spraying Machine Operators and Tenders: Operate or tend machines to spray or paint decorative, protective, or other coating or finish, such as adhesive, lacquer, paint, stain, latex, preservative, oil, or other solutions.
May apply coating or finish to any of a wide variety of items or materials, such as wood and wood products, ceramics, and glass.
Includes workers who apply coating or finish to materials preparatory to further processing or to consumer use.
Cementing and Gluing Machine Operators and Tenders 92956: Operate or tend cementing and gluing machines to join together items to form a completed product or to form an article for further processing.
Processes include: Joining veneer sheets into plywood; gluing paper to glass wool, cardboard or paper; joining rubber and rubberized fabric parts, plastic, simulated leather, and other materials.
Cleaning, Washing, and Pickling Equipment Operators and Tenders 92958: Operate or tend machines to wash or clean items, such as barrels or kegs, glass products, tin plate surfaces, dried fruit, pulp, animal stock, coal, manufactured articles, plastic, or rubber, to remove impurities preparatory to further processing.
Crushing, Grinding, Mixing, and Blending Machine Operators and Tenders 92965: Crushing, Grinding, and Polishing Machine Operators and Tenders: Operate or tend machines to crush or grind any of a wide variety of materials, such as coal, glass, plastic, dried fruit, grain, stone, chemicals, food, or rubber; or operate or tend machines that buff and polish materials or products, such as stone, glass, slate, plastic or metal trim, bowling balls, or eyeglasses.
Mixing and Blending Machine Operators and Tenders: Operate or tend machines to mix or blend any of a wide variety of materials, such as spices, dough batter, tobacco, fruit juices, chemicals, livestock feed, food products, color pigments, or explosive ingredients.
Extruding, Forming, Pressing, and Compacting Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92968: Set up or set up and operate machines, such as glass forming machines, plodder machines, and tuber machines, to manufacture any of a wide variety of products, such as soap bars, formed rubber, glassware, food, brick, and tile, by means of extruding, compressing, or compacting.
Extruding, Forming, Pressing, and Compacting Machine Operators and Tenders 92971: Operate or tend machines to shape and form any of a wide variety of manufactured products, such as glass bulbs, molded food and candy, rubber goods, clay products, wax products, tobacco plugs, cosmetics, or paper products, by means of extruding, compressing or compacting.
Packaging and Filling Machine Operators and Tenders 92974: Operate or tend machines, such as filling machines, casing-running machines, ham rolling machines, preservative filling machines, baling machines, wrapping machines, and stuffing machines, to prepare industrial or consumer products, such as gas cylinders, meat and other food products, tobacco, insulation, ammunition, stuffed toys, and athletic equipment for storage or shipment.
All Other Machine Setters and Set-Up Operators 92997: All other machine setters and set-up operators not classified separately above.
All Other Machine Operators and Tenders 92998: All other machine operators and tenders not classified separately above.
* Hand Workers, Including Assemblers and Fabricators Aircraft Structure, Surfaces, Rigging, and Systems Assemblers, Precision 93102: Assemble, fit, fasten, and install parts of airplanes, space vehicles, and missiles, such as tails, wings, fuselage, bulkheads, doors, stabilizers, and landing gear.
Fit and fasten sheet metal covering to surface areas and other sections of the aircraft preparatory to welding or riveting.
Install rigging and control equipment, tubing, and heating and ventilating systems.
Machine Builders and Other Precision Machine Assemblers 93105: Construct, assemble, or rebuild machines, such as engines, turbines, and office machines, or equipment used in construction, oil fields, rolling mills, textile and paper manufacturing, woodworking, printing, and food wrapping.
Fit or assemble components or subassemblies.
Install moving parts.
Assemble systems of gears by aligning and meshing gears in gearbox.
May test or assist in testing of completed product.
Fitters, Structural Metal, Precision 93108: Lay out, position, align, and fit together fabricated parts of structural metal products preparatory to welding or riveting.
Electromechanical Equipment Assemblers, Precision 93111: Assemble, test, and prepare electromechanical equipment or devices, such as servomechanisms, gear trains, gyros, dynamometers, ejection seat mechanisms, wave guides, magnetic drums, tape drives, punched-card reading devices, brakes, control linkage, actuators, and gearbox mechanisms, according to specifications.
Electrical and Electronic Equipment Assemblers, Precision 93114: Assemble or modify prototypes or final assemblies of electrical or electronic equipment, such as missile control systems, radio and test equipment, computers, numerical control machine tools, radar, sonar, telemetering systems, or appliances.
Includes workers who primarily assemble electrical systems for machinery.
Machine Assemblers 93902: Perform assembly work at a level less than that required of precision assemblers.
Includes Air Conditioning Coil Assemblers, Ball Bearing Ring Assemblers, Fuel Injection Assemblers, and Subassemblers.
Electrical and Electronic Assemblers 93905: Perform electrical and electronic assembly work at a level less than that required of precision assemblers.
Includes Electronic Wirers, Armature Connectors, Electric Motor Winders, Skein Winders, Carbon Brush Assemblers, Battery and Battery Parts Assemblers, Electric Sign Assemblers, and Electrical and Electronic Subassemblers.
Coil Winders, Tapers, and Finishers 93908: Wind wire coils used in electrical components, such as resistors and transformers, and in electrical equipment and instruments, such as field cores, bobbins, armature cores, electrical motors, generators, and control equipment.
May involve the use of coil-winding and coil-making machines.
Welders and Cutters 93914: Use hand-welding and flame-cutting equipment, such as arc welders, gas welders, and gas torches, to weld together metal components of such products as pipelines, automobiles, boilers, and ships; to join together components of fabricated sheet metal assemblies; or to cut, trim, or scarf metal objects to dimensions, as specified by layout, work orders, or blueprints.
Solderers and Brazers 93917: Use hand soldering and brazing equipment to join together metal parts or components of metal products, or to fill holes, indentations, and seams of fabricated metal products.
Pressers, Hand 93921: Press articles to remove wrinkles, flatten seams, and give shape by using hand iron.
Articles pressed include: Drapes, knit goods, millinery parts, parachutes, garments, slip covers, and textiles such as lace, rayon, and silk.
May block (shape) knitted garments after cleaning.
May press leather goods.
Cutters and Trimmers, Hand 93926: Use hand tools or hand-held power tools to cut and trim any of a wide variety of manufactured items, such as stone, glass, rubber, or fabrics.
Includes Oval or Circular Glass Cutters, Rock Splitters, and Tire Trimmers.
Meat, Poultry, and Fish Cutters and Trimmers, Hand 93938: Use hand tools to perform a wide variety of food cutting and trimming tasks that require skills less than that of the precision level.
Includes Meat Boners, Carcass Splitters, Poultry Eviscerators, Fish Cleaners and Butchers, Skinners, and Stickers.
Metal Pourers and Casters, Basic Shapes 93941: Operate hand-controlled mechanisms adjunctive to specialized machinery and equipment to pour and regulate the flow of molten metal into molds for producing castings or ingots of specific quality and size.
Includes Steel Pourers, Casters, and Ladle and Metal Pourers.
Molders and Casters, Hand 93944: Mold and cast, using hand tools or hand-held power tools, any of a wide variety of items, such as food products, lamps, figurines, ashtrays, tile, pipes, mannequins, and candles.
Includes Candy Molders, Pottery and Porcelain Casters, Refractory Molders, Concrete Vault Makers, and Candle Molders.
Excludes Metal Pourers who cast basic shapes such as slabs, blooms, bars, or billets.
Engraving and Printing Workers, Hand 93951: Engrave and print, using hand tools or hand- held power tools, patterns, designs, etchings, trademarks, or lettering onto flat or curved surfaces of a wide variety of metal, glass, plastic, or paper items (e.g., name plates, glass, optical glass, bowling balls, tags, and stamps).
Includes workers below the precision level such as Etcher-Circuit Processors, Pantograph Engravers, and Silk Screen Etchers.
Grinding and Polishing Workers, Hand 93953: Grind and polish, using hand tools or hand- held power tools, a wide variety of metal, stone, clay, plastic, and glass objects or parts.
Includes Grinders and Chippers, Polishers and Buffers, Metal Sanders and Finishers, Glass Grinders and Polishers, and Plastic Buffers and Finishers.
Excludes precision-level workers.
Assemblers and Fabricators, Except Machine, Electrical, Electronic, and Precision 93956: Assemble or fit together parts to form complete units or subassemblies at a bench, conveyor line, or on the floor.
Work may involve the use of hand tools, power tools, and special equipment in order to carry out fitting and assembly operations.
Includes assemblers whose duties are of a non-precision nature.
Excludes electrical, electronic, machine, and precision assemblers, and workers who perform specialized operations exclusively as a part of assembly operations, such as riveting, welding, soldering, machining, or sawing.
All Other Hand Workers 93999: All other hand workers not classified separately above.
* Plant and System Workers Water and Liquid Waste Treatment Plant and System Operators 95002: Operate or control an entire process or system of machines, often through the use of panelboards, control boards, or semi-automatic equipment, to transfer or treat water and/or liquid waste.
Gas Plant Operators 95005: Distribute or process gas for utility companies and others.
Distribute gas for an entire plant or process, often using panelboards, control boards, or semi-automatic equipment.
Chemical Plant and System Operators 95008: Control or operate an entire chemical process or system of machines, such as reduction pots and heated air towers, through the use of panelboards, control boards, or semi-automatic equipment.
Petroleum Refinery and Control Panel Operators 95014: Analyze specifications and control continuous operation of petroleum refining and processing units.
Operate control panel to regulate temperature, pressure, rate of flow, and tank level in petroleum refining unit, according to process schedules.
Gaugers 95017: Gauge and test oil in storage tanks.
Regulate flow of oil into pipelines at wells, tank farms, refineries, and marine and rail terminals, following prescribed standards and regulations.
Power-Generating Plant Operators, Except Auxiliary Equipment Operators 95021: Control or operate machinery, such as steam-driven turbogenerators, to generate electric power, often through the use of panelboards, control boards, or semi-automatic equipment.
Excludes workers operating auxiliary equipment, such as pumps, fans, compressors, filters, feedwater heaters, chlorinators, and condensers.
Auxiliary Equipment Operators, Power 95023: Control and maintain auxiliary equipment, such as pumps, fans, compressors, condensers, feedwater heaters, filters, and chlorinators, that supply water, fuel, lubricants, air, and auxiliary power for turbines, generators, boilers, and other power-generating plant facilities.
Power Distributors and Dispatchers 95028: Coordinate, regulate, or distribute electricity or steam in generating stations and substations, and over electric power lines.
May work for utility company or in a large industrial establishment.
May spend some time generating power.
Stationary Engineers 95032: Operate and maintain stationary engines and mechanical equipment to provide utilities for buildings or industrial processes.
Operate equipment such as steam engines, generators, motors, turbines, and steam boilers.
All Other Plant and System Operators 95099: All other plant and system operators not classified separately above.
* Transportation and Material-Moving Machine and Vehicle Operators 
May be required to unload truck.
Truck Drivers, Light, Include Delivery and Route Workers 97105: Drive a truck, van, or automobile with a capacity under 3 tons.
May drive light truck to deliver or pick up merchandise.
May load and unload truck.
Bus Drivers, Except School 97108: Drive bus, transporting passengers over specified routes to local or distant points according to a time schedule.
Assist passengers with baggage.
Collect tickets or cash fares.
Bus Drivers, School 97111: Transport students between pick-up points and school.
Maintain order during trip and adhere to safety rules when loading and unloading pupils.
Taxi Drivers and Chauffeurs 97114: Drive automobiles, limousines, custom-built sedans, or hearses to transport passengers or cargo.
May drive automobiles for delivery.
Excludes Ambulance Drivers and Bus Drivers.
Driver/Sales Workers 97117: Drive truck or other vehicle over established routes to: Deliver and sell goods, such as food products; pick up and deliver items, such as laundry; or refill, service, and collect coins from vending machines.
Includes Newspaper Delivery Drivers.
All Other Motor Vehicle Operators 97199: All other motor vehicle operators not classified separately above.
Railroad Brake, Signal, and Switch Operators 97317: Operate railroad track switches.
Couple or uncouple rolling stock to make up or break up trains.
Signal engineers and set warning signals.
May inspect couplings, air hoses, journal boxes, and hand brakes.
Aircraft Pilots and Flight Engineers 97702: Pilot and navigate flight of private or commercial aircraft for the transportation of passengers, freight, mail, or for other purposes.
Must be Federally licensed.
Includes workers who are concerned with flight operations and maintenance when a pilot's or flight engineer's license is required.
Includes Test Pilots, Helicopter Pilots, and pilots who accompany other pilots to periodically test and review proficiency.
Service Station Attendants 97805: Service automobiles, buses, trucks, boats, and other automotive or marine vehicles with fuel, lubricants, and accessories.
Collect payment for services and supplies.
May lubricate vehicle, change motor oil, install antifreeze, or replace lights or other accessories such as windshield wiper blades or fan belts.
May repair or replace tires.
Parking Lot Attendants 97808: Park autos or issue tickets for customers in a parking lot or garage.
Aircraft Line Service Attendants 97899: Service aircraft with fuel, lubricants, and accessories.
Collect payment for services and supplies.
(Not a standard OES occupation) Oil Pumpers, Except Wellhead 97908: Operate steam, natural gas, gasoline, electric, or diesel pumps and auxiliary equipment to restore and control flow of oil from wells.
Wellhead Pumpers 97911: Operate power pumps and auxiliary equipment to produce artificial flow of oil or gas from wells in oil field.
Main-Line Station Engineers 97914: Operate electric, diesel, or gas-driven pumping equipment to pump and route oil through pipelines at main- line or terminal stations.
Gas Compressor Operators 97921: Operate steam or internal combustion engines to transmit, compress, or recover gases, such as butane, nitrogen, hydrogen, and natural gas, in various production processes.
Excavating and Loading Machine Operators 97923: Operate or tend machinery equipped with scoops, shovels, or buckets, to excavate and load loose materials.
Excludes Dredge and Dragline Operators.
Dredge Operators 97928: Operate power-driven dredge to mine sand, gravel, or other materials from lakes, rivers, or streams; and to excavate and maintain navigable channels in waterways.
Loading Machine Operators, Underground Mining 97932: Operate underground loading machine to load coal, ore, or rock into shuttle or mine car or onto conveyors.
Loading equipment may include power shovels, hoisting engines equipped with cable-drawn scraper or scoop, or machines equipped with gathering arms and conveyor.
Grader, Bulldozer, and Scraper Operators 97938: Operate machine or vehicle equipped with blades to remove, distribute, level, or grade earth.
Excludes Paving, Surfacing, and Tamping Equipment Operators.
Hoist and Winch Operators 97941: Operate or tend hoists or winches to lift and pull loads using power-operated cable equipment.
Excludes Crane and Tower Operators.
Crane and Tower Operators 97944: Operate mechanical boom and cable or tower and cable equipment to lift and move materials, machines, or products in many directions.
Excludes Dragline Operators.
Industrial Truck and Tractor Operators 97947: Operate gasoline or electric-powered industrial trucks or tractors equipped with fork lift, elevated platform, or trailer hitch to move materials around a warehouse, storage yard, factory, construction site, or similar location.
Excludes Logging Tractor Operators.
Conveyor Operators and Tenders 97951: Control or tend conveyors or conveyor systems that move materials or products to and from stockpiles, processing stations, departments, vehicles, and underground workings.
May control speed and routing of materials or products.
Operating Engineers 97956: Operate several types of power construction equipment, such as compressors, pumps, hoists, derricks, cranes, shovels, tractors, scrapers, or motor graders to excavate, move and grade earth, erect structures, or pour concrete or other hard surface pavement.
May repair and maintain equipment in addition to other duties.
Excludes workers who specialize in operation of a single type of heavy equipment, such as a bulldozer or crane.
All Other Material-Moving Equipment Operators 97989: All other material-moving equipment operators not classified separately above.
All Other Transportation and Material- Moving Equipment Operators 97999: All other transportation and material-moving equipment operators not classified separately above.
* Helpers, Laborers, and Material Movers, Hand, Excludes Agriculture and Forestry Laborers Helpers, Mechanics and Repairers 98102: Help mechanics and repairers in maintenance, parts replacement, and repair of vehicles, industrial machinery, and electrical and electronic equipment.
Perform duties such as furnishing tools, materials, and supplies to other workers; cleaning work area, machines, and tools; and holding materials or tools for other workers.
Helpers, Brick and Stonemasons and Hard Tile Setters 98311: Help Brickmasons, Stonemasons, or Hard Tile Setters by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Brickmasons, Stonemasons, or Hard Tile Setters.
Helpers, Carpenters and Related Workers 98312: Help Carpenters or carpentry-related craft workers by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Carpenters or carpentry-related craft workers.
Helpers, Electricians and Power-Line Transmission Installers 98313: Help Electricians or Power-line Transmission Installers by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Electricians or Power-line Transmission Installers.
Helpers, Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, and Stucco Masons 98314: Help Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, or Stucco Masons by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, or Stucco Masons.
Helpers, Plumbers, Pipefitters, and Steamfitters 98315: Help Plumbers, Pipefitters, or Steamfitters by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Plumbers, Pipefitters, or Steamfitters.
Helpers, Roofers 98316: Help Roofers by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes construction or maintenance laborers who do not primarily assist Roofers.
Helpers, All Other Construction Trades Workers 98319: All other construction trades helpers not classified separately above.
Helpers, Extractive Workers 98323: Help extractive craft workers, such as Earth Drillers, Blasters and Explosives Workers, Derrick Operators, and Mining Machine Operators, by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying equipment or cleaning work area.
Excludes apprentice workers.
Excludes laborers who do not primarily assist extractive craft workers.
Machine Feeders and Offbearers 98502: Feed material into or remove material from machines or equipment that is automatic or tended by other workers.
Freight, Stock, and Material Movers, Hand 98700: Manually move materials.
Work in a variety of settings such as warehouses, production areas, stockrooms, or shipping departments.
Refuse and Recyclable Material Collectors 98705: Collect and dump refuse or recyclable materials from containers into truck, on a designated route in a municipality.
May drive truck.
All Other Freight, Stock, and Material Movers, Hand 98799: All other freight, stock, and material movers, hand, not classified separately above.
Hand Packers and Packagers 98902: Pack or package by hand a wide variety of products and materials.
Excludes workers whose jobs require more than minimum training.
Vehicle Washers and Equipment Cleaners 98905: Wash or otherwise clean vehicles, machinery, and other equipment.
Use such materials as water, cleaning agents, brushes, cloths, and hoses.
Excludes Janitors and Building Cleaners.
All Other Helpers, Laborers, and Material Movers, Hand 98999: All other helpers, laborers, and material movers, hand, not classified separately above.
__________________________________________________________________
Top Home | Contact Us | Contents | Links | Publications News Releases | Newsletters | Labor Force | Industry | Occupation | Affirmative Action Kansas Department of Human Resources Labor Market Information Services updated Jun 17, 1998
