Wrongful Convictions of the Innocent: Kentucky's Recent Experience, Response, and Remaining Reforms The nation has been startled by the repeated reports of innocent people being freed from prisons all across the country.
The shock comes not from the justified release of innocent people, but from the sheer numbers of actually innocent people found in the nation's prisons.
Nationally, 116 persons have been freed as a result of their wrongful conviction as of December 4, 2002.
The public overwhelmingly believes that innocent people are sometimes convicted of murder.
The Harris Poll over the last 3 years asked the following question and had these results: "Do you think that innocent people are sometimes convicted of murder, or that this never happens?"
[IMG: Poll Results] [IMG: Poll Results]
"Almost everyone (94%) believes that innocent people are sometimes convicted of murder.
On average they believe that 12% of all those convicted are innocent....
African-Americans, on average, believe that 22% of murder convictions are of innocent people, compared to 10% among whites and 15% among Hispanics."
Humphrey Taylor, chairman of the Harris Poll, in THE HARRIS POLL #41,8/17/01, http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=252
Innocent people have been sent to prison in Kentucky.
No Kentuckian wants an innocent person incarcerated.
The last two years have seen a lot of activity in Kentucky about the wrongly convicted that reflects the public's concerns.
Kentucky has experienced the uncovering and freeing of the innocent in three documented cases: William Gregory, Larry Osborne, and Herman May.
The public, Kentucky agencies, courts, prosecutors, public advocates and public policy makers have responded in a variety of ways.
Improvements are in process and much more remains to be achieved.
William Gregory in Jefferson County
William Gregory, a 45-year-old Jefferson County man was convicted and sentenced to 70 years for the rape of a 70-year old woman in 1992.
New DNA tests proved he did not commit that crime for which he served 8 years in prison.
Businessman William Gregory was the first Kentuckian and the 74^th nationally to be released as a result of exoneration by DNA evidence.
Mr. Gregory was the first inmate freed solely due to mitochondrial DNA testing, which was not available in 1992 when he was sentenced to 70 years in Jefferson County for rape and attempted rape of two women based on hairs in the mask used by the perpetrator.
Mr. Gregory was represented by the Innocence Project in New York by Barry Scheck with Larry D. Simon as local counsel.
In reflecting on his plight, Mr. Gregory said, "Being in prison for something you didn't do was very hard.
The stereotype that all black males are the same was used against me.
I was devastated when this happened to me and I walked around like a Zombie in jail.
This situation has made me aware of a lot of things."
Gregory said racial bias was evident when his white fiancée took the stand during the trial in 1992, "everybody dropped their pen, everybody stopped listening and they did not hear anything else after that.
When I went to prison, I felt all alone and I was angry because I was in a hole I couldn't get out of.
But I got past that with the help of the national Innocence Project.
There was hope.
There are a lot of prisoners in prison, be patient with them, you all are their hope.
Listen to them."
Larry Simon
Larry Simon
Larry D. Simon said that defense attorneys have an awesome responsibility in representing the citizen-accused.
"The outcome of William Gregory's case is powerful motivation for those of us who practice criminal defense.
As Barry Scheck and Peter Neufeld have demonstrated in their efforts with the Innocence Project at the Cardoza Law School, innocent people are in prison today primarily due to lying jail house snitches, mistaken (especially cross-racial) identifications, and junk science like the hair analysis used in Mr. Gregory's case.
Our job as criminal defense lawyers is to make sure these categories of unreliable evidence are excluded from the trials of our clients.
We can accomplish this by educating our judges and the public about the real reasons why innocent people are convicted."
Jefferson County Commonwealth attorney Dave Stengel asked that the charges be dismissed after he reviewed the DNA results, and was quoted in the July 6, 2000 Lexington Herald Leader saying the state, "has learned from this.
And hopefully we can do better to make sure mistakes like these don't happen again."
William Gregory was released on July 5, 2000.
Mr. Gregory's plight is a wake up call to defense attorneys who see little value in investigating and challenging forensic evidence or eyewitness identifications in cases with clients whose defense is innocence.
It is also a wake up call to prosecutors, judges, and the public.
Department of Public Advocacy's Kentucky Innocence Project Begins
The Department of Public Advocacy (DPA) has responded to the public's concern about innocent people behind bars by creating the Department of Public Advocacy Kentucky Innocence Project (KIP) in the Spring of 2000.
DPA's KIP assists those in Kentucky's prisons who declare their actual innocence and who have new evidence to support their innocence.
DPA's KIP began taking requests for assistance from Kentucky inmates in September 2000 and has been contacted by over 250 prisoners.
The Project is actively investigating 30 cases and continues to receive requests for assistance on an almost daily basis.
Public Advocate Ernie Lewis said the creation of DPA's KIP is one of the most exciting developments in Kentucky in the last few years.
"We have had a Post-Conviction Branch in the Department for many years.
That Branch has been litigating errors at the post-conviction level, sometimes resulting in the release of prisoners who had been wrongfully accused.
However, the creation of the Kentucky Innocence Project has allowed the Post-Conviction Branch to join a nationwide movement that is focusing on the injustice that is corroding our criminal justice system.
The advent of the technology of DNA with the national Innocence Project has created the right moment for this in Kentucky.
The collaboration of the Department of Public Advocacy with Chase Law School, the University of Kentucky School of Law, and Eastern Kentucky University promises to bring this issue into prominence in our state, as well as to bring justice to many innocent inmates now sitting in Kentucky prisons."
Kentucky's DPA's KIP is modeled after successful programs such as the Innocence Project at Cardoza Law School under the direction of Barry Scheck, the Innocence Project Northwest at the University of Washington School of Law and the Center for Wrongful Convictions at Northwestern University.
It utilizes volunteer students from Kentucky universities and law schools.
Gordon Rahn of DPA's Eddyville post-conviction office is coordinating this DPA effort with the oversight of post-conviction branch manager, Marguerite Thomas and the direction of DPA Post-Trial Director Rebecca DiLoreto.
"Although the primary goal and impetus for the innocence projects is the post-conviction representation of innocent people, innocence projects have also contributed to fulfilling the need for practical legal education.
Students in the projects have had the opportunity to learn by doing, under the supervision of attorneys and professors, as opposed to traditional learning in the classroom."
Stiglitz, Brooks, Shulman, The Hurricane Meets the Paper Chase; Innocence Projects New Emerging Role in Clinical Legal Education, 38 Calif.
Western L. Rev. 413, 415-416 (2002).
IOLTA Resources
The Kentucky Innocence Project has been the recipient of two IOLTA grants from the Kentucky Bar Association.
The grants are utilized to cover expenses incurred by the volunteers and externs as part of the investigations and to pay for the expensive DNA testing required by some of the cases.
The DNA testing in the Herman May case cost the Kentucky Innocence Project almost $7,000 (paid from the IOLTA grant funds) and KIP has another case that is presently in court requesting the release of evidence for DNA testing that will cost approximately $6,000.
UK College of Law and UK College of Social Work Partnership
Professor Roberta Harding led the way to establish a course at the University of Kentucky Law School that provides students with the knowledge, skills and opportunities to assist on cases.
Students are required to attend a specially designed class and conduct an investigation on their assigned cases.
The investigation is done under the supervision of Professor Harding and DPA's KIP personnel.
The College of Social Work at the University of Kentucky, under the guidance of Professor Pamela Weeks, also had students volunteer to work on cases and provided valuable background information for not only their assigned cases but cases that UK law students were working on.
Chase College of Law Partnership
Chase College of Law at Northern Kentucky University established a similar program for the 2001-2002 academic year.
Professor Mark Stavsky was instrumental in setting up the program at Chase.
Professor Stavsky is on a sabbatical, but will continue to work with the project at Chase along with Professor Mark Godsey.
Ten Chase students enrolled in the college's externship program for the 2002-2003 academic year and are presently investigating ten new cases.
Eastern Kentucky University College of Justice and Safety
Eastern Kentucky University's College of Justice and Safety has joined the DPA Kentucky Innocence Project's efforts and four graduate students are actively involved in investigating cases.
Two students are investigating an innocence claim and the other two students are teamed with law students from Chase College of Law.
The four EKU students travel from Richmond to Chase College of Law at NKU every other Friday to participate in the classroom setting of the program.
Professor Bill Nixon, an attorney and faculty member of the College of Justice and Safety, is the faculty sponsor for the EKU students.
The Selection Process for KIP
The selection process for the new cases to be assigned to the 2002-2003 student externs/volunteers will take place through the summer months.
Criteria for consideration by KIP is substantial:
* Kentucky conviction and incarceration; * Minimum 10 year sentence; * Minimum of 3 years to parole eligibility OR if parole has been deferred, a minimum of 3 years to next appearance before the parole board; and * New evidence discovered since conviction or that can be developed through investigation.
If an inmate's case satisfies all the four criteria, he or she is sent a detailed 20-page questionnaire for specific information about the case.
Tim Arnold
Tim Arnold
Larry Osborne in Whitley County Larry Osborne was sentenced to death in 1999 following his conviction for the murder of two elderly victims in Whitley County, Ky.
He was 17 at the time of the crime.
The Kentucky Supreme Court reversed Osborne's conviction on April 26, 2001 based on its finding that the trial court allowed inadmissible hearsay testimony from a
Gail Robinson
Gail Robinson
witness, Joe Reid.
Reid died prior to the original trial and, therefore, could not face cross-examination during Osborne's first trial.
At his re-trial in 2002, he was represented by Jim Norris, Gail Robinson and Tim Arnold.
Osborne was acquitted on August 1, 2002 of all charges and set free.
He spent over three years on Kentucky's death row.
He became the
Jim Norris
Jim Norris
102^nd death row person exonerated since 1973.
One of his trial counsel, Gail Robinson, believes his wrongful conviction occurred because of the trial judge's ruling allowing the unreliable and false statement of a 15 year old witness who testified before the Grand Jury but died accidentally before trial.
The reason there was such a false statement was misconduct by police and prosecutor intent on implicating someone, willing to ignore everything that indicated the accused was not guilty, and willing to coerce a false statement out of a 15 year old boy.
Herman May in Franklin County In the early morning hours of May 22, 1988, Herman May's life changed forever.
A young woman, a student at the University of Kentucky, was raped and sodomized in the back yard of a friend's house in Frankfort at approximately 3:00 a.m.
Just over a month later, while on vacation in California, the young victim picked the picture of Herman May from a photo lineup and identified him as her attacker.
May was convicted in October of 1989 of rape and sodomy and sentenced to concurrent 20 year sentences.
May was one of the first prisoners to contact the Department of Public Advocacy's Kentucky Innocence Project and request its help.
A review of the questionnaire he submitted about specifics of his case raised a lot of red flags and his case was assigned a University of Kentucky law student for investigation.
Almost immediately the red flags became glaring problems.
May's case involves some of the most common errors found in the wrongful conviction of innocent people.
First, there was the identification issue.
The initial description of the attacker was that he was thin, in his 20's, had long, stringy greasy dark brown hair and was wearing a blue cap.
Two police officers testified about the description given within minutes of the attack.
The investigating officer testified that the victim gave the same physical description at the hospital except noted that the attacker's hair was "chocolate brown."
Herman May was 17 years old in May 1988 and had bright red hair.
Once May was identified as a suspect, the investigating detective flew to California and showed the victim a photo lineup that included May's picture.
The victim first picked out three pictures and began a process of elimination that led to her identifying May as her attacker.
At trial there was also testimony about similarities between hair found on the victim and Herman May's hair.
The forensic specialist testified that "...it was as good of a match as I have ever had."
Gordon Rahn
Gordon Rahn
DPA's KIP's team of Marguerite Thomas, Gordon Rahn, Diana Queen, Chase College of Law Students Beth Albright and Debbie Davis and UK law student Chris Turner, however, continued to pursue the red flags.
Based upon the victim's testimony at trial that she had not had consensual sex for several weeks prior to the rape, KIP requested the release of slides from the rape kit for DNA testing.
The court granted the motion and DNA tests excluded Herman May as the donor of the semen.
Amazingly, what should have led to the release of Herman May from prison led to a new revelation from the victim--she had consensual sex within a "couple of days" of the rape.
As a result, the Franklin Circuit Court ordered an additional battery of tests on other physical evidence and all of those test results were inconclusive.
Still nothing matched Herman May.
On July 31, ^2002 the court ordered additional testing.
The hairs entered into evidence at trial were sent to a laboratory for mitochondrial DNA testing and on September 18, 2002, Herman May's life changed again.
Franklin Circuit Court Judge Roger L. Crittenden received the lab report on the 18^th and, after discussing the results with the lab technicians, entered an order that found that "...the results of the tests are of such decisive value or force...that it would probably change the result if a new trial should be granted."
Judge Crittenden's Franklin Circuit Court ordered the immediate release of Herman May from prison.
The order was entered at approximately 2:00 p.m. CDT and at around 3:30 p.m. on September 18^th, Herman May walked out of the Kentucky State Penitentiary and waited for his parents to take him home.
Herman May today is adjusting to his new life and catching up on 13 years he missed with his family.
Robert Coleman in Bullitt County Mistaken eyewitness identification, bad defense lawyering, and false witness testimony led to the conviction of an innocent man in Shepherdsville, Kentucky.
In March 1998, a Bullitt County jury found Coleman guilty of first degree rape and terroristic threatening.
He was sentenced to ten years imprisonment.
The only evidence against Coleman at trial was the word of his accuser whose story changed dramatically each of the four times she told it under oath.
Unfortunately, Coleman's trial attorney did nothing to point out the inconsistencies in the accuser's testimony to the jury.
The trial attorney also failed to call to the stand an alibi witness - Coleman's employer who could have testified that Coleman was at work at the time the alleged assailant dropped off Coleman's accuser.
Coleman was the only witness who testified for the defense.
Furthermore, Coleman's trial attorney had represented Coleman's accuser on a charge of DUI 3^rd only two months prior to undertaking Coleman's case.
No waiver of the conflict of interest was ever obtained and no mention of the accuser's possible alcohol intoxication was ever made at the trial despite the fact that the accuser had been at a bar for several hours prior to the alleged attack.
The Bullitt County Circuit Court held an evidentiary hearing in the case in March 2002.
The trial attorney, a retired police detective, Coleman's employer and Coleman himself testified at the hearing.
Initially, the Judge in the case denied Coleman's RCr 11.42 after the hearing.
On further consideration by the Judge, however, the Judge determined that Coleman did in fact receive ineffective assistance of counsel at the trial level.
He further held that if Coleman would have been given a fair trial, there is a reasonable probability that the result of his trial would have been different.
Therefore, the Judge granted Coleman's motion for a new trial.
Presently, Coleman is out of jail on bond awaiting his new trial.
He continues to adamantly maintain his innocence and looks forward to the opportunity to officially clear his name.
The September 17, 2002 Order of Judge Thomas L. Waller stated in part, "Since the entry of this Court's Orders on August 14, 2002, and August 23, 2002, and on further reflection and the Court being of the belief that one should admit one's mistakes, the Court believes that the evidence provided by the Defendant in the RCr 11.42 Hearing is sufficient to justify a new trial....
Believing that the defendant did not receive a fair trial and that there is a reasonable probability that the result of his trial would have been different had trial counsel proceeded as herein set out, the Court grants the Defendant's Motion for a new trial."
Why Are There Wrongful Convictions? DNA testing and challenges of the Innocence Project at Cardoza Law School led by Barry Scheck and Peter Neufeld have demonstrated there are in prison those that are innocent.
National estimates put the number of innocent people incarcerated in the nation's prisons between 4%-10%.
In Kentucky that could mean between 650 and 1650 inmates serving time for crimes that they did not commit.
Scheck and Neufeld in their book, Actual Innocence (2000), list the factors they found led to wrongful convictions: 1) Mistaken eyewitness identification; 2) Improper forensic inclusion; 3) Police and prosecutor misconduct; 4) Defective and fraudulent science; 5) Unreliable hair comparison; 6) Bad defense lawyering; 7) False witness testimony; 8) Untruthful informants; 9) False confessions.
Race plays a role in this process.
Scheck and Neufeld reported in Actual Innocence that the race of the exonerated defendants was: 29% Caucasian; 11% Latino; and 59% African American.
George F. Will in an April 6, 2000 Washington Post review of Actual Innocence recognized the importance of wrongly convicting the innocent and the affect of Actual Innocence when he said, "It should change the argument about capital punishment...You will not soon read a more frightening book...
Heartbreaking and infuriating."
The Sunday, Sept. 15, 2000 Boston Globe said of Actual Innocence, "One of the most influential books of the year...shocking...compelling...an objective reference for partisans of all stripes."
Americans want the wrongly convicted to be able to prove their innocence with scientific testing.
A Gallup poll, conducted March 17-19, 2000 finds "that 92% of Americans say those convicted before the technology was available should be given the opportunity to submit to DNA tests now -- on the chance those tests might show their innocence.
Support for this position runs solidly across all demographic groups, as well as all political ideologies....
Mark Gillespie, "Americans Favor DNA `Second Chance' Testing for Convicts: Nine in ten Americans support genetic testing to resolve long-held claims of innocence," GALLUP NEWS SERVICE.
Kentucky General Assembly Action Compensation to the Wrongly Convicted Innocent.
The last two Kentucky General Assemblies have had bills introduced in both the Senate and House to provide for a method of determining reasonable compensation to those innocent persons wrongfully incarcerated in Kentucky either through a civil action in the circuit court or an action in the Board of Claims.
In 2002, House Bill 699 http://www.lrc.state.ky.us/recarch/02rs/HB699/bill.doc was introduced by Representative Robin Webb and co-sponsored by Representatives Jesse Crenshaw, Paul Bather and Reginald Meeks.
Senate Bill 93 http://www.lrc.state.ky.us/recarch/02rs/SB93/bill.doc was introduced by Senator Gerald Neal, and co-sponsored by Senators Walter Blevins, David Boswell, Paul Herron Jr., Ray Jones II, David Karem, Marshall Long, Dan Mongiardo, R.J. Palmer II, Joey Pendleton, and Ernesto Scorsone.
Both bills apply to those convicted of a felony or capital offense after January 1, 1980 and exclude those who had pled guilty.
Both bills provide for compensation to include fines, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees.
HB 699 provided for relief in either the Board of Claims of $20,000 for each year of wrongful conviction up to a maximum of $250,000 or in circuit court of an amount as determined by the evidence.
SB 93 provided for $25,000 per year of wrongful incarceration.
The bills were not called for a vote in either the House or Senate Judiciary Committee.
At the November 19, 2002 Interim Joint Judiciary Committee meeting, Senator Neal presented on a draft of a bill to provide compensation to those wrongfully convicted.
Sitting at his side were Dave Stengal, former President of the Commonwealth Attorney Association and Ernie Lewis, Kentucky's Public Advocate.
Senator Neal identified Mr. Gregory as a victim who had 8 years of his life wrongfully snatched away.
"Our justice system has been brought into question when we... incarcerate someone... but we found we made a mistake... and then too often we do nothing about it."
Senator Neal said that he did not think Mr. Gregory can be made whole but he said we could make some attempt to acknowledge and moderate the impact of the injustice.
He also said that the avenue for relief was best in the Board of Claims so there is no re-victimization and so the prosecutor is not put on trial.
Jefferson County Commonwealth Attorney and former President of the Commonwealth Attorneys Association David Stengal said, "the Commonwealth Attorneys Association last year supported this bill" and supports it this year.
The prosecutors do not want the bill to provide an avenue of relief that puts it into an adversarial proceeding so prefer the Board of Claims as the venue.
Stengal said "the last thing any prosecutor ever wants to do is to put an innocent person in the penitentiary and we think this bill might do something if that awful occasion were to occur this bill could help remedy that."
Public Advocate Ernie Lewis expressed appreciation for not forgetting the innocent who have been wrongfully convicted and who have served time in prison.
He said the bill is consistent with what we know nationally and with the civil system where wrongs are compensated in a reasonable manner.
He said that the $25,000 amount was meager compared to 365 days of liberty being taken from a citizen.
Lewis expressed a concern that the bill draft excluded those who pled guilty when we know that nationwide people who are innocent plead guilty, especially the mentally retarded.
Lewis hopes that Senator Neal and the Committee will consider that reality.
DNA Evidence.
The 2002 Kentucky General Assembly did pass a significant DNA evidence bill, House Bill 4.
This is a significant piece of legislation that both expands the DNA database and ensures that samples are preserved.
Among its provisions set out in KRS Chapter 17 are the following: Persons already sentenced to death may request DNA testing and analysis of an item that may contain biological evidence related to the investigation or prosecution.
The Court must order testing and analysis if a reasonable probability exists that the person would not have been prosecuted if results of testing had been exculpatory, and if the evidence can still be tested and was not previously tested.
The Court may order testing and analysis if a reasonable probability exists that the person's verdict or sentence would have been more favorable with the results of the DNA or that the results will be exculpatory.
If the Court orders testing and analysis, appointment of counsel is mandatory.
If the sample has been previously tested, both sides must turn over underlying data and lab notes.
Once a request is made, the Court must order the Commonwealth to preserve all samples that may be subject to testing.
If the results are not favorable to the person, the request or petition must be dismissed.
If the results are favorable, "notwithstanding any other provision of law that would bar a hearing as untimely," the Court must order a hearing and "make any further orders that are required."
When a person is accused of a capital offense, either the Commonwealth or the defense may move for a sample to be subject to DNA testing and analysis.
The testing is to be done at a KSP laboratory or a laboratory selected by the KSP.
Up to 5 items may be tested with the costs to be borne presumably by the lab; testing of additional items "shall be borne by the agency or person requesting the testing and analysis."
The DNA database is expanded to include persons convicted of or attempting to commit unlawful transaction with a minor in the first degree, use of a minor in a sexual performance, promoting a sexual performance by a minor, burglary in the first degree, burglary in the second degree, and all juveniles adjudicated delinquent for these offenses.
The database is also expanded for all persons convicted of capital offenses, Class A felonies, and Class B felonies involving "the death of the victim or serious physical injury to the victim."
Items of evidence that may be subject to DNA testing may not be disposed of prior to trial unless the prosecution demonstrates that the defendant will not be tried, and a hearing has been held in which the defendant and prosecution both have an opportunity to be heard.
Items of evidence that may be subject to DNA testing may not be disposed of following a trial unless the evidence has been tested and analyzed and presented at the trial, or if not introduced at trial an adversarial hearing has been held, or unless the defendant was found not guilty or the charges were dismissed after jeopardy attached and an adversarial hearing was conducted.
The burden of proof for the destruction of samples will be upon the party making the motion.
Destruction of evidence in violation of this statute is a violation of the tampering with physical evidence statute (KRS 524.100).
Evidence must be retained "for the period of time that any person remains incarcerated in connection with the case" unless there has been a hearing and an order to destroy the evidence.
The statute was effective on July 15, 2002.
However, an elaborate implementation date mechanism is included in the statute that allows expansion of the database, as funding becomes available.
Kentucky Supreme Court Proposals were made to the Kentucky Supreme Court to change its Rules of Criminal Procedure to reflect the concerns of the public and to provide for improved procedures to lessen the chance of wrongful convictions of the innocent.
Requests were made to provide instructions to jurors in cases where there is eyewitness identification or an informant to require jurors to assess that testimony carefully.
The testimony of informants and eyewitnesses is used in criminal cases and not unusually in the most serious and highly publicized criminal cases where the stakes are high and pressures are great.
Informants and eyewitnesses play an important role for law enforcement.
We know from the DNA cases nationally and in Kentucky that incorrect eyewitness investigations and untruthful informant testimony contribute to wrongful convictions.
The proposed rule providing for an instruction in each of these areas would be one step in providing increased protections for citizens who are presumed innocent.
The Court declined to make these changes.
Under current Kentucky law, it is difficult or impossible in some instances to obtain post-conviction DNA testing to take advantage of these advances because of the time limits on requesting post-conviction relief.
Presently, there is a 3-year standard under RCr 11.42(10) and 1 year under RCr 10.06(1) or more "if the court for good cause permits."
The law's limitation which is intended to prevent the use of evidence that has become less reliable over time results in precluding DNA testing that remains highly reliable for decades after a trial.
The National Commission on the Future of DNA Evidence, a federal panel established by the U.S. Department of Justice and comprised of law enforcement, judicial, and scientific experts, has urged that post-conviction DNA testing be permitted in the relatively small number of cases in which it is appropriate, notwithstanding procedural prohibitions and notwithstanding the inmate's inability to pay.
This nationally recommended procedure was proposed to the Kentucky Supreme Court for all clients, not just capital cases.
While House Bill 4 passed in 2002 addresses some of these concerns, it is limited to capital cases.
The proposal made to the Court would have created a new rule, RCr 11.43, and provided improved procedures for all persons convicted in Kentucky, not just capital clients.
The Court declined to adopt this procedure.
Only Justices Janet Stumbo and James Keller voted to adopt proposed RCr 11.43 which sets forth a procedure for obtaining post-conviction DNA testing.
Kentucky Criminal Justice Council The Council has provided a focus to study significant policy issues and provide considered review and recommendations from a variety of criminal justice perspectives.
Their recommendations have included proposals for legislation that is meant to reduce wrongful stops, arrests and convictions.
For instance, it proposed a Racial Profiling Policy and Legislation that is now law.
KRS 15A.195.
The Law Enforcement Committee is currently studying ways to improve investigation when eyewitness identifications are involved.
The Council proposed to the 2002 General Assembly a study of the administration of the death penalty in Kentucky.
The General Assembly refused to fund that request.
The Council was instrumental in the passage of the DNA legislation.
Kentucky Editorials The Lexington Herald Leader said upon May's release in a September 21, 2002 editorial: "At a time when we are under pressure to surrender civil liberties in the name of security, we all should take Herman May's story to heart.
When things already can go so horribly wrong, even with the protections afforded the accused, what will happen if we surrender due process rights? More innocent people will be jailed.
The justice system that's the bedrock of American liberty could crumble.
As for May, we're sorry the state of Kentucky doesn't compensate those it wrongly imprisons.
It should, even if it'd difficult to put a price on what he lost."
In an August 7, 2002 editorial about Osborne's acquittal, the Courier Journal said, "The dangers of mistakes are too great, and the chance of putting an innocent person to death in the people's name is one that should never be risked."
In its August 29, 2000 editorial, the Lexington Herald Leader applauded the efforts to create a Kentucky Innocence Project but called for answers to remaining questions, "What do we make of a justice system that wrongly imprisons a man for seven years? Where are the cracks in the system? How do we seal them?"
Barry Scheck and Marguerite Thomas Barry Scheck and Marguerite Thomas KBA and Barry Scheck Barry Scheck spoke at the June 2002 KBA Convention and called Kentucky policy makers to address needed reforms, especially an Innocence Commission to investigate what went wrong in the wrongful convictions.
He also called for compensation to persons wrongly convicted.
The Innocence Project at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law at http://www.innocenceproject.org/index.php sets out a summary of recommended reforms.
Mistaken ID.
In 1999, the National Institute of Justice (DOJ) issued a report entitled Eyewitness Evidence: A Guide for Law Enforcement that outlined several methods for minimizing mistaken eyewitness identification when collecting evidence.
Policy and practice changes that should be adopted by police departments and other investigating agencies include:
* Videotaping of all stages of the identification process, whether by lineup, photograph, composite, etc.
* Lineups and photo spreads should be administered by an independent identification examiner.
The suspect should not be known to the examiner to ensure that the witness is not influenced or steered toward an identification.
* Witnesses should be informed before any identification process that the actual perpetrator may not be in the lineup or the perpetrator's picture may not be included in the photo spread.
* Sequential presentation of lineups or photo spreads should be used rather than the usual simultaneous presentation method, thus preventing relative judgements and forcing witnesses to truly examine their own identifications.
* Show-up identification procedures should be avoided except in the rare circumstance that the suspect is apprehended in the immediate vicinity and within a very short amount of time of the crime.
* Witnesses should be asked to rate their certainty at every instance of identification.
* Police and prosecutors should be trained with regard to the risks of providing corroborating details that may disguise any doubts a witness may have.
Police and Prosecutorial Misconduct.
Improper techniques, coercive tactics, and poor investigation have all contributed to wrongful convictions.
A prime example of improper police techniques is suggestive identification procedures employed by many police departments.
One on one show-ups, suggestive line-ups, and coerced identifications have often placed the wrong person in jail.
Forced confessions, violence toward suspects, manufactured evidence -- all of these have had both obvious and subtle effects upon the lives of many unjustly accused and convicted persons.
Overzealous and untruthful prosecutors have also been causes of wrongful conviction.
Examples of prosecutorial misconduct include suppression of exculpatory evidence, destruction of evidence, the use of unreliable and untruthful witnesses and snitches, and fabrication of evidence.
Police officers and prosecutors need to be trained to avoid and held accountable for utilizing improper techniques of securing convictions.
One step toward this goal would be the creation of disciplinary committees that focus exclusively on misconduct of police officers and prosecutors.
Additionally, the further involvement of federal agencies is needed to address misconduct by state police officers.
False Confessions.
In a surprising and disturbing number of DNA exoneration cases, the defendants had made incriminating statements or delivered outright confessions.
Many factors arise from interrogation that may lead to false confession, including: duress, coercion, intoxication, diminished capacity, ignorance of the law, and mental impairment.
Fear of violence (threatened or performed) and threats of extreme sentences have also led innocent people to confess to crimes they did not perpetrate.
All interrogations should be videotaped, thereby providing an objective record.
This is not only feasible, it has been made law throughout the United Kingdom and Alaska.
Additional reforms have been suggested by Governor Ryan's Commission on Capital Punishment.
Only two states, Alaska and Minnesota, currently mandate the taping of interrogations.
This common sense reform would help police minimize the occurrence of false confessions, which also means greater chances that the actual perpetrator is not free to commit more crimes.
Poor Defense Lawyering.
Mirroring prosecutorial misconduct, ineffective or incompetent defense counsel have allowed men and women who might otherwise have been proven innocent at trial to be sent to prison.
Failure to investigate, failure to call witnesses, inability to prepare for trial (due to caseload or incompetence), are a few examples of poor lawyering.
The shrinking funding and access to resources for public defenders and court appointed attorneys is only exacerbating the problem.
The ACLU has filed a class action law suit against Montana's indigent defense system for failing to meet the national standards of indigent defense.
Some suggestions that would help remedy the problem of bad lawyering: * Ensuring adequate pay for public defenders and competitive fees for court appointed attorneys would attract competent attorneys to staff these offices and take cases.
Public defenders and prosecutors in any given area should receive commensurate pay.
* Caseloads for public defenders should never exceed the standards of the National Legal Aid and Defenders Association.
If attorneys are forced to proceed with too many cases, ethical complaints should be lodged with the appropriate state bar.
* Every jurisdiction should establish standards of adequate defense.
The public should be informed and educated about the requirements of an adequate defense.
Standards would also provide notice to all defense attorneys of how much work is expected of them.
* Federal funds for defense services should be relative to the amount of funding provided to prosecutors' offices in any given jurisdiction.
Junk Science.
As finders of fact in a trial, the ultimate determination of truth is up to the jury.
In twenty-five of the first eighty-two DNA exonerations, scientists and prosecutors presented bad or tainted evidence to the judge or jury.
In these cases, it was fortunate that DNA testing could ultimately expose the truth.
Examples of junk science include: experts testifying about tests that were never conducted, suppression of evidence and/or exculpatory results of testing, falsified results, falsified credentials, misinterpretation of test results, and statistical exaggeration.
The following suggestions, once implemented, would limit or eliminate the phenomenon of junk science being presented in courtrooms.
* The scientific bases for forensic testing of all kinds must be reexamined in an objective manner.
These evaluations should follow the standards put forth by the Supreme Court in recent cases, which are specifically designed to keep junk science out of the courtroom.
* All crime laboratories should be subject to the same or better standards of professional organizations, like all medical laboratories.
Regulatory oversight agencies, like New York's Forensic Science Review Commission, should be created and given the authority to regulate the practices of laboratories as well as set standards for the use of private laboratories or other outsourcing.
These agencies or commissions should be comprised of scientists, prosecutors, defense attorneys, judges, and laboratory directors.
* All crime laboratories must be reviewed.
Accreditation standards should include rigorous quality control, spot-checking, quality assurance reviews, and periodic inspection by a regulatory body.
* Laboratories should be submitted to proficiency testing, including blind proficiency testing.
Laboratories should subsequently be rated on their performance and ability to provide valid data.
* Microscopic hair comparisons should give way to mitochondrial DNA testing.
* Information regarding controls must be presented at trial, whether or not they failed in the instant case, as well as error rates for any given testing procedure.
* Defense attorneys should have relevant scientific evidence and results independently examined and/or re-tested.
Public defenders and court appointed attorneys must receive funds to retain said experts.
* Every public defender and prosecutor's office should have on staff at least one attorney acting as a full time forensic expert.
* Forensics experts and crime laboratory directors should formally agree that crime laboratories should act as independent entities within the criminal justice system.
They would, thereby, be released from pressure from the prosecution and defense.
These laboratories should be staffed by professionals who can present data objectively, without regard for either the prosecution or defense.
* Crime laboratory budgets should not be linked, in any way, to the fiduciary process of any police agency.
Police agencies should not be allowed to exercise supervisory responsibility of the crime laboratory or its employees.
* Complete discovery of all data from forensic tests should be provided in all criminal cases to all parties involved.
Reports should include explanations of the testing involved, not just the results of said procedure.
All potentially exculpatory inferences drawn from any testing should also be disclosed.
* Protection should be extended to "whistle blowers" in any crime laboratory who have concerns about the reliability of testing or results.
Experienced expert personnel should be available to settle disputes among scientists.
* State and local governments should establish an office for an independent reviewer who is authorized to investigate allegations of misconduct in crime laboratories.
The federal government provided a good example in the case of the investigation of FBI laboratories.
* Law and medical schools should sponsor the creation of postgraduate forensic science programs and degrees.
The use of jailhouse informants, especially in return for deals, special treatment, or the dropping of charges, has proven to be a specious form of evidence, as has testimony that has only appeared after rewards were offered.
Often, the testimony of these snitches and informants has been the key in sending an innocent man or woman to prison for a crime he or she did not commit.
In Canada, after the exoneration of Guy Paul Morin, a commission was established to review the causes of his conviction and propose remedies for similar situations.
The Commission's findings can be downloaded at http://www.attorneygeneral.jus.gov.on.ca/english/about/pubs/morin/.
Please also see http://www.gov.mb.ca/justice/sophonow.
In general, these guidelines would allow the finder of fact to more evenly weigh the probative value of an informant's testimony: * Judges should presume, and instruct the jury, that a jailhouse informant's testimony is unreliable.
Moreover, the prosecution should be required to overcome that presumption before the jury even hears said testimony.
* Any deal or reward offered or accepted with regard to informants or snitches must be in writing.
All verbal communication should be videotaped.
Limits of Conventional Serology.
Prior to the introduction of DNA testing into the criminal justice system, forensic scientists were limited to the use of conventional serology.
By conventional serology, we mean International ABO Blood Typing, enzyme testing (e.g. PGM, ESD), secretor status testing, microscopic hair analysis, presumptive chemical screening (acid phosphatase, P30, amylase), and visualization methods like "christmas tree" staining.
International ABO Blood Type This form of testing is familiar to most lay people, as it yields blood types, i.e.
A, AB, B, and O. By itself, ABO blood typing is not very probative, as inclusion rates vary between 5% and 40% of the population.
Coupled with enzyme testing, ABO typing is more probative, but nowhere near as probative or discriminating as DNA testing.
The enzymes in question are also referred to as blood group markers and have acronyms like PGM (phoshoglutomase).
Secretor status also has to be factored in to any analysis by conventional serology.
People whose blood group antigens can be found in other bodily fluids like saliva and semen are called secretors.
Blood group antigens allow a forensic scientist to determine the blood type of a person by testing other fluids.
75% - 85% of the population are secretors.
Chemical Screening and Visualization Techniques Presumptive chemical screening allows forensic scientists to determine whether or not certain bodily fluids have been deposited on an item.
There are presumptive indicators for blood, semen (acid phosphatase, P30), and saliva (amylase).
Acid phosphatase, for example, is found in varying proportions in many body fluids, but is especially concentrated in semen.
"Christmas tree" staining is a method of visualizing spermatozoa.
Chemicals are added to a semen stain that turn any spermatozoa present red and green, thus making it easier to visualize them under a microscope.
Before the advent of mitochondrial DNA testing, hair was examined with the use of a microscope.
Forensic scientists examined hair for similar and varying characteristics.
This practice is highly subjective and very inaccurate with regard to including or "matching" a suspect.
Quite often, hair analysis has determined the outcome of a trial due to overblown statistics or where the probative value of microscopic hair analysis was exaggerated.
DNA.
The use of forensic DNA testing has brought about many changes in the criminal justice system.
DNA testing is now being used routinely to convict and clear those awaiting trial.
If performed correctly, DNA testing becomes a powerful and impartial tool, able to correctly identify any perpetrator in crimes where there is relevant biological evidence.
As the technology advances and is applied in appropriate cases before trial, the chances of convicting an innocent person, at least where identity can be proven through biological evidence, is greatly diminished.
In 1999, the Department of Justice released a report entitled Postconviction DNA Testing: Recommendations for Handling Requests.
Written by judges, prosecutors, defense lawyers, and victims' advocates, these guidelines provide a model that will help to insure that only the guilty are prosecuted and convicted.
Conclusion "This is the tip of the iceberg indicating fundamental problems with the criminal justice system," Public Advocate Ernie Lewis said commenting on the four Kentucky wrongful conviction cases.
"National estimates put the number of innocent people incarcerated in the nation's prisons between 4%-10%.
Our system must ensure that guilty people and only guilty people are punished.
It is not adequately doing that.
William Gregory in Louisville, the 17 year old Larry Osborne in Whitley County, the 17 year old Herman May in Frankfort and Robert Coleman in Bullitt County prove what we feared--we have serious problems across Kentucky with mistaken eyewitness identification, cross-racial identification, bad forensic evidence, overzealous prosecution, poor lawyering feared -- and innocent Kentucky citizens are being wrongly convicted.
We must ensure that before liberty is taken from a fellow citizen that someone is guilty.
There are serious problems with our justice system in Kentucky that can only be solved with adequate resources for our public defender system.
Kentucky has made great strides in the last 6 years, but heavy caseloads for public defenders threaten a return to the time when we cannot guarantee to the public the reliability of the verdicts in cases in which public defenders are involved.
The Department of Public Advocacy's Kentucky Innocence Project with DPA, the University of Kentucky Law School and School of Social Work, Eastern Kentucky University College of Justice and Safety, and Chase College of Law working in partnership is revealing the iceberg."
Kentucky has begun to respond to the public's call for procedures to insure the innocent are not convicted and to insure the release of those in prison who are innocent.
Some of the beginning responses are significant.
But much more work must be done to honor our deep felt value that our liberty and life must not be taken if we are innocent.
______________________________________________________________
Back Return to the Table of Contents
