United States Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service FY 2002 ANIM AL AN D WILDLIFE SERVICES--GEORGIA Contact Information: Doug Hall, Georgia Wildlife Services State Director USDA, WS School of Forest Resources, UGA, Athens, GA 30602 Phone: (706) 546-2020 FAX: (706) 316-9248 Toll-Free Number: 1-866-4USDAWS (866) 487­3297 E-mail: douglas.i.hall@aphis.usda.gov Web site: www.aphis.usda.gov/ws WI L D E S E RV LIF I EALTH INSP TH EC AN TI PL O S CE LT UR E N E RVIC SE USDA Resolves Wildlife Conflicts in Georgia Every day Georgia residents, industries, organizations, and agencies call on Georgia Wildlife Services (WS) for expertise in protecting agriculture, property, natural resources, and human health and safety from damage or threats posed by wildlife.
Managed by professional wildlife biologists, WS responds with effective, selective and humane strategies to resolve wildlife conflicts.
Georgia, with its diverse mix of urban and suburban settings, and agricultural and forested lands is the largest state east of the Mississippi River.
WS biologists help protect Georgia's timber, transportation, natural resources, and property from beaver damage and flooding.
WS protects property, agriculture, and landscapes from damage caused by white-tailed deer and resident Canada geese.
WS works to protect ground nesting birds, such as the bobwhite quail and threatened and endangered species from predation.
It also minimizes wildlife/aircraft conflicts by providing expertise to civilian airports and military installations.
Top 5 Major Assistance Activities:
U
· Protecting human safety, aircraft, and militar y operations from wildlife hazards at airports · Safely managing overabundant deer herds in diverse situations and donating venison to area food banks · Protecting timber, transportation, natural resources, and property from beaver damage and flooding · Humanely relocating Canada goose flocks and controlling overabundant feral pigeon populations to reduce associated property and health problems · Providing a Wildlife Damage Management Course at the University of Georgia Top 5 WS Research Projects of Interest to Georgia: · Defining and reducing wildlife hazards to aviation and problems associated with agriculture, property, and human health and safety · Researching methods to increase ground nesting productivity of quail and other species through predation management · Evaluating and monitoring wildlife diseases and parasites such as West Nile virus, histoplasmosis, E.coli, and rabies · Improving assessment, sampling, and economic methods for wildlife damage management · Protecting forest and wildlife resources as well as evaluating aquaculture problems in the southeastern United States
ED IT UN
ST IC AT GR ES FA DEP A RT M E N T O
Applying Science 
Often, this technical assistance can be provided over the phone.
WS also provides on-site expertise, or direct assistance, to manage complex wildlife problems that cannot be safely resolved by others.
To support this effort, WS conducts scientific research across the Nation to develop answers to new problems posed by wildlife and to ensure the program benefits from the latest science and technology.
Protecting Gamebirds--Efforts are underway to determine how to restore bobwhite quail populations that have steadily declined in the southern United States.
WS plays a major role in an on-going field research endeavor to determine if predator management during the nesting season can enhance bird productivity and populations on Georgia lands.
As part of the field study, WS is working in the Albany and Thomasville areas with private landowners as well as the State wildlife agency, major universities, and private research facilities to allow landowners and conservationists to strategically increase wildlife diversity on their lands.
Using a wide variety of safe, effective wildlife management tools, biologists are managing major nest predators ranging from armadillos to raccoons and coyotes.
Results of this study will have applications not only in Georgia, but over the entire range of the bobwhite quail.
Protecting Transportation, Property, Timber, and Other Natural Resources--Beaver populations throughout the State cause many of Georgia's 159 counties to experience losses.
WS provides assistance on a variety of properties, using an integrated management approach that includes water level manipulation, exclusion, population reduction, and the safe and effective use of explosives by a certified specialist.
Damage estimates to agriculture, landscapes, natural areas, ponds, pastures, timber, airport safety, sanitation lines, culverts, highways, wells, and other properties approach $1 million.
Protecting Human Health and Safety, Property, and Crops-- Nonmigratory Canada geese threaten human health and safety, property, and crops.
WS is involved in an active program to safely and humanely capture and relocate Canada geese from areas where they present a risk to aircraft or are a health hazard on public and private lakes, parks, golf courses, and even urban office complexes.
A population of more than 1 million white-tailed deer in Georgia also present a wildlife management challenge.
Loss of wildlife habitat through urbanization creates an ever increasing demand for the resolution of human-deer conflicts.
WS has taken the lead in resolving many deer-related issues in urban and suburban areas where sport hunting is no longer a viable option.
These areas include airports, agricultural research facilities, neighborhoods, arboretums, botanical gardens, military installations, and public and private recreational areas.
Looking to the Future While WS provides safe, professional, and humane assistance to combat a diverse range of wildlife conflicts, many wildlife management needs continue to go unmet in Georgia.
Increased habitat loss, human population growth, and the adaptability of many wildlife species to human environments will expand the need for professional resolution of wildlife conflicts in the future.
Significant species of concern include deer, geese, beaver, vultures, cormorants, pigeons, feral hogs, and raccoons.
For example, WS significantly reduces feral hog and raccoon predation rates on Loggerhead sea turtles at the National Park Service's Cumberland Island National Seashore.
Georgia Wildlife Services Funding In addition to receiving federally allocated funds, WS also receives money from cooperators; such as producers; private individuals; businesses; and other Federal, State, and local government agencies who have a vested interest in the program.
In most cases, these cooperators need help to resolve wildlife damage problems or they play a role in wildlife damage management.
FY 2002
USDA is an equal employment provider and employer.
