g l o b a l l e a f l e t News from International Programs of the USDA Forest Ser vice No. 3, November 2003: Protected Area Management
"Blue Eye of the Earth": Protecting Lake Baikal by Edmund Gee and Tony Brunello
L
ake Baikal has been called "the blue eye of the Earth."
Located in southern Siberia, Lake Baikal is the deepest lake on Earth, 1
improve the management of its watershed.
One enormous undertaking is constructing a trail around the entire lake, called the Great Baikal Trail.
Modeled on a similar trail around Lake Tahoe, the Great Baikal Trail will be 10 times longer--about 1,500 miles (2,400 km) long.
It will connect more than eight national parks and protected areas, offering tremendous opportunities for low-impact tourism.
Support has come from the U.S. Agency for International Development, the Sport Tourism and Mountaineering Federation of Buryatia in Russia, the Earth Island Institute, the Tahoe-Rim Trail Association, and others.
Project planning and training began in 2002.
Three experts from Lake Baikal traveled to the United States for training.
Related developments included an interpretive brochure and a conference in Russia.
For 2003, plans have included bringing volunteers and tourists to work on the trail, a train-the-trainer workshop at Lake Baikal, and more training for specialists.
The USDA Forest Service is also working with the Tahoe-Baikal Institute to improve watershed planning for Lake Baikal's largest tributary, the Selenga River.
Reaching far into Mongolia, the Selenga
watershed encompasses an area about the size of Spain.
In 2004, the USDA Forest Service will bring two experts from the Selenga watershed to a regional planning workshop at Lake Tahoe.
Tahoe and Baikal are two jewels in the crown of the world's protected areas.
"If you are stopped suddenly by a penetrating blue and your heart stops ...
it means, this is Baikal," sang the Russian poet Mark Sergeev, indicating the depth of local feelings for "the Old Man," as the lake is sometimes known.
The partnership between Russia and the United States to conserve such world treasures has payoffs for both sides--and for future generations.
Edmund Gee, formerly deputy forest supervisor of the USDA Forest Service Lake Tahoe Basin Management Unit, is now the national partnership coordinator for the Forest and Rangelands Staff in Washington, DC; and Tony Brunello is the executive director of the Tahoe-Baikal Institute, South Lake Tahoe, CA.
and, by volume, the largest.
It contains a fifth of the world's freshwater supply, and it is by far the world's oldest lake.
Whereas most lakes seldom last longer than 30,000 years, Baikal formed in a rift valley 25 million years ago! That makes Lake Baikal a living laboratory of evolution.
Of its 1,700 native species, more than 1,000 are found nowhere else on Earth.
For thousands of years, native Siberians have venerated the lake, which plays a prominent role in the Mongolian myth of creation.
In 1916, the first nature reserve was founded on Baikal's northwestern shore; more reserves have been added since.
In 1990, the TahoeÂ­Baikal Institute was formed to help protect both Lake Baikal and California's Lake Tahoe, similarly treasured in the United States.
In 2002, the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Forest Service established a long-term relationship with the Tahoe-Baikal Institute to help develop ecotourism at Lake Baikal and to 1
WHAT'S INSIDE? P M ROTECTED AREA ANAGEMENT
Sergeev, Mark.
Words of a Poet.
In: City of Irkutsk, Lake Baikal Homepage. http://www.irkutsk.org/baikal/mark.htm
A
N INNOVATIVE PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN
THE
USDA F
OREST SERVICE AND THE WORKS TO
International Perspective: Making Protected Areas Work . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.2 Wildness With Utility: Wilderness in the United States . . . . . . . . . .
.3 From Paper to Reality: Protecting Parkland in Bolivia . . . . . . . . . . . .
.4 Southern Africa: Learning How To Manage Protected Areas . . .
.5
TAHOE-BAIKAL INSTITUTE EYE OF THE EARTH
PROTECT LAKE BAIKAL--THE
"BLUE
."
ANDREY SUKNEV
News Bits from Around the World . . . . . . . . . .
.6 Bulletin Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.8 1
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
t
i
o
n
a
l
P
e
r
s
p
e
c
t
i
v
e
Making Protected Areas Work by William J. McLaughlin
T
here's no doubt about it; protected areas are flourishing worldwide.
Their number has
Whatever the type, protected areas reflect a broad moral choice to conserve landscapes of value, whether natural or cultural (see the article on Lake Baikal by Edmund Gee and Tony Brunello).
But what kind of protection should be provided? And who should decide? Over the years, we have discovered the value of involving stakeholders in deciding what to protect and how to manage it.
Local communities, national governments, indigenous peoples, nongovernmental organizations, industry, and individual citizens all have a stake in the outcome.
Collaborative programs, institutions, and
processes are becoming the norm for the successful practice of conservation.
Some scientists, however, have argued that collaborative models are not working.
They call for returning to a more preservationist, expert-driven model of protected area management.
However, such an approach is unlikely to succeed in today's world.
In fact, the "classic" national park model has not been very successful in empowering citizens, building trust, promoting societal learning about complex environments, or sharing the responsibility for their care, let alone preserving biodiversity (see the article on parkland in Bolivia by Larry Swan).
Because protected areas are central to
grown from almost zero in 1900 to more than 30,000 today.
About 9 percent of the Earth's surface is now in some form of protected area.
What is a protected area? There are many different types.
They range from strict nature reserves to distinct cultural landscapes.
The USDA Forest Service has almost a century of experience with a wide range of protected areas, from wilderness areas to multiple-use management areas (see the article by Richard Paterson).
What Is the Consortium for International Protected Area Management? The Consortium for International Protected Area Management was founded in 2000 by Colorado State University, the University of Idaho, and the University of Montana in cooperation with the USDA Forest Service International Programs Staff.
The consortium aims to strengthen the worldwide capacity for protected area policymaking, planning, and management through education, training, technical cooperation, and research.
Since August 2000, the consortium has offered an International Seminar on Protected Area Management where participants from nearly 30 countries have explored strategies for conserving the world's most special places.
In addition, the consortium offers the Spanish-language-based International Field Course on Wildlands and Protected Area Management.
The consortium now nurtures a growing network of protected area managers and stakeholders through continuing education and shared information and technology.
The consortium's activities include: developing a wildlife viewing program for ecotourism in southern Africa; helping to restore productivity in buffer zones around protected areas in the Philippines; working to resolve conflicts between fishermen and conservationists in Ecuador's Galapagos Marine Reserve; and training managers in Guatemala and Malaysia to collaborate with communities in planning and managing resource use in protected areas.
sustainable development, today's challenge is to build new collaborative and cooperative capacities among stakeholders.
The USDA Forest Service has a history of building stakeholder capacity for land management, both at home and abroad (see the article on capacity-building in southern Africa by Wayne Freimund).
Mission-oriented conservation can happen when it reflects the shared responsibility of stakeholders and adequately considers biophysical, social, and political consequences.
Whatever the mission of a protected area, today's managers and stakeholders need access to the latest scientific and experiential knowledge, as well as thinking about protected area management.
That requires a sustained investment in social capital and human capacity.
That's why three universities in the United States--Colorado State University and the Universities of Idaho and continued on p.7...
2
EIGHTY
YEARS AGO, THE
USDA
FOREST S S
ERVICE PIONEERED THE
NATIONAL WILDERNESS PRESERVATION YSTEM TO PRESERVE THE WILDNESS OF THE VANISHING OPEN COUNTRY AND SUSTAIN ITS NUMEROUS KARL PERRY
BENEFITS FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS OF AMERICANS
.
Wildness With Utility: Wilderness in the United States by Richard Paterson
"M
ixing a degree of wildness with utility."
That's how Aldo Leopold framed the wilderness
and most extractive uses.
The USDA Forest Service has a long history of wilderness management.
Leopold, Arthur Carhart, and Bob Marshall--all one-time USDA Forest Service employees--led the way (see the sidebar).
In 1924, the USDA Forest Service designated the first wilderness area.
Not until 1964 did the U.S. Congress, through the Wilderness Act, assume the role of designating wilderness areas.
Some see wilderness areas as places for no management at all.
But, in the spirit of Aldo Leopold, the United States does not cordon off wilderness areas.
The more benefits people can get from a wilderness area without sacrificing its wildness, the more likely it is to be valued and protected by future generations.
The benefits are enormous.
Many rivers in the United States begin in wilderness areas, which are critical for watershed protection.
Threatened and endangered species find refuge there.
Other uses are more direct.
Worldwide, wilderness is essential to native populations for traditional subsistence and cultural activities.
In research, it provides a baseline for studying more managed landscapes.
Grazing, tourism, and outfitter/guiding all generate jobs and badly needed income in rural areas.
But perhaps the greatest benefit for U.S. citizens is the "wilderness experience"; there are about 13 million of them each year on the national forests alone.
Properly mancontinued on p.7...
question.
Leopold was a founder of the wilderness movement in the United States, where we distinguish between wilderness areas and wilderness.
Wilderness areas are formally set aside in the National Wilderness Preservation System, some 105 million acres (42 million ha) of specially protected land.
They might not include every part of what some people might think of as wilderness.
The system represents more than 80 years of efforts to preserve the wildness of the vanishing open country in the United States by keeping out roads, machinery,
USDA FOREST SERVICE
Three Pioneers: Shaping the Agency's Long History of Wilderness Management Aldo Leopold (1887Â­1948) began his career with the USDA Forest Service in New Mexico.
Inspired by Carhart's kindred spirit, he championed creation of the Gila Wilderness in 1924, the first designated wilderness area in the United States.
Leopold later pioneered the field of wildlife management, weaving together forestry, agriculture, ecology, biology, zoology, and education.
His philosophy evolved from use-oriented conservationism to a holistic view that soil, water, biota, and other factors are interwoven on the land.
His land ethic, postulating a categorical imperative to keep every USDA FOREST SERVICE USDA FOREST SERVICE
Arthur Carhart (1892Â­1973) became the USDA Forest Service's first full-time landscape architect in 1919.
Assigned to plan recreational development of Trappers Lake in Colorado, he instead pressed for keeping the lake roadless and pristine.
It remains so to this day--the first formal application of the wilderness concept in the United States.
Carhart's efforts also led in 1926 to protection of the QueticoÂ­Superior region in Minnesota, now the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness.
Carhart later wrote that "there is no higher service that forests can supply ... than the healing of mind and spirit which comes from ... great solitude."
Bob Marshall (1901Â­1939) foresaw early in his career a need to reserve 10 percent of all U.S. forest lands as recreation areas.
In the 1930s, as chief of recreation for the USDA Forest Service, he reformed the use of wilderness and primitive areas by banning logging, roadbuilding, and motorized vehicles.
With Aldo Leopold and others, he cofounded the Wilderness Society in 1935.
In 1938, he took a team across the West to map and propose millions of acres for designation as primitive or wilderness areas.
Shortly after his death, the USDA Forest Service designated a wilderness in his honor, the Bob Marshall Wilderness in Montana.
part, has deeply influenced land managers worldwide.
3
DEEP K
IN THE AMAZON:
A
SIGN
WELCOMES VISITORS TO EMPFF
NOEL
MERCADO NATIONAL PARK, .
WHICH HAS SOME OF THE RICHEST BIODIVERSITY IN THE WORLD MICHELLE ZWEEDE
From Paper to Reality: Protecting Parkland in Bolivia by Larry Swan
F
ormal designations as protected areas alone can do little to conserve the world's last great
alone could do little to discourage rising encroachment and abuse.
In the early 1990s, working with the Bolivian Government and local nongovernmental organizations, The Nature Conservancy enrolled the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park in its new Parks-inPeril program.
The program builds partnerships between national and international organizations, both public and private, giving local nongovernmental organizations the capacity to manage protected areas in collaboration with local businesses and communities.
The Nature Conservancy worked with the Friends of Nature Foundation, a private nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting Bolivia's endangered tropical habitats.
In the 1990s, the foundation signed a 10-year agreement with the Bolivian Government to manage the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park.
Support and funding came from the U.S. Agency for International Development, along with technical assistance from the USDA Forest Service.
USDA Forest Service technical assistance has ranged from ecotourism and
interpretation to forest products marketing and utilization.
The purpose is to reduce pressure on park resources by helping communities near the park practice sustainable forestry.
In collaboration with the Amazon Center for Sustainable Forest Enterprise, a local nongovernmental organization, the USDA Forest Service works with producers to link certified forest products to the international export market.
That includes training to improve dry kiln practices and utilization of lesser known tree species.
All wood comes from forests certified by third parties as well managed.
The future looks hopeful for Noel Kempff Mercado National Park.
The private foundation that manages the park collaborates with local communities and has established an ecotourism and educational outreach program.
There are now two visitor facilities within the park, some small private facilities in local communities, and about 25 park guards.
About half the guards come from nearby communities.
Protected areas in developing countries make sense, as long as local people have the means and the know-how to protect the land while sustaining their communities.
International assistance can help forge the partnerships needed to build local con-
places.
Local communities must have an economic stake in their sustainable use.
A case in point comes from Bolivia.
In 1979, recognizing the value of its natural treasures, Bolivia established a park in the northeastern part of the country.
Today, the Noel Kempff Mercado National Park, about 3.7 million acres (1.5 million ha) in size, features some of the richest biodiversity in the world.
More than 1,100 animals have been identified, along with an estimated 4,000 vascular plants.
The park lies deep in the Amazon Basin.
Fewer than 30 people live or work there, and it takes 2 days to get there by bus from the nearest major city or 2-1/2 hours by small plane.
In the late 1980s, Noel Kempff Mercado National Park's isolation began to lose some of its protective value.
Land was being cleared for grazing and settlement; logging operations, both legal and illegal, were making inroads into the ancient forest; and poachers were depleting both fish and wildlife resources.
Paper protection
USDA F B
OREST SERVICE ENGINEER
servation capacity and leadership.
Through
OB SIMONSON HELPS LOCAL COM
-
the Parks-in-Peril program and with help from the USDA Forest Service, Noel Kempff Mercado National Park offers hope for conserving our biodiversity heritage worldwide.
Larry Swan is a forest products utilization specialist for the USDA Forest Service, Winema National Forest, Klamath Falls, OR.
MUNITIES IN BOLIVIA PRACTICE SUSTAINABLE FOREST MANAGEMENT TO REDUCE THE PRESSURE ON PARK RESOURCES
.
4
MICHELLE ZWEEDE
S K
TRETCHING DOWN THE SOUTHERN
TIP OF AFRICA, THE
CAPE FLORISTIC
INGDOM IS HOME TO INCREDIBLE
PLANT AND ANIMAL BIODIVERSITY.
WAYNE FREIMUND
Southern Africa: Learning How To Manage Protected Areas by Wayne A. Freimund
I
magine a vast field of flowers bathed in warm sunshine.
The field undulates around you in a
opment plans and biodiversity protection projects.
The success of both will depend on the knowledge and skill of policymakers and managers.
Recognizing this, the Centre for Environment and Development at the University of Natal has developed a multidimensional educational program in protected area management.
The program evolved from humble beginnings, with steady support from the USDA Forest Service.
Growing interest in protected area management in southern Africa gave the USDA Forest Service new opportunities for helping to build regional capacity for sustainable resource management.
In 1987, the USDA Forest Service invested in South African wilderness training through the Wilderness Action Group, a local nongovernmental organization.
Relationships blossomed as the University of Natal got involved.
Today, the Centre for
Environment and Development works together with the Wilderness Action Group and two U.S. partners--the University of Montana and the USDA Forest Service--to provide educational programs for both managers and policymakers.
With sound public policy and welltrained managers, the outlook is good for protected areas throughout southern Africa.
Future generations will enjoy their rich biodiversity, and local people can capitalize on a flourishing ecotourism industry to develop a service-oriented local economy.
By serving as a catalyst for capacity building, the USDA Forest Service has enhanced protected area management, both abroad and at home, through valuable contacts and exchanges.
Wayne Freimund is the Arkwright associate professor of wilderness studies and director of the Wilderness Institute at the University of Montana, Missoula, MT.
gentle breeze, with colors in every hue, some so iridescent that they seem to glow.
You are in one of the 25 richest and most threatened reservoirs of plant and animal life on Earth, a place with more than 8,000 plant species, 70 percent of which are found nowhere else.
You are in South Africa, in the Cape Floristic Kingdom, one of only six floral kingdoms worldwide.
The Cape Floristic Kingdom is by far the smallest floral kingdom, covering only 35,000 square miles (90,000 km2) in an arc stretching along the southern tip of Africa.
Its beaches and inland valleys, plains, and mountains support a tremendous variety of habitats.
Its plant species richness is therefore even greater than that of the Boreal Kingdom, which covers 40 percent of the Earth.
The Cape Floristic Kingdom is one of 25 biodiversity hotspots named by Conservation International, a nongovernmental organization dedicated to the conservation of biodiversity worldwide.
Yet only about 20 percent of it is under a form of management that sets biodiversity conservation as an explicit goal.
Here and elsewhere throughout southern Africa, protected areas play a critical role in conserving the world's biodiversity.
Protected areas also offer hope for the people of southern Africa.
Some see them as refuges for native species, others as places for recreation and spiritual renewal, and still others as opportunities for economic development.
Their values and dreams must be woven into both redevel-
OVER
THE PAST
16
YEARS, THE
USDA F
OREST SERVICE HAS SUP
-
PORTED TRAINING IN ALL ASPECTS OF PROTECTED AREA MANAGEMENT FOR LOCAL PEOPLE IN SOUTHERN AFRICA
.
WAYNE FREIMUND
5
N
e
w
s
B
i
t
s
F
r
o
m
A
r
o
u
n
d
T
h
e
W
o
r
l
d
Disaster Relief in Iraq: USDA Forest Service Draws on a Century of Service In spring 2003, war in Iraq left thousands of people in need of emergency relief.
The United States sent a Disaster Assistance Response Team to the region to assess relief needs and coordinate a response.
The team included a disaster response specialist from the USDA Forest Service International Programs Staff.
The specialist headed a U.S. Government civilian unit in northern Iraq responsible for providing information and programmatic recommendations for activities to the core team based in Kuwait City.
The local team coordinated with representatives from other nongovernmental and international organizations, the United Nations, and Coalition Civil Affairs forces.
In June 2003, a USDA Forest Service logistics specialist from the Sequoia National Forest in California joined the core Response Team in Kuwait City.
He coordinated the transport of humanitarian aid shipments from stockpiles in Kuwait and elsewhere to locations in Iraq.
These specialists belong to a cadre of trained and experienced personnel from the USDA Forest Service and the U.S. Department of the Interior's Bureau of Land Management who provide emergency disaster relief worldwide.
The USDA Forest Service has almost a century of service in emergency response on wildland fires.
Its expertise is being tapped worldwide through the International Programs Staff's Disaster Assistance Support Program, with funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance.
Amazing Find in the Bahamas: New Hope for Kirtland's Warbler In the winter of 2002-2003, researchers confirmed 30 individual warbler sightings at 12 different locations in the Bahamas.
With only about 2,000 Kirtland's warblers left in the world, that many sightings in the bird's little-known winter range signaled clear progress in recovering this songbird.
The endangered songbird nests only in northern Michigan, where decades of habitat loss once brought warbler populations to dangerously low levels.
Since the 1960s, recovery efforts have paid off in the bird's summer range, but little is known about the bird's winter needs.
The USDA Forest Service's International Programs Staff and the International Institute for Tropical Forestry joined with partners to establish the Kirtland's Warbler Research and Training Project in the Bahamas.
The project monitors the bird in its winter habitat while training Bahamians in methods of research and management.
Partners include The Nature Conservancy, the Bahamas National Trust, and the Bahamas Department of Agriculture.
A team that included two graduates from the College of the Bahamas made the most recent sightings.
Their newfound knowledge will enable them to continue monitoring the warbler and improve its winter habitat in the Bahamas.
A Lake Runs Through It Some of the world's most spectacular wildlife--elephants, zebras, hippopotami, buffalo, and giraffes--live along Lake Manyara, at the foot of the Great Rift Valley in Tanzania.
This watershed and its catchment areas represent part of a key wildlife corridor.
The USDA Forest Service and the African Wildlife Foundation, with funding from the U.S. Agency for International Development, have joined to protect watershed resources.
Together, the two organizations are helping local stakeholders identify conservation targets and threats to the lake's hydrology system, biodiversity, and habitat.
In December 2002, the partners held a joint workshop, a first step in assessing the Lake Manyara watershed.
Workshop participants outlined key issues and critical problems for the landscape surrounding Lake Manyara.
The workshop was the first of several steps to assess the Lake Manyara watershed.
By determining conditions in the catchment areas and characterizing threats, Tanzania's land managers can improve land use planning, enhance agriculture and livestock management, and develop and enforce water laws.
In the coming months, the USDA Forest Service and African Wildlife Foundation will gather remaining data and organize a final workshop.
6
...continued from p.2 Montana--established the Consortium for International Protected Area Management (see the sidebar on page 2).
The USDA Forest Service's International Programs Staff joined forces with the consortium to expand international education and training programs in protected area management.
Together, the partners sponsor programs such as the International Seminar on Protected Area Management, held annually at the University of Montana, and the Spanish-language-based International Field Course on Wildlands and Protected Area Management.
In these seminars, no single management approach is favored.
Like the articles in this issue of Global Leaflet, the seminars are designed to raise broad questions and explore the variety of possible management responses around the world, not deliver easy answers.
Long after such courses end, participants benefit from continuing education and shared information and technology through Dr. William J. McLaughlin is the executive director of the Consortium for International Protected Area Management and a professor in the Department of Resource Recreation and Tourism, College of Natural Resources, University of Idaho, Moscow, ID. the growing worldwide network of protected area managers.
Through such courses, protected area managers worldwide will have more of the tools they need to make informed decisions, in collaboration with the people they serve, in caring for the land on behalf of future generations.
...continued from p.3
Visit these Web sites for more information related to articles in this issue: http://www.tahoebaikal.org - Tahoe-Baikal Institute http://www.earthisland.org - Earth Island Institute http://www.tahoerimtrail.org - Tahoe-Rim Trail Association http://www.protectedareas.net - Consortium for International Protected Area Management http://www.cnr.colostate.edu - Colorado State University's College of Natural Resources http://www.uidaho.edu - University of Idaho http://www.umt.edu - University of Montana http://www.wilderness.net - Wilderness Society http://www.wilderness.net/nwps/default.cfm - National Wilderness Preservation System http://www.fs.fed.us/htnf/wildact.htm - Wilderness Act http://carhart.wilderness.net - Arthur Carhart Center http://leopold.wilderness.net - Aldo Leopold Institute http://nature.org - The Nature Conservancy http://parksinperil.org/ - Parks-in-Peril http://www.aceer.org - Amazon Center for Sustainable Forest Enterprise http://www.fs.fed.us/global/is/ispam/ - International Seminar on Protected Area Management http://www.fs.fed.us/global/is/field_course/ - International Field Course on Wildlands and Protected Area Management http://www.nwi.org - National Wilderness Institute http://www.usaid.gov/hum_response/ofda/ - US Agency for International Development's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance http://www.fs.fed.us/global/iitf/ - International Institute for Tropical Forestry http://www.awf.org - African Wildlife Foundation
aged, these experiences do no harm to and win support for protected areas.
Wilderness managers have discovered that different wilderness areas should be managed differently, taking both natural and social factors into account.
Heavily used wilderness areas near urban zones must be managed differently from those more remote.
Moreover, some management is needed to support the "wilderness experience," such as building trail bridges, installing climbing anchors, and using bear boxes.
The wilderness area concept is amazingly flexible, combining wildness with utility.
Today, the United States can be proud to leave a lasting legacy of wildness with utility through the National Wilderness Preservation System.
Richard Paterson, formerly Deputy Director of Recreation, Heritage, and Wilderness Resources, is now the Leadership Succession Program Leader for the USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC.
7
B
u
l
l
e
t
i
n
B
o
a
r
d
20th International Seminar on Forest and Natural Resources Administration and Management Dates: September 2004 Arizona, Colorado, North Carolina, and the District of Columbia, USA Jointly offered by Colorado State University and USDA Forest Service International Programs, this seminar is designed for senior natural resource management professionals.
The 19-day program focuses on strategies and methods to develop, manage, and conserve natural resources for the sustained delivery of goods and services to meet the full range of human needs.
For application details, visit http://www.fs.fed.
us/global/is/isfam/welcome.htm or write to Ann Keith, College of Natural Resources, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1401, USA, or e-mail at ifs@cnr.colostate.edu.
2004 International Seminar on Watershed Management Dates: Summer 2004 Stevens Point, Wisconsin, USA Jointly offered by the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point and the USDA Forest Service International Programs, this seminar is geared towards senior-level natural resource professionals.
The course examines the needs and challenges facing watershed managers and focuses on strategies and methods to manage and conserve watershed resources sustainably.
For application details, visit http://www.fs.fed.us/global/ is/watershed/welcome.htm or write to Dr. Earl Spangenberg, University of WisconsinStevens Point, College of Natural Resources, Stevens Point, WI 54481-389, USA, or e-mail at espangen@uwsp.edu.
2004 Curso de Manejo de Ã�reas Silvestres y Protegidas (2004 International Field Course on Wildlands and Protected Area Management) Dates: Summer 2004 Fort Collins, Colorado, USA Co-hosted by the Center for Protected Area Management and Training at Colorado State University and USDA Forest Service International Programs, this course, held entirely in Spanish, presents key concepts and methods of protected area management while emphasizing field-based practical exercises.
For application details, visit http://www.fs.fed.us/global/is/ field_course/welcome.htm or write to Ryan Finchum, Colorado State University, Center for Protected Area Management and Training, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1480, USA, or e-mail at finchum@cnr.colostate.edu.
2004 International Seminar on Protected Area Management Dates: August 2004 Missoula, Montana, USA This seminar--jointly offered by the University of Montana, University of Idaho, Colorado State University, and USDA Forest Service International Programs--is geared for senior-level managers and policymakers working in protected areas.
The program examines and stimulates debate on management strategies, policies, and innovative institutional arrangements to address the conservation and use of the world's most special places.
For application details, visit http://www.fs.fed.us/global/ is/ispam/welcome.htm or write to Wayne Freimund, School of Forestry, The University of Montana, Missoula, MT 59812, USA, or e-mail at wayne@forestry.umt.edu.
The Global Leaflet presents highlights of policy, research, technical cooperation, development, and conservation activities in which the USDA Forest Service is involved worldwide.
Its purpose is to demonstrate the breadth and importance of international collaboration on natural resource management issues and to share information within the USDA Forest Service and with our partners in the United States and around the world.
International Programs is dedicated to applying the wealth of skills within the USDA Forest Service to foster sustainable forest management globally.
We encourage linking the agency's researchers, foresters, wildlife biologists, hydrologists, policymakers, and disaster specialists with partners overseas to work on assignments in the areas of technical cooperation, policy assistance, and disaster coordination.
Our focus is on key natural resource problems and issues in countries with significant forest resources and important forest-related trade with the United States.
International cooperation results in improved sustainable natural resource practices in partner countries, develops the skills of USDA Forest Service personnel, and brings back knowledge and innovative technologies to the United States.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, or marital or family status.
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice and TDD).
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
Secretary of Agriculture Ann M. Veneman Chief of the Forest Service Dale N. Bosworth International Programs USDA Forest Service 1099 14th St. NW, Suite 5500W Washington, DC 20005-3402 Website www.fs.fed.us/global Director Val Mezainis Phone (202) 205-1650 Art Director Woody Machalek Editor Hutch Brown
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF
AGRICULTURE
FOREST SERVICE
INTERNATIONAL PROGRAMS
8
