TESTIMONY J. MICHAEL CRYE, PRESIDENT INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF CRUISE LINES (ICCL)
1
Before: The Subcommittee on Surface Transportation 
Mr. Chairman, my name is Michael Crye, and I am the President of the International Council of Cruise Lines (ICCL).
I am pleased to appear before the Subcommittee today to discuss the increased security efforts that have been implemented by the cruise industry in response to the terrorist attacks on September 11th.
With me here today is Captain Ted Thompson, the Executive Vice President of the ICCL.
His duty involves coordination of security and operations for our membership.
We are shocked and deeply saddened by the atta ck on America and the tremendous loss of life that resulted from this national tragedy.
In light of these recent events, we have heightened our already strict levels of security even further, and our cruise lines have been working on a daily basis with all appropriate federal, state, and local agencies to ensure that traveling Americans are protected to the maximum extent possible.
ICCL is a non-profit trade association that represents the interests of l6 of the largest cruise lines operating in the North American cruise market and over 73 Associate Member companies that are cruise industry business partners and suppliers.
ICCL member cruise lines serve major ports in the United States and call
2
on more than 400 ports around the world.
Last year, ICCL's member lines carried more than 7 million passengers on 95 vessels.
We welcome the opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee today to review and discuss our industry's efforts to ensure the safety and security of all of our passengers and crew.
The crui se industry's highest priority is to ensure the safety and security of its passengers.
A cruise ship is unique in that it is inherently secure because it is a controlled environment with limited access.
However, in order to maintain this secure environment, cruise lines have established strict and highly confidential ship security procedures that cannot, for obvious reasons, be discussed in detail.
These procedures are, in part, outlined in measures set forth by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), and the regulations established by the U.S. Coast Guard (USCG).
In the United States, the USCG oversees the Regulations address both passenger
enforcement of these security measures.
ship and passenger terminal security and outline methods to deter unlawful activities onboard passenger vessels.
In l986, the IMO adopted Measures to Prevent Unlawful Acts Against Passengers and Crew.
These measures address restricting access to authorized personnel onboard the ship and at the passenger terminal, and monitoring the flow of materials and consumable supplies brought onboard a ship.
Security procedures within these measures include inspection of all carry-on baggage and the use of metal detectors for embarking passengers.
Strict passenger screening to prevent unauthorized entry or carriage of weapons onboard is only one component of the
3
security procedures implemented to deter unlawful acts on board and to provide for the safety of all passengers.
In l996, the USCG implemented an Interim Final Rule on Security for Passenger Vessels and Passenger Terminals, which was finalized in October of l999.
This rule sets three levels of security (low, medium, and high) based on the nature of the threat received and requires vessel operators and port terminal operators to adjust security levels accordingly.
These regulations also require ship operators to submit Comprehensive Security Plans to the USCG for review and acceptance.
All ICCL member lines have submitted the required security plans.
These plans have been accepted by the USCG and are audited annually.
The security plans, which are sensitive law enforcement documents and therefore not available to the public, include the following major components: Identification of three levels of security and specifi c procedures to follow at each level; Prevent unlawful acts on board; Prevention and deterrence of weapons and other unauthorized items onboard; Prevention and deterrence of unauthorized access to vessels and restricted areas A security officer onboard every passenger vessel Security training for all crew members A security plan that is coordinated with the terminal security plan Reporting of violations and unlawful acts Annual security audits for each ship and reviews by the USCG
Passenger vessel security plans and their amendments are reviewed by the USCG National Maritime Center and inspections are conducted by the Captain of the Port to verify that all security practices and procedures are effective and up-todate.
4
The U.S. Department of Transportation Office of Intelligence and Secur ity and the USCG Commandant direct the implementation of nationwide and local security levels.
Domestic threat advisories are provided to the industry
summarizing the nature of the security threat and specifying changes to security levels both locally and nationally.
As a result of the attacks in September,
implementation of Level III security was directed by the U.S. Coast Guard at U.S. ports.
ICCL member operators reported that they implemented Level III security
measures even before it was ordered by the USCG.
Security Level III is the highest level of security set by Coast Guard Passenger Vessel Security regulations.
At U.S. cruise terminals, passenger vessel security measures include passenger screening procedures similar to those found at airports.
This includes l00% screening of all passenger baggage, carry-on
luggage, ship stores and cargo, and also includes higher levels of screening of passenger identification.
Official passenger lists are carefully reviewed and proper identification is ensur ed before anyone is allowed to board the vessel.
Even before the attacks of September 11, all passenger lists were made available to the INS and Customs for screening.
Passenger identification is now subject to even stricter scrutiny and the industry is working closely with the INS and other federal agencies to ensure that those passengers suspected of being on the INS "Prevent Departure" list are reported to the federal authorities for further action.
Another component of Level III Security requires ship operators to restrict access to authorized personnel and to identify restricted areas on the vessel that
5
require positive access control such as intrusion alarms, guards, or other measures to prevent unauthorized entry.
Restricted areas on a vessel will include the bridge, the engine room, and other areas throughout the ship where operations are conducted.
Other onboard security measures, not generally discussed for obvious reasons, are employed to maximize shipboard security and to deter unauthorized entry and illegal activity.
Every vessel has a trained security staff responsible for monitoring activities and responding to any suspicious activity that may jeopardize the safety of the passengers and crew.
For many years, the cruise industry has been pro-active in developing effective security measures and has looked for ways to increase passenger safety.
In fact, most ICCL member lines now utilize advanced technologies to control access to our vessels.
The Passenger Access Control System, that has been installed on most of our member's vessels, utilizes a passenger identification card that takes a picture of the passenger at the time of boarding and scans the picture into an onboard computer.
During the course of a cruise, the identification card is presented each time a passenger departs or boards the vessel.
The picture
appears on a computer screen that is matched against the person's face for identification purposes before they are allowed to board the ship.
This new
technology is part of an overall onboard security system that further enhances the proper identification of all passengers and crew boarding the vessel.
Since l998, ICCL and its member operators have been members of the U.S. Interagency Task Force on Passenger Vessel Security.
This group meets every 60
6
days to discuss emerging security issues, receive updated threat information, and address specific security concerns.
Since September 11, the ICCL Security and Operations Committee members have efficiently communicated and resolved problems in daily conference calls with all of the appropriate federal agencies.
This information exchange has proven to be valuable both to our member lines and the federal agencies involved as we mutually address matters impacting both ship operations and security.
We are committed to providing the highest levels of
security for our passengers and to working with appropriate federal agencies to address additional security measures that may become necessary.
Mr. Chairman, we in the cruise industry, believe that our security plans and working relationships with regulatory agencies are accomplishing many of the goals of the Port and Maritime Security Act of 2001.
The collaboration and cooperation of all agencies and industry exhibited since the events of September 11 are also accomplishing many of the goals of this legislation.
Of course all of the additional security measures that we have put in place are consuming resources and money at a rapid pace.
I would urge you to ensure that there is adequate funding that comes with any additional mandates that you place on agencies, ports or industry in this legislation.
These are challenging times, but our industry pledges its cooperation in working as partners to maintain the outstanding safety record of the cruise industry.
As I stated before, the highest priority of the cruise industry is to provide a safe and secure vacation experience for our passengers.
This country can and will unite to exercise one of our most cherished
7
freedoms, the freedom to travel.
It is up to us to ensure that we protect not only the freedom, but to ensure that those whose goal it is to disrupt our way of life are not successful.
We, in the cruise industry, will do everything possible to protect those who choose this outstanding and safe vacation option.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today.
GOD BLESS AMERICA.
8
