Quarterly Report July ­ September 2003 U.S. Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration Nuclear Safety and Emergency Cooperation 1.
Introduction The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) conducts activities to improve international nuclear safety and emergency cooperation.
The program helps to prevent nuclear incidents and accidents at foreign nuclear facilities, and mitigates consequences of accidents should they occur.
Program activities address significant nuclear safety concerns, and help the recipient countries to strengthen their nuclear safety cultures and to implement self-sustaining nuclear safety improvement programs.
Programs also improve emergency management capabilities so that a nation can respond effectively to an emergency, protecting the public and the environment.
This report provides status of the State/AID-funded activities in Armenia, Bulgaria, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine.
Information also is provided on DOE/NNSA-funded work in Russia, Lithuania, Bulgaria, and other countries.
2.
Project Activities A. Armenia Nuclear Safety Armenian officials indicate that the Armenia Nuclear Power Plant (ANPP) needs to operate until 2008-2015 to provide secure electric power.
International experts believe that more work is needed to address safety system, operational safety, safety analysis, and emergency management.
The program provides support to enable the plant to operate safely until practical energy supply alternatives are available, and to encourage Armenia to revise its energy strategy and include specific plans for plant closure and replacement capacity.
The financial management of ANPP was transferred to the Russian firm RAO-UES in order to finance nuclear fuel.
The control room computer information and warning system is being replaced to ensure that plant parameters and warning signals are reliably transmitted to the operators.
Training courses are being developed and implemented to train plant operators.
Operating procedures are being improved.
An important safety need is a full-scope training simulator.
Discussions at State indicated that the budget would not be able to support this item.
The EU/TACIS program is considering funding for this project.
ANPP is developing safety analysis documentation to clarify safety status and to meet regulatory requirements.
U.S. and Slovakian experts are providing support to ANPP and Armatom on deterministic analysis.
Plant drawings were verified to match current plant status, and a set of system descriptions was developed.
A RELAP5 computer analysis model was also developed.
1
The EU is providing support for a probabilistic analysis.
At the next project meeting in September, the U.S. team will work with Armenian experts to develop plans for a rigorous safety analysis report, including U.S., IAEA and Russian support.
Work is continuing to protect safety systems and safety components located in vital areas from sabotage.
Milestones · Safety System Upgrades.
Complete load sequencer and speed control upgrades to diesel generators (December 2004).
Complete emergency battery room cooling (September 2004).
· Operational Safety.
Replace the control room computer information and monitoring system (Summer 2004 outage).
Develop and implement electrical maintenance pilot training course (September 2003).
Improve the second set of operational procedures (September 2003).
· Safety Analyses and Documentation.
Complete peer review of probabilistic risk assessment (November 2003).
Complete deterministic safety analyses (March 2004).
Complete safety analysis report (December 2006) · Protection of plant safety systems and components located in vital areas.
Complete the first set of security upgrades (December 2004).
Complete second set of security upgrades (March 2005) Emergency Management The International Emergency Management and Cooperation (IEM
The program will also provide technical and training assistance, including an exercise program, tailored to specific needs and requests.
Assistance will focus on building and/or providing the core elements of an emergency program, including communications and networking equipment and training; development and implementation of procedures and policy for response; instruction of training personnel; readiness assurance (including exercise programs); and development and implementation of an exercise evaluation and appraisal program.
These core elements will be integrated into the national "command center" during an emergency.
This will enable Armenia to respond effectively to accidents in order to: notify, instruct, and protect affected populations; protect the environment; and protect workers.
The results of this program will be a more effective nuclear emergency response system, with data exchange between the nuclear power plant, the national command center, and the IAEA, for rapid, reliable communication in the event of an emergency.
Milestones · Provide surplus DOE equipment for personnel protection and radiation measurements (March 2004) · Conduct two training courses (June 2004) · Assist in development of full scale nuclear power plant emergency exercise (Dec 2004) · Complete training and monitor an emergency response exercise (Dec 2004) Radioactive Sources Armenia's radiation source control program has measures in place to ensure effective handling 2
and control of sources.
Tracking of sources by the Armenian Nuclear Regulatory Authority is effective, and once the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission supplies the computerized radiation source tracking system, the overall radiation source control program will be significantly strengthened.
Armenian officials requested training and personnel protection equipment as a priority.
DOE is searching inventories of surplus equipment with the intent of transferring such equipment to Armenian agencies and will be developing a training program that Armenian authorities can to implement and sustain in the future without assistance.
Milestones · Provide radiation monitoring equipment (October 2003) · Develop a radiation source handling and control training program.
This will be developed in conjunction with Armenia University to ensure the program will be sustained in country (June 2004) · Provide other equipment necessary to ensure safe handling and control of sources (June 2004)
B. Kazakhstan The United States and Kazakhstan signed an Implementing Arrangement in 1999 to assist with the irreversible shutdown of the BN-350 fast-breeder reactor in Aktau.
The reactor has been defueled and spent fuel packaged for long-term disposition, a decommissioning plan has been developed, and the decontamination of the sodium coolant is underway.
NNSA is providing technical and financial assistance to place the reactor in an irreversible and radiologically safe condition pending eventual dismantlement.
Objectives include: shutdown planning and regulatory guidance; upgrading safety, fire protection, and radiation monitoring systems; and sodium decontamination, draining, and processing.
These activities will render the breeder reactor inoperable, eliminate a source of weapons-grade material, and resolve nuclear safety and environmental concerns.
This project is being carried out in cooperation with Kazakhstan, the European Union's TACIS program, the IAEA, the United Kingdom, and Japan.
The entire U.S. program (1999-2006) will cost about $25 million, and continued funding is needed from DOE, State/AID, Nuclear Disarmament Fund, and the International Science and Technology Center.
A donors' conference is being planned for early 2004 to obtain funds for decommissioning activities.
Milestones: · Treatment of residual sodium in the reactor coolant loops after the sodium coolant is decontaminated and drained (December 2004).
· Design and construction of a sodium processing facility (final design by March 2004), with facility completion by March 2006.
· Placing the reactor in a safe storage condition, including pacification of the drained sodium (August 2007).
C. Ukraine Nuclear Power Plant Simulators and Training Well-trained operators are essential to the safe operation of nuclear facilities.
Eight simulator 3
projects have been completed.
The Zaporizhzhya unit 3 full-scope simulator is scheduled for completion in July 2005.
Training support was provided to each of the nuclear power plants to assist with the development of training programs based on the systematic approach to training methodology.
Current activities include: integrating the function of the safety parameter display systems into simulators at South Ukraine unit 3 and Zaporizhzhya unit 1; providing simulator training and engineering support; providing additional training technology transfer related to safety parameter display systems and emergency operating instructions; and providing simulation of the emergency control room function at Zaporizhzhya unit 5 (completion planned August 2003) and Rivne unit 2 (completion planned January 2004).
In-Depth Safety Assessments (ISA) Detailed safety assessments of nuclear facilities are needed to determine the most significant risks and to establish priorities for safety upgrades.
Initial Probabilistic Risk Analysis (PRA) results are available for three plants (South Ukraine, Rivne, and Zaporizhzhya).
The international peer review for the South Ukraine PRA indicates that the risk of the operating Ukrainian plants is somewhat higher than the desirable norm, and that the largest single risk contributor is operator error.
Reducing this risk of operator errors by implementing emergency operating instructions (EOIs) would bring the risk estimates into a more acceptable range (core damage frequency less than one ten thousandth per reactor year).
The ISAs are planned for completion in 2004/2005; however, reduced program funding will result in ISAs with some parts not completed.
Nuclear Fuel Qualification Program The Ukraine Nuclear Fuel Qualification Project (UNFQP) was formalized with a joint implementing agreement in 2000, in response to Ukraine's request for help to diversify the nuclear fuel supply, and as part of the Kharkiv Initiative.
Currently, Russia is the only vendor of fuel for Ukraine's nuclear power plants.
Assistance is being provided in the following areas: · · · · Technology transfer: equipment, documentation, computer codes for reactor core design, nuclear fuel safety analysis and licensing, and nuclear fuel use.
Training of specialists: performance-based training of personnel in nuclear fuel design, reactor core design, nuclear fuel safety analysis methodologies and licensing, nuclear fuel use, and project management.
Establishment of the Center for Reactor Core Design (CRCD) as the Ukraine organization responsible for nuclear fuel design, reactor core design, and associated nuclear safety and licensing of nuclear fuel.
Demonstrating the compatibility of U.S. nuclear fuel with the current Russian fuel.
(Contingent on receipt of additional funds.)
Westinghouse is responsible for nuclear fuel development and technology transfer.
Technical training of 13 CRCD specialists has been completed.
A plan for Ukrainian developed comments documentation needed for design, core compatibility and licensing approval by the participants has been prepared as a Technical Task Document.
This document was by Westinghouse and the CRCD and has been revised in a final version incorporating from the other Ukrainian project representatives.
4
A report on the compatibility assessment of U.S. fuel with Russian fuel was completed.
It shows that all reactor core operating and safety requirements are met.
Westinghouse has completed the design for a modified nuclear fuel.
Installation of this nuclear fuel will require modifications to the existing South Ukraine Nuclear Power Plant (SUNPP) reactor core monitoring system.
A proposed modification was developed by Westinghouse and is being reviewed with CRCD specialists.
The CRCD was established within the Kharkiv Institute of Physics and Technology, Nuclear Fuel Cycle Complex, and was designated by the Ministry of Fuel and Energy as the lead organization for the project.
CRCD experts are steadily developing expertise in nuclear fuel design, reactor core design, nuclear fuel safety methodologies and licensing, nuclear fuel use, and project management.
Activities include supporting Westinghouse's collection of nuclear fuel technical data, development of records management and quality assurance programs, and extensive training on current Russian nuclear fuel design.
The CRCD staff is integrated with the U.S.-based activities with quarterly meetings on technical and programmatic issues.
In light of the lower overall budget this year, the U.S. Department of State and U.S. Department of Energy are evaluating options to proceed with this project.
Milestones: · Install six nuclear fuel lead test assemblies at Energoatom's SUNPP in 2005.
(Contingent on receipt of additional funds.)
· Install one reload batch of 42 nuclear fuel assemblies for SUNPP by October 2007.
(Contingent on receipt of additional funds.)
Protection of Vital Areas from Sabotage Threats Protecting safety systems and components located in vital areas is an important element of nuclear safety.
Detection and alarm system upgrades, access control, physical barriers, and communication system upgrades, and related procedures and training have been completed at Khmelnytskyy unit 1.
Upgrades are in progress at Zaporizhzhya unit 1, scheduled to be completed in October 2003.
Upgrades are planned (if funded) at the remaining five reactors at the Zaporizhzhya plant with unit 3 scheduled for completion in December 2004, and the other units to be completed in 2006.
Nondestructive Examination and Safety Maintenance Nondestructive in-service inspection evaluates the integrity of nuclear safety systems and is an important element of nuclear safety.
The project assists Ukraine in improving the in-service inspection processes used for periodic maintenance of plant components and provides technology essential for implementing in-service inspection programs.
The project ensures the integrity of reactor piping and components.
A program that includes consumables manufacturing, advanced welding technology training, and personnel qualification and certification is being implemented to ensure the integrity of reactor primary piping and steam generators at all reactors.
Capital equipment and training have been provided for basic and advanced ultrasonic and eddy current testing of primary piping and steam generator piping.
A certification process that meets international standards has been developed and implemented and six ultrasonic specialists have successfully passed the American Society 5
for Nondestructive Testing Level III certification process for ultrasonic testing method.
A fabrication facility capable of manufacturing eddy current probes for in-service inspection of VVER steam generators is being developed.
This facility will fabricate eddy current probes that Ukraine plants are able to afford, thus providing a sustainable infrastructure for in-service inspection of steam generators.
Work underway includes: · Complete fabrication of an initial lot of eddy current probes for inspection of plant steam generators (September 2003) · Complete certification in eddy current methodology for eddy current specialists (November 2003) · Complete implementation of an ultrasonic in-service inspection performance demonstration documentation program (December 2003) · Assist the regulatory authority in developing basic regulatory guidance for eddy current inspection of steam generators (February 2004) Capacity Factor Improvements A study was completed that identified the potential for substantial improvements in the efficiency of Ukraine's nuclear power plants.
A demonstration of one of these improvements related to condenser vacuum was successfully completed at Rivne unit 3.
A second phase of the project involved a contractor working with Ukrainian counterparts and the Ukrainian Ministry of Energy to prepare a bankable program that Ukraine could submit to international financial institutions.
This project was successfully completed in June 2003.
Emergency Reactor Core Cooling Reliability Blockage of sump strainers during an accident could prevent emergency cooling systems from operating as designed.
Installing water-resistant insulation material can prevent the blockage of sump strainers.
Training and technology transfer to enable a Ukrainian firm, Askenn, to manufacture the NUKON insulation product, and a trial manufacturing run is in progress.
As a demonstration project, insulation is planned to be replaced at the South Ukraine nuclear power plant by December 2003.
The nuclear utility.
Energoatom, plans to work with Askenn on similar projects at the remaining reactors.
Operational Safety Operational safety activities improve the standards and procedures used by plant operators.
Activities include: development of quality assurance audit corrective action plans (completed December 2002); developing and implementing improved emergency operating instructions (EOIs) (Westinghouse is assessing status and developing the schedule); improving the system of event analysis and reporting (planned completion 2005); implementing a performance indicator system at each plant (planned completion 2003); and completing implementation and operation of a safety component reliability database system (2006).
Emergency Management The Office of International Emergency Management has been assisting Ukraine to develop the core elements of an emergency program.
These elements include communications and networking equipment and training; development and implementation of response procedures and policy; instruction of training personnel; readiness assurance (including exercise programs); and development and implementation of an exercise evaluation and appraisal program.
In 20036
2004, a satellite-based communications system will be provided to Energoatom so that the nuclear power plants and Energoatom headquarters can communicate in the event of an emergency.
It is important that the plants, which are repositories of technical skill, are integrated into the national "command center" during an emergency, enabling Ukraine to respond effectively to accidents in order to; notify, instruct, and protect affected populations; protect the environment; and protect workers.
The results of this program will be a more effective nuclear emergency response system with data exchange for rapid, reliable communication in the event of an emergency.
International Chornobyl Center The International Chornobyl Center improves nuclear safety and mitigates the socioeconomic impacts of Chornobyl's closure.
An effective infrastructure at the Center has been established and activities focus on upgrading the Center's professional and technical expertise necessary to promote self-sustainability.
Development of a comprehensive marketing plan and training on developing bid proposals have been completed.
Activities include helping staff obtain licenses and certifications in the areas of training, nuclear facility design, and quality assurance.
NNSA continues to follow progress in the Khmelnytskyy unit 2/Rivne unit 4 loan process.
D. Russia Russia has 30 operating civilian nuclear power plants, including 11 RBMK type reactors which are of special concern due to its design and lack of containment.
Russia plans to continue operating its RBMK reactors and its four old design VVER-440/230 reactors.
The program is concerned about continued operation of these plants, and encourages a rigorous process for life extension approvals, including use of in-depth safety assessments and regulatory involvement.
The program has been monitoring the safety improvements, the safety assessment, and regulatory process that was used to extend the operation of Novovoronezh units 3 and 4 (the oldest operating VVER reactor).
The United States is coordinating with G8 colleagues in the G8 Nuclear Safety and Security Group.
In support of these activities, NNSA experts are participating in the EBRD-sponsored independent peer review of the Kursk unit 1 in-depth safety assessment, which will be completed in 2004.
EBRD indicated that it does not plan to manage subsequent reviews, and none are planned.
NNSA is following Russia's plans to complete the construction of another RBMK type nuclear reactor, Kursk unit 5.
The Russians provided a technical briefing in June 2003.
DOE/NNSA funding for the Soviet-designed reactor safety program is ending, so no new projects are planned.
As part of a separate program to close the three plutonium production (ADE) reactors, near-term safety upgrades are planned.
In-Depth Safety Assessments (ISA) The ISA for Leningrad unit 2 was completed in 2002, and the ISA for unit 1 is scheduled for 7
completion in October 2003.
The program is encouraging the organization of a peer review of the Leningrad unit 2 ISA.
Initial work has been completed on a safety analysis code validation test program.
The first two tests, funded by NNSA, were completed in February 2003.
Additional tests are planned and are being sponsored by OECD/Nuclear Energy Agency, with partial funding from NNSA.
Safety Parameter Display Systems (SPDS).
SPDS systems were completed at 4 reactors, and will be done at Leningrad units 3 and 4 in 2004.
The Leningrad plant is receiving the SPDS manufactured before Nikiet sanctions were imposed.
Russia is financing installation and startup costs.
Simulators.
Six simulator projects have been completed.
The Volgodonsk full scope simulator is planned to be completed by April 2004.
Safety Issues Related to Plant Aging.
NNSA experts are working with Russian counterparts in the framework of an IAEA project to examine safety issues related to plant aging and continued operation.
Soviet-designed VVER440/230 reactors are being evaluated to identify issues and to determine next steps.
E. Lithuania Ignalina units 1 and 2 (RBMK type reactors) plan to operate until 2004 and 2009, respectively.
The control and protection project, the safety parameter display system project, safety analysis support, and training activities have been completed.
Support was provided to develop contracting specifications for a radiation monitoring system, and the plant has contracted for this work to be completed.
Upgrades to the unit 2 safety parameter display system will be completed in 2004.
Structural assessments of reactor building components and the steam generator system will be completed in 2003.
NNSA plans to support an interagency meeting with international nuclear safety experts in Vilnius in October.
The status of the diverse shutdown system for unit 2, and gap closure will be discussed.
Support on equipment and training to address pipe weld cracking is being discussed and depends on availability of funds.
8
F. Bulgaria Bulgaria's Kozloduy plant has four older VVER-440/230 reactors and two VVER-1000 reactors.
The oldest two reactors closed in December 2002.
Technical support is being provided to complete the development and implementation of emergency operating instructions, improve training, and conduct safety analyses.
An upgrade to the unit 5 full-scope simulator was completed in 2001, and an additional upgrade is planned with State/AID FY03 funds.
The initial meeting was held at GSE in July, with a meeting at Kozloduy nuclear power plant planned in September.
The $1.987 million funds transfer from AID to DOE has been completed.
G. Georgia Support and assistance has been provided to Georgia and the IAEA to locate, handle, and control radioactive sources.
Also, training and equipment was provided for the two large source surveys and several smaller survey operations conducted in Georgia.
The Office of International Emergency Management and Cooperation provided detection equipment to Georgia through the IAEA.
Management planning and training of Georgian and IAEA technical experts was accomplished with AID funding.
H. Research Reactors Projects to improve safety at research reactors are in progress in Romania, Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan.
At the research reactor in Tashkent, Uzbekistan, planned upgrades include reactor control and protection system, fire safety, and radiation monitoring.
At the research reactor in Alatau, Kazakhstan, planned upgrades include fire safety, reactor information system, and public announcement and alarm system.
Shutdown assistance is being provided for the research reactor in Magurele, Romania.
This includes decommissioning planning, radiation monitoring and air filtering.
A regional decommissioning workshop was conducted in Bucharest in May.
Safety assessments are planned for reactors in Latvia, Poland, and Ukraine.
9
