[news2001bug.jpg] [Site Selection....]
Fire Ants Still Marching Across State, Endangering People, Wildlife And Equipment
Contact: State Rep. James H. Dunegan Capitol: (405) 557-7366 Durant: (580) 924-0110 OKLAHOMA CITY (March 16) -- Because bipartisan points of view are clashing over a supplemental appropriation measure, fire ant research and control in Oklahoma are on hold due to insufficient funds.
House Bill 1564 passed the House by a split vote, 52-46, but the emergency failed to get the required two-thirds vote to pass.
House Democrats resurrected the emergency a day later, but it failed again due to a lack of Republican votes.
The supplemental appropriation measure bogged down in the House on an almost entirely partisan political vote.
Without the emergency provision, the bill, if passed, would not go into effect until three months after the Legislature adjourns in late May.
A fire ant task force met late last year and recommended $75,000 for further research to control or eradicate the red imported fire ant infestation that is rapidly approaching metropolitan Oklahoma City.
Rep. James H. Dunegan said there already are isolated reports of fire ants nesting in Oklahoma County.
"The $75,000 we're talking about is money that was not put in the budget last year.
It was short that amount of money, which was to go to Oklahoma State University for fire ant research," Dunegan explained.
Fire ants attack humans, kill wildlife and damage equipment, the Calera Democrat related.
During the fire ant task force meeting last December, professor Russell Wright, who heads Oklahoma State University's Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, pointed to financial woes.
"There is only $1,400 left in the fund for the remainder of the fiscal year (2000), and we're losing a valued researcher."
Dunegan said that money was depleted by the end of January.
"Because funding ran out, we had to release a well-qualified and nationally recognized researcher from the program.
Now we have to take a step back and start over again," Dunegan said.
Wright said during the task force meeting that the initial allocation from the state budget for fire ant research and control was $110,000 the first year, but was reduced to $60,000 the second year and $35,000 last year.
"While Texas and other states infected with red imported fire ants are spending millions of dollars on research and eradication, Oklahoma is struggling along with a budget far less," Dunegan said.
"But we are making breakthroughs."
The supplemental funding measure would contain $70 million to $96 million, "depending upon what the Legislature finally agrees upon," said Dunegan, a member of the House Committee on Appropriations and Budget.
Of that amount, "We're asking for $75,000 to control fire ants in 14 of Oklahoma's 77 counties, and over half of those counties are quarantined from moving agriculture products outside of their borders.
I'd say that's a small amount to help the people of those counties deal with what amounts to an epidemic."
People fail to recognize that many public parks in those 14 counties of southern Oklahoma are infested with the red imported fire ant, Dunegan said.
Families from metropolitan Oklahoma take advantage of those parks along with local citizens.
They are in danger of being bitten by the fire ants, but more important, the pesky critters can be transported by those visitors to un-infested areas of the state, he said.
"If my fellow Republican legislators understood that it's their constituents we're trying to protect from fire ants as well as the rest of the people of Oklahoma, I think they would understand the problem much better.
These are some of the things the state GOP should think about when they consider additional funding for fire ant research and control," Dunegan said.
"I think they're unaware that a man who lives in southern Oklahoma was called to eradicate fire ants carried into the Oklahoma City Zoo," Dunegan said.
"They also don't know that a red imported fire ant infestation was found in Stillwater."
Isolated fire ant sightings have been reported in several counties in Oklahoma, he said.
While mentioning reports from Texas where children cannot play in their back yards because of fire ant colonies, Dunegan said, "It's that serious in the 14 counties of Oklahoma, and it's spreading further north every year.
We're adding two to four counties each year as the fire ants march northward across Oklahoma.
It seems the weather or nothing else will stop them unless we intervene."
The northern-most boundary of red imported fire ant infestation in Oklahoma generally is acknowledged as a depth of three counties north of the Texas border and west of Ardmore toward Lawton, Dunegan said.
A 1999 report in the "Annals of Internal Medicine" details 10 cases of fire ant attacks on humans indoors -- in their own beds.
Three of the indoor victims died, and outdoor fire ant stings have caused at least 80 deaths in the country since the appearance of the red imported fire ant.
The report warns that infants and bedridden elderly are most at risk from the aggressive insects.
The report indicated the red imported fire ant has colonized more than 310 million acres in the U.S. and Puerto Rico.
In some areas, including New Orleans, La., and San Antonio, Texas, fire ants bite more than half of the human population each year.
One study showed that 51 percent of previously unexposed medical students were stung within three weeks of arriving in San Antonio.
Dunegan said he's heard horror stories of elderly nursing home residents who died from multiple stings from red imported fire ants.
The Environment News Service provided case histories of fatal fire ant attacks in nursing homes.
In August 1998, a 67-year-old woman in a Brookhaven, Miss., nursing home was found under attack by a swarm of ferocious fire ants during a 4 a.m. bed check.
She died five days later from at least 500 ant bites.
The woman could not walk without help and was confined to her bed.
A week after that attack, fire ants were discovered in the room of a 99-year-old patient in the same facility.
The nursing home had been inspected and treated by a pest control company only four days before the fatal attack.
In February 1997, a 60-year-old man in a Mississippi home was found covered with ants when checked early in the morning.
The man responded well to treatment, but he developed pneumonia and died of complications more than a year later.
That nursing home had been inspected by a pest control company one day before the attack, and no signs of fire ant infestation had been noted, according to the report.
As early as 1992, the Environment News Service reported a 5-day-old Alabama baby in a crib was attacked by fire ants.
The infant went into shock and coma, but survived.
A developmentally delayed 2-year-old suffered damage to his cornea when fire ants selectively attacked his eyes and head.
The red imported fire ant is believed to have arrived in the 1930s from South America to a port in Mississippi.
Their march has been relentless northward across the southern United States.
They cause property damage and are thought to be decimating some animal species.
According to the University of Texas at Austin, the horned lizard has disappeared from most of the range now dominated by the red imported fire ant.
The report indicates there may be other species of lizards or snakes that have been reduced in numbers due to the presence of the fire ants.
The university states the fire ants are at least indirectly responsible for the demise of the "horny toad."
Fire ants kill hatchling quail chicks and sting the noses and eyes of newborn deer in Texas.
Without question, the report notes, red imported fire ants can kill young birds, small mammals and reptiles.
But because quail populations fluctuate widely due to climatic changes, it is difficult to pinpoint the extent to which the fire ant might trigger population-wide collapse.
In 1998 the Associated Press blamed a major fish kill in the Guadalupe River on the fire ant infestation.
Texas wildlife officials estimated 22,000 trout were killed along a 15-mile stretch of the river after ingesting dead fire ants.
Red imported fire ants are toxic to fish.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department officials reported as many as 500 ants in the stomachs of trout.
A regional pollution biologist with the wildlife department said after winged male fire ants mate, they fall to the ground and die.
The fish eat the dead ants and they, too, die.
One of the greatest economic impacts and dangers posed by the red imported fire ant results from short-circuits and fires in electrical systems after fire ants move into circuit-breakers, relays, motors and other electrical devices, according to the University of Texas.
The fire ants appear to be drawn to magnetic fields generated by electricity surging through wires.
But all is not lost.
Dunegan said Oklahoma researchers want to control fire ants biologically, rather than using insecticides.
Some methods include releasing sterile fire ant males, using insect growth regulators and natural enemies like the phorid fly.
For example, the phorid fly lays its eggs inside the body of a fire ant, causing the ant's death.
In another example, fire ants infected with a micro-organism from South America were released in Hope, Ark., and Durant, Okla., to reduce the fire ant numbers.
The pathogen T. solenopsae infects ant colonies and chronically weakens them.
Worker ants transmit the pathogen to the queen through food exchange.
The disease slowly reduced the queen's weight and she lays fewer eggs, all infected with the pathogen, further weakening the colony.
Agricultural Research Service entomologist David Williams said the pathogen is proven to reduce fire ant numbers.
Colony elimination can take from nine months to a year and a half.
Lab studies indicated pathogen-infected ant colonies were significantly smaller than healthy colonies after three months.
The micro-organism does not harm plants or native ant species.
Dunegan said, "Not only are we using research and development to try to keep red imported fire ants from spreading north, but we're looking for an avenue to eradicate them.
Texas is seriously infested with them and it could happen in Oklahoma if fire ants aren't eradicated," he said.
Legislation Dunegan sponsored in 1998 formed the Oklahoma Fire Ant Research Management Advisory Committee.
The panel has met three times each year for the past three years to discuss ways of controlling the fire ant invasion.
The committee is an oversight panel which helps seek funding avenues, establishes new locations of fire ant infestations, and oversees chemical and biological control through test plots.
-- 30 --
Top Of Page
