[USEMAP:topmenu.gif] [home_button.gif]
* Sunni Muslim Arabs, Saddam's power base, live generally in the center of Iraq represent only 15 - 20% of the population.
* Shiite Muslim Arabs live mostly in the south of Iraq and represent 60-65% of the population.
* Sunni Muslin Kurds live in the north of Iraq and represent 15-20 percent of the population.
* Sunni Turkoman and Christian Assyrians make up 5% of the population.
I had a chance to visit parts of the homelands for all three dominant cultures - the Sunni Arabs in Baghdad and Tikrit, the Shiites in Babylon near Al Hillah and the Kurds in Mosul.
All the Iraqis we met were thankful that Saddam was gone.
Many expressed joy because they had hope for the first time.
All longed for the day when Iraqis would rule Iraqis.
Beyond that, there is a stark difference between the attitude of the Iraqi people in the Sunni triangle region and the rest of the country.
This in many ways reflects the difference in how they were treated during Saddam's rule.
The Sunni Arabs no longer receive preferential treatment, yet must endure the preponderance of remaining security concerns.
The 80%+ who are not Sunni Arabs suffered greatly from Saddam's persecution.
Although we provided some protection from Saddam after the 1991 Gulf War by maintaining southern and northern no-fly zones, he continued to brutally persecute them.
In total, 1.3 million Iraqis are missing and 300-500,000 are believed to be in mass graves.
The majority of Iraqis biggest fear is that America will leave too soon.
Sunni Arabs
Having never had the opportunity to meet the Iraqi army from this region in the field, we now must face the remnants from the Baathist regime in guerrilla combat.
The Saddam loyalists' ability to create turmoil in this region was greatly increased by Saddam releasing 100,000 prisoners and destroying their records just before the Allies took over, in part to create a ready pool of killers for hire.
The vast majority of Sunni Muslims are happy that Saddam is gone and do not support the Baathists' aims, yet they suffer from the ongoing conflict.
These murderers, rapists and thieves are not only a threat to American soldiers, but to the Iraqi people, especially in the Sunni triangle.
Concern about the rise in crime was a key concern expressed to me by the doctors I spoke with while touring a Baghdad hospital.
Continuing to improve the size and effectiveness of the Iraqi police force is critical to making them feel safe again.
The Police Academy I toured in Baghdad showed promise that an improved police force was on the way.
Though Saddam ruled the Sunni Arabs by terror too, they as a whole received preferential treatment.
As just one example, Iraq had three electrical grids - one for Saddam's palaces, a second one for Baghdad and the Sunni region and third one for the rest of the country.
The quality of the grid and the allocation of available power flowed in that order.
The Shiites and Kurds only got whatever power was left over
.
With electricity generation at near pre-war level, but being spread evenly, the Sunnis are worse off, yet the rest of the country is better off.
This obviously impacts the attitudes of the people.
Having gone from preferential treatment to bearing the brunt of the remaining conflicts and being treated the same as Shiites and Kurds has meant that Sunni Arabs have less evidence of an improved quality of life.
They are pleased to have Saddam gone and remain hopeful for the future, but must rely more heavily on that hope than other Iraqis.
Shiites Saddam's oppressions of the Shiites are too numerous to count.
Many were evident on our trip.
The first was a result of the Shiites revolt after Iraq's defeat in the 1991 Gulf War.
The Shiites' hope that U.S. troops would rescue them was unfulfilled and Saddam's army crushed the Shiite uprising within days.
We witnessed just one of the many mass graves in Iraq near Al Hillah where 3,000 bodies were recovered.
Another atrocity was evident as we flew over southern Iraq and saw dried up lands that once were the Fertile Crescent.
When Shiites hid in the marshes between the Tigris and Euphrates in southern Iraq during that the 1991 uprising, Saddam drained 90% of those marshes, depriving them of their ability to grow rice, an important source of food.
Saddam's serious neglect of the infrastructure in the Shiite south was evident as we flew to Al Hillah from Baghdad in Blackhawk helicopters.
Shiite's represent less than 15 percent of the world's Muslims and are primarily concentrated in Iran and southern Iraq.
Iran is trying to influence the outcome in Iraq, however the commander of the Marines in Al Hillah told us that most Shiites considered themselves Iraqis first.
He said that the vast majority of the Shiite population was very cooperative.
The Shiites indeed hope for a better future, and today are far better off than they were during Saddam's regime.
My most striking memory of the Shiite south was the children who ran to the end of their country driveway to excitedly wave at us as we passed.
Kurds
Saddam's most famous persecution of the Kurds was when Iraqi aircraft shelled Halabja with chemical weapons on March 16, 1988, in an attack that left 5,000 dead and 7,000 injured or with long-term illnesses.
Estimates of how many Kurds were killed during Saddam's genocidal campaign vary from 50,000 to 180,000.
The Kurds again rose in revolt despite heavy-handed Iraqi military attacks and in 1992 the Kurds established an "autonomous region" in northern Iraq.
Two rival factions, the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, engaged in sporadic warfare during the 1990s, but in 1999 the two groups agreed to end hostilities and they now work in harmony.
Under the protection of the no fly zone enforced by America and Britain, the Kurdish autonomous region flourished relative to the rest of Iraq.
Having met with the governor of the predominantly Kurdish northern region while in Mosul, I can say that Kurds are unabashedly pro-American.
Significant concerns remain, including the resolution of formerly Kurdish land that was re-settled with Arabs by Saddam.
But, America has showed itself to be a beneficial and reliable partner to the Kurds and they stand strongly with us.
Christian Assyrians
Though I did not meet with any Christian Assyrians while in Iraq, I subsequently met with an Assyrian pastor who visited Iraq from his home in Japan before and after the war.
He reports that the Assyrians are hopeful that America's influence will result in a secular constitution to protect religious minorities.
He first went to Iraq before the war as a peace protestor to serve as a human shield.
While there, the Iraqi natives convinced him that their best hope was for America to wage war against Saddam.
His relatives in Iraq tell him that they hope America will maintain a long-term presence in Iraq, just as we continue to do in Japan, to secure individual liberties.
Congressman Mark Kennedy | 6th District Minnesota | Privacy Policy
