NASA Spacelink Where am I? NASA Spacelink Home The Library NASA Projects Human Exploration and Development of Space Human Space Flight Shuttle Shuttle Missions Flight 059 STS-61 MCC Status Reports [horizontal line]
CST
The space shuttle Endeavour lit up the Florida skies this morning as the STS-61 crew began the first Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission.
The on-time launch at 3:27 a.m.
CST went off from the Kennedy Space Center without problems and Endeavour achieved its desired 308 by 214-nautical mile orbit some eight minutes later.
All systems are working well.
Shortly after reaching orbit, the STS-61 crew began checking Endeavour's systems and payload bay in preparation for the 11-day servicing mission with its record five space walks.
Mission Specialist Kathy Thornton sent birthday greetings to her eight-year-old daughter Laura, remarking about the special "candles" --the solid rocket boosters--that were lit for the occasion.
At 8:51 a.m.
Commander Dick Covey will fire the orbital maneuvering system for the first burn to set Endeavour on course for a Saturday rendezvous with Hubble.
Then the astronauts will settle down for an eight- hour sleep period and wake up at 6:57 p.m. CST to begin their first full day in space.
------------------------------[93-12-02b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #2 MISSION CONTROL CENTER Thursday, December 2, 1993, 6 p.m. CST
Endeavour's crew members will check out their space suits and continue chasing the Hubble Space Telescope during their second day in space as they prepare for the servicing tasks scheduled for later in the mission.
The primary activity for STS-61's Flight Day 2 is the checkout of the Extravehicular Mobility Units for Jeff Hoffman, Story Musgrave, Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers.
During the procedure, the astronauts will verify that the suits' communications and life support systems are all functioning as expected.
After all four units are checked, the suits will be ready for the first of the five spacewalks on Sunday.
Also in preparation for the EVAs, astronauts will check out Endeavour's robot arm and depressurize the crew cabin slightly from its current 14.7 psi to 10.2 psi.
At crew wake up, Endeavour was about 2,500 miles behind the Hubble Space Telescope, closing at a rate of 210 nautical miles per orbit.
Two jet firings are planned Friday morning to slowly close the distance between the orbiter and the telescope, and set up the final rendezvous and retrieval on Saturday morning.
Though the engine burn plan will be updated throughout the day, the NSR burn is set for Orbit 17 at about 5:35 a.m.
Central (1/02:08 MET), and the NC-2 burn is set for Orbit 19 at about 7:44 a.m.
Central (1/04:17 MET).
Both jet firings will adjust the closing rate between Endeavour and Hubble.
The NSR burn was moved one orbit earlier to give controllers and crew members more time between it and the NC-2 burn.
An NPC burn which was designed to place Endeavour in the same plane as Hubble will not be needed due to the orbiter's performance on ascent.
The orbiter is performing without any major system anomalies as it makes its fifth space flight.
Endeavour is currently in a 308 by 272 n.m. orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-03a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #3
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #3
Friday, December 3, 1993, 8 a.m.
CST
Endeavour's astronauts spent their second day in space closing in on the Hubble Space Telescope for the capture early tomorrow morning.
The following is a summary of the day's events, and all times given are in Central Standard Time.
The crew started its day Thursday night with a 6:57 p.m. wake-up call featuring the tune "Cosmos."
Soon after, spacewalkers Story Musgrave, Jeff Hoffman, Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers checked out the life support, power and communication systems of their four Extravehicular Mobility Units, or space suits, and found them ready for Saturday's first servicing EVA. European Space Agency astronaut Claude Nicollier gave the robotic arm system a warm up and used its TV camera to verify that payload bay equipment was in excellent condition.
Nicollier also received a congratulatory message from Adolf Ogi, president of the Swiss Confederation.
Later, Nicollier, Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox participated in an early morning interview with the Associated Press.
The crew also depressurized the orbiter's cabin atmosphere from 14.7 to 10.2 psi to reduce the amount of time Musgrave and Hoffman must breath pure oxygen before taking their first space walk.
The Hubble Space Telescope's Wide Field Planetary Camera and High Speed Photometer completed their last observations of the solar system before the observatory's aperture door was closed about 5 a.m.
The Space Telescope Operations Control Center at Goddard Space Flight Center also sent commands to the Telescope to move into its proper solar inertial attitude for tomorrow's rendezvous with the shuttle.
Before Endeavour's crew members settle down for their eight-hour sleep period beginning just before 10 a.m. today, Covey completed the two orbiter maneuvering burns to move Endeavour closer to HST.
The NSR burn was performed at 7:11 a.m. and the NC-2 burn about a half hour later.
The crew will be awakened around 6 p.m. Friday night for the final phase of the rendezvous with Hubble.
At approximately 1 a.m.
Saturday, another burn will put the orbiter 8 nautical miles behind HST with grapple to follow around 3:10 a.m.
About an hour later, HST will be berthed in Endeavour's payload bay, after which the crew will get to visually check the observatory for the first time in three-and-a-half years.
All Endeavour's systems are performing very well.
Endeavour circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 317 by 303 nautical mile orbit, closing in on HST at a rate of 60 nautical miles per orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-03b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #4
Mission Control Center Friday, December 3, 1993, 6 p.m. CST
As the Space Shuttle Endeavour gained ground on the Hubble Space Telescope in preparation for an early morning rendezvous and grapple, the seven-member crew was awakened to the strains of "Here I Come" by Rare Earth.
All of Endeavour's systems continued to function well as the crew got a full day's sleep in preparation for this evening's exacting rendezvous ballet.
Endeavour is circling the Earth every 95 minutes in a 317 by 303 nautical mile orbit, about 190 nautical miles behind HST at the beginning of the third flight day and closing the distance between the orbiter and telescope at 60 nautical miles per orbit.
The closing speed will remain the same until the next reaction control system firing, scheduled for 8:34 p.m. CST (MET 1/17:07).
The NH burn will change the shuttle's velocity by 4.6 feet per second, adjusting the high point of Endeavour's orbit and fine-tuning its course toward a point 40 miles behind HST.
The next burn, an orbital maneuvering system firing designated NC3, is scheduled for 9:22 p.m.
(MET 1/17:55) and will change Endeavour's velocity by 12.4 feet per second.
That burn will adjust Endeavour's catch-up rate to about 16 nautical miles per orbit and put it 8 n.m. behind HST two orbits later.
A third burn of just 1.8 feet per second, called NPC and designed to fine tune two spacecrafts' ground tracks, is scheduled for 9:58 p.m. CST (MET 1/18:31).
The multiaxis RCS terminal initiation or "TI" burn, which places Endeavour on an intercept course with HST and sets up Commander Dick Covey's manual control of the final stages of the rendezvous, is set for 12:35 a.m.
(MET 1/21:08).
Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier is scheduled to grapple HST with the orbiter's 50-foot robot arm at about 2:45 a.m.
Saturday as Endeavour passes over Australia and the South Pacific.
Berthing in the payload bay is expected at about 3:47 a.m.
CST, and a survey using the robot arm cameras is set to begin at 4:08 a.m.
CST.
Earlier in the day, controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center uplinked commands to stow HST's two high-gain antennae.
Controllers received indications that both antennae had nested properly against the body of the telescope, but microswitches on two latches of one antenna and one latch on the other did not send the "ready to latch" signal to the ground.
Controllers decided not to attempt to close the latches, as the antennae are in a stable configuration.
The situtation is not expected to affect plans for rendezvous, grapple and servicing of the telescope, however flight controllers are working on plans for additional visual inspections during the camera survey.
###
------------------------------[93-12-04a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #5
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #5
Saturday, December 4, 1993, 8 a.m.
CST
The third day of the STS-61 Hubble Space Telescope servicing mission included the successful rendezvous, grapple and berthing of the HST in the Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay.
Commander Dick Covey maneuvered Endeavour within 30 feet of the free-flying HST before Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier used Endeavour's robot arm to grapple the telescope at 2:48 a.m.
CST when the orbiter was several hundred miles east of Australia over the South Pacific.
Nicollier berthed the telescope in the shuttle's cargo bay at 3:26 a.m.
CST.
"Houston, Endeavour has a firm handshake with Mr. Hubble's Telescope," Commander Dick Covey told ground controllers after the shuttle's robot arm had grappled the telescope.
When Endeavour captured the HST, the telescope had traveled 530 million miles and made 19,695 orbits of the Earth since it was placed in orbit in April 1990.
Following the berthing of the telescope, crew members and ground controllers used cameras mounted on the robot arm to conduct a visual survey of the HST giving observers their first look at the telescope in three-and-a-half years.
During visual surveys of the HST , crew members and ground controllers saw a kink and twisting in the outer bi-stem of one of two solar arrays on the telescope.
However , after review HST program managers decided to follow the pre-flight plan for rolling up and retracting the solar arrays at the end of the first extravehicular activity or spacewalk at about 5:30 a.m.
CST Sunday.
The stowage of the solar arrays is a two step process with the initial step involving the rolling up of the solar arrays and the second step involving the actual folding up of the arrays against the telescope.
The solar arrays provide power to the telescope.
Each array stands on a four foot mast that supports a retractable wing of solar panels 40 feet long and 8.2 feet wide.
Crew members' sleep period begins at 9:57 a.m.
CST and they will awaken at 5:57 p.m. CST today to begin their fourth flight day activities which will include the first extravehicular activity or spacewalk.
Mission specialists Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman will leave the orbiter's airlock at about 10:52 p.m. CST today to begin the servicing tasks on the telescope.
Musgrave and Hoffman, sometimes referred to as "The Odd Couple" because they will go on the first, third and fifth spacewalks scheduled during this mission, will reenter the airlock at about 5:07 a.m.
CST Sunday.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 319 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-04b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #6
Mission Control Center Saturday, December 4, 1993, 6 p.m. CST
With the Hubble Space Telescope firmly anchored in Endeavour's payload bay, the seven-member crew was awakened at 5:57 p.m. CST to make ready for the first of five planned space walks.
Flight controllers uplinked the song "Fanfare for the Common Man" by Aaron Copland to start the day for Commander Dick Covey, Pilot Ken Bowersox and Mission Specialists Tom Akers, Jeff Hoffman, Story Musgrave, Claude Nicollier and Kathy Thornton.
Musgrave and Hoffman are scheduled to step out of the orbiter's airlock at about 10:52 p.m. CST, but the six-hour space walk could begin as early as 10 p.m. if onboard preparations allow.
The primary tasks for the first space walk are the replacement of the two gyroscope rate sensor unit packages, two electronic control units and eight fuse plugs that protect HST electrical circuits.
At the start of the space walk, Musgrave and Hoffman will secure HST for the in-space work week by installing protective covers on the aft low gain antenna and exposed voltage bearing connector covers.
At the end, they will set up the payload bay for Akers and Thornton, who will replace the two solar arrays the following day.
At midnight, controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center will prepare the telescope for servicing by powering down rate sensor units 2 and 3 and disabling their heaters.
At 3:50 a.m., they will turn off elements of the observatory that are powered through fuse plugs that will be replaced; those elements will be powered up again at 4:30 a.m.
After the rate sensor units are replaced, controllers will check whether they are "alive" at 4:40 a.m.
Functional testing of all the telescope's gyros will begin at 8:27 a.m., and functional testing of the fuse plugs will begin at 11:10 a.m.
The STOCC will start the 73-minute-long retraction of the two solar arrays at 6:10 a.m.
During a post-grapple survey of the telescope with the shuttle's robot arm cameras, the crew pointed out significant bowing and a kink in one of the bi-stem frame supports.
The European Space Agency- built solar arrays are expected to retract in spite of the deformities, said Derek Eaton, ESA's project manager.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
###
------------------------------[93-12-05a]
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #7
Sunday, December 5, 1993, 7 a.m.
CST
Spacewalking STS-61 crew members Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman completed several servicing tasks and wrestled with balky gyro doors on the Hubble Space Telescope early Sunday morning during this mission's first of five ambitious spacewalks.
Musgrave and Hoffman began their spacewalk about an hour earlier than scheduled by stepping out into the cargo bay about 9:44 p.m CST Saturday.
The two astronauts, who both are veteran spacewalkers, meticulously stepped through their assigned servicing tasks on the HST, which is anchored in the Space Shuttle Endeavour's cargo bay.
After leaving the airlock and moving into the cargo bay, the duo prepared the telescope, which towered above them, for a week full of work by installing protective covers on the aft low gain antenna and exposed voltage bearing connector covers.
During the seven hour and 54 minute spacewalk, Musgrave and Hoffman successfully changed out the rate sensing units and the electronics control unit.
The RSUs are pairs of gyroscopes on the telescope which are required to point and track HST.
The astronauts also changed out eight fuse plugs that protect the telescope's electrical circuits.
Hubble now has a full set of six healthy gyroscopes.
The astronauts struggled with the latches on the gyro door when two of four gyro door bolts did not reset after the astronauts installed two new gyro packages.
Engineers who evaluated the situation speculated that when the doors were unlatched and opened, a temperature change might have caused them to expand or contract enough to keep the bolts from being reset.
With the efforts of determined astronauts in Endeavour's payload bay and persistent engineers on the ground, all four bolts finally latched and locked after the two spacewalkers worked simultaneously at the top and bottom of the doors.
Musgrave anchored himself at the bottom of the doors with a payload retention device which enabled him to use some body force against the doors.
Hoffman, who was attached to the robot arm, worked at the top of the doors.
The duo successfully latched the doors when they simultaneously latched the top and bottom latches.
The spacewalkers also set up the payload bay for mission specialists Tom Akers and Kathy Thornton who will replace the telescope's two solar arrays during the second spacewalk scheduled to begin at 10:52 p.m. CST today.
The solar arrays provide power to the telescope.
In anticipation of that spacewalk, Musgrave and Hoffman prepared the solar array carrier which is located in the forward portion of the cargo bay, and attached a foot restraint on the telescope to assist in the solar array replacement.
Musgrave and Hoffman's spacewalk became the second longest spacewalk in NASA history.
The longest spacewalk occurred on STS-49 in May 1992 during Endeavour's maiden flight.
Spacewalking crew members during that flight were Tom Akers, Richard Hieb and Pierre Thuot.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-05b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #8
MISSION CONTROL CENTER
Sunday, December 5, 1993, 6 p.m. CST
STS-61 Mission Specialists Tom Akers and Kathy Thornton are scheduled to make their first space-suited foray into Endeavour's payload bay tonight to replace the Hubble Space Telescope's solar arrays.
It will be the second of five space walks scheduled for the mission.
The seven-member crew was awakened at 5:57 p.m. CST with the song "With a Little Help from My Friends" by The Beatles.
Controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center will power down the solar array electronics boxes at 8:20 p.m. CST and configure them for changeout.
The STOCC team will monitor the changeout throughout the space walk, then conduct a 23-minute aliveness test on the new arrays at 2:25 a.m.
CST.
The replanned time to start the extravehicular activity is 9:47 p.m. CST (MET 3/18:20).
The first chore will be detaching and jettisoning the right solar array, which failed to completely retract because of a kink in its bi-stem framework.
Thornton will step into a foot restraint on Endeavour's robot arm, and Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier will move her into position alongside the array.
Thornton will install a transfer handle and attach it to the balky array.
While she is holding onto the array with the handle, Akers will disconnect the array at the telescope body.
The electrical connections will be broken when the shuttle is in darkness and the array's photovoltaic cells are not generating power.
Nicollier will then use the arm to boost her and the array above the payload bay.
Thornton will release the array no earlier than 10:43 p.m. CST (MET 3/19:16), imparting no motion, and Nicollier will move her back down into the cargo bay.
After Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox maneuver the shuttle away from the drifting array, the two space walkers will install its replacement.
Akers and Thornton will then remove the array that retracted completely and stow it in its payload bay carrier.
Next, they will install its replacement.
Preparations for jettisoning of the right solar array are expected to take about half an hour to complete, and the entire space walk is scheduled to last about six hours.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 96 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-06a]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #9
Mission Control Center Monday, December 6, 1993, 8 a.m.
CST
Spacewalking STS-61 astronauts Tom Akers and Kathy Thornton, working in the Space Shuttle Endeavour's payload bay, successfully jettisoned a bent solar array and installed two new solar arrays on the Hubble Space Telescope during a six hour and 36 minute spacewalk that ended at 4:05 a.m.
CST Monday.
During a Monday morning press briefing, HST managers applauded the crew's performance.
"I believe that the first objective has been met," said Joe Rothenberg, HST flight project director.
"We can handle on-orbit servicing and we can handle contingencies."
The early Monday spacewalk marked the second extravehicular activity in as many days during the HST servicing mission.
Crew members are expected to perform three more spacewalks during this mission.
Akers and Thornton spent the duration of their spacewalk working with the telescope's solar arrays which provide power to the four-story tall orbiting observatory.
The spacewalking duo began their work in the payload bay at about 9:29 p.m. CST Sunday.
At about 10:51 p.m. CST, Thornton, who was positioned at the end of Endeavour's robot arm alongside one of the arrays, attached a transfer handlebar to the right solar array which failed to completely retract on Sunday because of a kink in its bi-stem framework.
Akers then disconnected the array at the telescope body and its electrical connections were broken before Thornton released the array above the payload bay.
After Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier, the robot arm operator from the shuttle's flight deck, moved Thornton back down into the cargo bay, Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox maneuvered the shuttle away from the drifting array.
The astronauts and ground observers got a long last view of the kinked solar panel and observed its solar blankets flutter as they felt the shuttle's gentle firing pulses.
"It looks like a bird," Thornton told ground flight controllers as the array drifted away from the shuttle.
Scientists have estimated it will take the discarded solar array about one year to re-enter the Earth's atmosphere where it will burn up.
At about 11:17 p.m. CST, Thornton used the transfer handle once again to lift one of the new solar arrays from the solar array carrier in Endeavour's payload bay and into position on the telescope where it was installed.
Thornton and Akers then manually folded down the other old solar array which had been automatically rolled up Sunday, and at about 2 a.m.
CST Akers tied the old array into position in the solar array carrier.
The old solar array will be returned to Earth for study.
Just before 3 a.m.
CST Monday, the spacewalking astronauts completed the installation of the second solar array and a few minutes later controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center in Greenbelt, Maryland, confirmed that both of the new solar arrays were electrically alive and well.
The new solar arrays will be unfurled after the fifth spacewalk is completed early Thursday.
At about 4:05 a.m.
CST as the spacewalking astronauts were wrapping up their payload bay activities, CAPCOM Greg Harbaugh congratulated Akers who had just broken the record for longest EVA time in the shuttle era by logging in 22 hours and 50 minutes, surpassing fellow astronaut Jerry Ross' record by one minute.
"Thanks, but I'm afraid it'll be short lived," Akers said, referring to his new record entry.
At the end of the EVA as the two spacewalkers had re-entered the airlock, Thornton reported ear problems.
As a result, the airlock was depressurized and then repressurized at a slower rate until the airlock's pressure reached the 10.2 pounds per square inch requirement.
Crew members' sleep period begins at 9:57 a.m.
CST and they will wake up at 5:57 p.m. CST today to begin their sixth flight day activities.
The mission's third spacewalk will highlight the sixth flight day.
EVA astronauts Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman, who performed this mission's first EVA, once again will step into the payload bay where they will changeout the telescope's wide field/planetary camera.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-06b]------------------------------ MCC STATUS #10
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #10
Monday, December 6, 1993, 7 p.m. CST
Mission Specialists Jeff Hoffman and Story Musgrave will put on their space work clothes for the second time about 9:47 p.m. CST tonight for a four-hour replacement of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera and a one-hour installation of two new magnetometers.
The seven-member crew of Endeavour was awakened at 6:02 p.m. Monday by flight controllers who played "Doctor My Eyes" by Jackson Browne.
Hoffman will step into a foot restraint on Endeavour's robot arm for the WF/PC swap, and Musgrave will be on a portable foot restraint anchored near the WF/PC opening on the Hubble Space Telescope.
Both astronauts will be anchored on the end of the robot arm for the magnetometer installation.
Controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center will begin powering down WF/PC I at 11:15 p.m., then begin reconfiguring their equipment to support the new WF/PC II.
On the aft flight deck, Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier will drive the robot arm, moving Hoffman into position to grasp WF/PC I. Musgrave will help stabilize the instrument as Hoffman slowly pulls WF/PC I out along its guide rails, pausing to allow Nicollier to reposition the arm.
Before WF/PC I is completely removed, the trio will conduct a practice session to prepare for installation of WF/PC II.
As Hoffman is placing the old camera in a temporary parking fixture in the payload bay, Musgrave will inspect the WF/PC orifice and begin preparing the new camera for removal from its transport container.
The pair will then attach a transfer handle to the new camera and pull it out of the transport canister.
Before Hoffman begins installing the new camera into the body of the telescope, Musgrave will remove a protective mirror cover.
Then, the astronauts will carefully align the new camera on its guide rails and insert it into the telescope.
STOCC controllers will conduct an "aliveness" test on the new camera at 1:20 a.m.
Tuesday, and begin functional tests about 4:40 a.m.
A science data dump will recover images from the functional tests for processing by the WF/PC Instrument Development Team as early as 7:35 a.m.
Results of those tests should be available within 30 minutes.
The telescope will be tilted forward on its work platform so that the robot arm can reach the top of the telescope, where the magnetometers are located.
STOCC controllers will configure the first magnetometer for replacement about 1:40 a.m.
After the astronauts install the first new unit, the STOCC will conduct functional tests about 3 a.m.
After those tests are complete, the space walkers will install the second unit and the STOCC will conduct its functional tests about 3:20 a.m.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
###
------------------------------[93-12-07a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #11
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #11
Tuesday, December 7, 1993, 7 a.m.
CST
The flawless installation of the Wide Field/Planetary Camera II early Tuesday morning highlighted the third back-to-back spacewalk to service the Hubble Space Telescope.
"Ohhh, look at that baby, it's a beautiful spanking new Wifpic," space walking astronaut Jeff Hoffman said as he pulled the replacement Wide Field/Planetary Camera II out of its storage locker about 11:24 p.m. CST Monday.
"We'll see some nice pictures with that."
Following the removal and storage of the original WF/PC which will be returned to Earth for post-flight analysis, STS-61 space walking astronauts Story Musgrave and Hoffman installed the 620 pound camera about 12:05 a.m.
CST Tuesday while in the Space Shuttle Endeavour's payload bay.
The camera sits just below the telescope's midpoint.
About 35 minutes after the installation was complete, ground controllers reported that the camera had passed the first electrical "aliveness" test, as it is called.
"I hope we have alot of scientists eager to use this beautiful thing," Hoffman said after the installation.
The space walking duo completed the installation of the camera in record time.
Pre- flight predictions provided a four hour time slot for the detailed installation.
The original camera experienced focusing problems shortly after the telescope's deploy in April 1990.
The problems were attributed to a manufacturing flaw in the telescope's 94-inch wide primary mirror.
Blurred photographs were the result of the flaw.
The new camera has four small precisely ground mirrors that should remove the blur by focusing the stray light of the telescope's primary reflector.
Hoffman and Musgrave also installed two new magnetometers during their six hour and 47 minutes spacewalk.
The astronauts began the third spacewalk at 9:35 p.m. CST Monday, more than an hour earlier than planned pre-flight.
The magnetometers , which are located at the top of the telescope, sense the magnetic field in three directions and are needed to keep the Hubble's momentum wheels operating with optimal efficiency.
At the end of today's third spacewalk, Musgrave had accumulated a total of 19 hours doing spacewalks and Hoffman had racked up a total of 17 hours and 51 minutes.
Both astronauts have been on three separate spacewalks, two of which have occurred on STS-61.
Musgrave was the first person in the shuttle program to conduct a spacewalk and he did so on STS-6.
Hoffman's first spacewalk occurred on STS-51D.
Crew members will begin their sleep period at 9:57 a.m.
CST and flight controllers will awaken them at 5:57 p.m. CST today.
Musgrave will begin his seventh day in space with a television interview at 8:27 p.m. CST today.
He will talk with Ted Koppel, the host of the ABC news program Nightline.
The interview is expected to last about 15 minutes.
Following the interview, crew members will devote their attention to the fourth spacewalk scheduled for this mission.
During tonight's spacewalk, astronauts Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers will replace the telescope's high-speed photometer with the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement.
The COSTAR has 10 small mirrors that should properly focus light from the Hubble camera's primary reflectors.
Thornton and Akers are scheduled to begin their spacewalk at 10:52 p.m. today.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-07b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #12
MISSION CONTROL CENTER Tuesday, December 7, 1993, 6 p.m. CST
STS-61 Mission Specialists Tom Akers and Kathy Thornton are getting ready for their second space walk -- the fourth of a record five planned for STS-61 -- to install the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement unit and a computer coprocessor.
In addition, the two space walkers hope to perform some easy activities to prepare for the installation of insulation around two of the Hubble Space Telescope's old magnetometers after space walkers Jeff Hoffman and Story Musgrave discovered that parts of one of the unit's shell had come loose.
Akers and Thornton are expected to step out of the airlock about 9:52 p.m. CST.
Their first chore will be . removal of the High Speed Photometer from the telescope and the installation of the COSTAR package in its place.
The 7 by 3-foot package is designed to correct for the spherical aberration in the telescope's primary mirror before light reaches its faint imaging systems.
Controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center will turn off the power to the HSP before Thornton, on the end of the shuttle's robot arm, opens the access door latches with a power ratchet tool.
Akers will climb inside the compartment and disconnect the HSP before helping Thornton remove it along guide rails.
Thornton will grasp the HSP with handles while Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier maneuvers her and the phone booth-sized instrument out of the compartment and onto a temporary parking fixture on the side of the payload bay.
Thornton then will be positioned above the COSTAR storage canister so that she can grasp its handles, and with the help of Nicollier and the arm, pull it out of its storage compartment and position it in front of the access door.
Akers will again enter the instrument compartment and help align COSTAR on the HSP guide rails.
Together, they will insert COSTAR into the cavity, and Akers will tighten its fasteners and reattach electrical cables.
The COSTAR installation is expected to take about 3 hours, 10 minutes, and will be followed by power-up and aliveness testing by the STOCC.
A functional test of COSTAR will begin about six hours later.
After Hubble is rotated on its lazy Susan and the STOCC turns off the telescope's computer, the two space walkers will turn their attention to increasing its speed and memory with the installation of a 386 coprocessor.
Akers, who will be on the end of the robot arm for this job, will open the protective enclosure that houses the onboard computer.
Thornton will carry the coprocessor from its storage compartment to the telescope, where Akers will remove the existing flight computer's handles.
Thornton will install them on the coprocessor, mount it to the resulting handle mounting holes with four bolts and make the appropriate electrical connections.
The entire operation is expected to take about 1 hour, 40 minutes, and will be followed by a full checkout of the coprocessor.
About five hours later, the STOCC will completely reconfigure the computer and its flight software.
If time allows, the space walkers then will collect some aluminized kapton and dacron mesh multilayer insulation for placement around the telescope's two old magnetometers during the fifth space walk.
The seven-member crew was awakened at 5:57 p.m. CST Tuesday to the sounds of Johnny Nash singing "I Can See Clearly Now" as all of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well.
The shuttle is circling the globe once every 96 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
###
------------------------------[93-12-08a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #13
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #13
Wednesday, December 8, 1993, 8 a.m.
CST
STS-61 crew members performed brain and eye surgery on the Hubble Space Telescope early Wednesday with the successful installation of the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement unit and a computer co-processor.
Astronauts Kathy Thornton and Tom Akers begain the mission's fourth spacewalk at 9:13 p.m. CST Tuesday.
Once in the Space Shuttle Endeavour's payload bay, the duo removed the blurred High Speed Photometer from the telescope and installed the COSTAR in its place, completing the task about 11:35 p.m. CST Tuesday.
The COSTAR is designed to correct for the spherical aberration in the telescope's primary mirror before light reaches its faint imaging systems.
The corrective optics will compensate for the problem, like eyeglasses or contacts correct human sight.
Following the installation, ground controllers performed a successful "aliveness" test of the instrument which checks its communications, telemetry and electrical continuity.
Spacewalkers Thornton and Akers conducted the COSTAR installation in record time, completing the task in 35 minutes.
It had been predicted that the task would take three hours and 10 minutes.
Thornton and Akers then placed the blurred High Speed Photometer into the storage locker that previously had held the COSTAR instrument and moved to their next task, the installation of a new co- processor, in the payload bay about 1:25 a.m.
CST Wednesday.
The co-processor will enhance the telescope's memory capability and enable it to process data faster.
Ground controllers, at about 3:41 a.m.
CST, reported that the co-processor had powered up successfully.
Astronauts disconnected the telescope's computer while installing the co-processor, a procedure roughly equivalent to major surgery on a human being, scientists said.
"Essentially what we were doing was brain surgery," said Ken Ledbetter, HST program manager, during a press briefing Wednesday.
"In a day or so, hopefully, the patient will be ready to walk on its own."
Referring to the COSTAR installation, HST senior project scientist Dr. Dave Leckrone added, "We also conducted eye surgery on the telescope."
HST scientists said they hope to complete the initial checkout of the telescope and receive its first images within six to eight weeks.
However, it will be about 13 weeks before a comprehensive checkout of the orbiting observatory is completed, they said.
During Wednesday's six hour and 50 minute spacewalk, Akers broke the all-time American space - walking record previously set by Eugene Cernan, who had accumulated a total of 24 hours and 14 minutes performing spacewalks on Gemini 9 and Apollo 17.
At the end of Wednesday's spacewalk, Akers had accumulated a total of 29 hours and 40 minutes.
Crew members' sleep period begins at 9:57 a.m.
CST and flight controllers will awaken them at 5:57 p.m. today as they begin their eighth day in space.
Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox will perform a small jet firing to circularize the shuttle's orbit in preparation of the reboost and release of the telescope about 12:57 a.m.
CST Friday.
During the fifth spacewalk on the eighth flight day, astronauts Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman will install the Solar Array Drive Electronics and the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph Redundancy Kit, a power backup for a HST science instrument.
Once those tasks are complete, Musgrave and Hoffman will install the newly fabricated covers on the old magnetometers.
Finally ground controllers will command the telescope's two newly installed solar arrays to unfurl.
All of Endeavour's systems continue to perform well, as the shuttle circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 320 by 313 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-08b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #14
MISSION CONTROL CENTER Wednesday, December 8, 1993, 7 p.m. CST
Mission Specialists Jeff Hoffman and Story Musgrave are expected to step out of Endeavour's airlock and into the record books tonight as they make STS-61 the first shuttle mission to include five space walks.
All of Endeavour's systems are working well, and the Corrective Optics Space Telescope Axial Replacement unit passed its functional tests about 4 p.m. CST.
However, controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center at the Goddard Space Flight Center have reported a loss of data lock on the downlink telemetry from the Hubble Space Telescope's main flight computer (DF-224).
The telemetry issue arose after co-processor functional tests had been completed with no initial problems.
The flight team has turned off the co-processor and formed a "Tiger Team" to analyze vehicle telemetry to better understand the situation.
All activities originally scheduled for the upcoming EVA are still planned.
However, they have been rearranged to give Goddard engineers additional time to study the anomaly.
Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox will trigger a reaction control system burn about 8:27 p.m. CST (MET 6/17:00) to circularize Endeavour's orbit at 320 nautical miles and prepare for HST reboost and release.
Before the space walk begins, the arms that attach the replacement solar arrays to the side of the telescope will be lowered.
Next, Hoffman and Musgrave will replace the Solar Array Drive Electronics, which control the array's ability to point toward the Sun and generate electricity to power the telescope.
That task is expected to take about an hour and a half.
Then, the space walkers will be lifted to the top of the telescope to install multilayer insulation around two of the telescope's magnetometers.
Next, the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph Redundancy Kit will be installed on the telescope, which should take about an hour.
Any activities related to the flight computer or the co-processor will be performed between the magnetometer insulation and GHRS installations.
The crew began Flight Day 8 at 5:57 p.m. CST with a traditional Swiss song chosen by Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier.
###
------------------------------[93-12-09a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #15
MISSION CONTROL CENTER STS-61 Status Report #15
8 a.m.
CST Thursday, December 9, 1993
STS-61 space walking astronauts Story Musgrave and Jeff Hoffman got front row seats to the successful deployment of the Hubble Space Telescope's two solar arrays early Thursday during the mission's fifth and final scheduled spacewalk.
The astronauts were in Space Shuttle Endeavour's payload bay after having completed their scheduled tasks when, at the end of their seven hour and 21 minute spacewalk, the telescope's solar arrays were smoothly unfurled.
Today's spacewalk made STS-61 the first U.S. shuttle mission to include five space walks.
STS-61's four space walking crew members spent a total of 35 hours and 28 minutes in Endeavour's payload bay.
A concern that developed Wednesday afternoon involving a loss of data lock on downlink telemetry from the telescope's main flight computer (DF-224) was resolved after scientists determined that the data glitch was due to imprecise pointing of the shuttle's Ku-Band antenna at the orbiting Tracking and Data Relay Satellite, which resulted in intermittent interruptions in the telemetry and communication between the telescope and ground controllers.
Thursday's spacewalk began at 9:30 p.m. CST Wednesday with the replacement of the Solar Array Drive Electronics, which control the arrays' ability to point toward the Sun and generate electricity to power the telescope.
Astronauts completed that installation about 1 a.m.
CST Thursday.
Shortly afterwards, Musgrave gently pushed on each of the solar arrays, giving them what they needed to unfold the solar wings' Primary Deployment Mechanism which had stuck earlier in the crew's work day.
Hoffman and Musgrave completed the installation of the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph Redundancy Kit on the telescope about 2:30 a.m.
CST.
Crew members then moved to the top of the telescope and installed two mylar covers over the original magnetometers to contain any contamination or debris that might come off the instrument and protect it from ultraviolet degradation.
Shortly after that task and while perched on the shuttle's robot arm, Musgrave paid tribute to the training team who worked with the crew in preparation for this mission's spacewalks.
"You're in our hearts," Musgrave said.
"You're in our heads.
What we've done and what we're going to do is simply a reflection on what you've given us."
The space walking duo then received word from ground controllers that the GHRS Kit had received a good health check.
"It'll make some of my astronomy friends happy," said Hoffman , an astronomer himself.
"Great, great news."
Solar array deploy operations began about 4:05 a.m.
CST.
The deployment of the first solar array was complete in about five minutes.
The deployment of the second array began about 4:30 a.m.
CST and it too was complete in about five minutes.
The slight twisting of one solar array was expected and attributed to manufacturing tolerance and residual stress that managers believe will ease after the telescope has completed a couple of orbits.
Musgrave and Hoffman ended their spacewalk about 4:51 a.m.
CST.
Ground controllers reported that the refurbished telescope's two High Gain Antennas were deployed about 5:55 a.m.
CST.
During a 6 a.m.
CST press briefing, project managers reported that the SADE aliveness and functional test was nearly complete and that everything looked good so far.
Crew members will begin their sleep period at 9:57 a.m.
CST and will awaken at 5:57 p.m. today.
Hubble's aperture door will be opened a few minutes before the telescope is released from Endeavour's payload bay to begin about a 13-week comprehensive checkout and continue on its scientific gathering journey.
Hubble's release is scheduled to occur at 1:08 a.m.
CST Friday.
All systems on board the shuttle continue to perform well as Endeavour circles the Earth every 95 minutes in a 321 by 320 nautical mile orbit.
------------------------------[93-12-09b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #16 MISSION CONTROL CENTER
Thursday, December 9, 1993, 7 p.m. CST
With a successful space-walking work week over, the STS-61 crew is scheduled to part company with the Hubble Space Telescope early Friday.
Release is scheduled for 1:13 a.m.
CST Friday (MET 7/21:46), but Space Telescope Operations Control Center workers are investigating some conflicting data relating to the operation of an HST data interface unit that monitors telemetry from the telescope's subsystems.
In the meantime, shuttle flight controllers have delayed a planned maneuver so that HST's solar arrays can remain pointed at the Sun.
When the "go" for redeploy is given, the STOCC will prepare HST for grapple by loading navigation tables into its computer, powering down its solar arrays and powering up its reaction wheel assemblies and magnetic torquers.
About 10 minutes later, Mission Specialist Claude Nicollier will grapple the telescope with Endeavour's robot arm.
Forty minutes after that, the crew inside Endeavour will command the shuttle's electrical umbilical to disconnect from HST, and open the berthing latches holding HST on the cargo bay Flight Support System.
Nicollier will raise HST out of the payload bay into release position.
Half an hour later, STOCC controllers will command HST's aperture door to open, which is a 33-minute-long activity.
Final release preparations will take another half hour.
Immediately after Nicollier releases the robot arm's grapple fixture, Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox will fire Endeavour's small maneuvering jets and move the shuttle slowly away from the revitalized and reboosted orbiting observatory.
Another engine firing 20 minutes later will increase the rate of separation.
Flight controllers awakened the crew at 5:57 p.m. CST Thursday for Flight Day 9 with the song "Hard Day's Night," by The Beatles.
All systems on board the shuttle continue to perform well as Endeavour circles the Earth every 96 minutes in a 321 by 320 nautical mile orbit.
###
------------------------------[93-12-10a]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #17
Mission Control Center Friday, December 10, 1993, 8:30 a.m.
CST
The STS-61 crew bid farewell to the Hubble Space Telescope with a successful, but slightly delayed, deploy early this morning.
The following is a summary of the day's events, and all times given are in Central Standard Time.
At 4:27 a.m., Claude Nicollier sent commands to open the berthing latches on the end effector of Endeavour's robot arm to release HST in free flight for the first time since it was captured for repair last Saturday.
Following the release, Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox performed two small separation burn maneuvers to gently move Endeavour away from HST at a rate of about 1-foot-per-second.
Almost immediately upon release, the HST solar arrays acquired the sun and HST communicated directly through the TDRS communication satellite.
The telescope's aperture door fully opened about 45 minutes prior to the deploy.
The release came nearly three-and-one-half hours later than originally planned due to erratic data telemetry from an HST subsystems monitor.
Overnight, one of four Data Interface Units that monitors Hubble engineering telemetry and commands some telescope functions experienced dropouts and conflicting readings.
Each DIU has two-sided redundancy, and telescope controllers at the Space Telescope Operations Control Center found data errors occurring only in Side A of DIU-2, but no problems with the command capability.
Controllers switched the DIU to its Side B function with full command and telemetry capabilities.
The problematic Side A will be used as a backup system with only a slight degradation in its capability.
Hubble has experienced this type of telemetry problem before and it is not related to any STS-61 servicing work or equipment.
President Clinton and Vice President Gore congratulated the STS-61 crew on a successful servicing mission in a 15-minute phone call from the Oval Office at about 7:35 a.m.
The president told the astronauts that this was "one of the most spectacular space missions in all of our history.
We are all so proud of you...I want to thank each and every one of you for what you did.
You made it look easy."
President Clinton called the HST servicing mission "an immense boost to the space program in general and to America's continuing venture in space."
The crew begins an eight-hour sleep period just before 10 a.m.
The space "fix-it" team will sleep in and have a much deserved day off.
Landing is still scheduled for Monday at 1:08 a.m. at KSC, weather permitting.
Endeavour has enough consumables on-board to stay in orbit for at least one-and-a-half days longer than planned, if necessary.
All Endeavour systems continue to perform excellently as the orbiter circles every 96 minutes approximately 320 nautical miles above Earth.
------------------------------[93-12-10b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #18
MISSION CONTROL CENTER Friday, December 10, 1993, 7 p.m. CST
Flight controllers on the ground let the seven-member crew of Endeavour sleep in Friday evening, providing a welcome respite for the Hubble Space Telescope servicing team.
The official flight plan called for the crew members to be awakened at 5:57 p.m. CST, but before signing off for the night, spacecraft communicator Greg Harbaugh told them that ground controllers would wait for them to call down following their sleep shift.
Schedulers have planned a light day for the hard-working crew.
The most significant activites planned are repressurizing of the crew cabin to 14.7 pounds per square inch and a simultaneous supply and waste water dump scheduled to begin at 8:57 p.m. CST (MET 8/17:30).
Landing remains scheduled for 1:08 a.m.
Monday at Kennedy Space Center in Florida, weather permitting.
Endeavour has enough consumables on-board to stay in orbit for at least one-and-a-half days longer, if necessary.
All Endeavour systems continue to perform well as the orbiter circles every 96 minutes approximately 320 nautical miles above Earth.
###
------------------------------[93-12-11a]------------------------------ MCC Status Report #19
Mission Control Center STS-61 Status Report #19
Saturday, December 11, 1993, 7 a.m.
CST
Endeavour's crew spent the day watching the world go by as flight controllers on the ground had a less hectic day preparing for Monday's scheduled landing.
Highlights of the rest day in space follow with all times given in Central Standard Time.
As many people do on the weekend, the astronauts slept in two hours, sending a good morning call to Mission Control at about 8 p.m. Flight controllers returned greetings with Willie Nelson's "Don't Let Your Babies Grow Up to Be Cowboys."
Commander Dick Covey said he observed "the brightest morning star" he had ever seen which was the Hubble Space Telescope, reflected in sunlight, trailing behind the orbiter.
HST currently is flying about 1 nautical mile above and 76 nautical miles behind Endeavour at a separation speed of approximately 4 nautical miles each orbit.
The old HST solar array that Kathy Thornton jettisoned during the second space walk, is about 2200 nautical miles in front of Endeavour, moving ahead at about 45 nautical miles per orbit.
HST is working fine, according to ground controllers.
The crew had just a few chores to do on the planned day off.
The astronauts recorded some IMAX large format camera views of the Earth, repressurized the crew cabin back to 14.7 pounds-per-square-inch, performed a supply and waste water dump, and conducted additional space suit evaluations.
Claude Nicollier tucked the Endeavour's robot arm away in the payload bay after a very active workout during the mission.
Mission Control also faxed up some "Sunday comics" for entertainment, although the crew spent most of their free time doing what astronauts love best, observing the Earth from their unique vantage point in space.
The crew will go to sleep around 9 a.m. and wake up shortly before 5 p.m. to begin their 11th and last scheduled day in space.
About three hours later, Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox will turn on Endeavour's back-up and flight control systems, running checks for Monday's return to Earth.
Around 9:42 p.m., Covey will also practice his landing techniques using the Portable Inflight Landing Operations Trainer, called PILOT.
A crew news conference is scheduled for just after midnight Sunday, followed by a congratulatory call for Nicollier from the Swiss Minister of Internal Affairs Ruth Dreifuss.
A news conference with European journalists will follow.
Weather so far looks favorable for Monday's 1:08 a.m. landing at KSC.
The deorbit burn is scheduled for 11:58 p.m. Sunday.
All Endeavour systems continue to perform well
------------------------------[93-12-11b]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #20
Mission Control Center Saturday, December 11, 1993, 10:30 a.m.
CST
While the STS-61 crew had a day off to relax, they will be coming home one orbit earlier than originally planned due to weather trends at KSC.
Endeavour currently is scheduled to land at 11:26 p.m. CST Sunday, which is 12:26 a.m. EST Monday.
The deorbit burn will be performed at 10:16 p.m. CST Sunday for the early end of mission landing opportunity.
The change was made to maximize the chances for two landing opportunities at KSC on Flight Day 11.
Weather trends indicate that winds will increase at the nominal landing time of 1:08 a.m.
CST Monday, and conditions are expected to worsen later in the morning.
Endeavour has enough consumables available to extend the mission at least another day, if necessary and could land at the backup site at Edwards Air Force Base, California if weather condition preclude a Florida landing.
To accommodate the earlier landing time, the crew's sleep schedule will be shifted slightly.
The crew will wake up just before 5 p.m. CST today as planned, but go to sleep one hour earlier on Sunday around 8 a.m., with Sunday afternoon's wake-up call now coming at about 4 p.m. CST.
Otherwise, the astronauts' schedule Sunday will continue much as planned.
The crew will hold a news conference around midnight CST, followed by a congratulatory call for Claude Nicollier from the Swiss Minister of Internal Affairs Ruth Dreifuss.
A news conference with European journalists will follow.
The crew had a relatively relaxing tenth flight day.
They investigated water system management techniques for the international space station by dumping waste and supply water simultaneously while a camera on the shuttle's robot arm monitored the progress, after which the arm was tucked away in the payload bay.
The crew also repressurized the orbiter to 14.7 pounds-per-square-inch as it is on Earth and spent the rest of their day off enjoying Earth views from space.
Ground controllers report that the Hubble Space Telescope is in fine shape and moving away from Endeavour at a rate of about 4 nautical miles per orbit.
All systems on Endeavour continue to perform well as the orbiter circles every 96 minutes, approximately 320 miles above Earth.
------------------------------[93-12-12]------------------------------ STS-61 Status Report #21 Mission Control Center
Sunday, December 12, 1993, 7 a.m.
CST
The STS-61 crew spent their last full day in space on clean-up chores in preparation for tonight's scheduled landing at KSC.
The following is a summary of the today's mission highlights, with all times given in Central Standard Time unless otherwise indicated.
The first KSC landing opportunity will be at 11:26 p.m. tonight, which is 12:26 a.m. EST Monday.
The landing time was moved up by 90 minutes to allow for two landing opportunities at the Cape due to a forecast of degrading weather conditions later in the morning.
A second opportunity at KSC exists at 1:08 a.m.
Monday.
If the weather does not cooperate today, plans are to delay landing until Tuesday, when two landing opportunities exist both at KSC and Edwards Air Force Base, California.
After sleeping in a little longer Saturday afternoon, the astronauts awoke to another Willie Nelson favorite, "My Heroes Have Always Been Cowboys."
Commander Dick Covey and Pilot Ken Bowersox conducted the pre-landing checkouts of Endeavour and turned on three hydraulic power units to test flight control systems for entry.
Covey and Bowersox also practiced simulated landings at KSC using a laptop computer software called PILOT.
The crew participated in a news conference early Sunday morning and told reporters that their intense training really paid off and that they were proud of their role in demonstrating a sophisticated level of on-orbit servicing capability.
Later, Mission Specialist Jeff Hoffman shared Hanukkah festivities with his crew mates by spinning small top, a traditional holiday toy called a dreidel, in microgravity.
Claude Nicollier snacked on a candy Hubble Space Telescope made from Swiss chocolate.
The rest of the day was spent stowing equipment for the trip home and for some final sightseeing of Earth.
The crew went to sleep shortly before 8 a.m. and will wake up around 4 p.m. to start deorbit preparations and unstowing of their pressure suits.
The deorbit burn for the first landing pass is planned for 10:15 p.m. Endeavour will glide across Mexico and the Gulf, crossing the west coast of Florida just north of Tampa and making its final left hand turn over Orlando for the final approach to the mile-long Runway 15 at KSC.
This will be the seventh night landing in the shuttle program, and the second night landing at KSC.
Endeavour continues to perform well as the orbiter circles every 96 minutes more than 300 miles above Earth.
------------------------------[END]------------------------------
[horizontal line]
Can't find what you're looking for? Try searching: __________________________________________________ Search Options __________________________________________________________________
Top of Page
Educational Services | Instructional Materials | NASA Overview | NASA Projects
NASA News | Frequently Asked Questions | Hot Topics | Cool Picks
NASA Spacelink Home
Site Map 
NASA Spacelink is a service of the Education Division of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
