Summary of Nonpoint Source Pollution Control 
During the past year significant progress has been made toward achieving a variety of management measures and program goals including: having over one million acres covered by nutrient management plans; restoring 114 miles of riparian forest buffers; and having 13 facilities being certified as Clean Marinas.
Below is more detailed information describing statewide progress in each broad pollution category.
Agriculture The agriculture industry contributes more than $11 billion in revenue annually, making it the state's largest commercial industry and with it comes the responsibility to farm not only economically but environmentally.
According to the Chesapeake Bay Program's Phase IV Watershed Model and Maryland's Integrated Watershed Analysis and Management System (IWAMS), nonpoint source pollution from agriculture is responsible for over one-third of the total nitrogen and total phosphorus entering the Bay.
As Maryland has grown in population, production of traditional commodities such as dairy, grain, and livestock has diversified to include poultry, tree nurseries, turf production, fresh fruits and vegetables, as well as racing and pleasure horse industries.
These are now important to Maryland's agricultural economy.
Programs Erosion and Sediment Control laws require that pollution caused by erosion and sediment problems be addressed.
Soil Conservation and Water Quality Plans ( SCWQP) have been developed to assist the agricultural community in proactively addressing this issue, and taking corrective action, as necessary, with assistance from the local Soil Conservation District (SCD) authorities.
Approved plans are currently in place on 54 % of the state's agricultural acreage.
Numerous agricultural assistance programs are available in Maryland.
The combined effect will adequately address the required NPS management measures.
For example, under the Water Quality Improvement Act of 1998, its Nutrient Management Plan (NMP) requirements; the Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP); and, the Maryland Agricultural Cost Share Program (MACS), the following BMP's were installed in 99-00.
* 325 livestock and poultry waste management systems * 1,327,807 acres under NMP * 817 projects built under MACS * 21,517 acres under CREP
The Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA) regulates agricultural public drainage facilities through Public Drainage Associations (PDAs), which are independent political subdivisions; the Agricultural Water Management Program covers over 800 miles of drainage ditches in the coastal zone, mostly on the Eastern Shore.
The PDAs must develop operation and maintenance plans which address sediment control and water quality protection.
MDA conducts biannual inspections and provides technical assistance to the PDAs through the SCDs.
Typical best management practices include vegetative filter strips and channel stabilization.
In June of 1999, a Public Drainage Task Force was charged by the Chesapeake Bay Cabinet to develop recommendations which would enhance the Eastern Shore environment and the agricultural community by considering changes in public land drainage.
Task Force members included representatives of the Public Drainage Associations, local environmental groups, as well as federal, state and local representatives.
In October of 2000, the Task Force completed its report, which was endorsed by the Governor's Chesapeake Bay Workgroup, and forwarded to the Chesapeake Bay Cabinet for approval.
Public Drainage Task Force recommendations included: * a recognition that BMPs should incorporate the best achievable methods to reduce nutrient export and increase habitat quality; * a list of acceptable BMPs to employ; * a recognition of the need to identify, site by site, opportunities for slowing the rate of water flow and improving habitat in and near public drainage ditches without creating uncompensated costs for landowners who depend on public drainage; * that watershed management goals must be consistent with the goals of non-point source nutrient load reduction efforts.
The State of Maryland should maintain, and, as feasible, enhance and expand current efforts to control nutrient losses from source areas, both public and private lands, before the nutrients reach public drainage ditches; and, * the recommendation for the creation of an interagency public drainage coordinating group, to be chaired by a designee of the Secretary of the Department of Agriculture with representatives from Public Drainage Associations (PDAs) and Public Watershed Associations (PWAs) and from each of the Governor's Chesapeake Bay Cabinet agencies.
Forestry Forests are widely recognized as one of the land uses that provides the greatest protection for water quality and aquatic and wildlife habitat.
As such, efforts to restore and conserve forests are an important part of Maryland's nonpoint source pollution control.
Today, forests cover about 2.7 million acres of Maryland representing 40 percent of the state's total land area.
As Maryland's population continues to grow and create the need for additional development, Maryland will continue losing forest.
Forest health is inextricably linked to healthy streams and a robust Chesapeake Bay.
Forests function as filters removing sediments, nutrients and other pollutants from water before they enter the groundwater system and receiving streams and regulate the amount, velocity, and rate of runoff maintaining a water body's natural hydrology.
Forested riparian buffers along streams and rivers stabilize banks and enhance aquatic habitat by shading streams and regulating stream temperature.
Programs To assist loggers and landowners in meeting environmental requirements, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) and the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) have developed a number of forestry programs.
Maryland law requires that a sediment control plan be approved before undertaking any earth-disturbing activity over 5,000 square feet and lists the general sediment control requirements for each harvest.
The state offers each county the opportunity to enforce the minimum requirements of these laws and regulations within its jurisdiction.
The plan also requires that uncut buffer zones, called Streamside Management Zones (SMZ), be maintained on all sides of perennial or intermittent streams, rivers, lakes, ponds, bogs or marshes.
The width of the buffer is dependent upon the slope of the land adjacent to the watercourse.
The Maryland Nontidal Wetlands Protection Act and Regulations require the use of BMPs when logging in nontidal wetlands.
When filing an erosion and sediment control plan for a forest harvest operation in nontidal wetlands, BMPs must be included which will protect the wetland hydrology.
The Chesapeake Bay Critical Area is comprised of the land within 1000 feet of the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal waters or tidal wetlands.
For one acre or more of forest in the Critical Area to be cut within any one-year interval, a Timber Harvest Plan must be prepared and approved before any timber can be harvested.
If a stream crossing is necessary and unavoidable, the Maryland Department of Environment, Water Resources Administration, requires that a Nontidal Wetland and Waterway Permit be obtained if the drainage area above the crossing exceeds 400 acres, or if it exceeds 100 acres for designated trout streams.
The DNR Stream Releaf Program has a goal of establishing 600 miles of riparian forest buffer restoration plantings by the year 2010.
The Department plans to supply 120,000 seedlings annually and provide targeted assistance to ensure that efforts occur in the most effective locations from a watershed perspective.
Data for 2000 indicates that 114 miles have been restored, with an estimated 133 miles in 2001.
Examples of additional programs include the Forest Conservation Act (1991), the Reforestation Law (1989) requirements, the Stewardship Incentive Program, and the Master Logger program.
Riparian Forest Buffers Re-Established
Developed Lands Urban development has a profound influence on the quality of Maryland's surface and ground water resources.
To start, development dramatically alters the local hydrologic cycle.
Cleared and graded sites erode, are often severely compacted, and can no longer prevent rainfall from being rapidly converted into stormwater runoff.
Impervious surfaces accumulate pollutants deposited from the atmosphere, leaked from vehicles, or windblown from adjacent areas.
Due to the increase in urban areas around the state, it is critical to control nonpoint source pollution from developed lands.
Maryland has several urban nonpoint source control programs that focus on new development, redevelopment, and new and relocated highways, bridges, and roads.
Roof tops, roads, parking lots, driveways and other impervious surfaces no longer allow rainfall to soak into the ground causing most rainfall to be converted directly to stormwater runoff.
This results in declining water quality, diminishing groundwater recharge, diminishing groundwater quality, and the degradation of stream channels.
Stormwater Management Program Final regulations for revision of the federal Water Pollution Control Program Addressing Stormwater Discharges (Storm Water Phase II) were published in December of 1999.
These new regulations expand the existing NPDES storm water management (SWM) program to address storm water discharges from municipal storm sewers and construction activity.
Developed lands nonpoint source programs include Stormwater Management coordinated by MDE, which has revised its existing SWM program.
The new SWM program incorporates the Phase II requirements, detailed in the publication known as the 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design Manual.
It has become part of the State's development regulations by reference and SWM is required on all sites which disturb over 5000 square feet of land.
The new Manual (adopted October 2, 2000) concentrates on controlling runoff increases and mitigating water quality degradation associated with new development as well as redevelopment of more urbanized areas under Smart Growth.
The Manual includes a unified approach for sizing stormwater BMPs to meet pollutant removal goals, maintain groundwater recharge, reduce stream channel erosion, prevent overbank flooding, and pass extreme floods.
Additional criteria for a series of non-structural techniques and incentives were developed to encourage environmentally sensitive site designs and the use of the following non-structural practices: * Natural Area Conservation * Disconnection of rooftop runoff * Disconnection of non-rooftop runoff * Sheet flow discharge to stream buffers * Environmentally sensitive development * Open section roads * Impervious cover reduction
All sites where SWM is required must meet the performance standards listed in the Manual.
The standards address the minimization of impervious area and thus runoff, treatment / pretreatment, structural and non-structural BMPs, peak discharges, stream channel protection, redevelopment, industrial Pollution Prevention Plans, sites with high pollution potential (hotspots), and permitting.
In addition, an innovative system of "credits" are offered to those employing progressive planning techniques.
The six credit-producing efforts listed in the document will reduce the impacts of development as well as reduce the size and cost of SWM practices needed onsite.
Sediment and Erosion Control Program In cases where local governments have shown the ability to enforce the provisions of their ordinances relating to soil erosion and sediment control, they have been delegated erosion and sediment control enforcement authority.
In other cases, the state has retained enforcement responsibilities.
MDE conducts periodic reviews of local programs to ensure that implementation is acceptable and it has the authority to suspend delegation and take over any program which does not meet state standards.
Maryland's On Site Disposal Systems (OSDS) Program The Maryland Department of the Environment, Ground Water Permits Division is responsible for the development of regulations pertaining to the siting, construction, and general permitting of OSDS.
Authority for tracking and monitoring OSDS is delegated to county health departments.
During the 2000 legislative session bills were introduced addressing the installation and maintenance of septic systems.
Proposed legislation did not pass and regulatory changes were not put in place.
Shore Erosion Control Program The DNR Shore Erosion Control Program was established in 1968 by an act of the Maryland General Assembly for the purpose of addressing shoreline and streambank erosion problems along the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries.
There are approximately 4,360 miles of tidal shoreline within the Maryland portion of the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
One thousand three hundred miles of tidal shoreline have been identified as eroding at various yearly rates.
Projects are designed to protect eroding shorelines, to retain established vegetative buffer areas, to act as filter systems and to prevent nutrient laden sediments from entering the waters of the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries.
During the 1999 State legislative session, Maryland's General Assembly passed Resolution 13 requesting that the Governor establish a Shore Erosion Task Force to: (1) identify shore erosion needs by county, (2) clarify local, State, and federal roles, (3) establish five and ten-year shore erosion control plans, and (4) review contributing factors to shore erosion.
In August 1999, Governor Glendening appointed task force members.
In January 2000, the Task Force published its final report.
The Task Force concluded that shore erosion is one of the most significant problems facing Maryland's coastal environment.
The Task Force recommendations included: * Establish an immediate response capability to provide the necessary planning and technical means to initiate development of a Comprehensive Shore Erosion Control Plan; emergency assistance for critical shore erosion control needs; and interim financial assistance for structural shore erosion control measures; * Identify and analyze areas subject to shore erosion, sea level rise, and environmental sensitivity to prioritize and target shore protection activities through the establishment of regional shore erosion control strategies; * Develop project review and selection criteria to guide the implementation of regional shore erosion control strategies; * Improve coordination of shore protection activities among various entities and individuals in order to encourage the implementation of cooperative regional projects; * Conduct public outreach on technical matters, funding resources, and environmental issues related to shore erosion control; and * Pursue projects to fill identified data and information needs to support the development of a Comprehensive Shore Erosion Control Plan.
* Identify overall funding needs and potential funding resources, and develop a financial strategy to implement a Comprehensive Shore Erosion Control Plan.
The Task Force advised that (1) its recommendations be implemented as part of a broader Comprehensive Shore Erosion Control Plan, and (2) the State establish an immediate response capability for a period of two years while the plan is developed.
The Task Force estimated that completing the Comprehensive Shore Erosion Control Plan and establishing an immediate response capability would require approximately $2.6 million over the next three fiscal years.
Marina and Recreational Boating With more than 17,000 miles of streams and rivers flowing into the Chesapeake Bay and 33 lakes with boating access, Maryland has abundant opportunities for fresh or saltwater recreation.
Since boating is such a popular past time in Maryland, the state has a wide variety of programs to address marina and recreational boating issues.
Clean Marinas Program The Maryland Department of Natural Resources, Clean Marina Program is an effort to assist marina and boatyard operators in protecting the resources critical to their livelihood clean water and fresh air.
This successful voluntary program will help the marine industry avoid new regulations.
The program distributes a comprehensive pollution prevention guidebook for marinas, recognizes "Clean Marinas" through an awards program, and conducts outreach activities to promote environmentally responsible marina and boating practices.
The guidebook outlines the actions that marine industry professionals can take to protect water and air quality.
It is written for managers of full-service marinas with boatyards.
The guidebook provides information on the following topics: * Siting considerations for new or expanding marinas; * Marina design and maintenance; * Stormwater management; * Vessel maintenance and repair; * Petroleum control; * Sewage handling; * Waste containment and disposal; * Marina management; and * Laws and regulations.
Currently, 31 marinas are designated as Clean Marinas by the State of Maryland.
Twelve were certified in 2000 and thirteen more have been added so far in 2001.
To achieve full standing as a Clean Marina, marina operators must adopt a number of the recommendations in the Maryland Clean Marina guidebook.
Boat Sewage Pumpout Program The Clean Marinas Program has also instituted a cost-share program for Marinas that are interested in installing the program's BMPs.
In the past, boaters tended to pump human sewage directly overboard.
The pumpout program promotes the installation of sewage pumpout stations in Maryland's marinas.
Currently there are 294 pumpout stations statewide.
The program has a stated goal of having pumpouts at 460 of the 600 marinas in Maryland by 2010.
Legislation was passed by the 1994 Maryland General Assembly for existing marinas to install a pumpout was phased in according to the following schedule: by July 1, 1995 all marinas with 200 or more slips; by July 1, 1996 all marinas with more than 100 slips; and by July 1, 1997 all marinas with more than 50 slips.
In addition, the Tidal Wetland, Water Quality Certification, and Chesapeake Bay Critical Areas Programs contribute to the Clean Marinas effort.
These programs provide regulatory oversight under various conditions which could potentially result in pollution.
Hydrological Modification Within Maryland, there is a network of over 14,000 miles of streams and rivers.
Human activities, such as channelization, building of levees, dams, diversions, and floodplain development disrupt the natural hydrologic regime of the system resulting in a widespread deterioration of environmental quality.
Current management approaches at the watershed level, focus on the modification of watershed hydrology to replicate (to the degree possible) the hydrology in undisturbed forested watersheds where stream channels have a greater potential to be stable because the magnitude and frequencies of peak storm discharges are reduced.
Maryland is working to curtail or reverse damage from hydrologic modifications through the following programs.
Water Quality Certification In Maryland, MDE is responsible for evaluating the potential effects of proposed channelization and channel modification projects on the physical characteristics of surface waters.
Any change to the course, current, or cross section of a stream or waterbody within the state including changes to the 100-year frequency floodplain of free-flowing waters is subject to regulations.
MDE evaluates the effects of projects on the chemical characteristics of surface waters through a Section 401 Water Quality Certification review.
This certification is required under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act and is regulated by the State to assure that the proposed activity complies with state water quality standards.
Applications for the Army Corps of Engineers dredge and fill permit under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act automatically become applications for Water Quality Certification.
Examples of the activities regulated include construction of roads, bridges, dams, dikes, lakes, ponds, landfills, lot grading, hydraulic dredging, shore erosion control projects, and stream restoration projects.
Nontidal Wetland and Waterway Permit Since 1973, Maryland has regulated construction activities in nontidal waterways and 100-year floodplains, collectively included in the definition of "waters of the State."
Construction activities in these areas need a Nontidal Wetland and Waterway Permit which are reviewed to (1) assure that construction activities within waters of the state will not contribute to flooding on upstream or downstream property and/or cause stream bank erosion; (2) assure that the structure will withstand the passage of floodwaters; and (3) to evaluate the safety, operation and maintenance of the structure.
The regulations also provide for the consideration of associated environmental impacts.
In FY 2000, compliance inspections were conducted on 2,066 sites.
99% of sites were in compliance.
The Stream and Floodplain (waterway construction) Regulation establishes an administrative procedure to promote public safety and welfare and, to the extent feasible, control and supervise the construction, reconstruction, and repair of dams, reservoirs and other projects within waters of the state.
Channel modification projects may also require detailed hydrologic and hydraulic data to ensure that the channel will remain stable.
Fish Passage Program The Department of Natural Resources administers the Fish Passage Program to reopen streams to allow for the migration of anadromous fish.
State law prohibits obstruction to the passage of fish.
This effort resulted in 291.2 miles reopened in 1999 and that total grew to 348.9 miles in 2000.
The goal is to establish at least an additional 51.1 miles of stream restored to fish passage for a total of 400 miles by 2003.
DNR can require any dam owners to construct, and keep repaired, a fish ladder if it is deemed necessary.
DNR has a state-wide data base identifying the blockages to historic migratory fish spawning habitat.
Priority site lists for restoration efforts are compiled annually.
This program also provides technical advice, construction oversight, and funding (when available) to local governments.
Wetlands and Riparian Areas Wetlands are an integral part of what makes the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem unique and of special significance to the citizens of Maryland.
A variety of wetlands exist in Maryland, however two basic types of wetlands are commonly recognized: nontidal wetlands and tidal wetlands.
Nontidal wetlands found in Maryland are most commonly inland freshwater areas not subject to tidal influence.
Tidal wetlands are associated with daily fluctuations of water levels driven by the ocean tides.
In Maryland, tidal wetlands are typically found along the ocean coast, in the Chesapeake Bay estuary, and along the tidal reaches of streams and rivers flowing into the ocean and bay.
Nontidal Wetlands Program In 1989, Maryland enacted the Nontidal Wetlands Protection Act (MD. Code Ann.
§ 5-901 et seq.).
The Act's goals are to attain no net overall loss in nontidal wetland acreage and function and to strive for a net resource gain in nontidal wetlands over present conditions.
In 1996, the Army Corps of Engineers issued a state programmatic general permit (SPGP) recognizing Maryland's wetlands permitting process for many types of activities in tidal and nontidal wetlands.
Under the Maryland SPGP, the Department of the Environment may issue many permits that are considered sufficient to satisfy § 404 of the Clean Water Act without further action by the Corps.
Maryland has organized all of the state wetland regulatory programs under MDE and MDA.
For FY 1999, total wetland loss was 23 acres which was offset by the 40 acres of created, restored, or enhanced nontidal wetlands.
During FY 2000 165 acres of nontidal wetlands were restored.
Tidal Wetlands Program Prior to the passage of the Maryland Wetlands Act in 1970, protection of Maryland's tidal wetlands was limited, and controls over dredging and filling of wetlands were primarily based on consideration of the effects on navigation rights rather than on ecological impacts.
Such inadequate protection resulted in the loss of an estimated 23,777 acres of wetland area between 1942 and 1967.
The Tidal Wetlands Program administered by MDE prohibits a person from altering tidal wetlands without obtaining authorization from the state.
Two types of wetlands are regulated: "state" wetlands - which are all lands lying below the mean high water line; and "private" wetlands - which are those lands extending shoreward from the mean high water line which are subject to periodic tidal flooding and support wetland vegetation.
In FY 2000, 2,178 tidal wetland impact permits were issued and 770 sites were inspected.
Of these, only eight were cited for violations or corrective actions.
Governor's Initiative/Wetland Goals On May 26, 1997, the Governor strengthened Maryland's commitment to wetlands protection and restoration by introducing the State's new Wetland Restoration Goal.
The purpose of this state initiative is to strengthen Maryland's policy of "no net loss" of wetlands by including a specific target to increase the State's wetland acreage base by 10 percent.
This ambitious effort is a commitment to create, restore, or enhance 60,000 acres of wetlands to restore Maryland's wetland base to post-World War II levels.
Since the introduction of the Governor's Wetland Restoration Initiative, approximately 1,600 acres of wetlands have been restored statewide.
_______________________________________________________________
Table of Contents NPS Home DNR Home
