link to WSDA home page Animal Health Link to WSDA Home Page Link to food and animals home page [btnBSE.gif] [btnBSEPreventSpread.gif]
BSE is one of a family of diseases known as transmissible (meaning they can be spread from animal-to-animal, or person-to-person) spongiform encephalopathies, or TSEs.
They are always fatal and affect both animals and humans.
TSEs include scrapie in sheep, chronic wasting disease in deer and elk (CWD) and in humans, two forms of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD): classic and variant CJD.
Classic CJD is frequently confused with variant CJD, which is linked to consumption of beef infected with BSE.
To learn more, see our fact sheet.
How do cattle become infected with BSE? Scientists believe animals are infected when they eat feed that contains remnants of infected animals.
That is why in 1997 the U.S. Food and Drug Administration banned the use of most mammalian protein in the manufacture of animal feed intended for cows and similar animals.
Although both of these diseases dominated news stories from Great Britain for nearly three years, they are not the same.
Foot-and-mouth disease is a virus that is easily spread but doesn't affect humans.
BSE is a deadly brain disease that may affect humans.
To learn more, see our publication, "Confused over 'mad cow' and foot-and-mouth disease?" [Top of Page] How does BSE affect humans? BSE only affects cattle.
The most common form of human TSE is classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
Scientists believe that the related variant CJD is caused by consuming the brain and spinal cord of animals infected with BSE.
Variant CJD (vCJD) is not the same as classic CJD.
Classic CJD occurs naturally every year at a rate of 1 to 2 cases per million people throughout the world, even in countries where BSE has never occurred.
It is not linked to consumption of infected meat; both vegetarians and meat eaters have died from classic CJD.
Has variant CJD been detected in the U.S.? According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, no cases of vCJD have been acquired in the U.S.
A young woman from the United Kingdom (UK) died of probable variant CJD in Florida in 2002, but she was most likely exposed to the disease while living in the UK.
In the UK, 143 people have died from variant CJD after an outbreak of BSE occurred in cattle there in the 1980s.
[Top of Page]
Food Safety
Is it still safe to eat beef? Consumers can have confidence that the beef they eat is safe.
The BSE infectious agent has never been found in beef muscle or milk.
It is only found in central nervous system tissue such as brains and spinal cords.
How is the safety of beef protected? The U.S. Department of Agriculture also prohibits importing live ruminants, meat, and rendered animal products from countries with BSE.
A USDA inspector or veterinarian inspects all U.S. cattle before they are slaughtered.
Animals with obvious signs of disease, or a neurological disorder, are kept out of the food supply.
A 1997 FDA ban makes it illegal to feed protein derived from mammals to ruminants (animals that chew their cud, such as cows and sheep).
Canada has had a similar ban in place, also since 1997.
Is it safe to eat other meats, such as goat, deer, or elk? Yes.
Infectious material has never been detected in muscle meats.
Make sure you clean the animal thoroughly, and do not eat the brains or spinal cord.
Is it safe to drink milk? Yes.
BSE is not found in milk.
Experiments have shown that milk from BSE-infected cows has not caused infection in any species.
[Top of Page]
Is organic beef safer? No.
The feed regulations to protect against BSE are the same for all animals.
A 1997 law says that no cattle may be fed protein derived from mammals.
What are the organic cattle feed standards? Organic livestock must be fed organic feed.
All feed ingredients must be organically grown and all mammalian and poultry by-products are prohibited.
Is it safe to eat cow brains (as in head cheese or brain tacos)? Although it is possible to buy and eat beef brains, the USDA does not consider them to be food and prohibits them from being included in meat products such as hamburger, hot dogs and sausage.
The law requires brain to be labeled as such.
[Top of Page]
Rendering
What is rendering? It is a process used to recycle slaughter by products and dead animals into useful items such as feed, glue, cosmetics and numerous other products.
The process removes moisture and fat through evaporation and heat processing.
The cooking process kills all pathogenic bacteria.
The abnormal prion that is believed to cause BSE is not affected by rendering.
What happened to rendered material from the cow that tested positive for BSE? All of the rendered material from the positive cow and any material that could have been contaminated with that material is currently being held for disposal.
How many plants in Washington do rendering? There are 5 companies in 6 locations that do rendering in Washington state.
Only two companies take dead animals.
In addition, several companies have a rendering license that allows them to pick up dead animals or animal by products and deliver them to rendering companies.
[Top of Page]
What types of products do rendering plants produce? Rendering plants typically produce two types of products: meat and bone meal, and fats and oils.
Meat and bone meal is a protein supplement used in the manufacture of some animal feeds.
How are these products used? Some are used in animal and pet food, others are further manufactured into pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, clothing, brake fluid, soaps, fire extinguisher foam and many other products.
[Top of Page]
Are these products fed to cattle? No.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) "animal feed rule," which took effect in 1997, is a public health measure designed to prevent the spread of BSE by prohibiting the feeding of most mammalian protein to ruminant animals such as cows, sheep and goats.
What is FDA's animal feed rule? All mammalian protein is prohibited from being fed to ruminants except for: * Milk products.
Scientists have not been able to transmit BSE by feeding or injecting cattle with milk from cows with BSE.
* Blood products.
In 1997 there was no scientific evidence that blood could transmit BSE. * Gelatin.
Abnormal prions have never been found in the materials used to make food grade gelatin.
* Pure swine products (pork).
Swine are not affected BSE or any other transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE).
* Pure equine products.
Horses and other equines are not affected by BSE or any other TSE.
[Top of Page]
How successful has the animal feed rule been? Inspections have focused on feed mills and renderers.
There has been a better than 99 percent compliance rate for the last couple of years.
Most violations have involved record keeping and not situations where prohibited material would have ended up being fed to cattle.
Are rendered materials imported from countries with BSE? No.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture prohibits importing rendered animals products from countries with BSE.
It is also illegal to import cosmetic and dietary supplement ingredients containing cattle-based materials from animals originating in the 33 countries where BSE has been found or is at risk for being found.
Are rendered products ever exported? Yes.
More than 95 percent of the rendered meat and bone meal and 75 percent of the tallow manufactured in Washington has been exported for the last several years.
Most of this has gone to Asian countries.
[Top of Page]
