Neah Bay Rescue Tug Report to the Washington State Legislature December 1, 2000 Publication No. 00-08-023 printed on recycled paper
Abstract: Neah Bay Rescue Tug: Report to the Washington State Legislature describes the need for additional marine safety infrastructure for the outer coast of Washington and the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The report provides a history of the issue, and describes and analyzes the operations and lessons learned from stationing a rescue tug at Neah Bay, Washington for three seasons.
For addtional copies of this report, contact: Department of Ecology Publications Distribution Center PO Box 47600 Olympia, WA 98504-7600 Telephone: (360) 407-7472 This document is also available on our Web site, at: http://www.ecy.wa.gov/biblio/spills.html
The Department of Ecology is an equal-opportunity agency and does not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, color, disability, age, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, disabled-veterans status, Vietnam-era veterans status or sexual orientation.
If you have special accommodation needs or require this document in alternative format, please contact Mariann Cook Andrews at (360) 407-7211 (voice) or (360) 407-6006 (TDD).
Neah Bay Rescue Tug Report to the Washington State Legislature
Prepared by: Washington State Department of Ecology Spill Prevention, Preparedness, and Response Program
December 1, 2000 Publication No. 00-08-023
Table of Contents I. II.
III.
IV.
V. VI. Executive Summary ..........................................................................................
7 Risk of Major Oil Spills ....................................................................................
9 Chronology .......................................................................................................
13 Operations 1999-2001 .....................................................................................
19 Funding 1999-2001 ..........................................................................................
23 Capability Evaluation .....................................................................................
25
VII.
Findings and Recommendation .....................................................................
31 VIII.
Endnotes ...........................................................................................................
33 IX. Appendices Appendix A: The Case for Extra Protection from International Tug 
Tables and Figures Table Table Table Table 1: 2: 3: 4: Number of Incidents ...................................................................................
Severity of Incidents ...................................................................................
1999 Rescue Tug Statistics .........................................................................
1999-2000 Rescue Tug Statistics ................................................................
Characteristics of the tugs Sea Breeze and Sea Valiant .........................
The Foss tug Barbara Foss .......................................................................
Tug Speed as a function of Response Distance - 1999 ...........................
Rescue tug track lines ...............................................................................
Tug Speed v. Wind Speed .........................................................................
Tug Speed v. Swell Height ........................................................................
Tug Speed v. Wave Height ........................................................................
Tug Speed as a function of Response Distance - 1999-2000 ..................
10 11 25 27 19 20 26 26 28 28 29 30
Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure Figure
1: 2: 3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8:
I. Executive Summary The outer coast of Washington and the western Strait of Juan de Fuca contain highly valuable marine resources.
These areas are also vulnerable to oil spills from the large volume of marine traffic.
This report focuses on an effective spill prevention measure that can significantly reduce the probability of an oil spill in this area a dedicated rescue tug.1 Recognizing the value of the resources and their vulnerability, the 1991 Washington Legislature called for an emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca (see sidebar).
In 2000, the Legislature appropriated $1.65 million to establish a rescue tug at Neah Bay that could assist disabled commercial vessels and prevent major oil spills.
In a competitive procurement process the Department of Ecology (Ecology) selected Foss Maritime Co. to provide the tug.
The tug Barbara Foss arrived in Neah Bay on September 18, 2000 and is expected to remain on station during the winter storm season, through at least May 18, 2001.
The Coast Guard routinely dispatches the tug through an operating protocol developed by the two agencies.
The primary mission of the rescue tug is to provide timely emergency towing services for disabled vessels to prevent pollution events on Washingtons northern outer coast and in the western Strait.
The rescue tug is also capable of rapidly assisting vessels with propulsion and steering failures, structural casualties, fires and other problems.
It can also escort high risk vessels, provide a lifesaving and spill response deployment platform during major casualties, and assist during salvage operations.
Rescue tugs have been stationed at Neah Bay a total of 11 months during the current and last two winter seasons.
The tugs have been called out to assist vessels eight times, towing or escorting five of the vessels to safety.
The tugs have also conducted more than 143 drills and exercises.
These drills proved the effectiveness of the tugs under moderate to adverse weather conditions.
Makah Tribal facilities and navigational access to Neah Bay have proven to be both operationally and logistically suitable for a tug the size of Foss Maritimes Barbara Foss.
Funding is the principal issue of contention regarding stationing a dedicated rescue tug at Neah Bay.
Opponents argue that the probability of a spill is low enough that a relatively expensive spill prevention measure like a dedicated tug is not a wise investment.
They also are concerned that Washington trade would be diverted to other ports if the marine transportation industry were forced to pay for a tug.
Proponents argue that the potential consequences of a spill on the coast are so enormous that a rescue tug is relatively cheap insurance in the long run.
They also point to the number of vessel propulsion, steering and other problems that continue to occur near the entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
(See Chapter III.)
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
Legislative Mandates The 1991 Legislature stated: An emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca shall be established by July 1, 1992.
(See Chapter III.)
The 2000 supplemental budget proviso for the tug stated: $1,650,000 of the general fundstate appropriation for fiscal year 2001 is provided solely to the oil spill administration account to be used for a rescue tug.
By December 1, 2000, the department shall report to the appropriate fiscal committees of the legislature on the activities of the dedicated rescue tug.
The report shall include information on rescues, assists, or responses performed by the tug.
The report shall also indicate the class of vessels involved and the nature of the rescue, assist, or response.2
7
Findings 1.
The U.S. Coast Guard has characterized vessel salvage capability in the Pacific Northwest as weak and slow.
A recent Coast Guard study projected that the risk of major spills will increase over the next 25 years.
However, Coast Guard headquarters continues to postpone national rulemaking on vessel salvage that would, in part, address the need for a rescue tug.
2.
A rescue tug should be permanently stationed at Neah Bay.
This finding is based upon previous studies, analysis of 10 years of vessel spills and incidents, hundreds of hours of tug operations and analysis of eight rescue tug vessel assists.
It also reflects the experience of other countries in deploying permanent rescue tugs. 3.
In its deliberations, the North Puget Sound Oil Spill Risk Management Panel suggested that government funding would be desirable to ensure a level playing field for Washingtons ports in competition with other West Coast ports.
4.
The federal government should provide the bulk of funding for the tug based upon the following premises: The federal government is a trustee of natural resources in the area, including the Olympic National Marine Sanctuary, Olympic National Park, and the coastal national wildlife refuges; The federal government has designated certain species found in the area as threatened and endangered.
These species and their habitats would be affected by major oil spills; The federal government has a responsibility to protect the treaty rights of Puget Sound tribes in their usual and accustomed fishing areas; Washington is meeting a regional energy supply need.
The North Puget Sound marine transportation corridor contains a regional crude oil refining center and is a conduit of refined petroleum products to other western states; The Strait of Juan de Fuca conveys more tonnage of cargo to and from Pacific Rim ports than any other West Coast waterway; Puget Sound is homeport for a large portion of the nations strategic naval fleet, which also poses a risk of major spills; and There is potential for international tension with Canada should a major transboundary oil spill occur in this waterway.
Recommendation Ecology recommends that state funding be provided to station a rescue tug at Neah Bay while federal funding is pursued.
Specifically, Ecology recommends that the legislature provide $3 million in stopgap funding for the 01-03 Biennium to provide the rescue tug for approximately 12 months.
If long-term federal funding does not become available, the state would have the option to proceed with rulemaking.
The rulemaking process would determine whether vessels transiting the northern coast and western Strait of Juan de Fuca should have a user-fee-supported rescue tug available during their passage.
8 Neah Bay Rescue Tug
II.
Risk of Major Oil Spills The risk of accidents is commonly viewed as the combination of two primary components, the probability that an accident will occur and the consequences of that accident.
Major oil spills are typically low-probability, high-impact events with the potential to cause serious long-term damage to natural resources, quality of life and economy.
As the public places a higher and higher value on the marine environment, the consequences of a spill in terms of depleted natural resources and diminished quality of life will become more significant increasing the risk.
In the Strait of Juan de Fuca and its ocean approaches there is a significant risk of a major oil spill due to the high vessel traffic and oil volumes.
In 1999, there were a total of 12,308 commercial vessel transits through the area 10,560 cargo and passenger vessel transits and 1,748 oil tanker or tank barge transits.
(A transit is the passage of a vessel entering or leaving Washington state waters.)
In 2000, approximately 15.1 billion gallons of oil will move through Puget Sound.
The risk of spills will grow over the next 25 years as the number of vessel transits and the size of vessels increase, unless additional spill prevention measures are put in place.
Significant Spills and Incidents These margin notes describe significant vessel spills and incidents that occurred in the general operating area of the rescue tug.
They illustrate the variety of problems experienced by deep draft commercial vessels transiting the area.
They all occurred while a rescue tug was not on station and in an area where vessels are not required to have a state-licensed pilot aboard.
We believe that, had a rescue tug been available during these incidents, it would probably have been dispatched to assist.
March 1964 the towline between a United Transportation barge and its tug snapped.
The barge grounded on the beach near Moclips.
The incident spilled 1.2 million gallons of refined oil on coastal beaches, killing a large number of razor clams and causing serious damage.
Marine Safety Considerations Vessels transiting the western Strait of Juan de Fuca do not benefit from several key spill prevention measures that are in place eastward of Port Angeles.
These include state-licensed marine pilots and tug escorts for laden oil tankers.
Because of this disparity, it is prudent to target additional prevention measures for the highly vulnerable coast and western Strait.
In 1991, the Washington Legislature directed that: An emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca shall be established by July 1, 1992 (RCW 88.46.130).
After ten years and numerous evaluations and community discussions, general agreement has emerged supporting the value of a rescue tug, although some have argued the cost effectiveness of the vessel.
A funding mechanism to permanently establish a rescue tug has yet to be set up.
Ecology, however, has demonstrated through this year s bid process that this additional safety net, with a tug such as the Barbara Foss, can be contracted for about $2.5 million per year.
An even larger, more powerful tug with enhanced capability for salvage and fire-fighting could be placed on station for approximately $3 million per year, considerably less than the $3.4 to $6 million annual cost estimated by previous studies.
Need for Additional Spill Prevention The U.S. Coast Guards Environmental Impact Work Group of the Volpe Study3 found that we must prevent oil spills on Washingtons outer coast because we cannot effectively respond to an oil spill there.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug 9
April 1988 the inbound tanker Matsukaze ran straight down through the entrance to the shipping lanes on automatic pilot and up onto the rocky coastline at Crescent Bay west of Port Angeles, causing extensive damage to the vessel.
Fortunately, the ships doublebottomed hull prevented any environmental damage and no oil was released.
December 1988 the tug Ocean Services towline snapped resulting in the barge Nestucca drifting off of the northern entrance to Grays Harbor.
The tug collided with the barge while trying to regain the tow.
The barge eventually spilled 231,000 gallons of heavy fuel oil causing extensive environmental damage as far north as Vancouver Islands Pacific Rim National Park.
Congress established the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary in 1994, in large part because the overall natural resource values on Washingtons pristine Northwest coast and the sensitivity of those resources to environmental damage are among the highest in the state.
A major oil spill could be catastrophic due to the impacts such a spill would have on threatened and endangered species, natural resources, cultural resources, recreation, trade, commercial fishing, aquaculture, tourism, and the overall quality of life for citizens of Washington.
The coast is also subject to frequent severe weather, which would make containing and cleaning up an oil spill difficult and often ineffective.
Vessel Incident Data Highlights Risk Since 1995, Ecology has maintained database for commercial vessels 300 self-reported by vessel operators and the U.S. Coast Guard.
Because some establishe the lower boundary of the Sound Area.
an incident, casualty and oil spill gross tons or more.
The information is supplemented by data received from incidents are not reported, these data actual incident rate in the North Puget
This information demonstrates that large commercial vessels traveling along Washingtons coast and approaching the Strait of Juan de Fuca continue to experience propulsion, steering and other problems that could lead to a vessel casualty and oil spill.
During 1999, 96 vessels transiting through Puget Sound experienced an incident that increased the risk of a spill.
Table 1: Number of Incidents, shows that 69 percent of the total vessel incidents occurred without prior warning of degraded propulsion or steering and when the vessel was within 12 miles of the coast.
This means there is only limited time for the marine safety system to take action to mitigate the added risk presented by the vessel.
Table 1: Number of Incidents Type of Incident Total incident since 1995 Incidents occurring without prior warning (Immediate incidents) Incidents of higher severity occurring within Straits · · Number 163 113 (69 percent of Total Incidents) 73 (65 percent of Immediate Incidents) Incident means collision, grounding, loss of propulsion or steering Higher severity means higher risk of an oil spill, i.e. actual collision, allision (impact with a fixed structure, such as a pier), grounding, or complete loss of steering
Furthermore, Table 2: Severity of Incidents, shows that 65 percent of these immediate incidents were in the higher severity category.
That is, they were more likely to involve a complete loss of propulsion or steering rather than a less-risky reduction in propulsion or steering reliability.
This 10 Neah Bay Rescue Tug
observation is particularly true in the coastal approaches to and the western portion of the Strait, where the availability of tugs or other spill prevention and response mechanisms is low.
Table 2: Severity of Incidents Incidents of Higher Severity 9 12 Incidents of Lower Severity 0 2
Washington seacoast (approaches to Strait) Western portion of Strait
Federal Obligation to Minimize Risk On our Northwest coast, the U.S. government by treaty has obligations to protect the Makah Tribe and other Indian tribes.
Their culture and economy depend upon protecting the marine and coastal environment and their usual and accustomed fishing grounds from the potential devastation of major oil spills.
The federal obligation extends to important coastal resources of national value that would be damaged by oil spills, including the Olympic National Marine Sanctuary, Olympic National Park, and the coastal national wildlife refuges.
The federal government has also designated several species found in the area as threatened or endangered.
An independent study for the North Puget Sound Oil Spill Risk Management Panel found that the consequences of a major spill in Puget Sound would be at least $500 to $1,000/gallon.
(See Appendix F.) From a national economic perspective, Washington is a regional crude oil refining center that provides refined products to other West Coast states.
Pacific Rim trade centered in Washington provides important national economic benefits while presenting risks to local resources.
The federal government prevailed at the U.S. Supreme Court in a suit that limited Washington states authority to protect its waters from oil spills.
Furthermore, should a transboundary spill occur, it could precipiate international tension with Canada.
Therefore, the federal government has significant responsibility to fund the Neah Bay rescue tug.
April 1989 the tanker Exxon Philadelphia lost power and was adrift off the mouth of the Strait of Juan de Fuca with a load of 23 million gallons of Alaska North Slope crude oil.
A tug reached the tanker approximately five hours later and towed it to Port Angeles.
September 1989 the tanker Exxon San Francisco lost power while outbound in the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The vessel later returned to Port Angeles without further incident.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
11
12
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
III.
Chronology The following is a chronology of studies, legislation, spills and vessel incidents related to the history of the Neah Bay rescue tug.
Early Marine Safety Legislation Washingtons marine safety system in Puget Sound was established by the Legislature in 1975 in anticipation of large tank ships with Alaskan North Slope crude oil on board transiting through Puget Sound to Washingtons refineries.
Laden tankers transiting Puget Sound waters east of Dungeness Light (just east of Port Angeles) were required to have tug escorts.
They were also required to take a Washington State licensed pilot while navigating Puget Sound and adjacent waters.
In 1977, pilotage requirements were extended to other large commercial vessels operating east of Port Angeles.
A 125,000 dead weight ton limit was placed on single hulled tankers proceeding east of Port Angeles.
1988-1989 Backdrop for 1991 Legislative Action The following incidents set the stage for legislators and the public to consider establishing a rescue tug at Neah Bay: December 1988, Nestucca oil spill.
March 1989, the Exxon Valdez oil spill.
1989, Exxon San Francisco and Exxon Philadelphia disabled off the Washington coast.
July 1991 the Chinese bulk carrier Tuo Hai did not respond to Canadian Coast Guard radio communication efforts.
The ship on automatic pilot ran straight over the Japanese fish processor Tenyo Maru northwest of Neah Bay.
The Tenyo Maru was cut in half and immediately sank.
The entire crew went into the frigid water; one crewmember was never found.
Over 400,000 gallons of oil was on-board the vessel and caused extensive environmental damage to coastal resources.
1991 Authorizing Legislation In 1991 the States precedent-setting spill-prevention legislation (House Bill 1027) passed with very strong bi-partisan support.
The legislation called for the establishment of an emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
Specifically, the legislation stated: An emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca shall be established by July 1, 1992.
In establishing the emergency response system, the administrator (of the Office of Marine Safety) shall consider the recommendations of the regional marine safety committees.
The administrator shall also consult with the province of British Columbia regarding its participation in the emergency response system.
(See the conclusions of the British Columbia governments report below.)
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
July 1994 the bulk carrier Verbier was outbound from Vancouver, BC when it lost power 2.5 miles from shore in the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
After an unsuccessful attempt to tow it to port by a small tug, a second larger tug was dispatched.
The towline parted after several hours of towing.
The tug made-up again and successfully completed the tow to Port Angeles, with the assistance of other tugs.
13
December 1995 the bulk-carrier ship Ledra drifted in the western Strait for seven and onehalf hours before emergency anchoring 2.25 miles off Vancouver Island to prevent grounding.
The ship had repeatedly notified authorities that repairs would take longer than estimated.
The regional safety committees shall recommend to the office (Office of Marine Safety) the need for, and the structure and design of, an emergency response system for the Strait of Juan de Fuca and the Pacific coast.
(See 1994: Regional Marine Safety Committee Report)
1993 Regional Marine Safety Committees In 1993 the Regional Marine Safety Committees for the Strait of Juan de Fuca/Northern Puget Sound and the Grays Harbor/Pacific Coast, made up of industry, tribal, and other stakeholders, issued preliminary recommendations supporting the concept of a rescue tug as part of an emergency response system.
In response, the Washington State Office of Marine Safety (OMS)4 formed the Emergency Towing System Task Force in August 1993.
May 1996 the bulkcarrier ship Mount Parnitha drifted in the western Strait for seven hours before emergency anchoring off Freshwater Bay, Washington (about 10 miles west of Port Angeles).
The ships main engine was undergoing repairs.
1994 Regional Marine Safety Committee Report In June 1994, the Strait of Juan de Fuca/Northern Puget Sound Regional Marine Safety Committee issued its report5 in conjunction with the OMS.
In reviewing the requirements for tug escorts for tankers, petroleum barges, commercial ships and barges, the Committee stated: This subcommittee does not recommend tug escorts west of Port Angeles, provided an adequate emergency response towing tug is stationed initially in Port Angeles, and then transferred to Neah Bay when conditions have been met to accommodate the vessel.
(Emphasis added) Study of Emergency Towing Services Worldwide In June 1994, marine expert Robert Allan prepared a Study of Emergency Towing Services Worldwide for OMS.
The report documented the availability of rescue tugs in Alaska, several nations in northern Europe, and Japan.
Emergency Towing System Task Force OMS established the broad-based Emergency Towing System Task Force in 1993 to further explore the need for an emergency towing vessel for the western Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The Task Force included the U.S. Coast Guard, Canadian shippers, the British Columbia government and others.
The report6 was issued in August 1994 with the preferred alternative of: a dedicated rescue vessel at the entrance to the Strait to provide immediate emergency assistance to disabled vesselsA dedicated rescue tug is a reasonable alternative to tug escorts in the Strait and a viable Neah Bay Rescue Tug
July 1996 the cruise ship Golden Princess drifted off Neah Bay for about four hours.
The ship had suffered a serious engine room fire losing electrical power and propulsion with 1,200 persons aboard.
Fortunately, the weather was good and the ship was eventually taken under tow to Victoria, British Columbia.
The vessel was also carrying over 600,000 gallons of fuel.
A tug eventually arrived on scene and towed the vessel to Vancouver for repairs.
14
means of reducing the risk of spill events in the area.
The study recommended a dedicated rescue tug with a pulling capacity of between 100 and 150 tons depending on whether severe or extreme duty criteria is selected.
Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary Established In July 1994, Congress recognized the unique and relatively pristine environment of Washingtons outer coast by establishing the Olympic Coast National Marine Sanctuary.
In recognition of the threat to the Sanctuary of oil spills, a voluntary vessel Area To Be Avoided was established to provide a buffer by moving vessels further off shore.
November 1996 the container ship Gao He drifted for nearly two hours north of Cape Flattery, Washington after suffering an engine problem that required a shut-down for repair.
Tug assistance was estimated to be four hours away.
November 1998 the general cargo ship Aristotelis drifted for about three hours after breaking down about three miles off Cape Flattery.
The ship drifted at about four knots towards Vancouver, Island, refusing a Canadian Coast Guard offer for an emergency tow-assist.
The ship finally anchored about two miles from shore.
February 1999 the Hanjin Elizabeth lost power off Cape Hook on Vancouver Island when a spare piston pin broke loose from its stowage in a storm and was tossed about the engine room.
The ship drifted for 36 hours, passing 20 miles east of Scott Island, British Columbia.
A tug dispatched to assist finally reached the ship and held the vessels head into the sea until the crew could make a repair.
The crew restarted the engine and arrived in Washington waters under her own power with two tug escorts.
15
1995 Canadian Tug Initiative In April 1995, the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment7 undertook a comprehensive review of regional risks, conditions, options, and costs for using escort, rescue and salvage tugs.
The final report included discussions of the Strait of Juan de Fuca and its western approaches.
One of the recommendations of the report was for a 70-ton pulling capacity tug to be stationed at either Bamfield or Victoria, British Columbia, for use as an escort/salvage tug to fill towing capability deficiencies, considered to be the most severe That recommendation has not been acted upon.
British Columbia Tug Study A September 1995 report to the Ministry of the Environment found that prepositioned rescue tugs were already in place in Europe and other locations.
It also supported the need for a rescue tug.
1997 International Tug of Opportunity System In 1997 a marine industry coalition established the International Tug of Opportunity System (ITOS), paid for by the industry through fees collected by the Puget Sound Marine Exchange.
Participating tugs were equipped with electronic transponders, which made them readily identifiable on computer tracking screens at the Marine Exchange and the U.S. Coast Guards Puget Sound Vessel Traffic Service.
While the system does not place any more tugs in service, it is designed to allow for rapid identification and contact with tugs that may be able to assist disabled vessels.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
February 1999 (at the same time the Hanjin Elizabeth was drifting), the general cargo ship Carias engines failed and the ship began drifting 17 nautical miles from Brooks Peninsula towards the northern end of Vancouver Island.
Severe storm to hurricane-force winds and seas prevailed in the area.
Ocean-going tugs from the United States and Canada were dispatched by the Canadian Coast Guards Rescue Coordination Center in Victoria.
The Caria drifted 41 miles over a 19-hour period.
It came within 10 nautical miles of both Vancouver Island and Scott Islands before a towline was secured by a Canadian tug.
It took the tug seven hours to arrive from Tahsis, British Columbia, approximately 80 nautical miles away.
The severe sea conditions made it difficult to secure a towline; the task took over five hours.
Based on drift rate, there were about two hours to spare before the ship could have grounded.
Scoping Risk Assessment (Volpe Study) The Coast Guard-sponsored Scoping Risk Assessment (Volpe Study) found that as a vessel moves westward from Port Angeles to the outer coast, the following progressive changes affect the probability and consequences (i.e. risk) of major oil spills: Certain spill prevention measures tug escorts for tankers and statelicensed pilots are not required.
The likelihood of a casualty is increased as sea-state and weather conditions become more severe.
Spill response resources are less available.
Because of weather and sea-state conditions, spill response measures are less effective.
Natural resources are more economically valuable.
Dr. Sharon Christophersen of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) chaired the Environmental Impact Work Group of the Volpe Study.
Dr. Christophersen communicated one of the work groups findings that we must prevent oil spills on Washingtons outer coast because we cannot effectively respond to an oil spill there.
1999 New Carrissa Oil Spill 
This incident renewed the call for a rescue tug at Neah Bay.
In February 1999, Congressman Norm Dicks secured funding for the tug from the U.S. Department of Defense through the U.S. Navy.
A tug was contracted and in place from March through April 1999.
(See Chapter IV.)
ITOS Evaluation An August 1999, review of the ITOS by the U.S. Coast Guard8 confirmed Ecologys earlier conclusion, that the ITOS provided a relatively small incremental improvement to the existing safety system.
Using assumptions regarding the ability and willingness of participating tugs to assist a drifting vessel, the report concluded that the risk eliminated by I TOS in western waters (western Strait of Juan de Fuca and Juan de Fuca entrance) to be nine percent.
This number was questioned by some observers who pointed out that the ITOS system partially duplicated the vessel tracking function of Tofino (Canada) and Puget Sound Vessel Traffic Services and did not physically add any new rescue capability to the waters around Cape Flattery.
16
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
Coast Guard Regulatory Assessment In November 1999, a report titled Regulatory Assessment: Use of Tugs to Protect Against Oil Spills in the Puget Sound Area was prepared for the U.S. Coast Guard.
While the report did not include oil spill clean up costs and environmental damage assessments in the cost-benefit analysis portion of the report, it found that: Vessel traffic in the Strait of Juan de Fuca will increase by 50 percent by the year 2025.
The quantity of oil transiting the Strait in ships of all types will increase from 360 million barrels to 457 million barrels by the year 2025.
The probability of a spill over 10,000 gallons from collisions and groundings of commercial vessels would increase from one every five years currently to one every 3.6 years by 2025 if additional risk mitigation measures are not put in place.
The spill probability from tankers would decrease by threefold over this time period, but this reduction in risk is expected to be offset by increased spills from dry cargo vessels.
In addition, the report concluded that while ITOS alternative reviewed for reducing oil spills, it was option.
In comparison, a dedicated rescue tug was expensive and would avert a moderate quantity of was the least expensive also the least effective found to be moderately spilled oil.
2000 Follow-up to the U.S. Coast Guards Regulatory Assessment In February 2000, Ecology commissioned a supplemental report titled Allocation of Tug Costs on a Per Transit Basis.9 (See Appendix E).
The per transit cost, based on $4 million and $6 million dollar per year estimates for a rescue tug, ranged from $369 to $553 per transit in 2000 and decreased to $240 to $360 per transit by 2025 (not accounting for inflation).
The bid process for the current tug contract, however, demonstrated that a tug can be put in place for as low as $2.5-$3 million per year, depending on performance standards.
Rescue Tug Interim Funding During the winter of 1999-2000, Washington state, through the Governor s emergency fund, and the federal government provided funding to station a dedicated rescue tug at Neah Bay, Washington.
The Tenyo Maru Oil Spill Natural Resources Trustees provided additional funding to extend rescue tug coverage at Neah Bay through the spring of 2000.
In the spring of 2000, the Washington State Legislature provided $1.65 million to position a rescue tug at Neah Bay for the September 2000 - May 2001 winter season.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
August 2000 the bulk carrier ship Marine Express departed Vancouver, British Columbia bound for Bangladesh, loaded with grain.
A fire was discovered in the engine room and the main engine was shut down when the ship was in the western Strait.
The fire was not reported to authorities.
Three men found refuge in the lower engine room.
Fortunately, the engine room ventilation fans remained on and provided fresh air.
The ships crew reentered the engine room with protective gear to search for the other men, fearing them dead.
The fire was finally extinguished when a hose was brought to bear on it from above.
No serious injuries were reported.
The ship drifted for about two and one-half hours.
17
September 2000 the bulk carrier ship Selendang Kasa and the 57-foot purse seiner Anthony G collided in fog near the western entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The collision resulted in no significant injuries, but the Anthony G incurred substantial damage to its wheelhouse.
Fortunately, the Anthony G, with three persons on board, did not sustain any damage below the waterline and no oil spilled.
The vessel was later escorted back to Bellingham, Washington.
North Puget Sound Risk Management Panel In July 2000, the North Puget Sound Long-Term Oil Spill Risk Management Panel (NPS Panel) issued its Final Report and Recommendations.
The NPS Panel, made up of 22 stakeholders, met from September 1999 to July 2000.
The Panel was formed through a Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. Secretary of Transportation and the Governor of Washington and co-chaired by the U.S. Coast Guard and Ecology (as non-voting members).
The NPS Panel adopted 24 recommendations to improve marine safety in the waters of the Washington Coast, Strait and northern Puget Sound.
Six additional measures were considered, but not adopted.
One of those considered was the recommendation for a year-round, federally-funded, dedicated rescue tug at the entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
(See Appendix B.) Three-fourths of the Panel members supported this proposed recommendation.
However, the Panels ground rules required a consensus of the members, with no more than two dissenting votes, to pass a recommendation.
The rescue tug proposal received four nay votes and did not pass.
18
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
IV.
Operations 1999-2001 March April 1999 One of two Crowley Marine Services tugs, Sea Valiant or Sea Breeze was stationed at Neah Bay during this short season with federal funds.
DES CRIPTION Dimens ions Length Bread t h Dept h To n n a g e M ain Engines Ho rs e Po wer Bo llard Pu ll A h ead Bo llard Pu ll A s tern Exp ect ed Sp eed* Dat es on Statio n S EA BREEZE 126' 34' 16.5' 198 GT 2 Cat In clin e 6 Cy l 3606 4962 max HP 102,580 lb s 70,000 lb s 11.5 Kt s 1 Mar - 7 Mar S EA VALIANT 128.5' 38' 19.9' 199 GT 2 EM D 20-645-E5 5750 max HP 175,000 lb s 103,000 lb s 12.0 Kts 8 Mar - 30 A p r
* Sp eed bas ed on performance in light t o moderat e weather
Figure 1: Characteristics of the tugs Sea Breeze and Sea Valiant presented for comparison to the Barbara Foss.
(From the U.S. Coast Guards 1999 report on the interim rescue tug [See Appendix I]).
The rescue tug responded to two vessel emergencies between March 1, 1999, and April 30, 1999:
Bouchard Barge No. 230 Incident On the evening of March 28, 1999 the tank barge Bouchard No. 230 was separated from the tug Ralph E. Bouchard when the towline parted in a storm.
The barge was not carrying an oil cargo, but had diesel aboard to fuel its generators.
The position was about 17.5 miles off the coast, west of La Push, Washington.
Two men were aboard the drifting barge, which was taking water over its deck.
During the evening of March 28 and early morning of March 29, despite attempts by the tug to reconnect, the Bouchard No. 230 drifted northeast about 19 miles at 2.3 knots.
By 4:15 a.m., the drifting barge was about 13.5 miles west of Cape Alava, Washington.
The rescue tug Sea Valiant was dispatched at 9:15 p.m. on March 28 and arrived on-scene at 1:15 a.m. on March 29, standing by to assist.
The Ralph E. Bouchard was finally able to retrieve the Bouchard No. 230 at 8:15 a.m. on March 29 and made its way to Port Angeles, Washington under escort by the Sea Valiant.
The Sea Valiant later assisted the Ralph E. Bouchard in retrieving the broken end of the tow wire still attached to the barge.
Following the incident the Captain of the Ralph E. Bouchard spoke very supportively of the rescue tug.
He told an Ecology investigator that it provided a comfort factor during the hazardous conditions his people worked in.
See Appendix C for details of this incident.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug 19
Aleutian Challenger Incident On April 5, 1999, the 78-foot fishing vessel Aleutian Challenger lost propulsion 3.6 miles northwest of Tatoosh Island as a result of running out of fuel.
The rescue tug, Sea Valiant, responded, but the Captain of the Aleutian Challenger refused the tugs assistance because a commercial agreement for towing services could not be reached.
The distant, potential destination for the fishing vessel, and the associated high cost of contracting with the tug for a long tow was a factor.
A U.S. Coast Guard boat stationed at Neah Bay later towed the fishing vessel into Neah Bay when it drifted near the shipping lanes.
During the time that the Aleutian Challenger was adrift, the Sea Valiant stood by ready to assist, and eventually escorted the U.S. Coast Guard boat, with the Aleutian Challenger in tow, to the entrance to Neah Bay.
December 1999 June 2000 The tug stationed at Neah Bay as a dedicated rescue tug was the Barbara Foss, a 4,300 horsepower twin-screw tugboat rated for ocean service.
The tug is 126 feet long, 35 feet wide, and has a maximum draft of 16 feet when fully loaded with fuel.
It has two diesel main engines that drive two conventional propellers to create 142,600 pounds of pull.
A recent refit enhanced the maneuverability of the tug with the addition of nozzles on its twin screws (propellers).
The tugs free-running speed is approximately 12.5 knots.
It has fuel capacity of over 100,000 gallons of diesel, allowing for extended tows.
Foss has previously used the tug for a wide range of tasks, including rescue work and towing heavy barges and ships on transocean voyages.
20
Figure 2: The Foss tug Barbara Foss, at the pier in Neah Bay.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
The rescue tug Barbara Foss responded to three vessel emergencies between December 16, 1999, and June 20, 2000:
Clipper Arita Incident On February 22, 2000, a large dry-cargo ship, the Clipper Arita, lost propulsion approximately 10 miles west of Cape Flattery and started to drift northeast toward shore (see Rescue Tug Response Report Map #0222-1, Appendix H).
The rescue tug Barbara Foss was underway in 11 minutes and was able to make over 10 knots in 12 to17 foot seas proceeding toward the disabled vessel.
The vessel crew was able to repair their propulsion system just as the Barbara Foss arrived on scene, 80 minutes after getting underway.
The Clipper Arita had a fuel oil capacity of about 235,000 gallons.
Sharlene K Incident On May 8, 2000, the Barbara Foss towed the Canadian fishing vessel, Sharlene K, to safety in Neah Bay after the vessel ran out of fuel near the entrance to the Strait (see Rescue Tug Response Report Map #0508-1, Appendix H).
Wind, wave and swell were from the west, which would have pushed the Sharlene K towards the coast of Vancouver Island.
The Barbara Foss reached the vessel 50 minutes after getting underway.
While out of fuel, the Sharlene K had lube and hydraulic oils aboard that would have been a risk to the environment had the vessel grounded.
Virtue Incident On June 6, 2000, a large bulk-cargo ship, the Virtue, bound for Vancouver, British Columbia, lost propulsion approximately 30 miles west of Cape Flattery and started to drift to the north (see Rescue Tug Response Report Map #0607-1, Appendix H).
The U.S. Coast Guard directed the master of the Virtue to arrange for tug assistance due to repeated propulsion failures on the ship.
The Virtues master contracted with the rescue tug Barbara Foss.
The Barbara Foss escorted the ship into the Strait of Juan de Fuca and finally, after repeated propulsion failures, towed the ship to Esquimalt, British Columbia for inspection by Transport Canada Marine Safety officials.
The response took over 29 hours to complete.
The Virtue had a fuel oil capacity of about 468,000 gallons.
(See Appendix D for details of this incident.)
September 2000 May 2001 The 2000-2001 operations plan for the rescue tug has been altered from that of 1999-2000.
Instead of emphasizing drills, the Barbara Foss will be sent out to meet and escort vessels when the vessels history suggests the need.
The rescue tug, Barbara Foss, responded to two vessel emergencies between September 18, 2000, and October 31, 2000: Neah Bay Rescue Tug 21
Ever Given Incident The Barbara Foss made its first deployment of the season to assist a drifting vessel on October 16, 2000.
The 885-foot container ship Ever Given shut down main engines about six miles off the Washington Coast, 26 miles south of the western entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The ship, with a fuel oil capacity of about 1.4 million gallons, was drifting to accomplish repairs to its fuel heating system.
The U.S. Coast Guard Captain of the Port issued an order to the Captain of the Ever Given requiring a tug escort to Port Angeles, Washington.
The Barbara Foss was dispatched and escorted the ship safely to anchor at Port Angeles.
Daewoo Spirit Incident The Barbara Foss again deployed on October 26, 2000 to assist the 941foot bulk carrier Daewoo Spirit.
The Daewoo Spirit, with a fuel oil capacity of about 1.2 million gallons, was having intermittent steering losses near the western entrance to the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
The U.S. Coast Guard could not determine the cause due to the crews limited English-language ability.
The Coast Guard therefore required the ships Master to undertake a tug escort to anchorage at Constance Bank, British Columbia.
The Barbara Foss undertook the escort.
Mediteran Frigo Safety Issue On October 27, 2000, the refrigerated cargo ship, Mediteran Frigo, reported on their arrival notice that they were approaching the Strait of Juan de Fuca, bound for Seattle, without nautical charts of the area.
In response, the U.S. Coast Guard issued an order requiring the ship to: (a) obtain the necessary charts before passing Buoy J (at the entrance to the Strait) or, (b) get a tug escort from Buoy J to the pilot station at Port Angeles and then take on nautical charts.
Early on the morning of October 28, the Barbara Foss was called into service to deliver nautical charts to the ship before it arrived at Buoy J so that the ship could transit the Strait and Puget Sound safely and in compliance with international regulations.
The Barbara Foss then escorted the ship to a point five miles east of Buoy J to further ensure safety.
(Lack of charts is not an isolated occurrance.
In 1999 alone, Ecology cited two tankers for coming to Puget Sound ports without adequate charts.)
22
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
V. Funding 1999-2001 For portions of three seasons the rescue tug has been funded from state and federal sources while on standby and during drills.
However, once a decision has been made to initiate an actual towing operation, four possible funding sources become available: A routine contract negotiated between the vessel owner and the private sector rescue tug operator; The vessels insurance company (such as one of the Lloyds of London P
The vessel operator is then billed to recover the costs.
March April 1999 The U.S. Navy, through its SupSalv organization, stationed an interim rescue tug at Neah Bay in March and April of 1999.
This was done in response to public pressure and the February wreck of the New Carrissa on the Oregon Coast.
Federal funding was secured in February 1999 through the efforts of Congressman Norm Dicks.
December 1999 June 2000 From December 1999 to June 2000, the federal government (led by the U.S. Navy and the Coast Guard) and the state of Washington contracted with Foss Maritime Services.
The contract covered commercial tug services at the western end of the Strait of Juan de Fuca, including rescue, standby and operational drills.
The Tenyo Maru Oil Spill Natural Resources Trustees provided additional funding to extend rescue tug coverage at Neah Bay through the spring of 2000.
Federal funding State funding Tenyo Maru funding Total Costs Length of Coverage = = = = = $1,000,000 100,000 400,000 $1,500,000 178 days
September 2000 May 2001 The Washington Legislature provided $1,650,000 for the winter of 20002001 to again station a dedicated rescue tug at Neah Bay, Washington.
The Foss tug Barbara Foss was selected.
The tug will be deployed from September 18, 2000 until May 18, 2001.
Ecology was able to achieve eight months of rescue tug coverage through the competitive bid process.
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
23
24
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
VI. Capability Evaluation An important factor in selecting a tug is its bollard pull.
Bollard pull is a measure of the towing power of a tug boat.
Crowley Marine Services Sea Valiant has 87.5 tons of bollard pull and 5,750 horsepower.
Foss Maritimes Barbara Foss has 70 tons of bollard pull and 4,300 horsepower.
For comparison, the April 1995 report to the Canadian Ministers of the Environment completed by Robert Allan recommended a minimum of 70 tons of bollard pull for a Strait of Juan de Fuca and Vancouver Island rescue tug.
Washingtons August 1994 Emergency Towing System Task Force recommended a tug with a 100 to 150 ton bollard pull, depending on the weather and sea state conditions in which the tug was expected to operate.
Prince William Sound, Alaska, which has lower volume and less diverse vessel traffic than Puget Sound, has systematic rescue tug coverage.
In addition, three Alert-class Crowley tugs (built in Anacortes) with 10,200 horsepower and a 150-ton bollard pull, were delivered to Prince William Sound in 2000.
These tugs are especially designed to operate in that area and carry out multiple missions including the ability to arrest the drift of a fully laden oil tanker under storm conditions.
March April 1999 During this two-month season, the rescue tug conducted 100 drills and responded to two vessel emergencies.
The U.S. Navy collected data on the drills and the Thirteenth U.S. Coast Guard District prepared a report on the interim rescue tug (see Appendix I).
Table 3: 1999 Rescue Tug Statistics Value Measured (units) Time to get underway (minutes) Time to arrival at ship (minutes) Distance traveled to ship (nautical miles) Underway Speed (knots) Effective Speed (from tug notification) (knots) Wind Speed (knots) Wave Height (feet) Minimum 0 13 Not Available Not Available Not Available 0 0 Maximum 45 210 Not Available Not Available Not Available 40 22 Average 10 80 Not Available 11.3 9.6 13.3 3.3
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
25
Tug S p eed as a f u n c t i on of R esponse D i st ance M o di f ied Spe e d M a de G o od 14
Spe e d M a de G o od
12
11.
3 4 10.
3 2 9.
87 9.
7 8
11.
2 4 10 .
0 6
11 .8 2
10
8
7.
5 2
6
4
2
0
0 to 7 .4 9
7 .
5 to 1 4 .
9
1 5 to 2 2 .4 9
2 2 .5 +
R e spo n se D i st anc e ( N au t i ca l M i l e s)
Figure 3: Adapted from the U.S. Coast Guards 1999 interim rescue tug report.
December 1999 June 2000 0214-1 0331-1 0126-1 0410-1 0416-1 0324-1 0205-1 0309-1 0222-1 0421-1 0508-1 0221-1 0225-1 0211-1 0115-1 0414-1 0316-1 0302-1 0208-1 0312-1 0403-1 0209-1
Rescue Tug Drill/Response Navigation Tracks 0424-1 0212-1
0204-1 0215-1
Neah Bay
0201-1 0607-1
0228-1
Port Angeles
0106-1
Navigation Buoy - J Tug Navigation Track with Event Id number
Nautical Miles
0
6
12
Wa. Dept. of Ecology, GIS Technical Services
10/12/00
Figure 4: Chart showing rescue tug track lines for drills and responses from December 15, 1999 to June 9, 2000.
(See also Appendix H.)
The rescue tug performed 43 drills between December 16, 1999, and June 20, 2000: 26 Twenty-seven (27) drills tested the tugs ability to respond to a fictitious drifting vessel in various locations and weather conditions (see Rescue Tug Drill Report Maps, Appendix H).
Four drills involved Navy vessels Neah Bay Rescue Tug
that simulated a drifting vessel by shutting off their propulsion plants.
Two drills consisted of escorting a high-risk vessel from three miles west of the Strait entrance past Duntze and Duncan Rocks, the navigational obstructions off Cape Flattery (see Appendix G).
Seven drills consisted of deploying an Orville Hook device from the tug, simulating recovery of a drifting barge or ship by snagging the bridle or anchor chain (see Appendix G).
Two drills simply tested the speed of the tug in existing sea conditions (see Appendix G).
One drill tested the fire pumps and hoses of the tug for use in assisting a fictitious fishing vessel in Neah Bay (see Appendix G).
Four drills self-initiated by the tug Captain involved traveling to a given location at best speed (see Appendix G).
Additional drills, using commercial vessels and U.S. Coast Guard vessels to pass a tow line to, were discussed at the beginning of the 1999-2000 tug deployment season, but no commercial vessel was willing to participate and Coast Guard resources were not available.
One drill with a Navy ship involved passing a heaving line to the vessel and picking up passengers (see Rescue Tug Response Report Map #0221-1, Appendix H).
Analysis The statistics in the following table were derived from the 27 deployment drills and three responses (a total of 30 deployments) that the Barbara Foss accomplished.
Table 4: 1999-2000 Rescue Tug Statistics Value Measured (units) Time to get underway (minutes) Time to arrival at ship (minutes) Distance traveled to ship (nautical miles) Underway Speed (knots) Effective Speed (from tug notification) (knots) Wind Speed (knots) Wave Height (feet) Swell Height (feet) Minimum 0 33 6.4 8.0 6.9 0 0 0 Maximum 15 419 62 13.7 13.7 25 5 14 Average 7 95 17.6 11.3 10.2 13.2 1.5 5.4
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
27
Reported wind speed, wave height and swell height were examined to determine if any of those factors significantly impacted the tugs underway speed during the 30 drills and responses accomplished.
It was found that wind speed, wave and swell height had only a weak statistical relation to tug speed.10 Wind speed, wave and swell height were also analyzed for impact on tug speed based on the direction of each environmental variable relative to the tugs direction of travel (impacting the tug from ahead, abeam or astern).
The statistical relationships to tug speed, while stronger in some cases, were also found to be weak.11 The following graphs show the tug speed versus each of the environmental factors observed by the Captains of the Barbara Foss.
Tug Speed v. Wind Speed
30.00 25.00 20.00 15.00 10.00 5.00 0.00 Speed to Ship from Underway Tug Obs.
Wind Spd (knots)
Figure 5
Tug Speed v. Swell Height 16.00 14.00 12.00 10.00 8.00 6.00 4.00 2.00 0.00 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 Speed to Ship from Underway Tug Obs.
Swell Ht. (feet)
Figure 6
28
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
Tug Speed v. Wave Height 16.00 14.00 12.00 Knots 10.00 8.
00 6.
00 4.
00 2.
00 0.
00 1 0 4 3 2 Feet S peed to S hip from Underway Tug Obs.
S ea Ht .(feet) 6 5
Figure 7 There were four drills in which the tugs average underway speed was reduced to below 10 knots (drill numbers 0106-1, 0115-1, 0414-1, and 0421-1, see Appendix H).
In the first case (0106-1) the Barbara Foss made the longest exercise transit of the season (62 miles) into approximately 7-foot seas from the west and southwest, reducing its speed to about 8.9 knots.
In the second case (0115-1), tug speed was reduced to 8.0 knots because the tide in Neah Bay was low, requiring the tug to move slowly past the rock pinnacles near the entrance to Neah Bay losing about 15 to 20 minutes.
In the third case (0414-1), tug speed was 9.1 knots, but no cause for the slower speed was discerned.
In the last case (0421-1), tug speed was 9.4 knots, into southerly winds of 25 knots.
During the initial part of the response the tug was traveling into a predicted current of about 0.7 knots.
The data collected by the Barbara Foss regarding environmental conditions had its limitations.
Notably, the record for each deployment includes only a single entry for wind, wave, swell and current and it was therefore assumed that conditions recorded were representative for the entire outbound tug transit.
In addition, tidal current observations were not recorded as consistently as other environmental conditions.
Therefore, the maps contained in Appendix H display tidal current based on predicted values for locations in the Strait of Juan de Fuca.
An analysis of the rescue tugs underway and effective speeds was also done by distance categories corresponding to the same categories contained in the U.S. Coast Guards 1999 Interim Rescue Tug Report (see Appendix I).
Analysis indicated that, as would be expected, both underway and effective speeds increased with longer travel distances as the tugs best speed running in open waters pushed-up the averages (see Figure 7).
Neah Bay Rescue Tug 29
Tug Speeds as a function of Response Distance Effective Speed (knots) 14 12 10 8 6 4 2 0 0 to 7.4 7.5 to 14.9 15.0 to 22.4 22.5 + 7.95 11.17 9.77 9.60 10.52 Underway Speed (knots) 11.96 12.24
11.27
Response Distance (Nautical Miles)
Figure 8
Neah Bay as a Rescue Tug Base
Foss Maritime Company provided the following summary comment regarding the feasibility of Neah Bay as a mooring and staging site for a rescue tug.
During the test period, Foss Maritime Company, unequivocally demonstrated that Neah Bay is an excellent location for mooring and staging a tug like the Barbara Foss.
Additionally, logistical support for all but fuel and lube re-supply and major marine repairs was satisfactory.
The Makah Tribal council members, residents, local vendors and Port managers deserve credit for their assistance and cooperative attitude during our stay.
Additional information can be found in Foss report, located in Appendix J.
30
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
VII.
Findings 
A recent Coast Guard study estimated that the current probability of an oil spill over 10,000 gallons in Puget Sound is one in five years.
This risk will increase to one in 3.6 years by 2025, driven by larger volumes of oil and more vessel traffic.
Rescue Tugs Protect Other Sensitive Coastlines In many areas of the world, communities with sensitive coastlines have stationed large, highly capable rescue tugs as an effective protection measure.
Alaska, several countries in northern Europe, South Africa and Japan all provide this extra margin of safety for their environment.
Community Supports Government-funded Tug A majority of stakeholders participating in the North Puget Sound LongTerm Oil Spill Risk Management Panel voted in favor of a year-round, government-funded, dedicated rescue tug as a risk management measure.
But due to the Panels voting procedure, the measure did not pass as a recommendation.
The Strait of Juan de Fuca/Northern Puget Sound Regional Marine Safety Committee, also representing diverse interests, also supported the rescue tug concept, as did the Emergency Towing System Task Force.
Federal Responsibility to Fund Tug The federal government should provide the bulk of funding for the tug based upon the following premises: The federal government is a trustee of natural resources in the area, including the Olympic National Marine Sanctuary, Olympic National Park, and the coastal national wildlife refuges; The federal government has designated certain species found in the area as threatened and endangered.
These species and their habitats would be affected by major oil spills; The federal government has a responsibility to protect the treaty rights of Puget Sound tribes in their usual and accustomed fishing areas; Washington is meeting a regional energy supply need.
The North Puget Sound marine transportation corridor contains a regional crude oil refining center and is a conduit of refined petroleum products to other western states; The Strait of Juan de Fuca conveys more tonnage of cargo to and from Pacific Rim ports than any other West Coast waterway; Neah Bay Rescue Tug 31
Puget naval There major
Sound is homeport for a large portion of the nations strategic fleet, which also poses a risk of major spills; and is potential for international tension with Canada should a transboundary oil spill occur in this waterway.
Actual Cost Lower than Estimated Cost The $1.65 million provided by the Washington Legislature was enough funding to station a rescue tug at Neah Bay for eight months of the 2000-2001 winter season.
By extrapolation, contract tug coverage on an annual basis might be obtained for as little as $2.5 million.
If it was determined that a more powerful tug would be best, Ecology believes one could be secured for approximately $3 million per year, based on recent procurement experience.
The Allocation of Tug Costs on a Per Transit Basis and Regulatory Assessment studies estimated the costs at $3.4 million to $6 million for a 5,500 or 10,000 horsepower tug.
While the Barbara Foss is less powerful than called for by the Emergency Towing System Task Force (100 to 150 tons pulling power), it does meet the minimum power criteria proposed in the report for the Canadian Ministry of the Environment (70 tons pulling power).
Rescue Tug Shown to be Effective Actual experience during the last three seasons demonstrated: A dedicated rescue tug is capable of rapid response.
The tugs were able to get underway within 15 minues and maintained an average speed of 11.3 knots.
Factoring in the time to get underway, the effective speed was 10.2 knots.
Neah Bay is an effective base of operations.
Foss Maritime was complimentary of the facilities and the support of the Makah Tribe.
Sea state only minimally affected the rescue tug speed.
Environmental conditions affected tug speed in only three cases out of 30 during the 1999-2000 season.
Recommendation Ecology recommends that state funding be provided to station a rescue tug at Neah Bay while federal funding is pursued.
Specifically, Ecology recommends that the legislature provide $3 million in stopgap funding for the 01-03 Biennium to provide the rescue tug for approximately 12 months.
If long-term federal funding does not become available, the state would have the option to proceed with rulemaking.
The rulemaking process would determine whether vessels transiting the northern coast and western Strait of Juan de Fuca should have a user-fee-supported rescue tug available during their passage.
32 Neah Bay Rescue Tug
VIII.
Endnotes 1
The term rescue tug refers to an Emergency Towing Vessel with additional capability to respond to other types of emergencies.
2
Engrossed House Bill 2497, page 119.
1997 Puget Sound Risk Assessment Expert Panel for the Scoping Risk Assessment
3
4
The Office of Marine Safety was merged into the Department of Ecology in July 1997.
It became part of the Spill Prevention, Preparedness, and Response Program.
5
Regional Marine Safety Committee Safety Plan 
June 1994.
6
An Oil Spill Prevention Proposal for A Dedicated Rescue Tug to Protect the Strait of Juan de Fuca and Adjacent Pacific Coast: Final Report of the Emergency Towing System Task Force for the Washington State Office of Marine Safety.
August 1994.
7
A Review of Escort, Rescue and Salvage Towing Capability in Canadian Waters.
Robert Allen Ltd.
And D. F. Dickens Associated Ltd.
April 1995.
8
Analysis of the Geographic Coverage Provided by the International Tug of Opportunity System from November 1998 to May 1999.
August 30, 1999.
9
Herbert Engineering Corporation.
Report No. 9939-001.
February 16, 2000.
10
Based on linear regression analysis with highest R-squared value found to be 0.13.
The 30 deployments represented a small sample size.
R-squared values ranged from 0.0025 to 0.49, with even smaller sample sizes.
11
Neah Bay Rescue Tug
33
Neah Bay Rescue Tug: Report to the Washington State Legislature Publication No. 00-08-023
Joe Stohr, Manager Spill Prevention, Preparedness, and Response Program P. O. Box 47600 Olympia, WA 98504-7600 (360) 407-7455 Authors Mike Lynch Jon Neel Major Contributors Stan Norman Jack Barfield Editing and Production Mariann Cook Andrews
