THE RIGHTS STUff PUBLISHED QUARTERLY BY THE MINNESOTA DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RIGHTS MAY - JULY 2002 Pushed Aside When the economy goes down, age discrimination claims go up.
But is cutting higher-paid, older workers unlawful? Plus Immigrants with disabilities A confluence of challenges News Shorts Duluth names Meg Bye as top human rights enforcement officer The City of Duluth has named Meg Bye, a longtime human rights activist and former Duluth city council member, as the city's Human Rights Compliance Officer and Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) Officer.
Bye will work with the Duluth Human Rights Commission to ensure compliance with the city's recently enacted human rights ordinance.
Duluth is the third Minnesota city, in addition to Minneapolis and St. Paul, to obtain authority from the state legislature to investigate charges of discrimination and determine whether there is probable cause to believe its human rights ordinance has been violated.
"I have been active and involved in human rights Meg Bye since the beginning of my public career," commented Bye.
"This is an opportunity "This is an to actually put into place opportunity to and get paid for doing what I have been doing all my actually put into place and get paid life."
As the city's first for doing what I compliance officer, Bye faces have been doing the challenge of setting up all my life."
an investigative process "from scratch," she noted.
"We likely are going to be using as much of the state's process as possible so that we can share information back and forth."
In her role as EEO officer, Bye will help develop a new affirmative action plan for city government.
"The city's affirmative action plan is way out of date," she said.
"We have a new census.
And the city needs to develop some in-house statistics to find out more than our gut-level feeling that there is a lot to be done to increase the diversity within city hall."
Community education also is one of Bye's responsibilities, an area in which she anticipates the active involvement of the Duluth Human Rights 2 Commission in "recognizing and celebrating the diversity that we do have in the city of Duluth, and making that a positive thing in everybody's mind."
Bill Jackson, president of the Duluth Human Rights Commission, praised the selection of Bye.
"She knows the workings of city government, and she also is a trained mediator," commented Jackson.
"She also is a strong woman who stands up for what she believes in.
She doesn't bend with the wind."
Third Annual Human Rights Art Contest winners About 90 students from six junior high schools submitted art for the Third Annual Art Contest sponsored by the Northwest Regional Human Rights Coalition.
First Prize Winner was Hannah Dyrud, 7th Grade, Medicine Lake Lutheran Academy, for "Every Vessel is Special."
Second Prize Winner was Sarah First Prize Winner Hannah Dyrud's Svegal, 6th "Every Vessel is Special."
See more Grade, St. winning and honorable mention Alphonsus Catholic School, artwork on our web site.
for "We Are One."
Third Prize Winner was Brenda Khothsombath, 8th Grade, Sandburg Middle School, for "Go Out There and Make a Difference."
The contest was designed to introduce 6th, 7th and 8th grade students to universal human rights issues.
A panel of five judges selected the 20 winning entries.
Department of Human Rights awarded grant to produce CD-ROM The Department of Human Rights has received a $2,000 grant from ADA Minnesota to help fund the development of a CD-ROM on disability issues, to be produced in cooperation with the Minnesota State Council on Disability.
The CD-ROM will complement a workbook the council is producing for a July 26 ADA Minnesota Workshop based on the theme, "Know Your Rights and Responsibilities."
Material from the workbook will be showcased on the CD-ROM, along with feature articles on disability that have appeared in The Rights Stuff, and additional information on the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Minnesota Human Rights Act.
Case histories of people with disabilities who have brought charges under the Human Rights Act and a list of community resources will round out the content.
To ensure accessibility, all material will be available in several different formats on the same CDROM, including a web browser format (HTML), text, and large text.
For those who may not have access to a computer, the CD-ROM will also include some audio material, playable on most CD players.
The disc will be produced during the summer and distributed in September, in cooperation with the Minnesota League of Human Rights Commissions.
Commissioner's Corner Minnesota, along with almost every other state and the District of Columbia, is grappling with a budget shortfall caused by an economic recession in the wake of September 11.
The Minnesota constitution prohibits the state from running a deficit at the end of a fiscal biennium.
Thus the legislature continues to debate what combination of spending cuts and/or taxes will be implemented to balance the budget.
But part of the solution will be reductions in state agency budgets, including that of the Human Rights Department.
In these tough economic times, we are more grateful than ever for the network of local human rights commissions throughout the state.
Some commissions provide mediation of human rights disputes in their communities.
Others have expressed interest in providing intake services, channeling charges to this department.
To this end, the League of Minnesota Human Rights Commissions has scheduled two training sessions this spring, one in Winona (April 28) and one in Hibbing ( June 23).
At these sessions, department staff will explain the intake process and provide forms.
There are many other ways local commissions can work more closely with the department.
For example, a commission could recruit a list of attorneys willing to represent charging parties in department mediations.
Or a local commission could organize a speaking opportunity for me or another department staff member.
Last year, the Owatonna commission invited us to speak about housing discrimination to a group of about 50 local realtors.
And I will be speaking to the Rochester Chamber of Commerce on June 5 at the request of the Olmsted County commission.
Economic hard times come and go; we will certainly recover from the current slowdown.
In the meantime, we are seeking to develop even more partnerships with local human rights commissions.
They can help us reach out to cities and towns throughout our state.
They can be our eyes and ears, ensuring that our vision of a state free from discrimination is not clouded by the current fiscal climate.
-Janeen E. Rosas, Commissioner Summer events: stop by, say hello For the third consecutive year, the Minnesota Department of Human Rights will participate in the Twin Cities' GLBT (Gay-LesbianBisexual-Transgender) Pride Festival.
This year's festival will be held Saturday, June 29 from 10 AM to 8 PM and Sunday, June 30 from Noon to 6 PM in Loring Park in Minneapolis.
Stop by our table and pick up some literature or a button.
The department will also participate in Rondo Days in St. Paul, scheduled for July 20, and in other events yet-to-be determined.
Look for updates on our web site (see back cover) or call 651-296-9062 for more information.
Commissioner Janeen Rosas testified on April 25 at the United States Commission on Civil Rights' hearing on the news media's coverage of minority communities, held in Minneapolis.
3 It's an age-old phenomenon: the economy crashes, older workers get laid off, and claims of discrimination soar.
A look at what's happening, what's legal, and what isn't Age Discrimination W hen the economy takes a dive, cases of alleged age discrimination predictably rise, as older workers find themselves among those bearing the brunt of layoffs and other reductions in force aimed at slashing salaries.
The current economic downturn is proving to be no exception: the number of charges of age discrimination filed with the Department of Human Rights in 2001 jumped 17 percent over 2000.
The federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), which also investigates age discrimination and often shares jurisdiction with the department, has seen a nine percent increase in fiscal year 2001.
Things could be worse, knows Department of Human Rights supervisor Elaine Hanson, and if the economy gets worse, they still might be.
4 Hanson, a 20-year department veteran, remembers the recession of the 80s, when age bias charges skyrocketed from their typical 12 percent of the department's caseload to 37 percent, surpassing the other big three--race, sex and disability.
The effects of bad economic times don't show up in the department's statistics immediately: employers typically cut staff first through attrition.
Even when the ax falls and mass layoffs make the front page, those who believe they were let go because of age often wait a while before filing a charge.
(They must file within one year after the discrimination took place under the Human Rights Act; within 300 days if they choose to file with the EEOC.)
"If the economic downturn continues, we'll see cases of age discrimination going zing again," Hanson says.
What is age discrimination? Age discrimination essentially is treating someone less favorably than others because of their age.
In employment, such differential treatment might include refusal to hire, termination, lower pay, reduced benefits, or fewer opportunities for promotion or training, if the reason for these disparities is age.
Both the Minnesota Human Rights Act (MHRA) and the federal Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) make such activities illegal, but state law is in some ways broader.
The MHRA also outlaws age discrimination in education (for individuals above age 25), while the ADEA covers only employment.
The federal law protects only those over 40 and under 70, who work for employers with 20 or more employees; the MHRA covers all workers over the age of majority.
The MHRA also allows more time to file a charge (a year after the discrimination happened vs. the ADEA's 300 days).
The law may seem clear enough.
But in practice, when tough economic times coincide with the layoffs of thousands of older workers, whether the reason in any individual case was age discrimination can be difficult to determine.
Suppose, for example, that a company legitimately needs to slash its payroll, and in doing so, lays off a disproportionate share of older workers.
They were pink-slipped not because they were a certain age, the company argues, but because they were earning the highest salaries.
Can a worker bring a successful age discrimination lawsuit based on the "disparate impact" on older workers of such downsizing? Currently, these disparate impact claims are allowed under the ADEA in some federal circuits such as the 8th circuit, which includes Minnesota, but not in certain others, including the 3rd, 6th, 7th and 10th circuits.
Unlike the ADEA, the MHRA expressly recognizes disparate impact claims (Section 363.03, subd. 11) and stipulates what a complaining party and an employer must prove to prevail.
Someone bringing a charge must isolate and identify the specific employment practice that is responsible for a statistically significant adverse impact on a class of persons protected by the Human Rights Act.
To defend against such a claim, an employer must show that this practice is manifestly related to the job or that it significantly furthers an important business purpose.
If the employer can do that, the charging party still can prevail by showing that another, "comparably effective practice" would have had significantly less adverse impact.
Mandatory retirement how old is too old? A mandatory retirement age is illegal under the state Human Rights Act, with certain notable exceptions.
One exception cited in the MHRA is another Minnesota age discrimination law, Minn.
Stat.
Section 181.81.
That law prohibits age discrimination by private employers, but permits companies to enforce mandatory retirement at age 70, or 65 for certain executives or those in a "high policy-making position," if certain requirements are met.
One key requirement: there must be a published mandatory retirement policy.
There are other exceptions to age discrimination laws, carved out by other statutes, regulations and court cases.
For example, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is allowed to specify an earlier retirement age (currently 60) for airline pilots.
Law enforcement agencies also are given more leeway to set maximum hiring and mandatory retirement ages.
State Supreme Court justices who have served for at least one term and who have arrived at the age of 70 must retire (Section 490.025, subd. 1).
Similarly, District Court judges who have served for not less than 15 years and who have arrived at the age of 70 must retire (Section 490.101, subd. 1).
The exceptions that permit airlines and law enforcement agencies to set mandatory retirement ages don't allow them to practice other forms of discrimination against those who may be approaching the end of their careers.
"We've brought a number of lawsuits against airlines who refused to hire older pilots," comments Laurie Vasichek, a senior trial attorney for the EEOC.
The airlines apparently reasoned that since 60 was the mandatory retirment age, hiring and training pilots over 40 who would not be around as AGE DISCRIMINATION continued on page 6 5 "You can't refuse to pay for more training if it's being offered to other employees.
That's classic age discrimination."
AGE DISCRIMINATION continued from page 5 the Minnesota Department of Human Rights has seen an even larger increase than the EEOC, which is reporting national data, may long wasn't a good investment.
The U.S mirror the fact that certain parts of Minnesota's Supreme Court has ruled that such practices economy have been particularly hard hit.
are discriminatory and unlawful.
Even as the economic situation brightens, To refuse to hire someone or give them there is reason to believe that age fewer opportunities for training because you discrimination claims will continue to climb.
think they are likely to retire soon is almost Minnesotans are, after all, getting older.
The always unlawful under state and federal law.
median age will rise from 36.2 in 2000 to 42.2 "You don't know when an employee is going to in 2030, and the state's 65+ population will retire; eligibility does not equate to retirement a almost double over the same period, even as the lot of times," points out Hanson.
"Or even if younger population declines.
It's expected that you do, you can't refuse to pay for more a lot of these older Minnesotans still will be training if it's being offered to other employees.
working, especially those in their late 50s and That's classic age discrimination."
early 60s.
Thus, the supply of older workers who are candidates for termination, and Other exceptions eligible to file age discrimination claims when The law also allows exceptions for what are the pink slips come, is certain to grow as called Bona Fide Occupational Qualifications Minnesota ages.
(BFOQ)--employment qualifications that, To avoid discriminating and a flood of although they may exclude discrimination claims, employers members of a protected class, will need to refrain from making "You can't relate to an essential job duty assumptions about workers who are and are considered reasonably discriminate against older--that they're less productive, necessary to the operation of less amenable to training, or for the particular business.
But an individual other reasons won't work out in a such BFOQs are rare in age particular job.
Such notions hamper because certain cases.
older workers all too often, as do While a business that caters things may be true generalizations that, while to a young clientele might statistically true, don't necessarily argue that it needs to employ of others in the same apply to any given individual.
younger salespeople or "Eyesight declines as we age," points protected class."
executives who can relate to a out Department of Human Rights certain generation, that supervisor Gary Gorman.
"But argument is unlikely to some people have 20-20 vision at persuade courts.
"But you age 75.
You can't discriminate against an could ask an older job applicant the same individual because certain things may be true questions you might ask a 24-year-old.
Are of others in the same protected class."
they familiar with the latest fashion trends, or The assumption that an older employee the hip music scene, or whatever is current inevitably will expect a certain salary is also with respect to that industry? Then make your dubious, especially in a recession.
Hanson selection based on objective criteria," says recalls one case a few years ago in which an Hanson.
employer had refused to even interview an older job applicant, believing that because of his age and experience, he would have wanted Looking ahead more money than the company could pay.
The As the nation's economic woes continue, department found probable cause to believe the the motives of employers for dismissing older company had violated the Human Rights Act; workers will continue to receive scrutiny.
The in Hanson's view, the company's refusal also data for 2002 isn't in yet; it's too early for the violated common sense.
"The guy was out of most recent wave of layoffs to show up in the work.
So what if he'd been making fifteen system.
"We're seeing more white-collar age bucks an hour in his last job? Who's to say that cases, which is symptomatic of the economy," he wouldn't have worked for $7.50?" Those says Department of Human Rights intake were, like now, tough times.
supervisor Lucy Johnson-Gaines.
The fact that 6 Case Studies Three cases of alleged age discrimination It wasn't just her boss's comments that were making Rooney's job increasingly unbearable.
If she made a mistake when ordering parts, she was reprimanded, while male coworkers who were guilty of the same infractions were not.
Although it was against company policy to stop for breaks or lunch when making deliveries to Minneapolis--a regular part of Rooney's job--male drivers were permitted to take such breaks.
One day when it had started to rain, Rooney asked her boss if she could leave the plant for a minute to roll up her car windows.
Her request was denied, even as male coworkers were dashing to their vehicles.
For nine months Rooney persevered at the plant, despite being the only employee who did not receive a customary, progressive raise.
Then one day in January 1999, she was given the bad news: sales were down, the company said, and as a result she was being laid off.
She was, she soon discovered, the only employee being laid off, while several men with less seniority were being retained.
Rooney filed a charge of discrimination based on age and sex with the Minnesota Department of Human Rights.
The department found substantial evidence to support her allegations; witnesses corroborated the ageist and sexuallydemeaning language, as well as the double standard that seemed to apply to her mistakes vs. those of her male counterparts.
The department found probable cause to believe the company had violated the Human Rights Act.
Her boss's repeated references to "old bags" and similar comments had created a hostile work environment for Rooney based on her age and her sex, the department concluded.
In a settlement negotiated by the department in December 1999, the company agreed to pay Rooney $15,750.
It admitted no wrongdoing.
CASE STUDIES continued on page 8 7 CASE 1 AGE AND SEX She was "too old" and "women are good for only one thing," her supervisor allegedly said.
As the only female employee at a factory in a small town in central Minnesota, Mavis Rooney had two strikes against her in the view of the plant manager: her age and her sex.
Her manager, Mr. Simmons, allegedly referred to the 54-year-old woman as "an old bag" on a daily basis, to her face and in conversations with other workers.
He also described her as a "dumb old bitch," and in a conversation with another male employee, explained his belief that "women are only good for one thing--sex.
Anything more than that just costs me money.
And there's not going to be any of that with that old____(charging party)," he allegedly said.
His conversations were also laced with vulgar slang related to sexual acts and female anatomy, language which made Rooney uncomfortable.
But when she complained to the company's president about Simmons' terminology, no action was taken.
The incidents described in these case studies are based upon complaints filed with the Depar tment of Human Rights.
In each case the depar tment found probable cause to believe that there had been a violation of the state Human Rights Act.
We have chosen not to include the real names of the charging par ties or the respondents.
Although the names of both are a matter of public record once a case is closed, we believe that to publish them here would ser ve no impor tant public purpose.
CASE STUDIES ontinued from page 7 CASE 2 "YOU DON'T FIT IN."
"You can't teach an old dog new tricks," his supervisor allegedly said.
Nate Lieberman, 50, worked for a high tech Twin Cities firm whose executives were in their 30s, and most employees with his job title, seminar specialist, were in their 20s.
Throughout his seven months of employment in 1999, he frequently was criticized by the company's district manger, Ms. Horton.
"You don't fit in," she allegedly told him, questioning his computer skills and his communication abilities.
Although by the company's own quantifiable measures of performance, Lieberman's work was average or above, he repeatedly was passed over for promotion.
Others were promoted in the company's typical informal style: "Here's your extra thousand bucks," a manager would announce at a meeting of all the seminar specialists.
Those promoted had comparable or lesser skills, according to other employees interviewed by the Department of Human Rights.
But they were half Lieberman's age.
One day in October 1999, Lieberman was summoned to a meeting with Horton and another company executive.
The district manager asked if he had decided to look for a new job.
He replied that he had not, but that he intended to file a charge of age discrimination.
Eight days later, Lieberman was fired.
After Lieberman filed his charge of age discrimination, an investigation by the Department of Human Rights substantiated his claim that he was not promoted and eventually fired because of age.
His computer skills, which the company cited as a reason for his termination, were comparable to those of other seminar specialists, witnesses said.
Like them, he had struggled with the company's new database.
But he sometimes could solve the problems it presented on his own, and then share the solution with others-- despite being the last to receive database training.
("You can't teach an old dog new tricks," Ms. Horton had allegedly said.)
One witness had been asked by the company to document Lieberman's computer performance prior to his termination.
She had refused to do so, she said, because she couldn't understand why he was being subjected to greater scrutiny than the other employees.
The Department of Human Rights found probable cause to believe that the high tech firm was 8 guilty of violating the Human Rights Act by firing Lieberman because of his age, and because he had raised the issue of age discrimination.
After the finding, Lieberman elected to hire his own attorney and pursue a private lawsuit against the company.
CASE 3 MIXED MOTIVES Sales were down.
But that wasn't the only reason he was replaced by a man 20 years younger.
Bob Johnson, 57, had worked in the service department of Wilkerson Motors for more than 30 years.
"You've been around here longer than dirt," the owner joked with him repeatedly, once suggesting that the employee should be paying him for the privilege of working there.
Your house and your cars must be paid off by now, the owner told him.
When are you going to retire? Would you consider a buy-out? Johnson told the owner he wasn't interested in a buy-out, and planned to work until he was 62.
He knew that soon he'd be eligible for increased pension benefits.
The owner knew that too, and that, according to Johnson, was one reason why on April 6, 1999 he was laid off--less than six months before he would have received that increased pension benefit.
After the layoff, Johnson learned that the car dealer had tried to get rid of him earlier, but a union steward, no longer with the firm, had raised objections.
Johnson was replaced, he alleged, by a man 20 years younger with only 18 months of seniority, who was given a different title but essentially the same job.
In August, Johnson filed a charge of age discrimination with the Department of Human Rights.
Denying that it had discriminated, the company argued that the layoff was necessary because sales had declined, requiring some reorganization.
That might be true and a legitimate reason for the layoff, the department agreed.
However, the department found plenty of evidence that the company also wanted to get rid of Johnson because of his age.
When an employee is fired for "mixed motives," if one of the reasons is unlawful and discriminatory, the employer can be held liable for violating the Human Rights Act.
The Department of Human Rights found that was the case here.
Although the company had a legitimate need to cut costs, there was probable cause to believe that Wilkerson Motors was guilty of age discrimination for firing Johnson.
Their disabilities are often hidden from public view.
But Minnesota's Hmong, Somali, Hispanic and other new immigrants have the same disability challenges as other Minnesotans -- and in some cases more Immigrants, On the University of Minnesota's West Bank campus, there are thousands of immigrants--eating in restaurants, shopping in stores, navigating the busy neighborhood streets.
Margot Imdieke Cross, who has lived on the West Bank for years, sees many of them every day.
But Imdieke Cross has noticed something that seems unusual: hardly any of the immigrants she sees on the West Bank or anywhere else appear to have a disability.
"I have yet to see a Somali in a wheelchair," says Imdieke Cross, who would likely 9 refugees and disability notice these things--she is, after all, an accessibility specialist with the Minnesota State Council on Disability.
"And I can count on one hand the number of immigrants I've seen with any visible disability."
Where are they, she wonders.
Where are the Hmong, the Russians, the Latinos, the Somalis and all the other groups of recent immigrants, who must have their DISABILITY continued on page 10 with a disability tend not to come.
There was a time when they couldn't come, when U.S. immigration laws barred share of disabilities, just like every other anybody with one of a wide range of population.
"It's the roll of the dice, it's disabilities, notes INS spokesman Tim going to happen," she says.
In fact, there is Counts.
"Back in the distant past, when some reason to believe that immigrant somebody had a club foot or something populations would have more disabilities they would be jettisoned," Counts explains.
than people who have been here longer, in While those laws have been taken off the part because they tend to be poor.
"Statistics books, what are called "public charge laws" show that the poorer the group, the more remain.
"The general idea behind the law is prevalent disability is going to be because of that if you will have to depend on the pre-natal care and many other issues government at any level to support you, that associated with poverty," says Imdieke you are not allowed to immigrate to this Cross.
country," says Counts.
But few immigrants Then consider the fact that many with disabilities are excluded on that basis, immigrants--including an estimated Counts says.
"There are always waivers three quarters of all refugees from available, and if somebody can show they Southeast Asia, Somalia and have a means of support or something that Russia--left their native countries will prevent them from becoming a public because of fighting or imminent charge, they can immigrate anyway."
danger; many spent time in refugee While people with disabilities may not camps, some were victims of tend to immigrate to the U.S. for jobs, torture.
What happens to those finding employment is not necessarily the who become disabled in their main reason immigrants come to native countries? "Are they Minnesota.
In a study by the Wilder being stopped from coming Research Center in November 2000 of over?" Imdieke Cross wonders.
Hispanic, Hmong, Russian and Somali Once they arrive, immigrants tend immigrants in Minneapolis-St. Paul, most to find work in society's most said that jobs played a smaller role than the dangerous jobs, where they are the most fact that friends and family were already likely to become injured and possibly here.
That was the reason cited most often disabled.
Where do they go? Why don't we by the group as a whole, and by 86 percent see them? of Hmong immigrants.
"There are plenty of people with disabilities who are coming over with their y some estimates, one out of every families," says Steve Maxwell, a mental five Americans has a disability of health program supervisor at Community some kind; whether the rate among University Health Care Center in immigrants is higher or lower is anyone's Minneapolis.
The center sees low-income guess.
One of the few studies of the issue, people from all published by ounds, UCLA in 2000, In many other cultures, a disability... is a backgrhalf are but about found that in California, curse from God, divine punishment for the Southeast Asian refugees, and 20 immigrants were percent are African less likely to report actions of one's parents or ancestors.
American or having a disability African refugees, including Somalis.
Because than U.S. born residents.
The researchers of cultural attitudes, these disabilities and found that surprising, given poverty and the individuals who have them often remain lower rates of health insurance coverage in the shadows, out of public view.
among the state's Latino and Asian To western culture and western immigrant population.
They theorized that medicine, a disability is a medical fact, since most immigrants come to the U.S. perhaps the result of an accident or a seeking employment, and that disability is disease; the explanation could involve the an additional employment barrier, those DISABILITY continued from page 9 B 10 families, which suggests that the disability was really environment, or one's genetic code.
But in many other beyond the family's control.
"Often it can be a great cultures, a disability has a different explanation: it is a relief when they are told, you really had no control curse from God, divine punishment for the actions of over this happening, and you're doing the best you can one's parents or ancestors or for one's own conduct in for the individual in your family.
The families really past life.
"It is not something you want out in public.
respond to that."
There is a lot of shame around it," explains Lolly Lijewski, a systems advocate at the Metropolitan Center for Independent Living, which provides services f all the barriers keeping immigrants with to individuals with disabilities, including Somalis and disabilities isolated and without medical and Hmong.
other services, perhaps none is more Courage Center has an outreach program that formidable than language.
Almost all immigrants in provides services to Somali, Hmong, Russian, Chinese the Wilder study speak a language other than English and Spanish-speaking individuals with disabilities and most of the time at home; only about one-third say their families.
In some cultures, a family member's they can speak and understand English well, and one disability creates a stigma that isolates the family from in five cannot speak English at all.
They also said its community, because it is believed that they caused it language was their greatest current source of stress some way, explains Karen Frees, a clinical social worker related to being an immigrant, by a wide margin.
at Courage Center.
When encountering a family's Courage Center and clinics like La Clinica in St. Paul traditional spiritual beliefs, it's important to honor the provide interpreters, but throughout Minnesota the family's culture, start where the family is, and build on availability of interpreters does not always meet the that foundation, she says.
It's a process that rarely need, especially in greater Minnesota.
happens quickly.
"With migrant farm "In our western culture, workers, the barrier is you assume that you're going "Their spirituality is where they go for language," says Joan to set an appointment with Altenbernd, executive strength.
Who are we to say that is the doctor, go in at one director of Migrant Health o'clock, meet for 15 minutes, Services, Inc. in Moorhead. wrong, or take that away from them?" go over whatever the Those who pick sugar beets diagnosis and prognosis is, and find work in Minnesota's and you're on your way," says Frees.
But in many processing plants may speak some English, but their cultures, that 15-minute process can require two or first language is Spanish.
A farming accident, a three two-hour sessions.
"You don't just jump in and repetitive stress injury or, especially, a mental health ask them something that in their mind might be very issue like depression can highlight the language barrier disrespectful.
You have to be aware of who the problem.
She finds that an increasing number of decisionmaker in the family is, and honor the fact that migrant families need the help of a mental health care they are being hospitable and respectful to you.
You professional.
"But there are very few in Minnesota's can't just come in with your own agenda."
rural communities and very few in the Twin Cites that One way in which agendas can differ: caregivers are bilingual, much less bicultural," she laments.
may be oriented toward helping an individual with a Even when language is not a problem, immigrants disability become more independent, so they can go to who become disabled may face yet another obstacle: school, hold a job, move out of the family home and transportation.
Consider the case of Romero, a truck live on their own.
"That may fly directly in the face of driver who had a stroke and needed rehabilitation.
what the family wants and believes," says Frees.
Not Language wasn't a problem--he spoke Spanish and only would independence expose the family's secret English fluently--but lack of health insurance was.
shame, but also, the idea that a person with a disability "When we tried to find him some assistance in rural can hold a job is in some cultures a foreign and Minnesota that was affordable and available, it was farfetched notion.
impossible.
He pretty much had to go to the Twin It's important to remember that the family's Cities," says Altenbernd.
But since he could no longer traditional culture and belief system can be a source of drive, his wife would have to leave her job one day a strength.
"The extended family takes the person with a week to take him to the Twin Cities, a huge hardship disability in, and accepts them as they are," Frees notes.
for a family suddenly dependent upon her income.
"And their spirituality is where they go for strength.
Who are we to say that is wrong, or take that away from them?" Instead of challenging a family's beliefs, DISABILITY continued on page 12 Frees will talk about her experience working with other O 11 DISABILITY continued from page 11 T here is one more potential roadblock for immigrants with disabilities: trust.
While knowing who to trust is a perennial issue for newcomers everywhere, it's especially problematic for some immigrants, including many Asians and Somalis.
"Many families from a different culture aren't going to have a high level of trust in any perceived bureaucracy or government, because of the places they've come from," says Frees of Courage Center.
"They're refugees, they're escaping from a war-torn country and some have been victims of torture."
In their native countries, they had plenty of good reasons not to trust their own governments--why should they trust a new one, or a social service agency that seems to be somehow part of it? If trust is based on understanding, immigrants may s Minnesota's immigrant population increases find that route especially difficult.
The system that and families become more established, provides immigrants with social and medical services is immigrants with disabilities inevitably will a complex web of agencies and programs.
"Helping become more visible.
On the streets of the West Bank, them understand all the different programs that are in cities like Moorhead and even in suburbia, out there can be very difficult.
The system can be very immigrants who use wheelchairs or have other difficult, even for us as English-speaking, born in the disabilities may no longer be an uncommon sight.
It United States kind of folk to try and understand," will be clear then, as it is to many health care providers comments Frees. and disability advocates now, that immigrants have the Those immigrants who have been here longer tend same disability issues as the rest of the population, to be more willing to trust from back injuries to orthopedic outsiders and to view problems to depression.
"If you're an immigrant with a disability as a condition Those who survived the trauma rather than a curse disability, you're facing our entire set of war or refugee camps may find, as bringing the family shame.
they emerge from the shadows, that of discrimination, plus you're A few years ago, Hmong they must now survive another families were much more powerful if sometimes more subtle carrying over everything from your likely to cling to obstacle: discrimination.
"If you're an traditional beliefs about immigrant with a disability, you're old culture."
disability, according to facing our entire set of Lijewski "We're on the discrimination, plus you're carrying second or third wave of the Hmong population, and over everything from your old culture," says Imdieke over the years I've seen a difference.
It's a little easier to Cross.
If someone feels uncomfortable around people establish trust."
they perceive as foreign, and uneasy around anyone It is important, however, to understand that they view as disabled, for an immigrant with a immigrants, like other Minnesotans, are not all alike.
disability "that's a double whammy," adds Altenbernd.
They may share the same burdens and frustration, but As they struggle with both physical and attitudinal they arrive in Minnesota with individual as well as barriers, they can rely on Minnesota's network of social cultural histories.
"You can't assume that because services agencies to help clear the path, and on laws someone is from a particular culture, they have a like the Minnesota Human Rights Act to ensure that certain belief," says Frees.
Within cultures there are their rights are protected.
They also can draw on the differences--between young and old, between those strengths of other own cultures, and on their own who were highly educated and those who were not, as individual courage.
"It takes a lot to uproot oneself well as clan or tribal differences that existed in their from one's culture, country and everything else, to native country and continue here.
relocate one's entire life," says Counts of the INS.
"I To make assumptions about an individual with or think it's safe to say that those who immigrate here, without a disability, based on his or her country or whether legally or illegally, are usually fairly strong culture, is as dangerous as ignoring the importance of people."
the culture.
Rachel Tschida of Minnesota's Center for Victims of Torture once assumed that its clients would want to connect with friends or colleagues from the same country.
Now she knows better.
"We had a man from Liberia, so we said OK, we need to find where the Liberian community is.
That scared the hell out of him, because frankly he had been tortured by Liberians.
And he didn't know who was here, the good guys or the bad guys."
In another case, when a counselor at the Center for Independent Living offered to look for another Russian to be the personal care attendant for a Russian child with a disability, the family didn't want someone from their own culture.
"They said no, they really wanted someone who was English-speaking, because they wanted their daughter to learn English," recalls Lijewski.
A 12 In some languages, there is no word for mental illness.
But depression, post-traumatic stress and other conditions afflict many new Minnesotans as they struggle with memories of the past and the shock of life in a new place.
Immigrants and Mental Health punctuated by arbitrary, random killings, according to Maxwell.
"Some of the Cambodians we have are still having nightmares virtually every night, and during the daytime they're having flashbacks."
Other Twin Cities immigrant and refugee populations have similar stories of violence and trauma, experienced in their home countries or in refugee camps.
Somalis fled a country torn by a bloody civil war.
In some cases, their memories are "even more fresh and acute, since it's been less than 10 years since they've left," says Maxwell, whose clinic sees about 120 Somalis a year.
Some immigrants arrive with memories of torture, like Joseph, a West African man in his late 20s.
A political prisoner for 18 months in his native country, he was beaten on the head to unconsciousness, his wife and children were MENTAL HEALTH continued on page 14 When a helicopter flies overhead, Chan's heart starts to pound.
It doesn't matter that the helicopter is only broadcasting a report on the rush hour traffic for a Twin Cities radio station.
The sound of the chopper's blades beating against the air brings back memories of her Cambodian village, of soldiers, bombing, and death.
There are many refugees like Chan living in the Twin Cities, and some whose symptoms are even more dramatic.
"In the past I've seen people hit the floor when they hear a helicopter," says Steve Maxwell, a mental health program supervisor at Community University Health Care Center in Minneapolis.
"It brings back memories of their village being bombed and their entire family being killed by soldiers."
Like Chan (not her real name), virtually every Cambodian refugee in Minnesota spent time in the Khmer Rouge camps, where there was starvation and forced labor for 20 hours a day, 13 the issues we are dealing with constantly now."
In the Southeast Asian community, the beaten, and he watched as other prisoners were frustration grows slowly and sometimes killed, then thrown to lions to be ripped apart.
explodes.
"What we're starting to see, among Eventually, he escaped, sought asylum in the those who have been here a little longer and are United States and arrived at Minnesota's not adapting well, is a growing sense of Center for Victims of Torture (CVT). discouragement," says Maxwell.
"They're very Diagnosed at CVT with post-traumatic stress aware that their family members or friends are disorder, Joseph (not his real name) now getting jobs, buying houses, and kind of receives medication to treat his depression, assimilating, and they're not."
nightmares, sleeplessness and intrusive At another clinic serving primarily thoughts.
Southeast Asians, the Metropolitan While the center sees about 250 clients a Community Mental Health Center in St. Paul, year, there are 20,000 torture survivors living in program director Blong Vang believes that Minnesota, the center estimates.
The mental mental health problems are higher for the health implications of so many victims are Hmong community than for other minorities.
staggering, one reason the center has started a He cites high unemployment and families with project to reach out to political and religious many children as leading to depression--and leaders of refugee communities to talk to them too often, to family violence.
"The husband about mental illness and its symptoms.
The will argue with his wife, the wife will argue physical repercussions from torture are almost with her husband, and the husband wants to be always accompanied by psychological alone so he can get away from the stress," Vang symptoms, explains CVT says.
The wife, spokesperson Rachel meanwhile, may be "They're not eating, they're not Tschida.
"They're not "unable to sleep and get eating, they're not sleeping angry all the time.... sleeping at night, they're having at night, they're having sometimes the wife nightmares.
And they'll nightmares.
And they'll think that wants to leave her kids think that those things are because she those things are happening to them behind,want to face the happening to them doesn't because they are crazy or stress."
weak, not because they've because they are crazy or weak, not Such arguments suffered trauma from because they've suffered trauma often can turn violent, being tortured."
The says Vang, who believes from being tortured..." program's goal is "to the murder rate is higher explain to them that those among Hmong than for symptoms are absolutely and completely other minorities.
Statistics are largely normal--that's how any normal person would unavailable, but the Hmong community has react to such trauma.
And to explain that there suffered several infamous family-violence is help available."
tragedies, including the murder of six children by their mother in 1998, and a murder-suicide or many immigrants with mental health that left 13 children dead two years later.
The problems, the cause of their depression stress of life in a new country can be or anxiety is not extraordinary trauma, compounded by memories of the old country, but the ordinary stress of everyday life, some mental health advocates point out. compounded by language and economic An immigrant who suffers from depression problems.
The stress is high in the Latino or other mental illnesses may be a 24-year-old community.
"Housing has been very difficult mother living with many children, or a person for everybody.
And maybe one day they have a in her 80s whose children come to visit her in a job, one day they don't," says Carmenza Preus, high-rise once a week.
Feelings of loneliness, a social worker at La Clinica.
The clinic on St. isolation, powerlessness and dependency are Paul's West Side offers medical care, mental common among the clients of the Korean health and social services to a large number of Service Center, an agency serving primarily Spanish-speaking clients.
"We have a lot of non-English-speaking Koreans in their 70s, 80s patients with issues with depression.
It's one of and 90s.
"They can't understand English, they MENTAL HEALTH continued from page 13 F 14 you can't even translate directly.
It's very don't drive, so they have to rely on their difficult to find a way to explain these children for everything," says the center's conditions in Hmong or Somali."
executive director, Yoonju Park.
"Their The explanations an individual culture children are middle-aged now, and busy with provides for bizarre behavior can sometimes their own businesses, and raising their own stand in the way of effective treatment.
It is kids."
especially hard for Hmong people to ask for Their children come by once a week; the help with mental health issues, says Vang, rest of the week, their lives can be filled with because the concept itself is so foreign.
"In our loneliness--and fear.
The fear might come culture, we feel that if a person has a mental from a letter in the mailbox.
One woman illness problem, that person in a past life did showed up at Park's agency one morning as the something bad to other people.
It's a spiritual door opened, shaking as she held the problem."
unopened letter--a routine notice for a public As with physical hearing on some issue illness, and perhaps before a district court.
even more so, mental Though the woman "In our culture, we feel that if a illness (or spirit could not read English, she concluded that it had person has a mental illness problem, possession) would bring shame to the been sent from a court.
that person in a past life did family if the "She said, `I couldn't sleep through the night, something bad to other people.
It's a individual's condition were known.
The because it came from the spiritual problem."
family would provide court.
I didn't do care, but keep the anything wrong.
Why do mentally ill family member isolated, away they send me this letter?'" from the community.
"A lot of our work over Like depression and anxiety, other more the years has been getting people to bring their severe mental illnesses afflict immigrants and mentally ill loved one out of the back room," refugees from all cultures.
"We certainly have a says Maxwell.
cohort of persons with schizophrenia in all the The work of treating mental illness among refugee groups we serve," says Maxwell.
Their immigrants typically involves strong emphasis cases are complicated by the fact that they may on group therapy, says Maxwell.
Those with also have depression and post-traumatic stress post-traumatic stress disorder often don't disorder on top of the schizophrenia.
"They've realize why they feel and react as they do-- been through some terrible experiences, and why the sound of a helicopter can induce they have complicated pictures because of the panic, why the sleeplessness continues, and trauma they've had, in addition to their nightmares never seem to stop.
The goal of underlying mental illness."
such therapy is to break down the traumatized individual's sense of isolation, "so that people hen the mentally ill individual is can look across the room and hear a similar from another culture, providing story and say, `I'm not the only one who went treatment also can be complicated.
through this.
And maybe I'm not crazy.'"
For Somalis, Cambodians, Hmong and others, Those who survived the camps, the killings "their explanation for mental illness is radically and other forms of brutality, then crossed an different than ours," explains Maxwell.
ocean and now must navigate a new culture, "Particularly people from rural backgrounds often don't realize that their mental health have no exposure to our way of thinking about problems are, in a sense, quite normal.
mental illness.
They tend to explain it as Families, coworkers and others who interact spiritual possession, or loss of their soul with them may not realize it either.
But to somehow."
therapists who are seeing an increasing number In some languages, there may not even be of immigrants with mental illnesses, posta word for mental illness or for any of its traumatic stress is hardly surprising, given all individual varieties.
"The terms that we use in their clients have experienced.
"If these things the DSM 4 (the Diagnostic and Statistical had happened to you or me," says Maxwell, Manual used by mental health professionals) "we would have the same kind of symptoms."
W 15 On our web site NEW HMONG, SPANISH CONTENT ; STUDENT ART CONTEST WINNERS The Department of Human Rights' web site now includes content in Hmong and Spanish.
Also online: all winners and honorable mentions in the Third Annual Art Contest sponsored by the Northwest Regional Human Rights Coalition.
Visit www.TheRightsPlace.org or www.humanrights.state.mn.us Seventh-grade student Danielle Bryant won Honorable Mention for "We Are All Equal."
THE RIGHTS STUff The Rights Stuff is published quarterly by the Minnesota Department of Human Rights, Army Corps of Engineers Centre, 190 E. 5th Street, Suite 700, St. Paul, Minnesota 55101.
Ed i tor/De s i g n : Jeff Holman (jeff.holman@state.mn.us) To be added to T he Ri g hts St u f f mailing list, please contact Peg Exley at 651-296-9062 or email peg.exley@state.mn.us.
If you be l i eve you have been a vict i m of discri m i n ation or if you would like more information on the state Human Rights Act, call the Minnesota Department of Human Rights at 651-296-5663 or 1-800-657-3704 (toll free).
T T Y: 651-296-1283.
Copyright  2002 by the Minnesota Department of Human Rights.
This publication is available in alternative formats upon request.
Minnesota Department of Human Rights Army Corps of Engineers Centre 190 E. 5th Street Suite 700 St. Paul, Minnesota 55101 Presort Standard U.S. Postage Paid Saint Paul, MN Permit 171
