5 Opportunities and Issues to Consider SUMMARY Waste composition data and county self-assessments indicate that opportunities exist to increase recycling and further reduce the amount of waste that Minnesotans discard.
The Legislature and counties will need to determine whether to pursue those opportunities and how to fund existing and future recycling and waste reduction efforts.
Better information about which efforts are most successful in reducing waste and increasing recycling rates would help policy makers decide future courses of action.
We recommend that the Office of Environmental Assistance continue to evaluate specific recycling and waste reduction practices and increase its efforts to synthesize research results and make them readily available to counties, cities, and other interested parties.
s discussed in Chapter 4, Minnesota's recycling rate has stabilized at 40 percent (excluding credits).
This compares favorably with recycling rates in other states.
Furthermore, a majority of counties have met or exceeded state recycling goals.
Still, opportunities exist to abate an even greater amount of waste, though reasonable people differ on whether and how aggressively those opportunities should be pursued.
In this chapter, we address the question:
A ·
What opportunities exist to further reduce and recycle waste, and what are some of the issues to be considered in weighing the alternatives?
OPPORTUNITIES Counties could make incremental improvements to SCORE programs in many areas.
For example, some residents and businesses do not recycle at all, and many counties do not collect all types of material that could be recycled.
Three areas stand out as potentially fruitful for expanding recycling and waste reduction efforts.
Based on analyses of discarded waste and interviews with county solid waste administrators and stakeholder groups:
·
Opportunities exist to 1) increase commercial recycling and waste reduction, 2) increase the amount of paper recycled, and 3) compost organic waste.
Although a majority of recycled material comes from the commercial sector, OEA and most county officials we spoke with said that commercial recycling presented
48
RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION
A key target of opportunity is to increase commercial-sector recycling and waste reduction.
a better opportunity for gains than residential recycling, primarily because counties currently do less outreach with commercial waste generators than residential.
However, officials also identified potential barriers to increased commercial recycling.
Commercial recycling is more clearly linked to disposal costs and market prices for recycled materials.
Officials in the counties we visited said pricing for commercial waste disposal is such that many businesses consider it cheaper to throw some materials away than to recycle or look for reduction and reuse alternatives.
While most officials said they could demonstrate that reuse and recycling were cost beneficial in many cases, they had little opportunity to do so in one-on-one interactions with local business owners.
Most county officials also said multi-family housing units (which are generally commercial accounts) are a particular problem because recycling is impeded by landlord reluctance to pay for recycling service, space limitations, and high turnover among tenants and building managers.
Studies indicate that about one-third of discarded waste is paper, much of which could be recycled.
About one-third of Minnesota's discarded trash is paper, most of which can be recycled or composted if such services are available.
All counties reported providing recycling opportunities for at least one type of paper, but the scope of paper recycling varies among counties, as does the level of effort to educate residents and businesses on reducing paper waste.
Organic material is another target of opportunity.
As discussed in Chapter 4, about one-quarter of Minnesota's discarded waste is organic material.
Much of this waste, including food waste, non-recyclable mixed paper, wood pallets, and disposable diapers, could be composted.
As discussed in Chapter 3, all counties provide opportunities to compost yard waste, but far fewer currently compost or otherwise divert other types of organic waste.
OPPORTUNITIES AND ISSUES TO CONSIDER
49
ISSUES TO CONSIDER Compared to its statutorily defined goals, Minnesota's SCORE efforts to date have been reasonably successful, which makes it difficult to determine where to go from here.
Some stakeholders argue that maintaining the status quo is a reasonable alternative given current success and ample cost-efficient, environmentally-sound disposal alternatives.
Others, however, argue that Minnesota has not yet reached the ultimate waste reduction goals articulated in the waste management hierarchy.
They would choose to invest in new, broadly-scoped efforts, such as organics composting.
Still others suggest that state funding for SCORE programs be eliminated.
Given the complexity of Minnesota's solid waste management system, there are many issues to be considered in weighing the alternatives.
Among them are the following:
· ·
Now that over a decade has passed since SCORE was implemented, does Minnesota's waste management hierarchy reflect current state priorities? Should future SCORE efforts continue to emphasize recycling or should emphasis shift to waste reduction, household hazardous waste management, or composting? How should recycling and waste reduction efforts be funded? Among the many ways counties have chosen to implement SCORE programs, are certain approaches more efficient or effective than others, and can any best practices be implemented more broadly?
· ·
Determining the future course of action requires policy decisions and value judgments on both the state and county levels.
As a result, we discuss these issues but do not make recommendations on whether to expand recycling and waste reduction efforts, which approaches to pursue, or how to fund them.
Assessing Priorities The state's waste management priorities will influence decisions regarding the future of SCORE programs.
Counties' SCORE activities are driven by state requirements, but also by a commitment to the waste management priorities articulated in the waste management hierarchy.
But, the state's waste management system is different today than it was when the Legislature enacted SCORE.
Since 1989, Minnesota has created a well-established recycling system, but has also invested in resource recovery facilities that currently face significant financial challenges.
Even with subsidies, tip fees at resource recovery facilities exceed those for landfill disposal, and Minnesota is relying more on landfill disposal, both in and out of state.
As discussed in Chapter 1, there is considerable debate regarding the environmental risks associated with today's landfills and the need to reduce landfill use.
Representatives of the waste hauling industry see nothing wrong with relying on landfills as the primary method of garbage disposal.
They argue that landfills are environmentally safe and that there is an ample supply of landfill capacity.
County officials and other stakeholders, on the other hand, argue that because landfilling presents environmental risks and wastes resources, landfill
50
RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION
disposal should be avoided to the greatest extent possible.
Officials from several counties included in our review said that they and their county boards were reluctant to invest in new SCORE efforts, such as adding staff dedicated to commercial waste reduction programs or building organic composting sites, without state action to reaffirm a long-term commitment to the SCORE program.
Indeed, legislative efforts to take a fresh look at Minnesota's waste management policy are underway.
The Legislature has convened a Solid Waste Advisory Committee charged with exploring and developing solutions to the state's growing waste stream in a manner that is sustainable and protective of the environment.
The group is to report its findings--options that the state might adopt to develop a fully integrated waste management system with, to the extent possible, associated costs and benefits--early in 2002.
Similarly, it may also be a good time to consider priorities among the various activities falling under the SCORE umbrella.
Statewide emphasis on recycling coupled with SCORE grant funding helped Minnesota create a recycling infrastructure, particularly for residential recycling.
The state and counties from this point forward need to decide whether to maintain recycling efforts at current levels, to pursue paper and commercial recycling opportunities, or to shift emphasis to other areas, such as composting or waste reduction.
Funding is a key issue.
Determining Who Should Pay Whether the Legislature chooses to expand the state's efforts to reduce and recycle waste, maintain the state's current level of recycling and waste reduction programs, or eliminate state funding for SCORE, it will need to consider how these services and programs will be funded.
One approach is to eliminate state SCORE funding and to pay for recycling and waste reduction programs entirely with user fees, in the same manner that residences and businesses pay for garbage collection.
Since waste management is a local responsibility, advocates of this approach argue that it should be paid for with local funds.
Counties that use SCORE funding to subsidize residential recycling collection would have to find other ways, such as increased service fees, to fund that service, or they could require cities or waste haulers to collect recycled material and pass the costs along to their customers.
Counties that use SCORE funding for activities such as household hazardous waste collection, yard waste programs, and education would have to determine whether to continue to fund those programs through increased service fees or some other means.
Counties, on the other hand, view recycling and waste reduction programs as a state priority.
County officials we spoke with argued that a cutback or elimination of state SCORE funding would send a message that the state no longer places a priority on recycling and waste reduction.
They noted that SCORE funding has not been adjusted for inflation and, as noted in Chapter 2, most counties already contribute more than the required match.
County officials said that recycling has been embraced by much of the public and has become an essential part of waste management.
They pointed out that it is politically difficult for county boards to raise service fees and that the state's recycling and waste reduction goals might be
Stakeholders disagree on the appropriate mix of state, county, and private funding for SCORE programs.
OPPORTUNITIES AND ISSUES TO CONSIDER
51
undermined if it stopped providing SCORE funding.
In addition, state grant funding gives the state a means to monitor county progress toward state goals and priorities.
OEA emphasized that funding issues should be considered in light of a concept called "product stewardship."
Under this concept, all parties involved in the design, production, sale, and use of a product assume responsibility for the full environmental impacts of the product throughout its life cycle.
For example, as discussed earlier, OEA is working with some manufacturers of televisions, computers, and carpets to establish used product collection systems operated and funded by the manufacturers.
OEA advocates more efforts of this kind.
It is up to the Legislature to determine the appropriate mix of state and local funding to pay for recycling and other waste reduction activities.
However, whether through state taxes, county service fees, local utility bills, garbage bills, or cost shifting by manufacturers, the public will ultimately pay.
Identifying Best Practices Policymakers would be better able to make decisions regarding the direction of future recycling and waste reduction efforts and funding if they knew more about the effectiveness of the different approaches and programs that have been implemented.
However:
Little data exist on factors that distinguish successful recycling and waste reduction practices from less successful ones.
·
The complexity of and variation among county SCORE programs and lack of consistent outcome measures make it difficult to assess the relative effectiveness of different approaches.
As a result, we were unable to determine, other than at a very general level, what factors distinguish successful SCORE efforts from less successful ones.
In evaluating recycling, for example, we used county SCORE reports, demographic data, and recycling rate data to explore factors that might distinguish counties meeting recycling rate goals from those that did not.
The analysis identified some demographic factors, such as the population density and the proportion of recycling and garbage generated from the commercial sector, that differentiate the two groups.
As shown in Table 5.1:
·
Among 50 outstate counties that met the 35 percent recycling goal in 2000, on average, 64 percent of their recycled material came from the commercial, industrial, and institutional sector.
In contrast, for the 30 outstate counties that did not meet the recycling goal, only 36 percent of the recycled material came from that sector.
Population density also differentiates outstate counties that met the recycling goal from those that did not.
Counties that met the goal had, on average, 44 people per square mile compared with 30 people per square mile for counties not meeting the goal.
Counties that met the goal also had a higher proportion of their population living in communities with curbside recycling collection.
This data supports current thinking in the solid waste community that curbside recycling boosts participation.
·
52
RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION
Table 5.1: Comparison of Counties Meeting and Not Meeting Recycling Goals, 2000 Metro Outstate Counties Counties Not Counties Counties Not Meeting Meeting Meeting Meeting Goal (N=5) Goal (N=2) Goal (N=50) Goal (N=30) 47% 8% 55% 1,077 202,964 458 96% 17% $6.19 40% 77% 39% 8% 47% 1,129 813,618 2,643 89% 35% $8.18 63% 76% 41% 8% 49% 921 32,719 44 59% 21% $13.22 62% 64% 21% 7% 29% 308 21,383 30 41% 20% $11.28 48% 36%
Average: Base Recycling Rate Source Reduction and Yard Waste Credits
Population density and the extent of commercial recycling activity may influence recycling rates.
Recycling Rate With Credits Pounds Recycled Per Capita County Population County Population Per Square Mile Population With Curbside Recycling Percentage of Households That Are Renter-Occupied Expenditures Per Capita Percentage of Revenue From County Sources Percentage of Recycled Material That Is Commercial/ Industrial/Institutional Percentage of Garbage That Is Commercial/Industrial/ Institutional
51%
48%
44%
37%
SOURCE: Office of the Legislative Auditor analysis of county SCORE report data.
County population figures and housing data from the U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Summary File 1, http://factfinder.census.gov/home/en/sf1.html; accessed November 9, 2001.
·
Metro comparisons are difficult because there are only seven metro counties and only two (Hennepin and Ramsey) did not meet the 50 percent recycling goal.
One possible reason why Hennepin and Ramsey counties had a more difficult time meeting the recycling goal is the higher 1 prevalence of multi-family housing units in those two counties.
We were unable to obtain data on multi-family housing from the 2000 census, but as a proxy, we looked at the percentage of households that were occupied by renters.
Hennepin and Ramsey counties have a higher proportion of 2 renter-occupied households than the other five metro counties.
The percentage of rental households was not related to outstate counties' likelihood of attaining recycling goals.
1 Multi-family units are generally considered to be commercial entities and, as such, are usually not included in residential curbside recycling programs.
2 Hennepin and Ramsey counties also have a higher population density than the other five metro counties, also suggesting that they have a higher proportion of multi-family residences.
OPPORTUNITIES AND ISSUES TO CONSIDER
53
Our analysis points to some general factors that influence recycling rates, such as the extent of curbside recycling, population density, and the proportion of recycled material collected from commercial, industrial, and institutional entities.
But, as we noted in Chapter 4, curbside recycling is already prevalent throughout the state and two other factors--population density and the extent of commercial and industrial activity in the county--are outside the control of county solid waste administrators.
We did not have sufficient data to determine at a more detailed level which implementation choices, or interaction of choices, are associated with higher recycling participation or volume (e.g., open vs. organized collection, commingled collection vs. highly separated collection, the number of materials collected, the use of pricing incentives or recycling mandates, etc.).
It may well be that no single strategy is more effective than others in all cases.
Rather, each county has a unique political, social, and geographic environment that might require a unique solution to waste management and SCORE-related issues.
Evaluative studies would help determine whether some recycling collection strategies are more effective than others.
The use of pilot studies that include evaluation components is an established means of identifying best practices.
Several such efforts have been completed or are underway around the state, many under the auspices of OEA competitive grant programs (distinct from SCORE grants).3 For example, OEA awarded a grant for a residential mixed-paper recycling project in three Minnesota cities.
In the project, cities collected preintervention participation and recycling tonnage data for pilot and control collection routes.
They introduced an education campaign for residents on the pilot route, and collected postpilot data on participation rates, tonnage, and participants' views of the project.
While the results are still being analyzed, the project includes an evaluation component that is important in that researchers can measure the success of a specific recycling effort and share the results statewide.
3 OEA awards Environmental Assistance grants for projects related to waste reduction, pollution prevention, recycling, and environmental education.
It also administers a capital assistance grant program to help cities, counties, solid waste management districts, and sanitary districts build solid waste processing facilities.
54
RECYCLING AND WASTE REDUCTION
Other groups are doing similar projects.
The Solid Waste Management Coordinating Board member counties are collecting baseline data and studying ways to increase recycling and waste reduction in certain business sectors.
Washington County, for instance, is focusing on cardboard recycling by grocery stores.
St. Paul's Neighborhood Energy Consortium is evaluating a strategy to increase recycling in multi-family residences.
Solid waste administrators we interviewed said they would be willing to try new approaches if they (1) had data demonstrating costs and benefits, and (2) had the resources required for the effort.
Although counties have opportunities to find and share information, it seems fairly clear that the results of pilot studies or other OEA grant projects are not effectively being shared around the state.
According to the solid waste administrators we interviewed, counties could use more detailed evaluative or best practices data that can be applied to their unique situations.
Stymied by a lack of such information, Washington County, for example, plans to hire a consulting firm to help it understand why some of its cities are recycling more material per capita than others.
OEA does collect evaluation data and make it available to the public.
As a condition of receiving competitive grants, OEA requires recipients to submit a final report that sums up the successes and failures of the project and to share this information in two or three presentations to appropriate audiences.
Similarly, capital assistance grant recipients are required to file annual reports that are to include outcome data.
OEA makes the results of its grant projects available on its website and in newsletters and shares information in meetings and other forums with county administrators and professional groups.
Nonetheless, this evaluative data is not compiled in a readily accessible venue or format.
OEA's website, for example, includes a policy and research page, but does not have a link to grant project reports or other evaluation data.
According to OEA staff, the agency has not placed a high priority on synthesizing and disseminating research and evaluation results.
By not doing so, OEA, in our view, is not fully realizing the benefits that could be gained from grant and other similar projects.
RECOMMENDATION To assist counties in discerning which strategies would work best for them, the Office of Environmental Assistance should continue to emphasize evaluation of specific recycling and waste reduction practices and increase its efforts to synthesize research results and make them readily available to counties, cities, and other interested parties.
OEA has staff who monitor grant projects, provide technical assistance to counties, and who develop and disseminate education programs, and the agency could use these existing resources to improve the way it gathers and uses data on effective SCORE efforts.
For example, OEA could summarize existing research to develop a best practices guide.
OEA could also use its grant program to focus on projects related to specific research needs and those that would allow direct measurement of outcomes such as increased recycling or actual waste reduction.
Other efforts, such as compiling research or best practice data into a searchable database, would take additional investment.
Some evaluative data exist, but they are not being shared effectively around the state.
