January 2001, Volume 9, Number 4 Texas On-Site Insights Information about On-Site Wastewater T eatment Systems in Texas r 9th Annual TOWTRC Conference Meets Febr9th Annual 13­14 the Texas On-Site Wastewater shallow groundwater.
Other uary Conference of in Waco The Treatment Research Council (TOWTRC) will meet February 13-14 2001 in Waco.
The conference will meet at the Waco Convention Center.
According to TOWTRC Executive Secretary Warren Samuelson, this year's conference will provide an excellent opportunity to learn more about the design, installation, and management of on-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems utilized throughout Texas.
A focus of this year's conference will center around the most recent revisions to Texas regulations about on-site wastewater treatment systems.
Staff from the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) will present an overview of the rules changes.
There will also be opportunities for participants to ask TNRCC staff questions about the proposed rules.
"The conference will help clarify what the proposed rules changes will address and how that will affect people in this industry every day," Samuelson said.
"As a result, we hope this conference will provide a lot of practical information people can put to use."
Several presentations will describe projects recently funded by the Council.
Some of the technical issues that will be covered include the extent to which many on-site systems may be chronically malfunctioning; design parameters for systems that treat high-strength wastes; designs for low-pressure dosing systems and drip irrigation systems; the use of caliche soil as a filter medium to dispose of and treat wastewater; and the development of maps to evaluate areas with
talks will discuss how soil absorption and evaporation can be used in combination to size drainfields; common problems with surface application systems; and characterizing soil hydraulic properties in subsurface drip drainfields.
Attending the conference will be a benefit to professionals in the industry as well as regulators.
The conference provides 8 certified hours of continuing education credits for designated representatives and installers.
Individuals with a Class D wastewater operator license who perform maintenance on OSSF systems can qualify for 10 hours of continuing education credits.
The conference will also feature many exhibitors, including companies in the private sector as well as representatives from the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) and other agencies and organizations.
Note: An abbreviated version of the schedule for this conference is shown below.
For a complete schedule or more details about the conference, contact Warren Samuelson of the TNRCC at (512) 239-4799.
The conference agenda is also on the TNRCC World Wide Web site at http://www.tnrcc.state.tx.us/admin/ events/01-02onsite.pdf.
The Waco Convention Center can be contacted at (254) 750-5810.
The host hotels for the conference are the Waco Hilton and the Courtyard Marriott.
(PLEASE S
EE
TOWTRC CONFERENCE,
PAGE
8)
Texas Water Resources Institute TAMU 2118 College Station, TX 77843-2118 ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED
Non Profit Organization U.S. Postage Paid College Station, Texas Permit No. 215
Table of Contents TOWTRC Projects TNRCC Rules Changes Meetings, Training BRA Assists Salado TAEX Wetlands Study 3 4 5 6 7
ASAE National On-Site Wastewater Symposium Meets in Fort Worth Texas On-site Insights Editor Ric Jensen TWRI Director C. Allan Jones Texas On-site Insights is published quarterly by the Texas Water Resources Institute, which is a unit of the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station (TAES).
The newsletter is funded by grants from the Texas On-Site Wastewater Treatment Research Council (TOWTRC).
Subscriptions are free upon request.
To contact the editor, call (979) 845-8571, fax (979) 845-8554, or e-mail rjensen@tamu.edu.
TWRI's mailing address is: TWRI, 301 Scoates Hall, Texas A
This newsletter and much more information about TOWTRC and onsite wastewater issues in Texas are on the WWW at http://towtrc.tamu.edu.
You can also subscribe to an Internet list server that discusses onsite wastewater issues in Texas called "TWRI SepticTalk."
Contact us if you want to learn more about this service.
Finally, TWRI is always looking for story ideas from its readers.
If you want to suggest an article for the newsletter, please contact the Editor.
An international conference that focuses on on-site wastewater treatment systems will come to Texas in March.
The conference, the 9th National Symposium on Individual and Small Community Sewage Systems, will meet in Fort Worth March 11­14.
The meeting is sponsored by the American Society for Agricultural Engineering (ASAE).
Major themes of the conference will discuss such issues as soils, new technologies, management, research, risk assessment, standards, and policies.
Other topics to be discussed include drip irrigation as well as constructed wetlands.
Many Texas speakers are scheduled to present papers at the Conference, including researchers and graduate students from Texas A
In addition to the main conference program, "The Septic System Inspection Course" will be offered March 10­11.
The course will be taught by staff members from the National Association for Wastewater Transporters, Inc.
(NAWT), which will also offer certification.
The purpose of this training is to properly teach professionals a standardized procedure about how to reinspect on-site wastewater systems when real estate is transferred.
On March 11, a technical tour will take people from Fort Worth to Waco.
Sites on the tour include the M
Note -- To obtain details on how to register for the conference, contact ASAE at (616) 429-0300.
The fax number is (616) 429-3852.
You can also visit the ASAE World Wide Web site at http://www.asae.org.
The conference hotel is The Radisson Plaza, which can be contacted at (817) 870-2100.
Members of the Texas On-Site Wastewater Treatment Research Council Disclaimer The articles in this newsletter do not necessarily reflect the official policies of the Texas On-Site Wastewater Treatment Research Council, the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, or the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station (TAES).
Feature articles often present useful information about on-site wastewater issues, but may not always identify systems endorsed by the TNRCC, TAES, or the Council.
Executive Secretary Warren Samuelson TNRCC P.O. Box 13087 Austin, TX 78711-3087 (512) 239-4799 Fax (512) 239-6390 Council Chairman Franz Hiebert RMT, Inc. 912 Capital of Texas Hwy South #300 Austin, TX 78746 (512) 329-3117 Fax (512) 327-6163 Teri H. Mathis BioTex Environmental Corp.
P.O. Box 1142 Rosenberg, TX 77471 (281) 342-4277 Maurice P. Short Cardinal Engineering 
Permit Division 9900 Northwest Fwy., Suite.
103 Houston, TX 77092-8615 (713) 956-3015
Other Members Lois Koock P.O. Box 1083 Mason, TX 76856 (915) 347-5237 Danny Ray Moss City of Bedford P. O. Box 157 Bedford, TX 76021 (817) 952-2140 Barry D. Bedwell Bedwell Construction 
Therese Baer Baer Engineering 6448 Highway 290 E., F-107 Austin, TX 78723 (512) 453-3733 Cynthia Williams TNRCC 3300 N. Ave.
A, Bldg..
4, #307 Midland, TX 79705 (915) 620-6122 Arthur Carpenter JPI Texas Development 98 San Jacinto Blvd., #100 Austin, TX 78701 (512) 685-8014
2
Texas On-Site Insights
· January 2001
New Council Projects Will Study Caliche Soils, Application Rates, Malfunctioning Systems The Texas On-Site Wastewater Treatment Research Council to better design application rates for on-site wastewater systems," (TOWTRC) recently funded three studies to investigate how well Fedler says.
"We hope to identify which sprinkler systems may caliche treats wastewater effluents, to evaluate surface application provide the most uniform application, and how the placement of rates for on-site wastewater treatment systems in Texas, and to assess turfgrasses, flowers and trees may influence the amount of wastewathe extent to which on-site systems may be chronically malfunc- ter on the site.
The results of this study may provide a basis to reuse tioning throughout the State.
wastewater in OSSF systems in the future."
"Study Of Caliche Soil As A Filter Medium For Treatment "A Study to Determine the Magnitude of, and Reasons for, And Disposal Of Wastewater," was awarded to researcher Larry Chronically Malfunctioning On-Site Sewage Facilities in Texas" is Wilding of the Texas A
The goal of this study is Kristin Keeling of Reed, Stowe 
In this effort, the "caliche" in relation to wastewater researchers will initially conduct a treatment.
This project will include literature search and interview developing a literature review about OSSF professionals to learn some the effectiveness of caliche soils as a of the reasons septic systems malbioremediation filter media in the function.
They will also extract treatment and disposal of wastes.
Wildinformation about OSSF perforing will also create a bibliography of mance from the Texas Water Depeer-reviewed and popular articles velopment Board statewide water about this subject.
The project should and wastewater survey.
Later, they provide insights about the effectivewill use this information to deness of caliche to treat and dispose of velop a survey that will be sent to wastewater from subsurface disposal Texas Natural Resource Consersystems used in association with onvation Commission (TNRCC) resite sewage facilities (OSSFs). gional offices and designated rep"The goal of this project," Wildresentatives.
Many survey quesing says, "is to use previous research to tions will seek to obtain informaassess how well caliche can be used to tion on the characteristics of failtreat and dispose of wastewater septic ing systems, including soil types, systems.
Once we have a firm idea of the depth to the groundwater table, what has already been learned from Texas A
He was recently funded by the research, we can then develop recomhow often maintenance was perCouncil to study how well caliche soils may work in on-site mendations for issues that need to be formed.
The researchers hope to wastewater systems.
addressed in future studies."
obtain a high response rate by pub"Reevaluating Surface Applicalicizing this effort at meetings and tion Rates for Texas On-Site Sewage Facility (OSSF) Systems" was conferences.
Survey results will be analyzed on a statewide and funded to Clifford Fedler and John Borrelli of the Civil Engineering regional basis.
Department at Texas Tech University.
In the initial stages of this "To date, many research studies and projects have been comproject, the researchers will develop data on distribution patterns of pleted in Texas, but we do not have a statewide or regional various sprinklers and nozzles, and will determine which technolo- understanding of how many OSSF systems are malfunctioning, and gies provide the most even distribution.
This information will then why these malfunctions occur," Pasternak says.
"Information that be entered into a database.
Afterwards, the researchers will develop results from this study will be the most comprehensive and detailed specifications and design guidelines for surface application systems data on OSSF systems available to the Council, and can be used to that address performance and design procedures, and infiltration prioritize and effectively address the problems of malfunctioning rates.
The design guidelines will also factor in nitrogen-uptake OSSF systems across the state."
utilization rates, the nitrogen balance, and the effect of various types Note: Wilding can be contacted at wilding@tamu.edu or (979) of vegetation on water use and transpiration.
Another aspect of this 845-3604, Fedler at clifford.fedler@coe.ttu.edu or (806) 742project is to develop a map of surface application rates for Texas 2801, and Borrelli at john.borrelli@coe.ttu.edu.
Pasternak can be using updated evapotranspiration data and specifications for veg- reached at (512) 450-0991 or spasternak@rsyllc.com. etation.
This information will be used to develop recommendations for the design and operation of future OSSF surface application systems.
"We hope to develop site-specific information that can be used
January 2001 ·
Texas On-Site Insights
3
TNRCC Proposes Changes to OSSF Rules Affecting Maintenance, Planning, Certification The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) has developed new draft regulations that, if adopted, will affect many aspects of on-site wastewater treatment.
The regulations are codified in Title 30, Chapter 285, of the Texas Administrative Code, The draft rules were published on December 8, 2000 in The Texas Register.
The public comment period ended January 12, 2001, and the regulations could be enacted by the TNRCC late this spring.
Because TNRCC staff must respond to all public comments before the rules are finalized, it is possible that some of the draft rules changes mentioned here may not be included in the final regulations.
The rules changes cover the following areas: requirements for maintenance companies; changes in planning materials and construction; procedures for authorized agents and permitting authorities; and changes in the certification process.
"In this rules revision process, we worked to make the new regulations more readable," said Warren Samuelson of the TNRCC on-site wastewater treatment (OSSF) section.
"We believe making the rules more easily understood should also make these regulations more enforceable."
Some of the highlights in each area are discussed below.
analysis as part of that site assessment.
The site evaluation will have to include an analysis of the gravel used in individual systems.
Class III soils can also be used as a backfill material for standard systems.
Surface application and distribution lines, valve boxes, and sprinklers will have to be colored purple.
Every seven years, manufacturers of approved proprietary systems will have to verify that these technologies can still meet the standards under which they were originally approved.
The proposed changes require that surface application systems with setbacks of less than 20 feet must spray at night.
They also require that residential septic tanks must be a minimum of 500 gallons.
The rules changes also address the proper sizing of leaching chambers and low-pressure dosing systems.
PROCEDURES FOR AUTHORIZED AGENTS PERMITTING AUTHORITIES
AND
REQUIREMENTS COMPANIES
FOR
M
AINTENANCE
The draft regulations clarify the process through which OSSF programs are delegated to local governments and other authorized agents.
They also emphasize that the permitting authority of municipal authorized agents is limited only to the incorporated area of those cities.
The proposed rules changes would allow the TNRCC to assess a "charge-back" fee to local governments for work the Commission performs on OSSFs when there is not a local authorized agent.
The draft changes remove the permitting of new cluster systems from the TNRCC OSSF regulations.
In general, the proposed rule changes clarify the frequency for required maintenance, testing, and repair of proprietary on-site wastewater treatment systems (OSSFs).
Under the draft rules, the Executive Director of the TNRCC would have to approve training courses presented by manufacturers of proprietary systems that are used to certify individuals who maintain these systems.
Manufacturers of proprietary systems will also be required to provide training to an adequate number of maintenance companies in each county where their systems are marketed and used.
When a maintenance company services a system, the rule changes would require that a tag be placed on the unit or marked at the site at the time of a service visit.
This would verify that required maintenance was performed.
CHANGES
IN THE
CERTIFICATION PR
OCESS
The rules changes that may affect the largest number of people deal with the certification process.
The draft rules remove the experience requirement to qualify as an Installer I, and modify the experience needed to become an Installer II.
The proposals also remove all language pertaining to the site evaluator license.
The rules changes would prohibit anyone from advertising or representing themselves to the public as an installer without possessing a current license.
The term of licenses would be increased from one year to two years.
Notes: The TNRCC has developed a World Wide Web page that contains much more information on the proposed rules changes.
It is located at http://www.tnrcc.state.tx.us/enforcement/csd/ics/ ossf_changes.html.
The TNRCC will review all the public comments.
Samuelson says the agency is committed to incorporating these suggestions into the new rules, when appropriate.
Samuelson can be contacted at (512) 239-4799.
CHANGES IN PLANNING M CONSTRUCTION
ATERIALS AND
The draft regulations will affect many aspects of site evaluation and construction.
Under the new rules, the TNRCC Executive Director would have to approve planning materials for non-standard disposal systems as well as proprietary treatment and disposal systems.
The new rules also clarify the need for a site evaluation as part of the planning process, but remove the need for a soil structure
4
Texas On-Site Insights
· January 2001
Meetings, Conferences, and Training The Texas Engineering Extension Service (TEEX) offers many excellent continuing education classes related to on-site wastewater treatment.
The Installer I class will meet February 6­7 in San Antonio.
The Installer II class will be taught February 27­March 2 in Tyler.
The Site Evaluator class will be offered February 20­22 in Bryan.
For more details about TEEX onsite wastewater training, visit their web site at http:// teexweb.tamu.edu, or call them at (877) 833-9638.
The WWW site of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) contains an extensive list of resources describing opportunities for training and continuing education (CE).
The WWW site lists approved providers for education relating to on-site sewerage facilities (OSSF), including educational institutions, governmental entities, and private companies.
Dates and places classes are offered, course codes, and the number of CE units available for participants are listed.
The WWW site address is http://www.tnrcc.state.tx.us/enforcement/csd/ics/ossf_ceu.html.
The phone number for the TNRCC OSSF Section is (512) 2394799.
The National Small Flows Clearinghouse (NSFC) is a tremendous resource for all kinds of information regarding on-site wastewater treatment and disposal.
Free products available from NSFC include magazines, newsletters, and fact sheets.
In addition, NSFC has published many special reports on specific topics relating to this field.
For more details, visit them at http://www.nsfc.wvu.edu, or call (800) 624-8301.
The Texas Onsite Wastewater Association (TOWA) provides continuing education programs for installers and designated representatives.
Their classes help people obtain continuing education credits required by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC).
To learn more about these training programs, contact TOWA at (512) 494-1125 or visit them on the WWW at http://txowa.org.
NOWRA Publishes Proceedings of 2000 Conference The National On-Site Wastewater Recycling Association (NOWRA) has published the proceedings of its 2000 conference, "Onsite: The Future of Water Quality."
Major themes in the 292-page proceedings features include the management of onsite systems, government and regulatory issues, education, biosolids management, how to run an onsite business, soil processes, constructed wetlands, wastewater reuse, monitoring system performance, and technological advances.
Some of the individual papers dealt with such topics as the long-term economic impact of on-site systems versus sewers; hydraulic loading as a function of soil type; health and safety issues for septic tank inspectors and pumpers; physical and chemical characteristics of residential wastewater; passive on-site wastewater systems; the longevity of onsite systems; and the consistency of treated wastewater needed for household and irrigation reuse.
Other papers describe such topics as planning for water-tightness in precast concrete septic tanks; onsite attenuation of phosphorus and E. Coli bacteria; remote management tools for decentralized systems; and a summary of onsite systems in the United States using data from 1998.
The proceedings can be purchased from NOWRA by contacting them at (301) 776-7468 or http://www.nowra.org/.
National Decentralized Project Funds Grants for Research, Education and Training About On-Site Systems A national program is underway to select, fund, and manage research and education projects related to on-site wastewater issues.
The National Decentralized Water Resources Capacity Development Project (NDCP) is funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
Several stakeholder organizations are participating in this effort, including the Coalition of Alternative Wastewater Treatment (CAWT), the Consortium of Institutes for Decentralized Wastewater Treatment (CIDWT), the National Onsite Wastewater Recycling Association (NOWRA), the Water Environment Federation (WEF), the Water Environment Research Foundation (WERF), the National Rural Electrical Cooperative Association (NRECA), and the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI).
The NDCP was created to identify and fund projects that address research gaps, regulatory issues, and policy and management questions related to decentralized wastewater treatment.
So far, two education projects have been awarded to develop university curriculum related to on-site systems, and to create a model curriculum for practitioners.
In the regulatory arena, studies have been funded to create a model ordinance for California, and to compare state authorities and practices that govern onsite systems.
Other NDCP projects cover such topics as quantifying the impact of on-site systems on watersheds; development of a framework for risk assessment to evaluate onsite technologies; and the creation of guidance manuals for alternative systems.
In the future, this program will likely create additional opportunities to research issues related to on-site wastewater treatment.
For more detailed information, contact Andrea Arenovski at (510) 658-2686 or a_arenovski@earthlink.net.
January 2001 ·
Texas On-Site Insights
5
BRA Works with Salado Downtown Businesses to Outline Wastewater Treatment Options A regional water management agency is cooperating with the business district of a small town to explore alternatives for on-site wastewater treatment systems that serve the central business district.
The study is being led by the Brazos River Authority (BRA), at the request of downtown businesses.
The study was initiated by the businesses in November 1999 and is expected to be concluded by the end of 2001.
The assessment is funded in part by a grant from the Texas Water Development Board.
but feel they are limited by having to reserve a large percentage of their property for a septic system and drainfield.
Obviously, you don't want to put a parking lot or a heavily-trafficked area on top of the drainfield.
Changing from septic systems to a community sewer may free up space now used by drainfields, thus potentially allowing businesses to grow.
Another challenge is cost.
One restaurant reported that the expense associated with replacing its on-site system with a unit that could properly treat its wastes was roughly $50,000.
According to Denis Qualls of the BRA, which manages a series of wastewater treatment systems throughout the region, this project is interesting for a variety of reasons.
First, while many projects are community-wide, this one focuses on the special needs of the downtown area.
As a result, he anticipates that the majority of homes in the small town will be able to stay on septic systems and will not be required to join a centralized system.
The only exception may be for homes located within the central business district.
Secondly, Qualls noted that the timing of this study parallels the decision by Salado voters to incorporate, but emphasized these are separate movements that are not related.
PHOTO COURTESY OF MICHAEL JAHNS/ BCHD
I
NTRODUCTION
According to Michael Jahns of the Bell County Health Department (BCHD), whose agency regulates on-site systems in Salado, the crux of the problem is that the size of current onsite systems may be inadequate for many businesses.
Currently, some businesses with inadequately sized systems have been grandfathered in by previous regulations.
These systems can continue to be used as long as they are still functioning properly.
Since many buildings have been converted from their original purpose (often a home), they now generate significantly more wastewater than their sepThe BRA study will explore wastewater tic systems can treat.
As a Salado business district result, Jahns said, his agency has detected problems in which effluents have surfaced, especially in low-lying areas.
There have also been complaints of foul odors coming from septic tanks and drainfields.
As a result of the failure of septic systems, the county health department has asked several restaurants and bed-and-breakfasts to curtail their water use, and hours of operation, in order to not overload their systems.
Some of these businesses resolved these problems in part by installing water-conserving toilets, faucets, and by adopting more water-efficient dishwashing methods.
treatment options for the downtown
S
UMMARY
DEVELOPING SOLUTIONS An associated problem is that many business owners have expressed a desire to expand the size and scope of their operations,
Although no preferred strategies or options have been identified so far, Qualls noted that there may be an opportunity to connect downtown Salado businesses with a BRA regional wastewater plant sited between Temple and Belton.
The main goal of this project, he said, is to fully explore the nature of how systems are currently functioning and what problems exist, and to identify potential alternative technologies and how much it will cost to implement them.
"Once this is done," Qualls says, "we will be able to go to the business owners and give them a price to solve these problems.
They can then decide if what we've outlined is something they want to participate in."
Note: For details, contact Qualls at (25) -776-1441) or Denisq@Brazos.org.
Jahns can be contacted at bcehfp@bellcountytx.com or (254) 939-2511.
6
Texas On-Site Insights
· January 2001
TAEX Report Reviews Performance of Constructed Wetlands in Texas A new report by the Texas Agricultural Extension Service model was evaluated to determine if it is applicable for the climate (TAEX) provides a comprehensive examination of many factors in many regions of Texas.
A sensitivity analysis was conducted to that affect how well constructed wetlands treat domestic wastewa- evaluate how well various parameters in the model work for Texas ter. conditions.
The report, "Constructed Wetlands for Prevention of NonPoint Source Pollution Caused by On-Site Sewage Disposal," EVALUATING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE summarizes the results of a Section 319-h project funded by the The researchers monitored water quality as it entered and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The project began exited the four subsurface flow constructed wetlands developed for in March 1995 and ran through September 1999.
this project, as well as four wetlands of this type which had already The work was led by Bruce Lesikar of the Texas A
The existing wetlands were located in D'Hanis, University (TAMU) Agricultural Engineering Department and Dublin, Weslaco, and Stephenville.
Rick Weaver of the TAMU Soil and Crop Sciences Department.
The evaluations covered such issues as pathogen levels; concenSeveral TAMU graduate students also participated, including Srini trations of nitrogen, phosphorus, and organic matter; the pathways Neralla, Matt Johns, Byron Neal, Russell Persyn, and Jeffrey Lane.
by which nitrogen is dispersed as it passes through these wetlands; The goal of the project the identification of plant species which may was to demonstrate that perform best in these systems; and how well constructed wetlands are a constructed wetlands lower biochemical oxygen best management practice demands (BOD) and remove nitrogen.
for on-site wastewater treatPathogen levels were investigated by meament.
"One of the things suring fecal coliform counts as the wastewater we wanted to do in this moved through the system.
Water quality data project was to answer many were collected and analyzed for such parameters of the questions people ofas BOD, ammonia-nitrogen, total suspended ten asked about the perforsolids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS), mance of constructed wetand phosphorus.
Labeled-nitrogen (N-15) was lands for wastewater treatused to study the fate of nitrogen as it passes ment," Weaver said.
"We through these wetlands systems.
The perforPHOTO BY RIC JENSEN/ TWRI wanted to find out more mance of 20 plant species in constructed wetTAMU graduate student Srini Neralla (left) and researcher information about how well lands was evaluated in laboratory and field studRick Weaver (right) take a water quality sample from this ies.
Attempts were made to correlate the perforthese systems remove septic tank, which is used with a constructed wetland. mance of constructed wetlands across various pathogens and treat wastewater and which plants work best.
We want to be able to confidently climatic regions of Texas.
tell people, based on research, the circumstances under which constructed wetlands are a viable wastewater treatment alternative."
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 
At five of these sites, the existing on-site systems were failing treatment, in general, as well as specific findings from this effort.
An and needed to be replaced.
The performance of these systems was educational videotape was produced that describes this technology.
monitored extensively for a year at each site.
Major components of Fact sheets were developed and distributed that discuss how conthis project involved planning and designing the constructed wet- structed wetlands should be designed, installed, operated, and lands, evaluating the performance of these systems, and transferring maintained.
Educational meetings and workshops were conducted this technology to regulators, industry professionals, and the public.
at the eight sites to present information generated through this project.
PLANNING AND DESIGN EFFORTS At the onset of this project, the research team carried out a RESULTS FROM THIS PROJECT literature review and developed a quality assurance plan.
The team In general, contaminant removal was excellent from these worked with the Harris County Engineering Department and local constructed wetlands.
The systems were able to consistently proCounty Extension agents and selected sites for four subsurface flow duce secondary quality effluent.
However, low levels of fecal constructed wetlands in Houston, Tomball, Bryan, and College coliforms remained in the wastewater that exited from these sysStation. tems, documenting the need for additional treatment.
Tablet A model developed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) was used to design the constructed wetlands.
The PLEASE SEE WETLANDS (PAGE 8) strategy was to model the systems to develop wetlands that would produce secondary-treated domestic wastewater.
The EPA design 7
January 2001 ·
Texas On-Site Insights
(TOWTRC CONFERENCE, F
ROM PAGE
8) WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 14 CONCURRENT SESSIONS 8:15­9:45 AM Owning Your Own OSSF Business Managing a Maintenance Company Would You Like Fries or a Shake with that On-Site System? Design Overview of Drip Irrigation Systems Characterizing Soil Hydraulic Properties in a Subsurface Drip Drainfield
Schedule for the TOWTRC Conference TUESDAY, FEBRUARY 13 GENERAL SESSION 8:30 AM CONCURRENT SESSIONS 9:45­11:30 AM Designated Representatives: History and Future Developing an Enforcement Case for Justice of the Peace Court OSSF Industry: Past, Present 
CONCURRENT SESSIONS, 10:15 ­ 11:45 AM OSSF Rule Revisions Soils: A Common Sense Approach Depth of Drip Tubing Installation and Water Surfacing Installation of Drip Irrigation Systems (Panel Discussion)
CONCURRENT SESSIONS
3:30 TO 5 PM
Texas Department of Highways and Texas Department of Public Safety Vehicle and Highway Requirements Common Problems with Surface Application Systems Electrical Requirements for OSSF Systems Study of Caliche Soil as a Filter Medium for Treatment and Disposal of Wastewater Maps for Shallow Groundwater Evaluation
WETL
ANDS (FROM PAGE
7) Four of the 20 plant species that were evaluated (umbrella palm, dwarf umbrella palm, and broad and narrow leaf cattail) performed very well in the constructed wetlands monitored for this study.
In particular, umbrella palm was shown to be winter-hardy, insectresistant, did not go dormant, and recovered rapidly after frosts and freezing periods.
Note: Lesikar can be contacted at (979) 845-7453 or blesikar@tamu.edu.
Weaver can be reached at (979) 845-5323 or rwweaver@tamu.edu.
Weaver published a paper about this project, "Improvement of Domestic Wastewater Quality by Subsurface Flow Constructed Wetlands," that was published in Bioresource Technology in 2000.
Contact TWRI at (979) 845-8571 or at twri@twri.tamu.edu and we will send you a copy.
chlorination was used to reduce fecal coliform levels in one system, so that the effluents could safely be used for surface irrigation.
It appears that these systems may have been oversized, since they were developed to handle maximum flows.
The use of winter air temperatures appears to be too conservative a parameter to design these systems for Texas.
However, the use of soil temperatures proved to be a more accurate factor in the design of constructed wetlands.
Labeled-nitrogen was used to determine the fate of nitrogen as it moved through the system.
These studies suggest that the majority of nitrogen was lost through ammonia volatilization, not plant uptake.
As a result, the plants in these constructed wetlands did not contribute significantly to improved wastewater treatment, although they did remove a lot of water through evaporation and transpiration.
In addition, the plants made these systems more aesthetically pleasing.
TOWTRC Proceedings Are Now on the WWW Two proceedings from annual conferences of the Texas Onsite Wastewater Treatment Research Council (TOWTRC) have been scanned in and put on the World Wide Web.
As part of a project to update and redo the Council's WWW site, Ric Jensen of the Texas Water Resources Institute (TWRI) is leading efforts to place the full-text of all TOWTRC conferences on the web.
So far, the proceedings from the 1993 and 1998 conferences have been posted.
The proceedings can be accessed in standard html web format and as an Adobe Acrobat pdf file.
The proceedings are on the Council's WWW site, http://towtrc.tamu.edu.
