Gifted and Talented Rules and Regulations: Program Approval Standards Arkansas Department of Education
GIFTED AND TALENTED Rules and Regulations: Program Approval Standards Arkansas Department of Education Raymond Simon, Director General Education Division Kevin Penix, Assistant Director School Improvement and Instructional Support Ann Biggers, Administrator Programs for the Gifted and Talented 1999 Original document 1986 First Revision June 1999 TABLE OF CONTENTS Introduction..........................................................
...............................
Overview..............................................................
...............................
Purpose of Document..............................................................
.............
Arkansas Department of Education Rules and Regulations: Gifted and Talented Program Approval Standards.............................................................
........
1 2 4 5 Community Involvement...........................................................
.............
11 Staff Development...........................................................
......................
12 Personnel.............................................................
...............................
13 Identification........................................................
................................
16 Program Options...............................................................
...................
19 Curriculum............................................................
..............................
25 Evaluation............................................................
...............................
26 Appendices A. Gifted Education Organizations B. Web Sites and E-Mail addresses INTRODUCTION When Act 917 of 1995 changed the funding process to local school districts regarding gifted and talented students it became necessary to update the Program Approval Standards for Gifted and Talented Programs.
The Department of Education saw this as an opportunity to include many areas and program options, which were not available in 1986 when the original document was written.
This update has been a long process but we feel confident that the document is now current and reflects national standards.
The Arkansas Department of Education wishes to thank the following people for attending meetings to update the Program Approval Standards and for editing numerous drafts.
The Department sought suggestions and ideas from as many sources as possible.
Each of the following people represented groups of educators, parents, community members, higher education and the Governor's Advisory Council for Gifted Education.
Input from all was necessary to ensure the continuation of a well developed document which has been, and continues to be, requested from around the nation: Tommie Sue Anthony, Mandy Bell, Linda Boswell, Heidi Cox, Mable Donaldson, Kim Duell, Roger Eveland, Marna Gardner, Beth Greenway, Davis Hendricks, Linda Johnson, Lynn Lovette, Brian Mefford, Gwen Morgan, Hazel Parker, Janet Parrish, Barbara Prichard, Ann Robinson, Danny Slay, Jeanna Westmoreland, and Ezerene Williams.
1 OVERVIEW
Responding to the concern for educational programming for gifted and talented students, the Arkansas General Assembly passed Act 106 of 1979.
This legislation established the Office for the Education of Gifted and Talented Children, headed by an administrator to direct the state program.
Funds were appropriated to provide financial assistance to school districts operating programs for gifted and talented students
.
Guidelines were developed to provide information to assist districts in planning, implementing, and evaluating programs for gifted and talented students.
This document, Education of Gifted and Talented Students: Guidelines for Local Education Agencies, was approved by the State Board of Education in 1981.
Since that time, a number of pieces of legislation enacted have had a profound effect on gifted education.
Act 445 of 1983, the Quality Education Act, established minimum standards for accreditation of public schools and authorized the State Board to name a committee to recommend regulations, criteria, and minimum standards.
The Standards for Accreditation of Arkansas Public Schools, which were adopted by the State Board of Education February 22, 1984, included a provision that all districts must provide a program for gifted and talented students.
Act 34 of 1983, First Extraordinary Session, the School Finance Act, provided funding for districts which were developing or operating programs for gifted and talented students.
The Department of Education was directed to set aside annually, beginning in 1984-85, funds for program development, not to exceed $6 million.
Districts which were operating approved programs were eligible to receive funds based on an "add on" weight of .25 for each student identified as gifted and talented (funding was based on no more than five percent of the district's average daily membership).
The original guidelines developed to assist districts were then refined and updated and became the Rules and Regulations for gifted education in Arkansas.
This document, Gifted and Talented Program Approval Standards, was approved by the State Board of Education in 1987.
Act 917 of 1995 changed the funding process to local school districts regarding gifted and talented students.
The new law now stipulates an expenditure requirement replacing the funding provision that had previously existed.
This expenditure requirement reads: Local school districts shall expend from state and local revenues not less than the following amounts on gifted and talented programs, in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the State Board of Education - the previous year's average daily membership participating in gifted and talented programs, up to five 2 percent (5%) of the previous year's average daily membership, multiplied by fifteen hundredths (.15) times the base local revenue per student.
The following definition shall guide districts in providing services and opportunities for students identified as gifted and talented in Arkansas: Gifted and talented children and youth are those of high potential or ability whose learning characteristics and educational needs require qualitatively differentiated educational experiences and/or services.
Possession of these talents and gifts, or the potential for their development, will be evidenced through an interaction of above average intellectual ability, task commitment and /or motivation, and creative ability.
3 PURPOSE OF THE DOCUMENT The purpose of this document is to establish the minimum standards for approval of programs which meet the requirements of the Standards of Accreditation adopted by the State Board of Education February 22, 1984, and have been effective since June 1, 1987.
Included are guidelines, which enable school districts to: 1) Establish equitable criteria for identification of gifted and talented students; 2) Establish programs which will lead to appropriate educational opportunities for these students; and 3) Establish procedures to evaluate the effectiveness of the provisions of these educational opportunities.
School districts may choose to work cooperatively to develop and operate programs for their gifted students.
Any mention of "district" in this document applies also to a group of districts working as a cooperative.
This definition does not include Educational Service Cooperatives established under Act 349 of 1985.
Standards for approved programs are listed on the following pages.
Evidence verifying compliance should be kept on file in the district so that it will be available for review by the Department of Education when the district is monitored.
Please note that these are minimum, not optimum, standards.
Districts are encouraged to go beyond them in providing educational opportunities for their gifted and talented students.
No school district may establish criteria which are less than the standards required in this document and the Arkansas Department of Education's Rules and Regulations for Gifted and Talented Program Approval.
4 ARKANSAS DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION RULES AND REGULATIONS GIFTED AND TALENTED PROGRAM APPROVAL STANDARDS Revised June 1999 1.00 Regulatory Authority 1.01 These regulations shall be known as the Arkansas Department of Education Regulations Governing Gifted and Talented Program Approval Standards.
The State Board of Education enacted these regulations pursuant to its authority under Arkansas Code Annotated �6-42-102 (Repl. 1993).
1.02 2.00 Purpose The purpose of these regulations is to establish the minimum standards for approval of gifted programs which meet the requirements of the Standards of Accreditation adopted by the state Board of Education February 22, 1984, and have been in effect since June 1, 1987.
3.00 Definitions 3.01 Gifted and Talented: Gifted and Talented children and youth are those of high potential or ability, whose learning characteristics and educational needs require qualitatively differentiated educational experiences and/or services.
Possession of these talents and gifts, or the potential for their development, will be evidenced through an interaction of above average intellectual ability, task commitment and/or motivation, and creative ability.
Approved teacher of the gifted: This refers to a specialist who has attained certification, passed appropriate state approved assessments and meets standards as set by the State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education Professional Licensure Department for add-on endorsement in gifted education.
Approved Administrator/Coordinator of Gifted Programs: This refers to a specialist who has attained certification, passed appropriate state approved assessments and meets standards as set by the State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education Professional Licensure Department for add-on endorsement in gifted education and in gifted education administration and promotes the administration/coordination of programs and services for gifted students kindergarten through grade twelve.
5 3.02 3.03 4.00 COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT (see page 11) 4.01 4.02 Opportunities for community awareness and involvement are provided.
Parents and community members are informed annually of the program opportunities for gifted and talented students and have the opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions.
Parents and other community members are included on an advisory committee for gifted education.
4.03 5.00 STAFF DEVELOPMENT (see page 12) 5.01 5.02 There is a written plan for staff development based on local education needs of gifted students Opportunities to increase knowledge of the education of gifted and talented students are provided for school board members, school and district administrators, teachers and support staff on a continuing and regular basis.
6.00 PERSONNEL (see pages 13-15) 6.01 Persons who teach identified gifted students in homogeneous groups must hold current Arkansas teaching certification, pass appropriate state approved assessments, and meet performance standards as set by the State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education, Professional Licensure Department for add-on endorsement in gifted education.
6.02 Persons who administer/coordinate a program for gifted and talented students kindergarten through grade twelve must hold current Arkansas teaching certification, pass appropriate State approved assessments, and meets performance standards as set by the state Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education, Professional Licensure Department for add-on endorsement in gifted education and in gifted education administration and promote the administration/coordination of programs and services for gifted students kindergarten through grade twelve.
6.03 A process for selection of administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted is clearly defined and established.
6 6.04 Job descriptions are developed for administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted.
6.05 Regularly scheduled time is provided for administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted to perform duties other than direct services to identified students.
(The equivalent of five periods per week is recommended.)
7.00 IDENTIFICATION (see pages 16-18) 7.01 The process for identifying students has several stages.
1.
Nominations are sought from a wide variety of sources to ensure that all potentially gifted and talented students have an opportunity to be considered.
Data are collected (on the nominated students) to aid in making decisions for selection of students who are in need of special education services.
Placement of students is made in an appropriate program option.
2.
3.
7.02 7.03 Identification procedures are clearly stated, uniformly implemented, and communicated to the entire school staff.
A committee chaired by a trained specialist in gifted education and including administrators, teachers, and/or counselors collects and analyzes data, maintains appropriate records, and makes professional decisions on placement of students.
The identification process yields information obtained through a variety of procedures and from multiple independent sources.
1.
Procedures for obtaining information about students include at least two objective assessment methods such as group and individual tests of ability, achievement, and creativity.
Procedures for obtaining information about students include at least two subjective assessment methods such as checklists, rating scales, biographical data, product evaluations, auditions, interviews, and grades.
7.04 2.
7 3.
Information about students is obtained from multiple sources, which may include teachers, counselors, parents, community members, peers, and students' themselves.
7.05 7.06 Student placement decisions are based on multiple criteria.
No single criterion or cut-off score is used to include or exclude a student.
Procedures used in the identification process are non-discriminatory with respect to race, cultural or economic background, religion, national origin, sex, or handicapping condition.
Instructionally useful information about individual students obtained during the identification process is communicated to the appropriate members of the instructional staff regardless of final placement.
Written identification and placement procedures include parental involvement.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Parents grant permission for individual testing.
Parents are informed of the criteria for placement in a program for the gifted.
Parents give written permission for child's participation in gifted program.
Parents may appeal a placement with which they disagree.
7.07 7.08 7.09 Identification of gifted and talented students is an ongoing process extending from school entry through grade twelve.
1.
Opportunities are provided for students to be considered for placement in gifted/talented programs throughout their school experience.
A review of students' placement in the gifted/talented program is made at least annually.
Written policies for exit from a program are developed and implemented.
Records of placement decisions and data on all nominated students are kept on file for a minimum of five years or for as long as needed for educational decisions.
8 2.
3.
4.
8.00 PROGRAM OPTIONS (see pages 19-24) 8.01 A program is systematically developed, with long-range goals that are coordinated to guide the development of gifted students from the time they are identified through graduation from high school.
A table of organization is developed which clearly delineates roles, responsibilities, and coordination procedures.
Students' placement in program options is based on their abilities, needs and interests, and resources of the district.
Administrative arrangements are used which promote interaction among gifted students and both their intellectual and chronological peers.
A minimum of 150 minutes a week direct instruction must be provided during the regular school day.
8.02 8.03 8.04 8.05 9.00 CURRICULUM (see page 25) 9.01 9.02 Curriculum for the gifted extends or replaces the regular curriculum.
Curriculum is differentiated in content, process, and/or product.
1.
2.
3.
Content is differentiated in breadth or depth, in tempo or pace, and/or in kind.
Processes for gifted students stress creativity and higher level thinking skills.
Students investigate problems in depth and develop products which are communicated to appropriate audiences.
9.03 Curriculum has scope and sequence to assure continuity.
10.00 EVALUATION (see pages 26-28) 10.01 The evaluation process provides accurate, timely, and relevant information to decision-makers for improving program options offered gifted students.
10.02 The plan for evaluation is based on program objectives.
9 10.03 All components of the gifted/talented program are evaluated annually: identification, staff development, program options, curriculum, community involvement, program expenditures, and evaluation.
10.04 Data for evaluation are obtained from a variety of instruments, procedures, and information sources.
10.05 Evaluation findings are compiled, analyzed, and communicated to Arkansas Department of Education, Office of Gifted and Talented and appropriate audiences.
10.06 Student progress is assessed, with attention to mastery of content, higher-level thinking skills, creativity, and affective growth.
10.07 Participation in the gifted program is noted on student transcripts and permanent records.
10 4.00 COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT A working partnership between school personnel and other members of the community will benefit a gifted and talented program.
The district should encourage open communication with parents and community members, making them aware of the characteristics and needs of the gifted, the program goals of the district, and student activities.
The Advisory Committee for Gifted and Talented Education must include parents, as well as professional educators.
Community members can play an important role in the education of gifted students by serving as speakers or mentors.
Groups in the community whose cooperation may be sought include colleges and universities, museums, theater groups, civic clubs, libraries, industries, and businesses.
Each district should develop an inventory of community resources that can be used to meet the needs of gifted and talented students.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 4.01 Ongoing opportunities for community awareness and involvement are provided.
One or more of the following Newspaper clippings Copies of letters to parents Meeting agendas Brochure/handbook describing gifted programs Newsletters Column in local or school publication Radio/TV spots Meeting agendas 4.02 Parent and community members are informed annually of the program opportunities for gifted and talented students, and have the opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions.
Parents and other community members are included on an advisory committee for gifted education.
4.02 List of members, minutes of meetings 11 5.00 STAFF DEVELOPMENT To design a successful staff development program, the district allocates sufficient time and money.
Plans for ongoing training in gifted and talented education are incorporated into the district's total staff development plan.
Planning for staff development is based on the data obtained from periodic needs assessments conducted by the district.
All personnel must be made aware of the results of the assessments and the district's plan for serving gifted and talented students.
Other areas of training which are appropriate for the entire school staff are: (1) characteristics and needs of the gifted; (2) identification procedures; (3) teaching strategies; (4) creativity; (5) utilization of community resources; and (6) program evaluation.
Staff development is also encouraged by adding books and journals on gifted education to the school's professional library; placing reprints of pertinent articles in teachers' boxes; presenting short, specific classroom demonstrations and teaching techniques at regular building-level faculty meetings; and sharing gifted students' projects with all staff.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 5.01 There is a written plan for staff development based on local educational needs of gifted students.
Opportunities to increase knowledge of the education of gifted and talented students are provided for school board members, school and district administrators, teachers and support staff on a continuing and regular basis.
Copy of plan 5.02 Meeting attendance rosters and programs 12 6.00 PERSONNEL Persons associated with the gifted and talented program need special qualifications in the areas of training, experience, and personal qualities.
Selection of personnel is critical to the quality of the program.
A process to ensure the selection of appropriate teachers of the gifted must be established and clearly articulated.
At least one person serves as district administrator/coordinator of the gifted program.
The percentage of time assigned to duties associated with the program will necessarily vary depending on the size of the district.
In small districts it is likely that the same person will be the teacher of gifted students and the administrator/coordinator of the program.
Training requirements for an administrator/coordinator are the same as those for an approved teacher of the gifted.
It is strongly recommended that the district gifted and talented administrator/coordinator have training in administration.
The minimum standards for an approved teacher of the gifted are certification, pass appropriate state approved assessments, and meet standards as set by the Arkansas State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education, Professional Licensure Department, for add-on endorsement in gifted education.
Persons holding the position of administrator/coordinator of gifted programs will also meet state licensure requirements.
Specific courses are not stipulated; however, the following areas should be included: a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. Identification and programming for the gifted; Methods and materials for the gifted; Curriculum development for the gifted; Counseling and guidance of the gifted; Testing and evaluation; Creativity; Supervised practicum; Independent study; and/or Seminar or special topics course in gifted education.
Any teacher holding gifted and talented certification is an approved teacher of gifted and talented students.
Job descriptions are on file for administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted.
Duties included in the job description for the administrator/coordinator are 1) planning and administrating of the district's gifted program in consultation with teachers, administrators, and parents, 2) preparing a local gifted and talented budget for the school district, and 3) recommending purchase of supplies and materials In addition to time spent in direct services to gifted students, teachers and administrators/coordinators in gifted programs have a variety of duties that will promote integration of the gifted program with the regular education program.
13 Time must be provided for: a.
Working with classroom teachers, counselors, administrators, and other personnel; b. Locating resources; c. Arranging mentorships and other out-of-school learning experiences; d. Supervising independent studies and mentorships; e. Involvement in the identification process; f. Conducting community awareness activities; g. Conducting staff development activities; h. Program documentation; and/or i. Development of appropriate curriculum.
A minimum of five periods a week, or the equivalent, is strongly recommended.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 6.01 Persons who teach identified students in homogeneous groups must hold current Arkansas teaching certification, pass appropriate state approved assessments, and meets performance standards as set by the State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education Professional Licensure department for add-on endorsement in gifted education.
Persons who administer/coordinate a program for gifted students kindergarten through grade twelve must hold current Arkansas teaching certification, pass appropriate state approved assessments and meet performance standards as set by the State Board of Education through the Arkansas Department of Education, Professional Licensure department for add-on endorsement in gifted education and in gifted education administration.
Certificate, transcript 6.02 Certificate, transcript 14 6.03 A process for selection of administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted are clearly defined and established.
Job descriptions are developed for administrators/coordinators and teachers of the gifted.
Regularly scheduled time is provided for administrators/ coordinators and teachers of the gifted to perform duties other than direct services to identified students.
Copy of Policy and Procedures 6.04 Written job description 6.05 Schedule 15 7.00 IDENTIFICATION The purpose of careful and comprehensive identification procedures is to find and serve as many students as possible who need special programs to develop their exceptional abilities.
It is important to identify students with potential for outstanding achievement.
The emphasis in identification procedures should be on student need for specialized services.
A comprehensive identification plan should be based on the best available research and recommendations of experts in the field.
It must take into account the local student population and should ensure inclusion of potentially gifted and talented students from all cultural and economic backgrounds.
The list of nominated students must be representative of the entire student population in terms of race, sex, and economic status.
Each district's written identification procedures must include the following: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Students must be identified as gifted and talented according to Arkansas Department of Education, Office of Gifted Education, guidelines.
A process to explain the nomination procedure and seek nominations from parents, school personnel, students, and community members.
An identification committee of at least five members, made up of professional educators, chaired by a trained specialist in gifted education.
Provision for review of school records of nominated students and the gathering and compilation of additional data where needed.
Parental consent in writing if additional individual testing is required.
Assurance of confidentiality of records.
A policy for placement decisions based on multi-criteria, including both objective and subjective data, with the stipulation that no single criterion or cut-off score is used to include or exclude a student.
Use of at least two objective and two subjective measures (one of which must assess creativity), chosen from the following: OBJECTIVE Standardized mental ability test Standardized achievement test Test of creative ability 16 8.
SUBJECTIVE Behavioral checklists (Parent and/or teacher) Rating Scales Evaluations of products Student interviews Biographical inventories Grades Auditions 9.
Assurance that procedures are non-discriminatory.
10.
Provision that educationally useful, student-specific information obtained in the identification process is communicated to the appropriate instructional staff.
11.
A process by which parents are informed of placement decisions, give permission for their child to participate, and have the opportunity to appeal a decision with which they disagree.
12.
Provisions for continuous evaluation of the identification process: a.
Opportunity for consideration for placement at any time; b. Annual review of students' placement; c. Policies for exit from a program; and d. Maintenance of records of placement decisions and data on all nominated students for a minimum of five years or for as long as needed for educational decisions.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 7.01 7.02 The process for identifying students has several stages.
Identification procedures are clearly stated, uniformly implemented, and communicated to the entire school staff.
A committee chaired by a trained specialist in gifted education and including administrators, teachers, and/or counselors collects and analyzes data, maintains appropriate records, and makes professional decisions on placement of students.
17 Copy of written procedures Copy of written procedures 7.03 List of members 7.04 The identification process yields information obtained through a variety of procedures and from multiple independent sources.
Student placement decisions are based on multiple criteria.
No single criterion or cut-off score is used to include or exclude a student.
Procedures used in the identification process are nondiscriminatory with respect to race, cultural or economic background, religion, national origin, sex, or handicapping condition.
Instructionally useful information about individual students obtained during the identification process is communicated to the instructional staff regardless of final placement decisions.
Written identification and placement procedures include parental involvement.
List of instruments and procedures for use 7.05 Copy of written procedures and data on nominated students 7.06 List of procedures 7.07 Copy of procedures for dissemination of information 7.08 Copies of consent forms Written appeals procedures Copy of written procedures Records of placement 7.09 Identification of gifted/talented students is an ongoing process extending from school entry through grade 12.
18 8.00 PROGRAM OPTIONS Gifted children are as different from each other as they are from other children.
They have needs for differing amounts of homogeneous grouping, and at various stages of development their interests differ.
No single program option can ever meet all of the needs of all gifted children.
However, approved programs must meet for a total of 150 minutes a week during the regular school day.
Programs should be systematically developed, with long-range goals that are coordinated to guide the development of gifted students from the time they are identified through graduation from high school.
There must be consistency among the program's components; curriculum objectives and evaluation procedures need to be based on the district's philosophy of education.
Most program alternatives will include some kind of combination of enrichment (experiences which supplement the regular curriculum), acceleration (activities designed to allow students to progress at a rate faster than average), and guidance (planned activities that promote understanding of the self and one's relationship to others).
Districts are encouraged to be innovative in designing programs that combine these elements in ways that best meet the needs of their gifted students.
In whatever form the program for the gifted is organized, there must be clear delineation of roles, responsibilities, and coordination procedures.
A written table of organization outlining lines of responsibility and authority must be developed.
Possible administrative arrangements for providing programs for the gifted are listed below.
They represent the organizational patterns used in gifted programs across the United States.
Please note that these are descriptions of ways to organize program options, not prescriptions.
No matter which administrative arrangement is used, a minimum of 150 minutes a week direct instruction must be provided.
Exceptions to the 150 minutes requirement may be granted upon written request to the Department of Education, Office of Gifted and Talented, in the following circumstances: a.
If an approved teacher provides direct instruction to identified gifted students on a regular basis for at least 75 minutes per week, the remainder of the required 150 minutes may be met in the regular classroom, provided that there is a written management plan and that activities are developed and supervised by an approved teacher.
b. Independent studies and mentorships are developed in consultation with an approved teacher.
Though these program options may not require 150 minutes per week contact time an approved teacher 19 must meet with the student for at least 30 minutes per week to assess progress.
ADMINISTRATIVE ARRANGEMENTS: I. Modification in the Regular Classroom A. Cluster grouping: Groups of gifted students are placed in a regular classroom.
An approved teacher of the gifted provides instruction and curriculum to meet their special needs (ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY).
Class size should be consistent with state standards.
B. Consultant teacher: An approved teacher of the gifted meets regularly with identified students and designs differentiated activities to meet their needs.
The approved teacher works with the regular classroom teacher in delivering services to identified gifted students by developing management plans, providing demonstration lessons in the classroom, and supervising gifted students' progress (ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY).
A consultant teacher may supervise a maximum of 75 students.
C. Course content: An approved teacher of the gifted works with the content teacher to design a differentiated curriculum to meet the needs of identified gifted and talented students in a regular classroom setting.
The following provisions must be in place for this administrative arrangement to be used: (SECONDARY) Class size should be consistent with state standards.
1.
There is written documentation that the program component was developed in consultation with the district's administrator/coordinator of gifted programs.
There is a written plan of curriculum differentiation for the identified gifted students.
This may be in the form of an individual management plan or another form developed by the local district and approved by the Department of Education, Office of Gifted and Talented.
An approved teacher of the gifted maintains oversight of the students' activities.
The content teacher must complete an Arkansas Department of Education approved staff development workshop related to curricular differentiation for the gifted.
In order to better meet the needs of teachers as they work to meet the needs of 20 2.
3.
4.
individual students, each teacher involved in this model should receive annual training/staff development related to the education of gifted and talented children.
(see 5.00, paragraph 2) D. Whole Group Enrichment: An approved teacher of the gifted works with the classroom teacher to design enrichment curriculum for the whole class.
This option is considered long-term identification and therefore a portfolio should be maintained to document student(s) actions/responses.
The delivery of services to students must be at least 30 minutes a week.
The approved teacher of the gifted and the classroom teacher may organize teaching responsibilities as needed.
This option may be used in conjunction with other options to serve identified students.
However, if this is the only option for serving students, it may not be used beyond grade three.
The following provisions must be in place for this administrative arrangement to be used: (ELEMENTARY K-2).
1.
There is written documentation that this program option was developed in consultation with the district's administrator/ coordinator of gifted programs.
There is a written plan of curriculum enrichment for the grades being served.
This includes a portfolio and/or management plan that maintains and documents student actions/responses.
An approved teacher of the gifted maintains oversight of the students' activities.
The delivery of services to students must be at least thirty (30) minutes a week and can be delivered by the approved teacher of the gifted, classroom teacher, or a combination of the two.
2.
3.
4.
E. Instruction Through Technology: Instruction provided through technology, such as Distance Learning, Satellite, Internet, etc. must meet all requirements as outlined under the Course content option.
II.
Pull-out Programs A. Resource room: Gifted students participate in classes in which they receive instructional services different from those normally provided in the regular classroom.
They have the opportunity to work at the level 21 of their abilities and in their area of interest or talent (ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY).
Recommended class size is 10-12.
B. Resource center: Students are transported on a regular basis to a center which serves a local district, county, or region.
Instructional services are the same as those in a resource room (ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY).
Recommended class size is 10-12.
III.
Special Classes A. Self-contained classroom: Gifted students are provided instructional services different from those normally provided in the regular classroom.
All basic subject areas are included.
Resources of the regular education program, such as art, music, and physical education, are used to supplement the gifted program (ELEMENTARY).
Class sizes should be consistent with state standards.
B. Honors, advanced, Pre-Advanced Placement classes: Students of high ability, though not necessarily identified as gifted, are placed in a class in which the curriculum focuses on higher levels of thinking and complexity therefore avoiding "more of the same."
The Pre AP curriculum is designed to prepare students for AP classes (SECONDARY).
Class size should be consistent with state standards C. College Board Advanced Placement classes: Students have the opportunity to pursue college-level studies while still in secondary school and to receive advanced placement and credit, or one of these, upon entering college.
Students should be encouraged to take the AP exam(s) (SECONDARY).
Recommended class size is 17-20.
D. International Baccalaureate: The program is sponsored by the International Baccalaureate Office in Switzerland and begins at the eleventh grade (SECONDARY).
Class size should be consistent with state standards.
E. Special classes/seminars: Courses are offered in subject matter fields not normally offered in high school which may be interdisciplinary in nature (SECONDARY).
Recommended number of students per period is 15-20.
IV.
Special Schools A. Special school: School serves only identified gifted students at local, county, or regional level.
22 B. School-within-a school: School for gifted students functions as a separate unit although housed within a regular school complex.
C. Magnet schools: School (or component within a school) which is designed to attract students with high interest/ability to its particular curriculum.
V. Extra-School Opportunities A. Mentorship: Student works on a regular basis with an adult resource person, matching student interests and needs with the expertise of the mentor (ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY).
B. Concurrent enrollment in high school and college: Student is enrolled in college courses while continuing to attend high school (SECONDARY).
Districts may choose to implement more than one of the foregoing patterns.
However, the maximum total of identified gifted students for whom a full-time teacher of the gifted may provide direct services is 75.
Waivers from this requirement, based upon program options offered, may be requested in writing by individual districts.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 8.01 Program is systematically developed, with long range goals that are coordinated to guide the development of gifted students from the time they are identified through graduation from high school.
A table of organization is developed which clearly delineates roles, responsibilities, and coordination procedures.
Identified students' placement in program options is based on their abilities, needs and interests, and resources of the district.
23 Written program goals 8.02 Copy of table of organization 8.03 Student assessment data 8.04 Administrative arrangements are used which promote interaction among gifted students and both their intellectual and chronological peers.
A minimum of 150 minutes a week direct instruction must be provided during the regular school day.
Schedule 8.05 Program Schedule 24 9.0 CURRICULUM Curriculum for the gifted must differ not only in degree, but in kind.
It is important to avoid simply "more of the same."
It should be coordinated with the district's basic curriculum objectives but must be in place of rather than in addition to required classroom work.
Students should not be penalized for being identified as gifted by being given extra work.
Teachers should be sensitive to student interests and talents in planning both cognitive and affective activities.
To assure that curriculum opportunities are appropriate to the abilities, accomplishments, interests, and cognitive and affective needs of gifted students, modifications should be made in content, process and/or product.
Content refers to the body of knowledge presented to the student.
Differentiation may be made in level of complexity, pace of learning, or degree of abstractness.
Another means of differentiation is the study of topics not ordinarily a part of the regular curriculum.
The process skills, which should be a part of the curriculum for gifted students, include critical thinking, creative thinking, independent learning skills, research skills, problem-solving, and logic.
Students in a gifted program should be expected to achieve a greater degree of proficiency in these skills than would be required in the basic curriculum.
Products are the end result of a learning experience.
Gifted students should be encouraged to develop products that use new techniques, materials, and forms.
They should be encouraged to select a specific area of interest and talent and pursue an intensive study rather than be assigned a prescribed problem.
Results of such investigations should be communicated to an appropriate audience.
Curriculum objectives must be carefully sequenced for continuity.
Development of a scope and sequence will avoid the "grab-bag" approach.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 9.01 Curriculum for the gifted extends or replaces the regular curriculum.
Curriculum is differentiated in content, process and/or product.
Curriculum has scope and sequence to assure continuity.
25 Written curriculum description 9.02 9.03 Written curriculum description Written scope and sequence 10.00 EVALUATION Arkansas Standards for Accreditation require that each school use procedures to evaluate the effectiveness of educational opportunities provided for gifted and talented students.
Evaluation, as it is applied to the program for the gifted, involves both a determination of the program's effectiveness and assessment of student growth.
The purpose is to provide accurate, timely, and relevant information to decisionmakers for improving program options offered gifted students.
The plan for evaluation is based on program objectives and is reviewed annually to determine its effectiveness in providing appropriate information.
This ensures that program changes or modifications reflect relevant data.
There are two purposes of evaluation: to provide information so that modifications and adjustments can be made in a program as it develops and to examine overall program effectiveness.
The evaluation plan must contain procedures for assessment in both these areas.
Only if the evaluation is carefully planned is it probable that really useful information can be obtained.
To make reasonable judgments about the effectiveness of various facets of the program, all components should be included in the overall evaluation plan identification, staff development, program options, curriculum, community involvement, program expenditures, and the evaluation process itself.
A variety of procedures including questionnaires, surveys, charts, graphs, statistical analysis, anecdotal data, etc., should be used because different components of the program call for different techniques.
Neither outcomes of the program nor attitudes of any stakeholders should be ignored.
Input should come from students, teachers, administrators, parents, school board members, other community members, and statistical analysis of enrollment and achievement data.
Program evaluation should also reflect an assessment of how the gifted program contributes to and articulates with the overall district improvement plan.
Evaluation of student growth must be based on appropriate and specific criteria and should include self-appraisal and criterion-referenced and/or standardized instruments.
It must be kept in mind that programs for the gifted deal with a unique population.
Gifted students' progress cannot be fully assessed by standardized tests, which have been normed on a heterogeneous group because these tests will not present a true picture of student growth in gifted students.
In fact, if a student has scored at the top of the scale on a test, the phenomenon of "regression toward the mean" may result in a lower score on the retest.
In choosing methods to measure student progress, care should be taken to ensure that the methods chosen: 1) are in agreement with program objectives; 2) involve the student in self-evaluation; 3) consider process as well as product; and 4) are appropriate and valid assessments of the population being tested.
26 The results are compiled into an annual report.
This report is provided to the State Department of Education, Office of Gifted and Talented, the local school board, school faculty and administration, parent groups and other appropriate audiences to seek formative feedback, resources, developmental assistance, and demonstrate reasonable accountability.
Participation in the gifted program must be noted on students' transcripts and permanent records.
STANDARD EVIDENCE VERIFYING COMPLIANCE 10.01 The evaluation process provides accurate, timely, and relevant information to decision-makers for improving program options offered gifted students.
10.02 The plan for evaluation is based on program objectives.
10.03 All components of the gifted/talented program are evaluated annually: identification, staff development, program options, curriculum, community involvement, program expenditures, and the evaluation process/plan.
10.04 Data for evaluation are obtained from a variety of instruments, procedures, and information sources.
10.05 Evaluation findings are compiled, analyzed, and communicated to ADE-OGT and appropriate audiences.
10.06 Student progress is assessed, with attention to mastery of content, higher level thinking skills, creativity, and affective growth.
27 Written evaluation plan Written evaluation plan Written evaluation plan Copies of evaluation instruments Evaluation report Policy for student evaluation 10.07 Participation in the gifted program is noted on student transcripts and permanent records.
Policy for student evaluation 28 APPENDICES Appendix A GIFTED EDUCATION ORGANIZATIONS
Arkansans for Gifted and Talented Education (AGATE) P. O. Box 250754 Little Rock, AR 72225
Arkansas Association of Gifted Education Administrators (AAGEA) 815 Bishop Little Rock, AR 72202
The Council for Exceptional Children Talented and Gifted Division 1920 Association Drive Reston, VA 22091 (703) 264-9446
The National Association for Gifted Children 1707 L Street, NW, Suite 550 Washington, DC 20036 (202) 785-4268
The National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented The University of Connecticut 362 Fairfield Road, U-7 Storrs, CT 06269 (203) 486-4826
Appendix B WEB SITES AND E-MAIL ADDRESSES American Association for Gifted Children http://www.jayi.com/aagc/ Arkansas Governor s School http://www.hendrix.edu/ags/agshane.htm Belin-Blank Center for Gifted Education and Talent Development http://www.uiowa.edu/~belinctr Council for Exceptional Children http://www.cec.sped.org/ Gifted Education Press http://www.cais.com/gep Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) Clearinghouse eric@cec.sped.org http://www.cec.sped.org/ericec.htm National Association for Gifted Children http://www.nagc.org/ National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented http://www.ucc.uconn.edu/ wwwgt/nrcgt.html Open Space Communications, Inc.
(Publishes Understanding our Gifted magazine) http://www.openspacecomm.com/
