FINAL ADOPTION - CHAPTER 8 - FIELD TRIALS AND TRAINING OF HUNTING DOGS Mailing 
A. "Field Trial" means and includes any licensed hunting dog trial held under the rules of a dog or kennel club for the purpose of gaining points toward a hunting dog championship, including any sanctioned, practice or training trial where there is organized competition; , and any hunt test or other performance event in which hunting dogs compete against an accepted standard.
. and training of dogs for the purpose of preparing for a licensed trial.
B. "Privately-owned "game birds " means game birds held in private ownership and otherwise acquired in accordance with Commission regulations.
B.C.
"Training" means the noncommercial act of a person(s) training their hunting dog(s) to improve the dog's performance in hunting wildlife or for field trials.
"Group training" means training involving 10 or more people and their associated hunting dogs.
#801-FIELD TRIAL LICENSE AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREDREQUIREMENTS A.
No field trial, as defined in #800A, may be conducted unless a field trial license therefore has been issued by the Division.
A.
Division Properties 1.
A field trial license must be obtained prior to holding any field trial or group training on any Division property.
Participants in field trials may be charged a nominal fee by the licensee to cover the costs associated with the field trial.
wildlife on any Division property involving 10 or more peopleand their associated hunting dogs 2.
Field trials and group training of hunting dogs on Division properties may be held only as specified in Chapter 9 of these regulations.
A.
Private Lands and Other Public Lands
1.
No license is required to hold any field trial on private land, or on public lands managed by agencies other than the Division of Wildlife.
However, the person sponsoring the event is required to notify the Division of Wildlife on forms provided by the Division at least 30 days in advance of the trial, providing the date, location, species and number of birds to be released.
Such field trials may be held anywhere in the state year-round, provided permission to hold such trial has been obtained from the owner of the property, person in charge, or land managing agency.
ARTICLE II - APPLICATION PROCEDURES AND LOCATIONSREQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES #802- APPLICATION AND LICENSE PROCEDURE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCESSING
1
A. Application to hold a field trial must be submitted to the Division at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the field trial.
B.
All applicants must apply on forms provided by the Division, accompanied by a certified check or money order in the amount of the license fee established in 33-4-102(2) CRS. C.
A Field Trial License shall be issued within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application after all requirements for issuance have been met.
D.
The Director of the Division or the Director's representative may deny a field trial license when information available indicates there will be any significant detrimental impact on the wildlife resource or wildlife habitat as a result of holding a field trial or if it is determined that the field trial will not be conducted in accordance with provisions of these regulations, or if a migratory waterfowl season is in progress.
E.
The Division shall give written notice to the applicant within ten (10) working days after receipt of the application.
Said notice shall include a statement of the reasons for such denial.
F. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude application for a field trial permit which may authorize a field trial to be held during a closed season.
A. Application Requirements 1.
Prior to the processing of any license application, the applicant is required to submit the following: a.
A completed application on forms provided by the Division, which shall include, at a minimum: 1) information about the dates and type of trial, location, and name of property.
2) acreage needs and specific portion of property to be used, if known.
3) estimated minimum and maximum number of participants, dogs, and horses.
4) species and number of game birds to be released.
5) anticipated impact to wildlife resources and habitat, including any actions proposed to avoid or remediate such impact, if any.
6) anticipated conflict with other wildlife-related recreational activities, including actions proposed to avoid or reduce such conflict, if any. b.
Such application shall be accompanied by the statutory license fee. c. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude application for a field trial permit which may authorize a field trial to be held during a closed season.
2.
Applications to hold a field trial must be submitted to the Division at least sixty (60) days but not more than 180 days prior to the date of the field trial.
B. Criteria for Approval or Denial 1.
Applications will be evaluated and approved, conditioned, or denied based on the following criteria: a.
Significant adverse impact to wildlife resources or wildlife habitat.
b. Unresolvable conflict with other wildlife-related recreational activities, including established hunting or fishing seasons.
c. Compliance with application requirements and other applicable regulations.
d. Applicant's failure to comply with previous field trial license conditions, including, but not limited to, post-field trial habitat rehabilitation requirements.
2.
Conditions may include, but are not limited to: a. maximum number of participants and dogs. b. maximum number, use, and picketing of horses
2
c. d. e. f.
type and scope of infrastructures specific to the field trials that would be required or allowed.
type and scope of vegetation management for the field trials that would be allowed, including any rehabilitation requirements.
the approach for dealing with time and space conflicts between field trials and hunting seasons and other public uses.
any other condition intended to avoid or reduce impact to wildlife resources or wildlife habitat or avoid or reduce conflict with other wildlife-releated recreational activities.
3.
Previously issued licenses may be modified, suspended, or revoked based on the following criteria: a. impact to wildlife resources or wildlife habitat beyond that identified and considered as part of the application and license approval process.
b. conflict with other wildlife-related recreational activities beyond that identified and considered as part of the application and license approval process.
c. failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions of the field trial license.
#803- LOCATION OF FIELD TRIALS A. Field trials may be held anywhere in the state provided permission to hold such trial is obtained from the owner of the property or person in charge thereof.
B. Field trial on Division properties may be held only as specified in Chapter 9.
#804- HUNTING LICENSE REQUIREMENTS A.
The field trial license shall authorize persons designated thereby as official gunners for the field trial to kill, take, or attempt to kill or take wildlife released during such trial.
Such persons so designated shall not be required to have a separate hunting license for such activity.
#805803- USE OF PRIVATELY OWNED WILDLIFE RELEASE AND TAKING OF WILDLIFE
A.
For the purpose of this Chapter, privately-owned wildlife means wildlife purchased or donated from a commercial wildlife park, a noncommercial wildlife park or imported under the General Provisions Chapter of the Wildlife Commission regulations and in accordance with federal law.
A.
The only wildlife which may be released for field trials or hunting dog training are privately-owned game birds.
All releases must be done in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable regulations, including, but not limited to, regulation numbers #007, #008, #009, and #1103 E, except that more than 25 game birds may be released for field trials and training.
B.
The person in charge of any field trial is authorized to designate official gunners to kill, take, or attempt to kill or take game birds released during a field trial.
The total number of game birds taken at any field trial or when training hunting dogs shall not exceed the number of birds released.
Provided further that birds released for hunting dog training may only be hunted on the day of release and may not be released on private land when there is a hunting season in progress for the same species in the same location.
B.C.
A valid invoice or donation slip proving ownership of such wildlife shall be in the possession of the person in charge of the field trial and shall be available provided for inspection when upon requested demand by a Division representative.
C.D..
Migratory birds shall be marked or banded in accordance with Federal law.
D E..
Privately-owned wildlife game birds released for a field trial not taken during the field trial shall become the property of the state.
No wildlife shall be released without Division approval.
3
E F..
The taking of any wildlife not marked authorized in accordance with this chapter shall immediately be reported to the Division.
F.The field trial license shall authorize only the taking of the number of game birds that have been released for that licensed field trial.
ARTICLE III - DOG TRAINING OF HUNTING DOGS FOR HUNTING #806804 - TRAINING ON WILDLIFE A. Individuals may train hunting dogs on wild game birds from the first day of August 1st through the last day of March April 15.
B. Only firearms shooting blank cartridges or shells shall be used while training hunting dogs on wild game during any period when a hunting season is not in progress for such wildlife.
C.
The training of dogs on coyotes is permitted except from April 16 through July 15 of each calendar year.
D.
The training of dogs on raccoons is permitted except from May 1 through June 30 of each calendar year.
4
09/13/01 Chapter 8 Field Trials and Hunting Dog Training Basis and Purpose Draft Basis and Purpose Statement: These regulations are necessary to manage field trials in Colorado, particularly field trials occurring on Division properties, the associated release of privately-owned game birds on all lands, and in understanding the demand for and role of field trials.
Field trials are a form of wildlife-related recreation which, through training and competition, result in highly trained hunting dogs which contribute to the overall improvement of hunting dog breeds and, from a hunting recreation standpoint, retrieval of game birds.
This adoption constitutes a five year review of field trial and hunting dog training regulations, and there are some significant changes.
The definition of a field trial is modified to specify that the activity involves hunting dogs and their associated hunting skills.
A new definition is added for privately-owned game birds, for use in releases for field trials.
The definition of training is modified to specify that it is a noncommercial activity for hunting dogs.
Dog trainers who charge their clients fees to train their dogs are commercial uses and must have a commercial use agreement to perform those services on Division properties.
However, clinics or group training seminars sponsored by hunting dog clubs on Division properties may have a nominal cost to participants intended to cover the costs to the club.
These types of activities require a field trial license and are not classified as a commercial use for the purpose of permitting.
The definition of training is also expanded to include group training of 10 or more people and their hunting dogs, with a further requirement later in the chapter that a field trial license be required on Division properties.
Field trial licensing requirements for all lands other than Division properties, including other public lands and all private lands have been eliminated, although all private or non-Division property access permission requirements remain in place according to applicable laws or regulations.
In place of licensing on non-Division properties, field trialers are required to notify the Division 30 days in advance of such trials, providing information on location and number and species of game birds to be released.
All releases must be in accordance with existing regulations on importation and release.
Releases which, in the past, were authorized by these licenses, remain legal, and a specific authorization for an unlimited number of birds to be released and taken is provided as long as compliance with the other regulations is maintained.
This is a significant streamlining of the licensing process which is intended to lessen the administrative burden for both field trial organizers and the Division when Division property is not involved.
Licensing necessary to manage field trials and group training on Division properties is maintained.
This is necessary due to the increasing demand for all types of special uses of Division properties and the potential for impacts to wildlife habitat from this type of group activity.
Licensing requirements are modified to provide adequate time for processing of applications and timely approval which meets the needs of applicants in scheduling their events, with the application period expanded to a minimum of 60 days but not more than 180 days prior to the trial or group training event.
The 180 day limitation is to ensure that annual access opportunity to field trial dates, especially on properties with limits on the number of trials allowed, is provided to all prospective applicants.
Criteria for approval, denial, and conditions for licenses and modification, suspension, or revocation of previously issued licenses are updated and clarified, and will be applied using clear and defensible information in accordance with the Administrative Procedures Act (Title 24, CRS).
Release and taking of wildlife provisions are updated to reflect the changes in this chapter and to avoid conflict with release provisions for game birds found in Chapter 11.
In the past, more than 25 birds could be released because it was approved as part of the field trial license.
Now that field trial licenses are not required except on Division properties, Chapter 11 would restrict releases to 25 birds, so these regulations authorize release of more than 25 birds for both field trials and training.
These regulations also ensure that the designation of official gunners can take place whether a field trial license is required or not.
The receipt for the birds is the authorization to take the birds and designate the official gunner, as it serves as documentation that the birds came from a private source.
The regulations are also modified to require reporting of the inadvertent taking of any wildlife not authorized in accordance with the chapter, rather than only marked migratory birds, in the event that a wild bird should be taken.
Finally, the period for training of hunting dogs on wild game birds using blank cartridges is expanded to end on April 15
rather than March 31.
This expansion will facilitate training without negatively impacting most nesting game bird species.
There are some Division properties which serves as significant production areas for waterfowl where such training could have such adverse impacts, however, those properties have site specific closures providing that protection, listed in Chapter 9.
There are also related changes in Chapter 9 which identify property specific field trial provisions and limitations.
Administrative procedures to be followed, including proactive and technologically updated notification of applicants to improve processing, procedures for ensuring timely review, and procedures designed to improve communication between applicants and the Division have been placed in a separate document to be used by Division employees in reviewing applicants and working with field trial interests.
This is intended to prevent problems and denial of applications due to poor understanding of expectations and/or criteria by both employees and applicants.
The Division will provide a copy of the administrative procedures to field trial license applicants along with all necessary application and notification forms and regulations so that applicants and the Division know what to expect and can address procedural problems if they should occur.
The primary statutory authority for these regulations is §§ 33-1-101 through 108 and -110, 33-4-102, Article 6 of Title 33, and 24-4-103, all CRS as amended.
EFFECTIVE DATE - THESE REGULATIONS SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 1, 2001 AND SHALL REMAIN IN FULL FORCE AND EFFECT UNTIL REPEALED, AMENDED OR SUPERSEDED.
APPROVED AND ADOPTED BY THE WILDLIFE COMMISSION OF THE STATE OF COLORADO THIS 13TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2001.
Rick Enstrom Chairman ATTEST: Marianna Raftopolous Secretary
