RESEARCHERS CONTINUE TO PROBE THE NATURE OF THE DISEASE, WILDLIFE MANAGERS LOOK FOR WAYS TO CONTROL IT WHILE HUNTERS AND OTHER CONSERVATIONISTS ASK HARD QUESTIONS.
ARTICLES BY CHRIS MADSON, TIFFANY MEREDITH, TOM REED, AND MICHELLE ZITEK PHOTOGRAPHY BY TIM CHRISTIE, CHRIS MADSON, LURAY PARKER, AND BETH WILLIAMS
ANSWERS...
AND QUESTIONS Article by Chris Madson Wildlife diseases have a way of going unnoticed.
A deer or a dickey bird picks up an infection, starts feeling draggy, and repairs to some secluded hiding place to heal.
If the patient recovers, he's back in circulation within days, if he expires the coyotes and buzzards clean him up, leaving little evidence of the cause of death.
Either way, a disease outbreak can go years without being noticed, even if the illness itself is well known.
If the disease is something new to science, it can do an even better job of hiding.
Which is why chronic wasting disease has been such an enigma.
Nobody knows for sure where CWD started.
Researchers first recognized it in the late 1960's.
Some of the captive mule deer in a wildlife research facility near Fort Collins, Colorado, seemed to be starving, even though they had plenty of food.
Affected animals became emaciated and listless; their ears drooped; they drooled and seemed constantly thirsty.
Within months, they dropped dead.
The cause of this pattern of illness wasn't known until Beth Williams, a veterinary graduate student at Colorado State University, decided to look at tissue samples from the brains of the dead animals.
The tissue was shot through with microscopic holes, a tiny version of a kitchen sponge.
Williams recognized the pattern.
This was one of a group of diseases called "transmissible spongiform encephalopathies."
"Transmissible" because they spread from one victim to another.
"Spongiform" because they leave brain tissue looking like sponge.
"Encephalopathy" because they are diseases of the brain.
TSEs are a relatively rare group of diseases.
Probably the most common is scrapie, a sheep disease that was first described in Europe more than 200 years ago.
Transmissible mink encephalopathy is occasionally found in ranched mink.
Each of these diseases seems to be species-specific in normal circumstances-cats don't catch mink encephalopathy; shepherds don't catch scrapie.
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy - or mad cow disease - appeared in British cattle about twenty years ago.
Up until the late 1980s, feed producers in Britain used parts from dead animals to boost protein content in their products.
Apparently, animals that had died of disease were sometimes used as protein supplement.
Scientists who have studied BSE think sheep that had died of scrapie were used for cattle feed, eventually allowing the sheep disease to jump the "species barrier" from sheep to cattle.
There are also a few human TSEs all of them very rare: fatal familial insomnia, kuru, Gerstman-StrausslerShenker syndrome, Creutzfeldt-Jakob and variant Creuzfeldt- Jakob disease (vCJD).
Kuru was spread from one member of New Guinea's Fore tribe to another when the men participated in the ritual cannibalism of a deceased relative.
Fatal familial insomnia and Gerstman-Straussler-Shenker syndrome are apparently passed down through families genetically.
CJD occurs in about one in a million humans and is not ordinarily transmissible.
Variant CJD developed in 136 people in Europe, mostly in the United Kingdom, over the last eight years after hundreds of millions of people ate meat that contained brain or spinal cord from cows with BSE.
What causes TSEs? There is still some debate.
A few scientists believe the culprit is an extremely simple, slowacting virus.
However, an extended search has failed to find either the viruses or evidence of the RNA or DNA from a phantom virus.
Most of the scientists who have studied TSEs think these diseases are caused by a whole new group of pathogens.
They are rogue proteins called prions.
Normal versions of these proteins are found in the membranes of cells, primarily in the nervous system.
Their function is unknown.
Apparently, it's possible for these proteins to change form, although they do so very rarely.
The altered form of the protein doesn't break down easily, and because of its different shape, it disrupts the structure of the tissue it occupies.
One infectious protein or "prion" would have negligible effect, but a prion can cause a normal protein to shift its shape so that it becomes a prion as well.
Prions aren't alive in any way we understand the term, so they don't reproduce.
Instead, they convert existing benign proteins to the damaging prion form.
Eventually, the change in billions of protein molecules rips tiny holes in the brain, causing death.
It's tempting to assume that chronic wasting disease began out of nowhere in the Fort Collins research pens or on the Wyoming Game and Fish Department's Sybille Wildlife Research Unit in Southeastern Wyoming.
Analysis of the infection rates in wild deer and elk along with mathematical modeling suggest that the Fort Collins area may, in fact, be one focus of infection, but deer from the Colorado research facility were routinely moved to Sybille and vice versa.
The Wyoming research pens seem to be another long-term focus of infection.
All the research deer tract their lineage back to the wild, so there is some chance that the disease was brought into the research units.
Speculation on the source of the disease is easy to find, but it's likely that no one will ever know for sure how or where CWD started.
Efforts to sterilize the research pens in Wyoming and Colorado didn't succeed, suggesting that the CWD prion doesn't break down readily in the environment and can survive outside an animal's body for a year or more.
When apparently healthy deer or elk are released on sites that have supported large numbers of infected animals, the healthy newcomers often develop CWD.
So far, there is no way of testing for prions outside of animal tissue, which means that researchers can't look for it in soil, water, or feed.
That makes it hard to figure out how CWD makes its way from one animal to another.
The best guess now is that the disease usually spreads by direct contact between two animals and/or possibly through feces, and ingestion with food.
Colorado researchers have found that some of the highest infection rates among deer are found in herds that people routinely feed.
Experience with CWD in captivity indicates that, once a deer develops signs of the disease, it will die.
The body doesn't seem to mount any sort of immune reaction, probably because the prion is so similar to other proteins.
Elk seem to be more resistant to CWD than deer, and some research suggests that the elk that do die of the disease may have the same genetic makeup at one site on their chromosomes.
This leads to a faint hope that a few elk in the wild could have a genetic resistance to CWD.
At this point, no one knows for sure.
Disease specialists have been tracking the incidence of CWD in Colorado and Wyoming since the early 1980s.
As a general rule, the proportion of infected animals is highest where a disease begins and has been present the longestinfection rates drop off in areas where a disease has just spread.
The proportions of CWD-infected deer seem to indicate that the outbreak in Wyoming and Colorado began in the Fort Collins area and around the Sybille wildlife research center west of Wheatland, Wyoming.
The disease seems to be spreading in the wild, but even this spread is open to some question.
Until five years ago, there was no intensive effort to test for CWD outside of Wyoming and Colorado the animals that were positive came either from captive herds or were killed in the wild because they looked sick.
As testing for the disease has expanded, more CWD-positive deer and elk have turned up in places farther and farther from the original areas of infection.
This is probably because the disease has spread, but it may also have something to do with the intensified testing itself.
In the wild, CWD now occurs in most of northcentral Colorado, south eastern Wyoming, and the western edge of the Nebraska panhandle.
A dozen CWD-positive deer and elk have turned up in South Dakota's Black Hills, and several positive deer have been found in eastern Utah near Vernal, northeast of Moab, and southeast of Salt Lake City.
Biologists in Wisconsin have found hundreds of positive white-tailed deer in the southwestern part of the state, and several have been taken in northcentral Illinois.
Saskatchewan also has CWD in wild deer, and it has been identified in a small herd in southern New Mexico.
In addition to CWD in wild deer and elk, there have been many cases reported in farmed deer and elk.
At last report, nine states and two Canadian provinces had CWD in captive deer or elk- seventy-three herds in all.
The infections in these herds could have been introduced to the wild in places like Saskatchewan, Nebraska, and Wisconsin.
This is what we think we know about chronic wasting disease.
Crucial questions remain unanswered.
How does CWD spread? How long can a CWD prion persist outside the body of a living animal? How can we identify the prion in the physical environment? Do some deer and/or elk have a genetic resistance to CWD? Are there tests for CWD that can be done quickly and inexpensively on wild animals? Is there a practical way to immunize animals against CWD? Researchers are already straining to find the answers to these and other questions concerning chronic wasting disease.
The pace of the work is controlled, as always, by the funds that are available.
While we spend more money on dealing with CWD, we should make sure we spend more trying to understand it.
A deer may suffer from chronic wasting disease for several months before obvious symptoms begin to show.
Near the end, an infected deer may show a rough disheveled coat, drooping ears, a lack of interest in its surroundings, excessive thirst, and a tendency to drool.
At this point, death is certain, often in a matter of days.
(Photo by Chris Madson)
CWD's IMPACT ON DEER HERDS - -article by Chris Madson As far as we know, chronic wasting disease is 100 percent fatal- no one has ever seen a deer or elk recover from infection with CWD.
If CWD passes readily from one animal to the other- and it seems to do that - then it could take a huge toll on a deer herd.
If the prion persists in the environment for a long period of time- and it seems to do that- then recovery of a deer herd could be slowed.
While deer managers try to contain CWD a few specialists in wildlife disease have been trying to figure out how it will affect deer populations in the wild.
This can be a difficult exercise.
It's difficult to count deer in the wild, even with modern techniques like aerial transects and sophisticated computer modeling.
And many forces impinge on deer herds.
Over the last eight to ten years, a prolonged drought in much of the West has taken a toll on deer that is hard to quantify.
In an effort to predict what might happen to a deer herd infected with CWD, several disease specialists have used what we think we know about CWD to build a computer model.
The model starts with a deer herd of a given size, then adds or subtracts deer for various reasons.
Deer are added during simulated breeding seasons.
They die as a result of simulated hunting seasons; the effects of winters; the toll claimed by predators, other accidents, and disease.
The model considers the mortality rate in CWD-infected animals, the rate at which the disease might spread, the lag between the time an animal first catches the disease and the time that same animal can infect other animals.
All of these gains and losses can be adjusted, allowing the researchers to consider the effects of all the variables.
The next step is to get some sort of estimate of the range of gains and losses in real deer herds.
With those numbers in hand, the researchers can set up a digital deer herd and follow its ups and downs through fifty or 100 years.
Clearly, no model can be as complex as the interaction between real deer and a constantly changing environment, so the estimates any model makes are a rough estimate at best.
The performance of the model also depends on the accuracy of the data fed into it, another source of distortion.
Still, with all their shortcomings, models can be useful in testing our assumptions about deer losses to disease and other mortality.
After fine-tuning the model, the researchers ran 250 simulated deer herds through the computer.
The graph, shown below is an average of those simulations.
The top line shows a century of fluctuations in the population of a theoretical deer herd of 1,000 animals without CWD.
The centerline shows the change in 250 simulated deer populations infected with chronic wasting disease.
The bottom line shows the change in the number of CWD-infected animals at any given time.
The model's predictions are sobering.
In the first twenty years, the disease spreads through the simulated herd, but it has little effect on the over- all population.
As the number of infected animals increases, however, the population begins to fall.
Thirty years into the simulation, the average population has dropped about ten percent.
Fifty years out, the population has been cut in half, and at the end of the century, it has dropped by ninety percent.
In many of the simulations, the deer herds were wiped out.
(Of course, wiping out an infected deer herd has its advantages- if it can be done before the disease spreads, the disease provides for its own extinction, assuming, of course, that the disease pathogen can't survive outside a deer.
Unfortunately, CWD takes months to kill a deer, allowing an infected animal to spread the disease to other members of its herd or to animals in other herds.
And the CWD prion seems to persist for long periods in the environment.
If that's the case, a local deer herd could disappear, and the disease could still find its way into new animals moving into the unoccupied habitat.)
The model gives us one other piece of information.
By considering the change in the proportion of animals that are infected, the model can give an estimate of when the CWD started in the herd.
According to the researchers, "chronic wasting disease probably has been occurring in captive deer for more than 30 years."
According to this modeled view of CWD, some of the infected herds in Colorado and Wyoming should be showing some signs of decline.
Since Colorado has increased harvest and done some selective culling on the deer in CWDinfected areas, the populations have already been reduced, and the effect of CWD on numbers may be camouflaged.
Colorado has experimented with herd reduction as a way of controlling CWD, but Wyoming hasn't.
The number of permits issued for deer in southeastern Wyoming has changed through the years as the populations have ebbed and flowed, but there has been no effort to reduce deer numbers drastically with expanded hunting seasons or professional gunners.
The graphs presented here show population estimates for three deer herds in southeastern Wyoming.
The Iron Mountain herd is found from the Colorado state line north to Sybille Canyon west of Wheatland, Wyoming.
The Laramie Peak herd ranges from Sybille Canyon north into the country west of Glendo and Esterbrook.
The north Converse herd uses the high plains and breaks from Douglas and Casper north to the towns of Wright and Midwest.
The Iron Mountain and Laramie Peak herds may have had chronic wasting disease as long as it has existed.
Sybille Canyon, the border between the two herd units, is home to the Sybille Wildlife Research Center, one of the two research facilities where CWD was first identified.
The north Converse herd lives near these two herds in country that has about the same elevation and weather, but north Converse deer have only recently been infected with CWD.
It's hard to see any difference between the population trends, even though there is reason to believe that the Iron Mountain and Laramie Peak deer may have had CWD, for more than thirty years.
And the three graphs have yet to show a good fit with the population trends predicted by the CWD model.
There may be several possible reasons for the disparity.
First, the population estimates for the herds are not precise because it is almost impossible to get a precise count of wild deer.
Second, we don't know for sure how long CWD has been in the wild in southeastern Wyoming- we may still be in the first few years of the model before the declines show themselves.
Third, the deer in these herd units aren't confined by any impassable barriers.
It's possible for deer to move into these herds from nearby areas, masking a population decline.
It's also just possible that these herds aren't responding to CWD as the model predicts.
If that turns out to be the case, it suggests that one or more of our assumptions about chronic wasting disease may be flawed.
Another ten or fifteen years of routine big game census will give us a much better picture of the population trends in these CWD areas.
At this point, the model and the real-world population estimates tell us the same thing: The list of things we don't know about CWD is a lot longer than the list of things we know for sure.
MANAGING CWD - article by Tiffany Meredith Since chronic wasting disease was discovered in the wild in March 1981, wildlife officials have been faced with a dilemma: how to manage a disease about which so much is unknown.
Biologists don't know what kind of long-term impact the disease will have on wild populations of deer and elk.
Researchers aren't sure how the disease is spread, although they know it can be transmitted from animal to animal.
While the number of cases has gone up recently, it's not clear if that is because more animals are infected or because officials are looking harder for the disease.
They are.
The first line of attack, at least for now, is to pinpoint where chronic wasting disease exists through intensive surveillance.
In Colorado, Nebraska, and Wisconsin, officials are going a step further by thinning herds and reducing the number of animals in "hot spots," or areas with a high number of cases, in an attempt to put the brakes on the disease's spread.
Officials believe the disease is spreading, but slowly.
Until 2000, CWD was known only to exist in the wild in northeast Colorado and southeast Wyoming, which found its first wild case in an elk in 1986.
CWD now also exists in the wild in Nebraska, South Dakota, Utah, New Mexico, Wisconsin and Illinois and in Saskatchewan.
Surveillance began in Wyoming in the early 1980s.
The first documented wild case was a sick elk found by biologists in Rocky Mountain National Park that was determined to have CWD.
Surveillance is now going on throughout the U.S. and in Canada.
CWD also has been found on game farms in Colorado, Nebraska, South Dakota, Wisconsin, Minnesota, Kansas, Oklahoma, Montana, Saskatchewan and Alberta.
Most of these captive herds have now been depopulated because of the presence of CWD. Culling of wild deer, which may be more susceptible to CWD than elk, has generated some controversy from the public over whether the action is warranted based on what officials know about the disease.
But Colorado Division of Wildlife officials point to long-term modeling done in conjunction with Colorado State University that shows deer populations in northeast Colorado, where the disease has been established for decades, could eventually be reduced dramatically if CWD was left to run its course.
"In areas where we find an unusually high prevalence of the disease, the best tool we have is to remove those animals with the disease or those that have been exposed," said Todd Malmsbury, public information chief for Colorado's wildlife division.
"By removing these hot spots of infection, we believe we can slow the spread of the disease and reduce the prevalence."
Since chronic wasting disease doesn't kill an infected animal quickly, there is a chance for a sick deer or elk to move long distances and gather with large wintering herds where the infection can spread.
(Photo by LuRay Parker)
Culling in Colorado has been done only in the northeast.
Many times those hot spots are associated with urban areas, where deer are protected and unnaturally numerous, and where they are sometimes illegally fed by the state's burgeoning Front Range human population, which enjoys watching them.
The division also has cracked down on those who don't obey the ban on feeding.
"While there's no absolute connection, there's some suggestion that feeding concentrates deer and elk and contributes to the problem, " said Mike Miller, Colorado Division of Wildlife veterinarian and a leading CWD researcher.
"It brings them back to the same place day after day and congregates them, which is not normal in free-ranging animals."
As the disease takes two to three years to claim its victims, it's too early to tell if the culling strategy is working.
"These animals were probably infected before we started our management efforts," Miller said.
"We need data to look at over several years.
We've been managing in earnest for only about two years, and it'll be about five years before we could really see a positive response.
It would be a pleasant surprise to see a reduction in CWD now."
Wyoming, however, has opted not to cull herds, instead focusing on finding out where exactly the disease occurs in the state.
Officials have expanded surveillance from the southeast area statewide this year, prompted by cases found in other states outside the area where the disease was known to exist.
"It may be elsewhere, but we might not have looked hard enough," said Wyoming Game and Fish Department wildlife veterinarian Terry Kreeger.
"We're probably going to delay management efforts we might take until we find a new case in a new spot some distance from the southeast."
Right now, Kreeger said that known cases appear to be a natural extension of the disease, although two cases some distance from the established area are being investigated.
A new case in Saratoga will be the Game and Fish Department's first attempt at management.
"When we find one new case, we'll sample about twenty to thirty animals to see if there are any more cases to determine if it's an isolated one or more widespread," Kreeger said.
"If it's two to three cases, we might widen the area where we culled deer to see if we find more.
But if we find seven to ten cases, we might decide not to do anything more because this would suggest that CWD was well established."
Game and Fish hopes to collect about 6,000 samples from hunter- killed animals, this year to better understand the distribution of the disease.
Last year, the department looked at 2,550.
"If we're really lucky, we might not find CWD anywhere else and might not do a statewide surveillance again for a couple of years," Kreeger said.
"The biggest key to the ultimate management and control of the disease is to understand how it's spread from one animal to another.
We understand a lot about bacteria and viruses, but don't understand how this is spread.
"Then we might develop management tools to break the train of transmission."
Like Wyoming, Colorado's goal is to get precise location information about CWD.
Last year, the Division of Wildlife looked at over 27,000 samples.
"Our goal over the next few years is to survey all deer and elk populations statewide," said Miller.
"We hope to build our sample size and fill in gaps to get a complete picture of where the disease is and where it is not."
Colorado also is thinning herds with longer hunting seasons for mule deer in the northeast part of the state, with increased licenses and with special licenses to control populations of deer and elk in problem spots.
In Nebraska, chronic wasting disease turned up in 2000 in the extreme southeast corner of the panhandle near Kimball, although the state had been monitoring for the disease since 1997.
The state has now expanded its surveillance and also is thinning herds, said Bruce Morrison, assistant administrator for wildlife for Nebraska Game and Parks.
"We're doing our best to reduce deer density with expanded hunting," Morrison said.
The state currently is trying to secure federal funding for a study to determine social interaction and movement of deer in infected areas through radio collaring.
Wisconsin has taken arguably the most aggressive stance since the disease was found in its southwest corner in February 2002.
The department has succeeded in lowering the population in known infected areas with high harvest on antlerless animals, including summer seasons of one week per month last summer and extending gun seasons from the traditional nine days to late October through January.
The state continues to sample every deer harvested in the CWD area, and is using focused thinning in areas where it knows the infection is present, said Andy Nelson, an area wildlife supervisor with the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources.
"We're mapping exactly where the problem exists and at what level," Nelson said.
"Then we'll shape our CWD management where the sick animals are."
Through sampling, the department has found ninety confirmed locations, and believes there are no other infected areas.
"I think it's fair to say we've done a good job of finding out where the disease occurs, where it doesn't and documenting the degree of occurrence," Nelson said.
Landowners in infected areas also were offered free deer licenses with an unlimited bag but had to "earn a buck" by killing a doe first.
Nelson said the move was effective in increasing the harvest, but "there's still a significant number of deer within the infected area."
"It remains to be seen if there's a strong enough desire from the public to eliminate the herd and the disease along with it."
This year, the department will continue to solicit heads from hunters in and around known infected areas.
Wisconsin also has a goal of getting a large number of deer systematically across the state to complete the statewide surveillance.
"We are going to continue to take the pulse of health of the herd," Nelson said.
"The zone has gotten bigger as we find more positive cases.
The size of the problem area doubled this year, though the original hot spot herd was reduced."
In addition to efforts by states, the federal government has taken steps to control CWD.
In May 2002, Congress directed the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior to come up with a plan to help state wildlife and agriculture agencies manage CWD and to coordinate federal and state efforts.
Interstate movement of deer and elk from game ranches is managed by the USDA, which will ban importation of animals from states where the disease had been detected.
In Colorado and other states, entire commercial game herds have been purchased by the USDA and destroyed and incinerated, as some believe the movement of commercial elk from one ranch to another across state lines spreads the disease.
In Saskatchewan, all game farms are required to be enrolled in a CWD monitoring program.
"Much of our work is adaptive to the rapidly increasing knowledge about CWD," said Colorado's Malmsbury.
"It was first noted by Beth Williams (at the University of Wyoming) in the 1970s, and in terms of understanding the disease and management, that's a relatively short period of time."
NEW RESEARCH - article by Tiffany Meredith In the fight against chronic wasting disease, Wyoming and Colorado are on the front lines.
As wildlife management agencies, public health officials, hunters and the beef industry struggle to understand the mysterious infection, studies under way in the two states could eventually provide answers.
"We want to know how it's transmitted, how the (disease) agent might be shed and what the fate of it might be in the environment," said Beth Williams, a professor of veterinary science at the University of Wyoming in Laramie and one of the nation's foremost experts on chronic wasting disease.
"Right now, we don't have any firm results."
But Williams -the first to find evidence of the disease in the brains of infected animals -and her colleagues in Colorado have uncovered some clues: In a report published last month in the science journal Nature, Williams and Mike Miller, wildlife veterinarian for the Colorado Division of Wildlife, concluded that the disease is spread from animal to animal and that transmission directly from mother to fawn or calf probably is not significant.
The findings also suggest the disease could spread among congregating animals.
Miller and Williams placed nine pregnant does with the disease in pens at the Division of Wildlife's Foothills Research Unit in Fort Collins.
They also turned out nine disease-free fawns from the wild in the pens, with the goal of finding out whether only the fawns born of the infected mothers would contract the disease.
All nine did, but so did eight of the nine fawns from the wild.
In other studies, animals were taken from areas where the disease did not exist and placed into pens where infected animals had been.
They did not have direct contact with infected animals but still developed the disease.
"There's strong evidence it can be picked up from the environment," Williams said.
The studies are funded by the National Institutes of Health, the National Science Foundation, the Department of Defense, the U.S. Department of Agriculture and Wyoming's and Colorado's state wildlife agencies.
Chronic wasting disease research, on all fronts, is going on across the nation and in Europe.
Most in the U.S. is a cooperative effort between federal and state agencies and universities.
The University of Wyoming, Colorado State University, the Wyoming Game and Fish Department and Colorado's Division of Wildlife often work together on chronic wasting disease research.
The Department of Defense, which often is involved in medical research, recently awarded $2 million to a collaborative CWD study involving the University of Wyoming, the Wyoming Game and Fish Department and the Colorado Division of Wildlife.
The study will attempt to develop sensitive prion-detection techniques and use them on samples from CWD-affected deer and elk in hopes of better understanding how CWD is transmitted.
Colorado and Wyoming also are testing about 24 cattle at the Foothills Research Unit and the Game and Fish Department's Sybille Wildlife Research Unit to determine whether cows can contract chronic wasting disease by contact with sick elk and deer.
Cattle often share pastures and public land with deer and elk.
Chronic wasting disease belongs to the same family of diseases as "mad cow" (bovine spongiform encephalopathy) called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, or TSEs.
A form of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) has caused a human disease called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 'which has killed about 140 people primarily in England and Europe since the 1990s.
The victims most likely became infected by eating beef contaminated with the BSE agent, raising concerns in North America about the possibility of CWD transmission to humans.
Studies to date, however, have shown cattle appear to be resistant to CWD When a herd of captive deer and elk by natural routes of exposure.
But the studies, set to go for 10 years, are not is infected with chronic wasting complete.
Research cattle fed a high dosage of brain material from infected mule disease, the proportion of sick deer and elk still are healthy.
Cattle living in the same research facilities in Sybille animals is generally much higher and Fort Collins as infected deer and elk also still are healthy.
than it is in infected wild herds.
Even when thirteen cattle were inoculated with the CWD agent directly into Evidence strongly suggests that shipment of animals from one game their brains, where the disease begins, only five showed evidence of transmission, ranch to another has spread CWD Williams said.
much faster than it spreads in the "Of course, that's an abnormal route of transmission, but it shows us what wild.
(Photo by Beth Williams) CWD might look like if it occurred in cattle, and indicated that our diagnostic tests are adequate to pick it up."
Research indicates that CWD does not spread from deer to cattle or other domestic livestock.
However, deer that are fed through the winter in a CWD area are much more likely to develop the disease than deer wintering in native habitat.
(Photo by LuRay Parker) Along with the states, the USDA is monitoring cattle in Wyoming and Colorado and throughout the country for BSE by examining cattle with neurologic disease.
So far, no evidence of BSE or CWD transmission has been found.
Colorado State University also examined about 250 culled cows from northeast Colorado, where chronic wasting disease has been established for decades and cattle often are free roaming along with deer and elk.
Nothing was found.
Several agencies, such as the Food and Drug Administration, are carrying out studies on risks to human health.
A two-year, $500,000 FDA study with the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis focuses on the risk of BSE transmission to humans through FDA-regulated products.
Another three-year, $2 million to $3 million FDA study at Case Western Reserve University with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention uses genetically engineered mice developed to study the transmissibility of CWD.
The mice carry either a human or deer gene for normal prion protein and are exposed to tissue from CWD-infected animals.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases awarded a seven-year, $8.4 million contract to Colorado State University.
The university is investigating how CWD progresses within deer and elk and how it could jump the species barrier.
Researchers already have mapped out how it progresses through the brains of deer, and currently are working on elk.
Eventually, they will attempt to develop a vaccine to protect deer and elk.
Researchers at NIAID' s Rocky Mountain Laboratories in Hamilton, Mont., are developing compounds that could block the formation of prion proteins.
On the wildlife front, Colorado Division of Wildlife researchers are studying the relationship between high numbers of deer in an area and the occurrence of the disease.
They are using a "test-and-cull" tactic in Estes Park just outside Rocky Mountain National Park, a town where the robust elk population is known to snack on residents' yards and share the road with cars.
Colorado's Miller said wildlife officials were looking for an urban area where hunting is limited.
They caught, marked, and tested about 200 adult mule deer for CWD with a new live animal test using tonsils.
They then went back and removed the positive deer.
They also are culling deer in areas where there are a high number of cases to see if it halts the disease's spread; studying whether other big game animals, such as bighorn sheep, can contract the disease, whether deer movement is connected with disease prevalence and experimenting with early detection methods to diagnose CWD in healthy-looking animals.
Right now, examining brain and lymph node tissue, which requires an animal to be killed, is the only approved way to know whether an animal is infected.
Private companies, working with veterinary diagnostic laboratories including the Wyoming State Veterinary Laboratory at the University of Wyoming and state wildlife management agencies, are working to hone and improve testing methods.
A new test, ELISA, has now been approved by the USDA.
Results of the test, which identifies prions in an animal's lymph nodes, come back in about a day, instead of more than two days, which is required with the old gold
The prion that causes chronic wasting disease focuses on nerve tissue, especially in the brain.
Infected brain tissue shows microscopic holes.
One way of identifying the disease is to take a sample from the base of the brain, treat it with a special stain, and examine it under a microscope for signs of spongy tissue and tinted prions. by Beth Williams
standard - immunohistochemistry -which still is being used to confirm positive cases.
With ELISA, a hundred samples can be run at once instead of a just a few.
Wyoming and Colorado both are using the new method, and new CWD diagnostic tests are being developed and will be available in coming years.
Along with laboratory work, intensive monitoring across the nation through hunter-killed and culled animals has helped researchers gain insight into the disease.
Results so far suggest CWD is relatively localized and not widespread, said Williams.
"It's not surprising CWD was found in northeastern Utah, because deer and elk migrate from areas in Colorado where CWD occurs," Williams said.
"But there are a few occurrences of CWD in distant areas that are unexplained."
CWD was found in deer on the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico in 2001.
Researchers can't figure out a link in some of these cases, if there is one, because they have no way yet of tracking strain types.
But there's evidence commercial game farms, which are banned in Wyoming and Montana but allowed in other states, could have contributed to the disease's geographic spread, Williams said.
"We don't expect with fence-line contact over the short term that an animal would contract the disease," she said.
"But with long-term interaction, particularly when deer or elk can get through fences, the risk is increased."
Officials and politicians have called for more money to develop better laboratory techniques and a better understanding of chronic wasting disease and how it spreads.
But adequate funding for CWD research, which is expensive, as it often requires large facilities to house large animals, is limited.
The U.S. Geological Survey was appointed as a clearinghouse for allocating and coordinating federal funds for research, but often the financial burden of CWD research falls on the states.
Colorado's wildlife division foots 90 percent of its bills on CWD research and surveillance, allocating $3.5 million this year, up from $2.9 million the year before.
Wyoming spent $238,927 of Game and Fish Department funds last year for CWD surveillance and management.
This year, the department received $240,557 from the U.S. Department of Agriculture earmarked for surveillance and management.
SURVEILLANCE AND REGULATIONS - article by Michelle Zitek and Tom Reed The Wyoming Game and Fish Department is going to be testing deer statewide this year to determine if chronic wasting disease has spread outside the current known boundaries.
Department employees will be working at selected meat processors and check stations across the state the first five days of deer seasons.
In addition to collecting the customary bio- logical data, employees will remove lymph nodes for CWD tests.
"Expanding surveillance will allow us to better understand the distribution of this disease," said Hank Edwards, wildlife disease specialist with the department.
"Past surveillance efforts allowed us to document CWD in new hunt areas and we hope expanded surveillance will allow us to identify the leading edge of the disease."
When hunters arrive at check stations they will be asked if they would like to participate in the CWD surveillance program.
If they do, trained employees will remove the animal's lymph nodes.
This will not affect the meat, but may affect the hunter's ability to have their trophy mounted.
"Hunters who wish to have their animal mounted will need to make arrangements with their taxidermist to retrieve the head after it has been caped if they choose to submit it for testing," said Edwards.
Employees will record detailed information about where the deer was harvested and will apply barcode stickers to the hunter's license and corresponding samples to make sure the hunter information is matched to the correct animal.
Testing is voluntary, but as a service to those who take time to participate, the department will post test results on its Web site.
Hunters will need their barcode numbers to obtain results, and results will be posted as they become available.
Completing tests will take about twelve weeks.
Hunters will be notified by letter if their animal tests positive.
The department is working with other state wildlife agencies, and will contact those agencies in the home state of any nonresident hunter whose animal tests positive.
Hunters who do not participate in the surveillance program may have their animals tested at their own expense at the Wyoming State Veterinary Laboratory in Laramie.
Some vets around the state have been trained to take samples and may be willing to work with hunters to obtain samples and ship them to the appropriate place.
Deer and elk hunters headed to the field this fall should be aware that a number of states have adopted new regulations pertaining to the transportation of hunter-harvested deer and elk.
These regulations are in response to growing concerns about the spread of CWD, and are an attempt to minimize the risk of spreading the disease into new areas.
The first objective in the management of CWD is to prevent its spread.
One theoretical mode of disease transmission is via infected carcasses.
Since the suspected infective agent (prion) is concentrated in the brain, spinal cord, and lymph glands, the most common regulation is the prohibition of the importation of whole carcasses harvested from CWD areas.
Some states, like Colorado, also have established regulations addressing the transport of deer and elk out of CWD areas.
Generally, states that have adopted carcass transportation regulations do not allow the importation of any brain or spinal column tissue and allow transport of only the following: · Meat that is cut and wrapped (either commercially or privately); · Quarters or other portions of meat with no part of the spinal column or head attached; · Meat that has been boned out; · Hides with no heads attached; · Clean (no meat or tissue attached) skull plates with antlers attached; · Antlers with no meat or tissue attached; · Upper canine teeth, also known as "buglers," "whistlers," or "ivories": · Finished taxidermy
This fall, Game and Fish employees will take lymph nodes from the necks of dead deer to check for chronic wasting disease.
Research has shown that prions tend to concentrate in these tissues.
(Photo by Chris Madson)
California, Colorado, Illinois, Iowa, Manitoba, Michigan, Minnesota, North Dakota, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Utah, and Vermont have adopted some form of carcass transportation regulations.
Since these regulations are continually evolving, we recommend that hunters check the CWD regulations before hunting- this should include the regs in their home states, the state in which they will be hunting, and the sates through which they will travel on their way home from the hunt.
Most state wildlife agencies provide regulation information on their Web sites and may be accessed through the CWD Alliance Web site's CWD LINKS page, www.cwdinfo.org/index.php/fuseaction/links.main.
Here's an example of what some states are doing: Colorado ­ As a precaution against the possible spread of chronic wasting disease, only the following carcass parts may be transported out of infected units in northeastern Colorado (units 7,8, 9, 19, 20, 38, 87, 88, 89, 90,91,92,93,94, 95, 96, 191,951) or brought into any part of Colorado from infected areas in other state: 1) Meat that is cut and wrapped (either commercially or privately); 2) quarters or other portions of meat with no part of the spinal column or head attached; 3) meat that has been boned out; 4) hides with no heads attached; 5) clean (no meat or tissue attached) skull plates with antlers attached; 6) antlers with no meat or tissue attached; 7) upper canine teeth, also known as "buglers," "whistlers," or "ivories": 8) finished taxidermied heads.
California- On April 4, 2002, the California Fish and Game Commission adopted regulations restricting the importation of hunter-harvested deer and elk into California to replace the emergency regulations enacted earlier in 2002.
The new regulations went into effect June 5, 2002, and eliminated the seventy-two-hour grace period provided in the
emergency regulation and do not allow the importation of any brain or spinal column tissue.
Other body parts allowed by the proposed regulations include quarters and other portions of meat with no spinal column or head attached, hides with no heads attached, clean skull plates with antlers attached, antlers only, finished taxidermied heads, and upper canine teeth.
Illinois- The Illinois Department of Natural Resources is allowing hunters to bring deer and elk hunted out of state back into Illinois so long as the carcasses are brought to a licensed meat processor or licensed taxidermist within seventytwo hours of entry into the state.
The rule amends an earlier prohibition on the transportation of hunter- harvested deer and elk carcasses into Illinois, except for deboned meat, antlers, antlers attached to skull caps, hides, upper canine teeth, and finished taxidermy mounts.
Individuals who do not take their harvest to either a licensed meat processor or licensed taxidermist still must comply with this regulation.
The rule requires meat processors and taxidermists to dispose of discarded animal materials either with a renderer or in a landfill.
Hunters are strongly advised to consult with their state agencies on carcass transport before leaving for the hunting area.
This cow elk is being held at the Wyoming Game and Fish Department's Sybille Wildlife Research Center.
She has been infected with chronic wasting disease and is beginning to show the rough coat often seen in the final stages of a CWD infection.
Investigators at Sybille are trying to find out how CWD is transmitted from one animal to another.
(Photo by Chris Madson)
RISK TO HUMANS - article by Tom Reed Federal health officials thought they were on to something last year.
Three Midwestern men, who were known to have eaten wild game at a cabin in Wisconsin, all died from strange neurological disorders.
Perhaps, they thought, here was a connection between Creutzefeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and wild game meat.
CJD is a rare fatal brain disorder with about one case per million people diagnosed each year.
There are essentially three ways for a human to get CJD: sporadically, which means there is no apparent cause; genetically; and it can be transmitted through infection.
The agent that carries the disease is thought to be a protein, a pathogen called a prion, which is a nickname for "proteinaceous infectious particle."
Investigations commenced.
Relatives and friends were interviewed.
Brain tissue from the victims was analyzed.
In the end, the trail between game meat consumption and CJD went cold.
It turns out that only one of the victims died from CJD, and he was not a frequent participant in the game feasts at the cabin, according to Dr. Ermias Belay, M.D. "That cluster didn't pan out," said Belay.
So far, scientists have not been able to find a link between CJD and the consumption of game meat from an animal infected with chronic wasting disease.
The fear is that since CWD is a brain disorder in deer and elk, the consumption of meat from infected deer and elk could lead to CJD in humans.
So far, however, scientists haven't found that to be the case.
"There's no direct evidence for CWD transmission to humans," said Belay, a medical epidemiologist with the federal Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
"But, there's not a lot of studies looking for such evidence."
CJD was first identified in humans by Dr. Hans Creutzfeldt and Alfons Jakob in the 1920s.
It's not a pretty disease by any means.
Victims display ever-increasing debility, including progressive dementia and uncontrollable muscular action.
There is no known cure.
So if there is no evidence that CWD jumps across species boundaries (cervid to human) why all the fuss? The answer lies overseas.
In the mid-1990s, scientists in the United Kingdom identified a possible link between the so-called mad cow disease and a variant form of CJD.
For the first time, scientists speculated that humans could get a form of CJD from eating infected animal products.
Mad Cow Disease, also known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), was initially discovered in 1986 in the UK and was thought to be transmitted to the cattle through their feed.
This cattle feed included, in part, groundup portions of BSE-infected cattle or sheep that had scrapie (another prion- based brain disorder).
Further compounding the problem was the practice of using all the parts of the slaughtered animals such as brains, bones, spinal columns, and lymph nodes in such delicacies as sausages, before regulations brought such things to a halt.
According to the Creutzfeld- Jakob Disease Foundation, scientists in the UK- without direct evidence of a link between the variant form of CJD and BSE- theorized that the most likely way to get the new form of the disease was by eating these animal byproducts.
Panic swept across the British Isles, and farm animals were slaughtered by the thousands and burned in huge piles.
Television news stations around the world carried images of smoldering carcasses being burned and buried.
There is no evidence that chronic wasting disease can infect humans.
Still, no one wants to shoot a sick deer if he can avoid it.
So the first precaution a hunter should take is simple- don't shoot deer that seem emaciated or are acting strangely.
(Photo by Tim Christie)
But the untold story behind the mad cow panic is the fact that only 136 people have been diagnosed with that variant CJD, with an exposure factor in the millions in the UK alone.
It's likely that about a billion people (that's three times the population of the United States) have been exposed to BSE since it was identified and only 136 have died.
What's more, those victims all seem to have a similar genetic makeup.
"The outbreak is not over yet, they are still counting, but it's clearly not exploding," said Belay.
For perspective, consider this: In the decade since UK scientists theorized that there was a link between BSE and the variant CJD, only 136 people have been identified with the disease.
They seem to have a similar genetic makeup, and they quite probably ate meat products that contained offal like brains and bone meal.
More people died on Wyoming's highways last year alone-l 75- than have died from the millions exposed to BSE in its history.
Drunks behind the wheel on our nation's highways killed more than 100 times as many people last year alone-17,000.
In 1997, more than 32,000 people were killed by firearms, and if you just want to focus on diseases, consider that cancer in the United States kills the equivalent of the entire population of the state of Wyoming- more than 550,000 people- every year.
"You look at those factors, things like road deaths and gunshot deaths, hunters accept those risks all the time," said Dr. Patrick Bosque, a neurologist with the Denver Health Hospital and a faculty member of the University of Colorado, "They seem to accept those risks as reasonable, I guess."
Bosque has been studying prions in laboratory settings for a decade and studied under Stan Prusiner, the University of California-San Francisco scientist who won the Nobel Prize for his work with prions.
"People worry more about the bizarre and unusual than they do about familiar risks," said Bosque.
"It's uniformly fatal and unusual, and that's why people are worried about it because so much is unknown about it.
My take on it is if I were eating venison and knew the animal had been tested-and I think it's reasonable to test every animal-I would eat it.
From a human health perspective, it is just common sense to avoid eating diseased animals, said the CDC's Belay.
"If the animal is positive, it's probably not a good idea to eat an animal that is sick with any disease at all," said Belay.
"It's a common-sense precaution to not eat it, particularly if you don't know whether or not it has CWD."
Several studies are looking at death records and hunter information to see if there's any link between CWD and unusual neurological deaths.
So far, no link has been identified.
"The data to this point that we've looked at in Colorado says that it's either not occurring, or if it does, it does so rarely that we are unable to pick it up," said John Pape, epidemiologist with the Colorado Department of Health and Environment.
"But the data right now is not strong enough to exclude that possibility (that CWD can be transmitted to humans).
That's why we recommend hunters take precautions."
In the lab, Bosque and his assistants take special precautions when dissecting lab specimens, including wearing gloves and being shielded from any material such as blood and offal.
He recommended similar precautions for hunters afield taking game animals.
"I'd recommend wearing gloves and an eye shield of some sort," said Bosque.
The Wyoming Game and Fish Department recommends several precautions for hunters: Do not harvest or eat wild animals that appear sick; Wear rubber or latex gloves as a routine precaution when field dressing; Minimize handling of brain and spinal tissues and wash hands, knives, and saws afterward; Meat should be boned out when the animal is butchered; Do not eat the brain, spinal cord, eyes, spleen and lymph nodes of harvested animals.
In the end, scientists are not ruling out that eating CWD-tainted elk or deer could lead to a prion-based brain disease like CJD, but so far, there is no proof or any scientific evidence that is the case.
Regardless, based on the extremely long odds demonstrated with BSE and variant CJD in Europe, the chances of someone getting CJD from eating venison from a CWD-infected animal are very, very slim.
But, more study is needed and in the meantime, hunters should take the necessary steps.
"It's new; it's a horrible disease that is poorly understood even among scientists and is clearly not understood among the public," said Pape.
@ Wyoming Game 
