Newsletter www.tsbp.state.tx.us Fall 2002 PRESIDENT'S COLUMN by Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.
PHARMACIST INVOLVEMENT IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS by Milton Jez, R.Ph.
Staff Compliance Officer As the events of 9-11 and the anthrax scare unfolded, the American people realized how vulnerable they were in the realm of terrorist activities in our country.
Homeland security has become a reality in everyone's life.
Activities such as chemoprophylaxis for anthrax, plague, etc., and vaccination against smallpox have become important at the local pharmacy level.
Patients know that drugs used to cure or prevent some of these diseases may be readily available from these pharmacies.
In emergency situations individuals realize there is quick access to life saving antibiotics at the local pharmacy and useful information on drug therapy may be obtained from the pharmacist at the local pharmacy.
Pharmacists are becoming more valuable as potential emergency response team members due to their training and public trust.
We have to remember the pharmacist is a very visible member of the healthcare community and the pharmacist is a logical participant in any drug distribution activity in an emergency situation.
Community pharmacies as well as healthcare institutions may be called upon to contribute personnel and/or inventory in an emergency.
Many pharmacists have shown interest in emergency preparedness roles and activities and have asked what their role may be or what they may do in preparation for a bioterrorism emergency or even natural disasters.
Involvement in emergency preparedness begins at the local community level.
The Texas Department of Health is developing a plan by which bioterrorism (BT) emergency activities would start at the local community see EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS on page 3
PATIENT SAFETY Patient safety! This phrase has been intimately associated with the health p rofessions since time immemorial.
The Board's Mission Statement reflects this concern for patient safety.
"To promote, preserve, and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by fostering the pr ovision of quality pharmaceutical care to the citizens of Texas, through the regulation of the practice of pharmacy; the operation of pharmacies; and the distribution of prescription drugs in the public interest."
It is clearly apparent this concern is shared by the profession of pharmacy as all professional associations continue to work collaboratively with the Board to ensure patient safety.
Certainly the practice of pharmacy is much more than just patient safety.
Achieving positive patient outcomes through the provision of pharmaceutical care is the ultimate goal.
However, for this article, the first of my columns as President of the Board, I would like to focus on the Board's role in patient safety.
Board Requirements The Board works hard to be sure the r equir ements the y adopt serv e to accomplish the Boar d' s statutory mission.
Patient safety concerns weave through the requirements to practice pharmacy.
For example, something as basic as licensing standards are established to be sure that all entry level pharmacists meet minimum competencies to practice pharmacy safely and accurately.
Even labeling requirements
for dispensed prescriptions promote patient safety by clearly stating what drug, for whom, and how to take, the medication.
Several years ago, the Board required pharmacists to keep patient profiles containing information needed to perform meaningful drug regimen reviews.
These reviews foster patient safety by identifying potential problems and resolving or minimizing them pg. pg. pg. pg. 2 4 5 6
before they occur.
Yo u may notice several disciplinary actions in this issue of the Newsletter which involved errors that would not have occurred if the pharmacist performed a comprehensive drug regimen review.
And, please do not forget or minimize patient counseling.
This is the critical see PRESIDENT'S COLUMN on page 3
Inside
TSBP Officers ----------------------------------------Complaint Corner -----------------------------------Compliance Reminders ---------------------------Because They Trust Us -----------------------------
Canadian Drug Imports to the United States ------------Adopted Rules ----------------------------------------------------Law Book Order Form ------------------------------------------On-Line License Renewals -------------------------------------
pg. pg. pg. pg.
8 11 15 16
TSBP OFFICERS As reported in the "Late Breaking News" article in the Summer 2002 issue of the Newsletter, the Board elected officers on August 7, 2002, for fiscal year 2003 (September 1, 2002 - August 31, 2003).
The new officers are: President - Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph.; VicePresident - Doyle E. High, R.Ph.; and Treasurer - Oren M. Peacock, Jr., R.Ph.
Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph., was appointed to the Board in November 1999 by then Governor George W. Bush.
Dr. Anderson is currently the Head of the Division of Pharmacy at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, Texas.
He also holds an appointment at the University of Houston as Professor of Clinical Pharmacy Practice.
Dr. Anderson received his undergraduate pharmacy degree fro m Fe rris State University (Big Rapids, Michigan) in 1964.
He obtained a M.S. in Hospital Pharmacy fr om The Ohio State Univ er sity (Columbus, Ohio) in 1968, and completed an accredited Residency in Hospital Pharmacy at Grant Hospital (Columbus, Ohio) in 1967.
He earned a Doctorate in Public Health from the University of Texas (Houston, Texas) in 1997.
He served as Assistant Director of Pharmacy at The Ohio State University Hospitals (1967-69), Director of Pharmacy and Central Supply at Grant Hospital (1969-73), and Vice President for Operations at Pharmacy Systems, Inc.
(Columbus, Ohio) before assuming the position at M.D. Anderson in 1978.
Dr. Anderson has been active with professional organizations throughout his career serving as President of the Central Ohio Society of Hospital Pharmacists
(1970), President of the Ohio Society of Hospital Pharmacists (1973), Member of the Board of Directors of the American Society of Hospital Pharmacists (1983-86), President of the American Society of Hospital Pharmacists (1987), and is currently serving on the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy's Task Force to Examine NABP's Data Resources.
He has received distinguished alumnus awards from both Ferris State University and The Ohio State University.
In 1988, he received the Clifton J. Latiolais Award from The Ohio State University, and in 1992, he received the Harvey A.K. Whitney Award (The American Society of Hospital Pharmacists' highest award).
More recently, Dr. Anderson was appointed the 2001 John W. Webb Visiting Professor for Northeastern University School of Pharmac y.
The Visiting Professorship was established in 1985 to recognize commitment to hospital pharmacy management, experience as a practitioner and educator, and dedication to excellence in pharmacy management.
Dr. Anderson has authored over 55 publications in the field of health-system pharmacy.
His current research interests include the safe handling of antineoplastic agents, drug delivery, drug use management, and outcomes research.
Memberships in pharmacy associations include the American Pharmaceutical Association, Rho Chi (Pharmacy Honorary Society), the National Community Pharmacists Association.
Mr. High is currently serving as an alternate on the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy's Committee on Constitution and Bylaws.
Mr. High was named Pharmacist of the Year, in 1997, by the Texas Pharmacy Association and in 2000, was named Independent Pharmacist of the year by the National Community Pharmacists Association.
Doyle E. High, R.Ph., was appointed to the Board in November 1999 to fill an unexpired term and reappointed in December 2001 by Governor Rick Perry.
Doyle High is a 1966 graduate from Southwestern Oklahoma State University with a Bachelor of Science degree in Pharmacy.
He also received his Master's in Pharmacology and Toxicology from the University of Kansas in 1968.
He is currently doing pharmacy consulting and has an interest in Anson Plaza Pharmacy in Anson, Texas.
Oren M. Peacock, Jr., was originally appointed to the Board in 1995 and reappointed in November 1999 by then Governor George W. Bush.
Mr. Peacock received his Bachelor of Science Degree in Pharmacy in 1962 from the University of Texa s.
Mr. Peacock has steadily progressed through the ranks of the Eckerd Drug Company to his current position as Vice President of Pharmacy Relations.
Mr. Peacock makes his home in Sachse, Texas, near Dallas.
Membership in professional associations includes the Dallas County and Texas Pharmacy Associations and the Texas Federation of Drug Stores, for which he has served as an officer on several occasions.
Mr. Peacock has served as a member of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy Task Forces on Certification Standards and Programs, Central Fill and Central Processing, and is currently serving as Chair of the NABP Task Force on Evaluation and Modification of NABP's Constitution and Bylaws.
Mr. Peacock currently serves as a member of the Dean's Advisory Council for the Texas Tech School of Pharmacy and as a member of the Pharmaceutical Foundation Advisory Council for the University of Texas.
2
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
PRESIDENT'S COLUMN continued from page 1
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS continued from page 1
point where the results of drug regimen reviews become real in the life of a patient.
The information imparted to, and more importantly understood by the patient, can protect the patient as well as improve therapeutic outcomes.
Counseling is also the last opportunity for a pharmacist to catch a potential error before the patient received the drug.
Patient counseling is a tremendous opportunity to affect a patient's safety.
Unfortunately, the Board receives many complaints that the patient was not counseled and all too often, have never been counseled by a pharmacist.
It appear s that man y of our fello w pharmacists are not taking counseling seriously.
I can assure you, the Board takes it seriously.
A more recent development is the Board's increased support for the work of peer review committees.
Peer review as part of a continuous quality improvement program can provide objective information which can be used to decrease the potential for errors which impact a patient's safety.
Although the use of peer review committees is not currently a requirement, the Board considers their use as a mitigating factor whenever disciplinary action involving a dispensing err or is consider ed. Although the proper use of peer review can improve patient outcomes, patient safety can also be a major outcome of the peer review process.
Through the use of a task force in 2001, the Board w orked with e xperts to developed guidelines for establishing peer review committees .
These guidelines ar e a v ailable on the Boar d' s w ebsite: www.tsbp.state.tx.us.
Board Resources The Board's website is a useful resource to impr ov e patient safety in y our practice.
Besides the guidelines for establishing peer review committees, pertinent Newsletter articles are maintained on the w ebsite for futur e reference.
Links to other organizations are available, some of them directly addressing patient safety issues.
For example, there is a link to the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP). see PRESIDENT'S COLUMN on page 7
level.
Participation would escalate to the regional, state, and federal level if necessary.
The Federal Government has developed the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile (NPS) that can be mobilized and deliv er ed within 12 hour s to anywhere in the United States in the event of a massive emergency situation which would require its contents.
The NPS contains 5 0 tons of pharmaceuticals and medical equipment If the NPS is deployed, local pharmacists may be called on to perform important functions: involvement in pharmaceutical distribution, overseeing proper drug packaging, labeling, and provision of pr oper written information to patients.
In addition, screening patients, taking medical histories, and counseling would all be necessary to insure that patients would be treated properly and effectively.1 Pharmacists should get involved now if they are interested in becoming part of and providing input for the emergency preparedness planning effort.
Involvement at the local community level is the first step in developing a plan for emergency situations whether it be BT events or local disasters.
Some suggestions are: build close working relationships with clinical colleagues prior to actual threatened BT events; work with or form local health task forces in conjunction with regional State efforts; and provide ongoing communication with those involved with these efforts.2 Useful web sites providing information for pharmacists who desire to become involved locally as well as statewide in emergency preparedness activities are: www.bt.cdc.gov www.texashomelandsecurity.com www.texas3dmat.com
BOARD CALENDAR DECEMBER 2002 4-5 8-12 24-26 INFORMAL CONFERENCES, TSBP, Austin ASHP Mid-Year Clinical Meeting, Atlanta, GA CHRISTMAS HOLIDAY - State Holiday (Office Closed)
JANUARY 2003 1 14-16 20 NEW YEAR'S DAY - State Holiday (Office Closed) INFORMAL CONFERENCES, TSBP, Austin M.L. KING, JR.
DAY - State Holiday (Office Closed)
FEBRUARY 2003 4-5 17 25-27 TSBP BOARD BUSINESS MEETING, Austin PRESIDENT'S DAY - State Holiday (Office Closed) INFORMAL CONFERENCES, TSBP, Austin
MAJOR CE PROVIDERS IN TEXAS Univ. of Houston College of Pharmacy 713/795-8360 Univ. of Texas College of Pharmacy 512/471-6213 Univ. of Texas College of Pharmacy (secondary), 512/471-4512 Texas Southern Univ.
College of Pharmacy 713/313-4340 Texas Tech University Health Science Center School of Pharmacy, 806/354-5463 Texas Pharmacy Assn., 800/505-5463 Texas Society of Health-System Pharmacists, 800/242-8747 West TX Pharmacy Assn., 806/799-5908 Professional Compounding Centers of America, 800/331-2498
PLAN (PHARMACISTS LEARNING ASSISTANCE NETWORK) 800-533-3606 A national, computerized data base of continuing education programs.
Continuing education programs are compiled and crossreferenced three ways: by topic - such as pharmacy administration, drug therapy, or disease state; by location - broken down by city and state; and by calendar - sorted by date.
Take advantage of this free information service by calling the toll-free number listed above.
References: 1.
www.medscape.com/viewarticle/442444.
Pharmacists and Emergency Preparedness.
Accessed October 23, 2002.
2.
The Pharmacist's Role in Treating Victims of a Mass Casualty Attack, J.L.Woon, University of Texas at Austin postgraduate CE seminar, September 15, 2002.
v
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
3
C O R N E R
OMPLAINT
Review of FY2002 Disciplinary Orders Allison Benz, R.Ph. Assistant Director of Enforcement
During the past three fiscal years, the Texas State Board of Pharmacy has entered an average of 34 disciplinary orders alleging that at least one error had occurred.
Information regarding these types of disciplinary orders is depicted in the chart below:
Fiscal Year
Total # of Disciplinary Orders
Total # of Disciplinary Orders Involving Alleged Dispensing Errors
Total # of Alleged Errors
% of Disciplinary Orders Involving More Than One Alleged Error
% of Alleged Errors Resulting in Negative Patient Outcomes
% of Alleged Errors Involving Pediatric Prescriptions
FY2000
126
43
71
37%
37%
25%
FY2001
145
22
36
18%
61%
31%
FY2002
181
38
45
8%
62%
13%
FY2002 disciplinary orders included the following types of errors:
TYPE OF ERROR WRONG DRUG
PRESCRIPTION ISSUED FOR Toprol 100 mg tablets Claritin 10 mg tablets Acular eye drops Cardura 2 mg tablets Demadex 10 mg tablets Coumadin 2 mg tablets Prednisone 5 mg tablets Norvasc 10 mg tablets
INCORRECTLY DISPENSED AS Topamax 100 mg tablets Ambien 10 mg tablets Auroto ear drops Warfarin 2 mg tablets Demadex 20 mg tablets Coumadin 10 mg tablets Deltasone 50 mg tablets Norvasc 5 mg tablets
WRONG STRENGTH
WRONG DIRECTIONS Doxepin 10mg/ml solution Zantac liquid
5 - 10 mg at bedtime 0.5 ml twice daily
5 - 10 tsp at bedtime 5 ml twice daily
Approximately 56% of the 45 errors which resulted in disciplinary orders may have been detected (and thus prevented) if a pharmacist had verbally counseled a patient or patient's agent and/or conducted a drug utilization review.
In addition, approximately 33% of the 45 errors may have been detected if the dispensing or consulting pharmacist had looked inside the prescription container and compared the contents to the drug name on the prescription label, before giving the prescription container to the patient or patient's agent.
Accordingly, the Board encourages pharmacists to read the drug name on the label and look inside the prescription container, before giving the medication to the patient/patient's agent.
Pharmacists are also encouraged to review errors that may have occurred in the pharmacy, evaluate their practice setting, and then make any changes necessary to prevent errors from occurring in the future.
v
4
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
COMPLIANCE REMINDERS Pharmacists Lunch Breaks In Class A (Community) pharmacies with only one pharmacist on duty, the pharmacist is allowed to take breaks and leave the prescription department provided the pharmacist remains on-site at the pharmacy and is available for an emergency.
The breaks may be no more than 30 minutes at a time and may not exceed a total of one hour in a 12 hour period.
Technician Certification and Training Certified Pharmacy Technicians are defined as technicians who have completed the pharmacy's technician training program, taken and passed the National Pharmacy Technician Certification Exam, and maintain current certification with the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board (PTCB).
All technicians, including certified technicians, must complete the pharmacy's in-house technician training program.
This training must be documented and available for inspection.
Rules relating to this training can be found in the personnel section for each class of pharmacy.
New Lawbook The 2002 Edition of the Pharmacy Laws and Regulations is still available for purchase.
This new edition includes a searchable CDRom which makes locating information quick and easy.
Order your new lawbook today and when you receive it take a moment to explore the new CDRom.
Of particular interest is the section containing procedures, forms, and addresses.
Medical Gases (Oxygen) Any pharmacy involved in the manufacturing or filling of medical gases for patient use outside of that facility is required to be licensed with the Texas Department of Health (TDH) as a Drug Manufacturer, register and list with the Federal Food 
Pharmacies who only dispense prepackaged Oxygen U.S.P. pursuant to valid patient specific prescriptions and do not fill gas cylinders or liquid containers, do not have to license with TDH or register with FDA.
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS AUGUST 2002 After the Board obtains evidence of alleged violations, a licensee is sent a preliminary notice letter of the Board's intent to institute disciplinary action.
The licensee then has an opportunity to show compliance with the law in an informal conference with the Board staff (Executive Director/Secretary, Board Legal Counsel, and other staff at the discretion of the Executive Director and Board Legal Counsel).
If the licensee cannot show compliance with the law and desires to dispose of any pending allegations, the licensee may consent to the entry of an "Agreed Board Order."
The licensee must agree to the terms of the order and the order must be approved by the Board.
It should be noted that while there is agreement on the part of the licensee to the entry of an "Agreed Board Order," there is neither admission nor denial of guilt with respect to any matters that have come to the attention of the Board.
If a licensee, or the Board does not agree to terms of the "Agreed Board Order" or if the licensee does not wish an informal conference, a disciplinary hearing is scheduled before an Administrative Law Judge from the Office of Administrative Hearings.
The Administ rative Law Judge, after hearing all evidence in the matter will make a recommendation to the Board for action to be taken.
The Board then makes a decision in the case, which is documented by the entry of a "Board Order."
On the finding of the existence of grounds for discipline of a licensee, the
Board may suspend, revoke, restrict, fine, refuse to issue or r ene w, probate, reprimand, cancel, or retire a license.
The Board has directed that "Agreed Board Orders" and "Board Orders" be published in the NEWSLETTER.
Although every effort is made to assure that the following information is correct, you should contact the Board's office to confirm the accuracy of the listing before making any decision based upon this information.
Copies of specific orders may be obtained for a fee, upon written request.
AGREED BOARD ORDERS Evelyn Phyllis Berkowitz, License No. 13490, Houston, TX. Agreed Board see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 6
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
5
personnel BECAUSE THEY TRUST US Jill McGahey Enforcement Officer A Continuing Education Videotape Series On Chemical Dependence Did you know that almost half of the patients encountered by a pharmacist have misused, abused, or are dependent on legal, illegal, or prescription drugs? Are you trained to recognize these patients? Is it your legal obligation to do so? In response to a State Board request to increase pharmacy practitioner's awareness of chemical dependence, a valuable resource is now available which provides information on chemical dependence, abused prescription drugs, illegal drugs, alcohol, and nicotine.
This video series "Because They Trust Us" includes nationally-recognized researchers and faculty members who provide the most current information on each topic.
The video series consists of six a set provide a comprehensive begins with an overview of the ramifications of pharmacists customers.
individually accredited CE programs that as study of chemical dependence.
The series disease as a whole and ends with the legal ignoring the subject with their patients/
VIDEOTAPE SERIES Module 1: Drug Use Ter minology of Chemical Dependence Disease Basic Phar macology of Addicting Drugs Treatment of Chemical Dependence Disease Willful Dr ug Abuse - The Phar macist's Role in Prevention and Inter vention Strategies for Communicating with Patients Who May Have a Drug Problem What are the Legal Implications for Phar macists Helping Drug Abusing Patients?
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 5
The program was developed and is offered by The University of Texas College of Pharmacy, Office of Pharmacy Continuing Education, an approved American Council on Pharmaceutical Education (ACPE) provider of continuing pharmaceutical education.
If you have questions or wish to order the CE program, call 512/4716213 or view the U.T. website at: www.utexas.edu/pharmacy/ce.
see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 7
6
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license retired.
Mark Kevin Mileski, License No. 30509, Carrollton, TX. Alleged violation: deferred adjudication (possession of a controlled substance with intent to deliver).
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license suspended for the longer of one year or until licensee passes the pharmac y la w e x am, followed by a five-year probation under conditions.
Wayne Murphy English, License No. 33992, Garland, TX: Alleged violation:
A new Enforcement Officer has recently joined the staff of the Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
As part of her responsibilities , Jill McGahe y, CPhT, will regularly interact with pharmacists as she investigates and resolves complaints received by the Board.
Jill graduated from Texas A
Before joining the Te x as State Boar d of Pharmacy, Jill worked as an intern in the Texas Department of Public Safety Crime Laboratory.
She has also worked as a certified pharmacy technician for over seven years with experience in both r etail and compounding pharmacy settings.
For maximum learning, all six modules can be purchased and watched in sequence or if you have an interest in a specific area, a specific module can be purchased separately.
This educational opportunity is valuable for pharmacist working in all practice sites.
Module 2: Module 3: Module 4: Module 5: Module 6:
PRESIDENT'S COLUMN continued from page 3
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 6
This organization publishes an excellent newsletter focusing on current problems and practical solutions to those problems.
One purpose of the Board's Newsletter is to alert pharmacists to patient safety concerns.
The President's Column has addressed topics such as, "Medication Safety Self AssessmentTM - An Extremely Useful Tool," which announced continuing education credit for completing the assessment designed b y ISMP.
Other Pr esident' s Column' s ha v e addressed similar safety concerns, for example "Guidelines for Establishing Pharmacist Peer Review Committees," and "Dispensing Errors and Patient Counseling."
Another r egular featur e of the Newsletter is the Complaint Corner, with articles such as , "Pack aging and Delivery Errors," "Accidents Waiting to Happen," and "Learning From Mistakes."
Before you dismiss these articles too quickly, most of the information presented comes directly from complaints received by the Board, some resulting in disciplinary action against a licensee.
The situations presented are happening right here in Texas, in your city, ma ybe do wn the str eet, and possibly even in your own pharmacy.
Yes, the Texas State Board of Pharmacy is committed to improving patient safety.
But it takes effort, ... your effort, ... to effectively protect your patients, your neighbors, the citizens of Texas.
Follo w the Boar d ' s r equir ements , improve upon them where you can, and learn fr om the mistakes of other s through the resources available to you.
A suggestion, procedure, concept, or idea taken from these resources and placed into your practice, could prevent a devastating error.
v
THANKS DAVID!
Michael Da vid Sy do w, Jr. , worked on a full-time basis in the Legal Division of the Texas State Board of Pharmacy as an unpaid intern for appr oximately six weeks in July and August of 2002, and will continue to work one day a week throughout the fall semester.
Mr. Sydow is a second-year law student at the University of Texas School of Law, after having obtained his under gr aduate degr ee fr om Baylor University in 2001.
While interning with TSBP, Mr. Sydow has accomplished a significant number of projects with minimal supervision, which have proved to be very helpful to the agency.
He performs legal r esear ch, assists with hearings preparation for cases before the State Office of Administrative Hearings, and dr afts documents for use in informal conference proceedings.
He is extremely committed to his work at the agency, and very eager to assist.
We really appreciate his volunteer efforts and the benefit Mr. Sydow is providing to TSBP in protection of the public.
Happy Holidays! from the
Staff of the
unauthorized dispensing of controlled substances and danger ous drugs .
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-0 7 - 0 2: 2-y ear pr obation under conditions.
Walgreen Co. #3050, License No. 10719, Midland, TX: Alleged violations: dispensing error; failed to evaluate and identify appropriate directions for use; and failed to provide verbal patient counseling.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: 2-year probation under conditions, including the re quirement to submit documentation that all pharmacists have completed the ISMP assessment, along with an action plan for implementing the r ecommendations from the ISMP assessment; and license fined $3,000.
Gerald Christopher Melvin, License No. 35 0 31, Houston, TX: Alleged violation: allowed an individual with a suspended license to w ork in the prescription department.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered b y the Boar d on 08-07 - 02: license reprimanded and must complete a pharmacy law seminar.
Maximum Pharmacy, License No. 17558, Houston, TX: Alleged violations: alleged violation by Gerald Christopher Melvin (see above); and unauthorized dispensing of controlled substances and dangerous drugs.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: 2-year probation under conditions, including the requirement to develop policies and procedures to ensure that the pharmacy does not employ or allow a person to have access to prescription drugs if the person has a revoked or suspended pharmacist license.
Walgreen Co. #6715, License No. 13968, Odessa, TX: Alleged violations: unauthorized substitution; and failed to pr ovide v erbal patient counseling.
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-0 7 - 0 2: 1-y ear pr obation under conditions, including the requirement to develop and implement a Continuous see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 10
Texas State Board of Pharmacy Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER _ Fall 2002
7
Canadian Drug Imports to the United States Who w ould ha v e thought that upholding the la w w ould be so complicated? Yet, when it comes to the hot-button issue of importing drugs from Canada into the United States, enforcement authorities on both sides of the border are finding themselves struggling to correctly interpret and enforce the laws.
In essence, the situation as some consumer s e xplain stands thus: Prescription drug prices in the United States are higher than in any other country; high enough that some patients have trouble affording necessary drug regimens.
Drug prices are lower in Canada, where price controls and the country's health system mandate lower purchasing prices from manufacturers.
It is becoming increasingly popular and socially acceptable for US residents to purchase their medications either from Canadian pharmacies in person by crossing the border, or by ordering from an Internet pharmacy.
Companies touting the later alternativ e ar e springing up and advertising their services in national publications; and while they imply that such activities are completely legal, they are not.
In fact, importing or r eimporting medications from Canada and other jurisdictions outside the US is almost always illegal, for a variety of reasons: usually does not meet all of the requirements of the US approval."
Labels must comply with FDA requirements.
Drugs are often dispensed without a valid prescription, a problem with many Internet drug transactions.
It is illegal for a Canadian pharmacy to reimport prescription drugs originally manufactured in the United States.
At the state level, 42 states require non-resident pharmacies to be registered with or licensed by the state board of pharmacy in order to ship drugs to resident consumers.
With drug importation clearly illegal in most situations, why the confusion among law enforcement agencies? In large part, the political climate and mixed messages from lawmakers are responsible.
Popular opinion strongly favors legalizing importation of drugs as a solution to high prices in the United States, and politicians seem to agree.
They do not necessarily support current law.
As reported in a recent issue of Newsweek , for e x ample , Vermont Governor Howa rd Dean encourages Vermonters to buy drugs from Canada.
Moreover, Congress has voted on more than one occasion to legalize the importation of medications fr om Canada for personal use, a move that keeps both consumers and regulators uncertain about imminent changes in the law.
In July 2002, the Senate passed H.R. 5186 approving the legalization of such imports with the proviso that it becomes law only if Secretary of Health and Human Services Tommy Thompson finds that such imports are safe.
Given the Bush administration's stated opposition to such a measure, it seems likely that the bill will meet the fate of its predecessors in past years and not be implemented.
In the meantime, the ambiguity of such an action causes more confusion among consumers and regulators alike, and fuels misleading advertisements.
"The US Senate and House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly in favor of allowing you and your doctor
to or der y our pr escription drugs directly from Canada," trumpets one advertise-ment for a "pharmacy guide" that assists US consumers in ordering medications from across the border.
Confusion also stems in part from enforcement decisions made in the past by the FDA.
The FDA has allowed individuals and their physicians to bring under strictly defined circumstances certain drugs that are otherwise illegal into the United States.
In its written guidance to compliance officers, the agency states, "FDA personnel may use their discretion to allow entry of shipments of violative FDA- regulated products when the quantity and purpose are clearly for personal use, and the product does not present an unreasonable risk to the user."
This Personal Importation Policy outlines the agency 's enforcement priorities, which may have been more relevant in a time when international commerce was less common, and certainly the Internet not so pervasive.
The language is broad enough that some Internet operations have apparently used it to help justify their promotion of current importations.
Enforcing the Law As a result of these mixed messages flying about, both US and Canadian pharmacists and regulatory authorities find themselves caught in the middle, and not always sure of the correct course of action.
But stripped of its popular and political trappings, the issue is fairly simple: Can a US pharmacy send a prescription to a Canadian pharmacy to have it filled and then returned to the US pharmacy? No.
Can a US consumer or der a prescription online from a Canadian pharmacy? Again, no.
Does the responsibility rest with the pharmacy or the consumer? Both.
But since pharmacies are fewer in number and are already professionally regulated, they are the ones sought out by enforcers.
In fact, re gulatory agencies ar e actively addressing the issue.
The FDA has sent warning "cyber-letters" to a
Drugs shipped to US consumers must be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA); most imported drugs are not.
The FDA gr ants drug approvals specific to manufacturers and products, and takes into consideration a host of other requirements, including manufacturing location and processing methods, formulation, source of active ingredients , and mor e .
As Da vid J. Horowitz, acting director of the FDA's Office of Compliance for the Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, notes, "Frequently, drugs sold outside of the US are not from a manufacturer that has FDA approval for that drug.
Moreover, even if the manufacturer has FDA approval for a drug, the version produced for foreign markets
8
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER _ Fall 2002
number of pharmacies that operate on the Internet, advising them that they may be violating the law.
The agency continues to monitor these sites.
Some US state boards of pharmacy ha ve also begun to advise those pharmacists under their jurisdiction of the illegality of such imports.
Enforcement naturally becomes more complicated when international bor der s ar e inv olv ed. Canadian boards of pharmacy may find themselves scrambling to research US federal and state laws on the topic, and how their own laws intersect with US law.
Like the US boards of pharmacy, the Canadian boards enforce existing rules.
If drug exportation to the US is not illegal under Canada's national or provincial law or regulations, the board has little ability to act.
Moreover, privacy issues can prevent boards from sharing information with other jurisdictions that could act.
Indeed, cooperation is the key to addressing the issue.
"If it's an issue that has to be addressed because of patient care and legalities, then we need to take a multi-party approach," says Ronald Guse, registrar of the Manitoba Pharmaceutical Association.
While Guse has been attempting to establish the legalities of the situation within both Canada and the United States, "Clear legal definitions have not been forthcoming," he says.
Establishing clear laws that are coordinated across provincial, state, and international boundaries would obviously help, even if politics make it unlikely.
And effective enforcement requires cooperation as well, particularly as drug importation becomes a multi-million dollar business and enforcement resources remain small.
Meanwhile, within the scope of their mandate, Canadian authorities are not ignoring the issue.
The Ontario College of Pharmacists r ecently brought charges against an Internet pharmacy, the Canadian Drug Store, Inc., and seve ral individuals and entities associated with the online pharmacy.
The company had unlawfully set up and operated an unaccredited pharmacy, filling prescrip-
tions written by US doctors for US residents.
Provincial boards, including the Manitoba Pharmaceutical Association, have been active in ascertaining US law so those pharmacies under its jurisdiction can be properly notified about the issue.
Nonetheless, clear national guidance on a policy level has been lacking from both countries.
A Role for VIPPS? One concern touted by opponents of legalizing drug imports from Canada is the possibility that companies could transport drugs that appear authentic, but are, in fact, counterfeit or of lower quality.
NABP launched the successful Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice SitesTM (VIPPSTM) program in 1999 to address similar concerns in regard to US-based Internet pharmacies.
The Association is now wo rking with Canada's National Association of Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities to establish a similar program there.
Such a move would help put to rest at least some public health concerns.
Ultimately, the fate of drug importation lies with politicians, who will need to weigh competing pressures for affor dable medications and drug company profits sufficient to support research and development of new drugs.
Until this complex issue is resolved, regulators must continue to uphold the laws as they stand, not as what they may someday become.
Reprinted with permission of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) from the September 2002 issue of the NABP Newsletter.
Editor's Note - The Board has received numerous complaints about organizations promoting Canadian drugs and assisting patients with obtaining those drugs.
Many of these organizations are merely assisting consumers in obtaining prescription drugs from Canadian pharmacies.
These activities do not classify them as pharmacies.
Although their activities may be questionable and possibly illegal, they do not violate the Texas Pharmacy Act.
Therefore, the Texas State Board of Pharmacy does not have jurisdiction over their activities.
The Board is monitoring their activities and will act if they cross the line into the actual practice of pharmacy or operation of a pharmacy.
HELP IS AVAILABLE o you know a pharmacist with any of the following symptoms?
D
þ Depressed þ Drinking alcohol in more than moderate amounts þ Abusing drugs þ Has a physical or mental impairment þ Not practicing pharmacy in a manner that is in the public's interest If you do, please give the Texas Pharmacy Association's Pharmacist Recovery Network (PRN) an opportunity to help.
All calls are kept strictly confidential.
For information, call the toll free Help Line:
1 / 800 / 727-5152
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT The Americans with Disabilities A ct (ADA) became effectiv e January 26, 1992, for all public and private organizations offering goods and services to the public.
It is the goal of the Texas State Board of Pharmacy to assure the public and all constituencies that the agency is in full compliance with ADA and that our office, programs, activities, and publications are accessible to anyone needing reasonable accommodations.
The Director of Administrative Services 
An AD A Grie v ance Pr ocedur e is available to the public and complaints should be addressed to the ADA coordinator, Cathy Stella, at 512/3 0 5-8013 (Voice), 512/3 0 5 8082 (Fax), or 512/463-5741.
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
9
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 7
Quality Improvement Program, which must include peer review, for purposes of compliance with pharmacy laws and rules; and license fined $3,000.
Antonio Renteria Campos, License No. 19585, El Paso, TX: Alleged violation: unauthorized dispensing of controlled substances and dangerous drugs.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-0 7 - 0 2: 1-y ear pr obation under conditions, including the requirement to complete a pharmacy law seminar.
Linda Sue West, License No. 19231, Port Neches, TX: Alleged violations: as pharmacist-in-char ge of a Class A Pharmacy in Beaumont, TX, falsified response to warning notice; possessed sample drugs and improperly labeled dispensing stock; and failed to remove outdated drugs from dispensing stock.
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded, fined $1,000, and must complete a pharmacy law seminar.
Fannett Pharmacy , License No. 19770, Beaumont, TX: Alleged violations: alleged violations by Linda Sue West (see above).
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: 1-year probation under conditions.
Abdullah Yousufi , License No. 29170, Houston, TX: Alleged violation: upon audit, failed to submit proof of completion of required and/or reported number of CE hours.
Ag reed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license fined $2,350.
Veronica Haynes Simmons, License No. 34782, Houston, TX: Alleged violations: dispensing err or; and recordkeeping errors.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered b y the Boar d on 08-07 - 02: license reprimanded.
Maximum Pharmacy, License No. 19340, Houston, TX: Alleged violations: alleged violations by Veronica Haynes Simmons (see above); and failed to keep and maintain complete and accurate records of purchases and disposals of controlled substances.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered b y the Boar d on 08-07 - 02: license
APPOINTMENTS AND AWARDS The National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP) assists member state boards of pharmacy in developing, implementing, and enforcing uniform standards for protecting the public health.
The Texas State Board of Pharmacy is a member of NABP and is fortunate to have eight members and staff serving on NABP committees and task forces.
Please join the Board and Staff in congratulating these people on their new appointments.
Committee on Constitution and Bylaws Doyle E. High, R.Ph., (Alternate) Committee on Law Enforcement/Legislation W. Michael Brimberry, R.Ph.
(Member) Rosemary Forester Combs (Member) Task Force on Evaluation and Modification of NABP's Constitution and Bylaws Oren M. Peacock, Jr., R.Ph.
(Chair) Wiki Erickson (Alternate) Task Force to Examine NABP's Data Resources Kim A. Caldwell, R.Ph., (Chair) Roger W. Anderson, R.Ph., (Member) Task Force on the Transition of Pharmacy Regulation from the Dispensing Process to Outcomes Gay Dodson, R.Ph.
(Member)
reprimanded, fined $1,000, and re quired to develop and implement a Continuous Quality Impr o v ement Program, which must include peer review, for the following purposes: controlling access to the pharmacy, including restriction of keys to pharmacist personnel; preventing diversion of prescription drugs; and preventing dispensing errors.
Albertson' s Pharmac y #4262 , License No. 10902, Bedford, TX: Alleged violation: failed to keep and maintain complete and accur ate r ecor ds of purchases and disposals of controlled substances.
Ag reed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license fined $1,000.
Thomas Edward Yavoski, License No. 26504, Plano, TX: Alleged violation: deferred adjudication (prescription fraud).
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded and fined $500.
see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 14
The NEWSLETTER is published in an attempt to keep pharmacists and pharmacy owners informed about la w s and rules r elating to the practice of pharmac y in Te x a s. Unless otherwise noted, permission to quote from or reproduce items in this publication is granted when due acknowledgment is made.
Guest articles do not necessarily express the views of the Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
Comments and/or suggestions should be addressed to: Steve Morse, R.Ph.
Managing Editor Retta Cole Editorial Assistant Texas State Board of Pharmacy William P. Hobby Bldg., Ste. 3-600 333 Guadalupe Street, Box 21 Austin, Texas 78701-3942
10
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
ADOPTED RULES øøø RULE SUMMARY øøø §281.2.
Definitions §281.4.
Official Acts in Writing and Open to the Public §281.14.
Charges for Public Records §281.17.
Historically Underutilized Businesses §281.27. Service of Documents on Parties §281.33.
Discovery §281.43.
Public Attendance and Comment at Hearing §281.45.
Evidence Amendments to these sections are the result of the rule review process and simply correct citations.
Editor's Note - Since these changes are nonsubstantive, the rules will not be published in the Newsletter.
For a copy of the rules as changed, please contact the Board's office.
§281.40.
Participation by Telephone The repeal and simultaneous adoption of this new rule updates this section to be consistent with the rules adopted by the State Office of Administrative Hearings.
§291.20.
Remote Pharmacy Services Amendments to this section: (1) adds Assisted Living Centers to the list of facilities where Automated Pharmacy Services can be located; and (2) deletes the requirement for the signature of the medical director or other person responsible for the onsite operation of the facility on renewal applications.
§291.36.
Class A Pharmacies Compounding Sterile Pharmaceuticals Amendments to these sections do two things: (1) permit a pharmacist to be In-Charge of two Class A pharmacies under certain circumstances; and (2) separate the responsibilities of the pharmacist-in-charge and the owner of a Class A pharmacy license.
§291.73.
Personnel Amendments to this section permit pharmacy technician certification certificates to be maintained in a file at a Class C pharmacy provided the technician only performs inpatient duties.
Chapter 301.
Fraud, Deceit, and Misrepresentation in the Practice of Pharmacy This chapter was repealed.
Pursuant to a review of Board rules in accordance with Government Code, §2001.039, it wa s determined that the reason for this rule no longer exists.
§311.1 Procedures Amendments to this section are the result of the rule review process and simple correct references.
Editor's Note - Changes made to Chapter 311 were corrections to references as a result of the rule review process.
Since these changes are nonsubstantive, the rules will not be published in the Newsletter.
For a copy of the rules as changed, please contact the Board's office.
øøø RULE LANGUAGE øøø Chapter 281.
Administrative Practice and Procedures Subchapter B. General Procedures in a Contested Case §281.40.
Participation by Telephone (a) A party ma y r equest to appear b y telephone or videoconferencing or to present the testimony of a witness by such methods, upon timely motion stating the reason(s) for the request and containing the pertinent telephone number(s).
A timely motion that is unopposed will be deemed granted without the necessity of an order, unless denied by order of the judge.
(b) The judge may conduct a prehearing conference by telephone or videoconferencing upon adequate notice to the parties, even in the absence of party motion.
(c) All substantive and procedural rights apply to telephone and videoconferencing rehearings and hearings, subject only to the limitations of the physical arrangement.
(d) Documentary evidence to be offered at a telephone or videoconferencing prehearing conference or hearing shall be served on all parties and filed with SOAH at least three days before the prehearing or hearing unless the judge, by written order, amends the filing deadline.
(e) For a telephone or videoconfer encing hearing or prehearing conference, the following may be considered a failure to appear and grounds for default if the conditions exist for more than ten minutes after the scheduled time for hearing or prehearing conference: (1) failure to answer the telephone or videoconference line; (2) failure to free the line for the proceeding; or (3) failure to be ready to proceed with the hearing or prehearing conference as scheduled.
Chapter 291.
Pharmacies Subchapter A.
All Classes of Pharmacies §291.20.
Remote Pharmacy Services.
(a) Remote pharmacy services using automated pharmacy systems.
(1) - (2) (No change.)
(3) General requirements.
(A) A provider pharmacy may provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system to a jail or prison operated by or for the State of Texas, a jail or prison operated by local government or a healthcare facility regulated under Chapter 142, 242, 247, or 252, Health and Safety Code provided drugs are administered by a licensed healthcare professional working in the jail, prison, or healthcare facility.
(B)-(G) (No change.)
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application for permission to pr o vide pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
(i) A Class A or Class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using an automated pharmacy system.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of the
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
11
pharmacist-in-char g e, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive officer), and include the following: (I) - (III) (No change.)
(IV) documentation that the automated pharmacy system is located where medications are administered by license healthcare professionals and is: (-a-) a facility regulated under Chapter 142, 242, 247, or 252, Health and Safety Code; or (-b-) a jail or prison, operated by the State of Texas or local government.
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the application for renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal petition shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph except the notarized signature of the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, chief operating officer, owner, chief executive officer) is not required.
(iii) (No change.)
(B)-(H) (No change.)
(5) (No change.)
(b) Remote pharmacy services using emergency medication kits.
(1)-(3) (No change.)
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application for permission to provide pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit. (i) A Class A or Class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using an emergency medication kit.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of the pharmacist-in-charge, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive officer, chief operating officer), and include the following: (I)-(IV) (No change.)
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the application for renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal petition shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph except the notarized signature of the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive officer, chief operating officer) is not required.
(iii) (No change.)
(B)-(G) (No change.)
(5) (No change.)
(c) Remote pharmacy services using telepharmacy systems.
(1)-(3) (No change.)
(4) Operational standards.
(A) Application to provide pharmacy services using a telepharmacy system.
(i) A Class A or class C Pharmacy shall make application to the board to provide remote pharmacy services using a telepharmacy system.
The application shall contain an affidavit with the notarized signatures of pharmacistin-charge, and the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive officer, chief operating officer), and include the following: (I)-(V) (No change.)
(ii) Such application shall be resubmitted every two years in conjunction with the renewal of the provider pharmacy's license.
The renewal application shall contain the documentation required in clause (i) of this subparagraph except the notarized signature of the medical director or the person responsible for the on-site operation of the facility (e.g., administrator, owner, chief executive officer, chief operating officer) is not required.
(iii) (No change.)
(B)-(F) (No change.)
(5) (No change.)
(d) (No change.)
Subchapter B. Community Pharmacy (Class A) §291.32.
Personnel (a) Pharmacist-in-charge.
(1) General.
(A) Each Class A pharmacy shall ha v e one pharmacist-in-charge who is employed on a full-time basis, who may be the pharmacist-in-charge for only one such pharmacy; provided, however, such pharmacist-in-charge may be the pharmacist-in-charge of: (i) more than one Class A pharmacy, if the additional Class A pharmacies are not open to provide pharmacy services simultaneously; or (ii) up to two Class A pharmacies open simultaneously if the pharmacist-in-charge works at least 10 hours per week in each pharmacy.
(B) The pharmacist-in-charge shall comply with the provisions of §291.17 of this title (relating to Inventory Requirements).
(2) Responsibilities.
The pharmacist-in-charge shall hav e responsibility for the practice of pharmacy at the pharmacy for which he or she is the pharmacist-in-charge.
The pharmacist-in-char ge ma y advise the o wner on administrative or operational concerns.
The pharmacist-incharge shall have responsibility for, at a minimum, the following: (A) education and training of pharmacy technicians; (B) supervising a system to assure appropriate procurement of prescription drugs and devices and other products dispensed from the Class A pharmacy; (C) disposal and distribution of drugs from the Class A pharmacy; (D) bulk compounding of drugs; (E) storage of all materials, including drugs, chemicals, and biologicals; (F) maintaining records of all transactions of the Class A pharmacy necessary to maintain accurate control over and accountability for all pharmaceutical materials required by applicable state and federal laws and sections; (G) supervising a system to assure maintenance of effective controls against the theft or diversion of prescription drugs, and records for such drugs; (H) adher ence to policies and pr ocedur es regarding the maintenance of records in a data processing system such that the data processing system is in compliance with Class A (community) pharmacy requirements; (I) legal operation of the pharmacy, including meeting all inspection and other requirements of all state and federal laws or sections governing the practice of pharmacy; and
12
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
(J) effective September 1, 2000, if the pharmacy uses an automated pharmacy dispensing system, shall be responsible for the following: (i) consulting with the owner concerning and adherence to the policies and procedures for system operation, safety, security, accuracy and access, patient confidentiality, pr e v ention of unauthorized access, and malfunction; (ii) inspecting medications in the automated pharmacy dispensing system, at least monthly, for expiration date, misbranding, physical integrity, security, and accountability; (iii) assigning, discontinuing, or changing personnel access to the automated pharmacy dispensing system; (iv) ensuring that pharmacy technicians and licensed healthcare professionals performing any services in connection with an automated pharmacy dispensing system have been properly trained on the use of the system and can demonstrate comprehensive knowledge of the written policies and procedures for operation of the system; and (v) ensuring that the automated pharmacy dispensing system is stocked accurately and an accountability record is maintained in accordance with the written policies and procedures of operation.
(b) Owner.
The owner of a Class A pharmacy shall have responsibility for all administrative and operational functions of the pharmacy.
The pharmacist-in-charge may advise the owner on administrative and operational concerns.
The owner shall have responsibility for, at a minimum, the following, and if the owner is not a Texas licensed pharmacist, the owner shall consult with the pharmacist-in-charge or another Texas licensed pharmacist: (1) establishment of policies for pr ocur ement of prescription drugs and devices and other products dispensed from the Class A pharmacy; (2) establishment and maintenance of effective controls against the theft or diversion of prescription drugs; (3) if the pharmacy uses an automated pharmacy dispensing system, reviewing and approving all policies and procedures for system operation, safety, security, accuracy and access, patient confidentiality, prevention of unauthorized access, and malfunction; (4) pr o viding the pharmac y with the necessary equipment and resources commensurate with its level and type of practice; and (5) establishment of policies and procedures regarding maintenance, storage, and retrieval of records in a data processing system such that the system is in compliance with state and federal requirements.
(c) Pharmacists.
(1) General.
(A)-(D) (No change.)
(E) A dispensing pharmacist shall ensure that the drug is dispensed and delivered safely, and accurately as prescribed.
In addition, if multiple pharmacists participate in the dispensing process, each pharmacist shall ensure the safety and accuracy of the portion of the process the pharmacist is performing.
The dispensing process shall include, but not be limited to, drug regimen review and verification of accurate prescription data entry, packaging, preparation, compounding and labeling, and performance of the final check of the dispensed prescription.
(2)-(3) (No change.)
(d) Pharmacy Technicians.
(1) - (5) (No change.)
(e) Identification of pharmacy personnel.
All pharmacy personnel shall be identified as follows.
§291.36.
Class A Pharmacies Compounding Sterile Pharmaceuticals (a)-(b) (No change.)
(c) Personnel.
(1) Pharmacist-in-charge.
(A) General.
(i) Each Class A pharmacy compounding sterile pharmaceuticals shall have one pharmacist-in-charge who is employed on a full-time basis, who may be the pharmacistin-charge for only one such pharmacy; provided, however, such pharmacist-in-charge may be the pharmacist-in-charge of; (I) more than one Class A pharmacy, if the additional Class A pharmacies are not open to provide pharmacy services simultaneously; or (II) u p t o t wo Class A pharmacies open simultaneously if the pharmacist-in-charge works at least 10 hours per week in each pharmacy. (ii) The pharmacist-in-charge shall comply with the provisions of §§ 291.17 of this title (relating to Inventory Requirements).
(B) Responsibilities.
The pharmacist-in-charge shall have responsibility for the practice of pharmacy at the pharmacy for which he or she is the pharmacist-in-charge.
The pharmacist-in-charge may advise the owner on administrative and operational concerns.
The pharmacist-in-charge shall have the responsibility for, at a minimum, the following: (i) developing a system to assure that all pharmacy personnel responsible for compounding and/or supervising the compounding of sterile pharmaceuticals within the pharmacy receive appropriate education and training and competency evaluation; (ii) supervising a system to assure appropriate procurement of drugs and devices and storage of all pharmaceutical materials including pharmaceuticals, components used in the compounding of pharmaceuticals, and drug delivery devices; (iii) developing a system for the disposal and distribution of drugs from the Class A pharmacy; (iv) developing a system for bulk compounding or batch preparation of drugs; (v) developing a system for the compounding, sterility assurance, quality assurance and quality control of sterile pharmaceuticals; (vi) participating in those aspects of the patient care evaluation program relating to pharmaceutical material utilization and effectiveness; (vii) implementing the policies and decisions relating to pharmaceutical services; (viii) maintaining records of all transactions of the Class A pharmacy necessary to maintain accurate control over and accountability for all pharmaceutical materials required by applicable state and federal laws and rules; (ix) supervising a system to assure maintenance of effective controls against the theft or diversion of prescription drugs, and records for such drugs; (x) adherence to policies and procedures regarding the maintenance of records in a data processing system such that the data processing system is in compliance with this section; (xi) assuring that the pharmacy has a system to dispose of cytotoxic waste in a manner so as not to endanger the public health; and
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
13
(xii) legal oper ation of the pharmac y, including meeting all inspection and other requirements of all state and federal laws or rules governing the practice of pharmacy.
(2) Owner.
The owner of a Class A pharmacy shall have responsibility for all administrative and operational functions of the pharmacy.
The pharmacist-in-charge may advise the owner on administrative and operational concerns.
The owner shall have responsibility for, at a minimum, the following, and if the owner is not a Texas licensed pharmacist, the owner shall consult with the pharmacist-in-charge or another Texas licensed pharmacist: (A) establishment of policies for procurement of prescription drugs and devices and other products dispensed from the Class A pharmacy; (B) establishment and maintenance of effective controls against the theft or diversion of prescription drugs; (C) if the pharmacy uses an automated pharmacy dispensing system, reviewing and approving all policies and procedures for system operation, safety, security, accuracy and access, patient confidentiality, prevention of unauthorized access, and malfunction; (D) providing the pharmacy with the necessary equipment and resources commensurate with its level and type of practice; and (E) establishment of policies and procedure s regarding maintenance, storage, and retrieval of records in a data processing system such that the system is in compliance with state and federal requirements.
(3) Pharmacists.
(A) General.
(i)-(v) (No change.)
(vi) A dispensing pharmacist shall ensure that the drug is dispensed and delivered safely, and accurately as prescribed.
In addition, if multiple pharmacists participate in the dispensing process, each pharmacist shall ensure the safety and accuracy of the portion of the process the pharmacist is performing.
The dispensing process shall include, but not be limited to, drug regimen review and verification of accurate prescription data entry, packaging, preparation, compounding and labeling, and performance of the final check of the dispensed prescription.
(B) (No change.)
(4) Pharmacy technicians.
(A)-(E) (No change.)
(5) Special education, tr aining, and e v aluation r equir ements for pharmac y per sonnel compounding or responsible for the direct supervision of pharmacy personnel compounding sterile pharmaceuticals.
(A)-(D) (No change.)
(6) Identification of pharmacy personnel.
Pharmacy personnel shall be identified as follows.
(A)-(C) (No change.)
(d)-(f) (No change.)
Subchapter D. Institutional Pharmacy (Class C) §291.73.
Personnel (a)-(d) (No change.)
(e) Pharmacy technicians.
(1) Qualifications.
(A)-(B) (No change.)
(C) Certified Pharmacy Technicians.
(i) All certified pharmacy technicians shall have taken and passed the National Pharmacy Technician Certification Exam or other examination approved during an open meeting by the Board and maintain a current certification with the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board or any other entity providing an examination approved by the Board.
(ii) A certified pharmacy technician shall publicly display their current certification certificate in the technician's primary place of practice and a copy of their current certification certificate in all other pharmacies where the technician performs the duties of a technician except as noted in clause (iii) of this subparagraph. (iii) A certified pharmacy technician who only works in the inpatient portion of a Class C pharmacy is not required to publicly display their current certification certificate in the pharmacy, provided the pharmacist-in-charge maintains on file for inspection by a Board representative: (I) the technician's current certification certificate if the pharmacy is the technician's primary place of practice; or (II) a copy of the technician's current certification certificate if the pharmacy is not the technician's primary place of practice.
(2)-(5) (No change.)
(f)-(g) (No change.)
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 10
Wendy Phuong Nguyen, License No. 38798, Houston, TX: Alleged violation: dispensing error.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
Walgreen Co. #3285, License No. 10751, Houston, TX: Alleged violation: alleged violation by Wendy Phuong Nguyen (see above) and unable to produce original record (hard copy of pr escription).
Ag r eed Boar d Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded
and must develop and implement a Continuous Quality Impr o v ement Program, which must include peer review, for purposes of preventing dispensing errors.
Reynaldo P. Moreno, License No. 23334, Fort Worth, TX. Alleged violation: dispensing error.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered b y the Boar d on 08-07 - 02: license reprimanded.
The Medicine Shoppe, License No. 16239, Saginaw, TX. Alleged violation: alleged violation by Reynaldo P. Moreno (see abo v e).
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted by licensee and entered by the
Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded and must develop and implement a Continuous Quality Impr o v ement Program, which must include peer review, for purposes of preventing dispensing errors.
Thomas Stephen Jaworski, License No. 38273, Pr osper, TX: Alleged violations: dispensing error; and failed to evaluate and identify appropriate directions for use.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 15
14
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 14
Tom Thumb Pharmac y #2581 , License No. 22177, Frisco, TX: Alleged violations: alleged violations by Thomas Stephen Jaworski (see above).
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and enter ed by the Board on 08-07-02 : license reprimanded and must submit documentation that all pharmacists have completed the ISMP assessment, along with an action plan for implementing the recommendations from the ISMP assessment.
Antonio Martinez, Jr., License No. 25903, Laredo, TX: Alleged violation: dispensing error.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
J 
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered b y the Boar d on 08-07 - 02: license reprimanded and must submit documentation that all pharmacists have completed the ISMP assessment, along
with an action plan for implementing the recommendations from the ISMP assessment.
Helen Nwakuso Okidegbe-Uwajeh, License No. 29937, Sugar Land, TX. Alleged violations: failure to keep and maintain complete and accurate records of purchases and disposals of controlled substances; unauthorized dispensing of controlled substances; and failure to evaluate and identify clinically significant overutilization of controlled substances.
Ag reed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded and must complete a pharmacy law seminar.
Gloria Ir ene Arredondo Miller , License No. 26329, San Antonio, TX. Alleged violation: failed to keep and maintain complete and accurate records of purchases and disposals of controlled substances.
Ag reed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
University Family Health CenterSoutheast Pharmacy , License No. 15663, San Antonio, TX. Alleged
violation: alleged violation by Gloria Irene Arredondo Miller (see above).
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
Jung Hee Kim, License No. 33931, Austin, TX. Alleged violation: dispensing error.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
S 
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
Wilma Addison Grace, License No. 20441, Houston, TX. Alleged violation: misdemeanor conviction (theft).
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and enter ed by the Board on 08-07-02 : license reprimanded.
Raynold Rochon Dudley, License No. 28513, Houston, TX. Alleged violations: as pharmacist-in-charge of see DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS on page 16
" 2002 VERSION
TEXAS PHARMACY LAWS AND REGULATIONS NEW FORMAT: smaller, more compact bound version with:
contents
features
Texas Pharmacy Act 
ORDER FORM **PREPAID ORDERS ONLY!** Enclosed is my check or money order payable to the Texas State Board of Pharmacy.
2002 Texas Pharmacy Laws 
Please allow 6 weeks for delivery! Name: Street: City /State/ ZIP: Mail Orders to:
Texas State Board of Pharmacy, 333 Guadalupe St., Ste. 3-600-21, Austin, Texas 78701-4942 Phone: 512/305-8000
Texas State Board of Pharmacy NEWSLETTER · Fall 2002
15
ON-LINE LICENSE RENEWALS
DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS continued from page 15
G a y Dodson, R.Ph., Ex ecutiv e Director/Secretary, is pleased to announce that Texas pharmacists may now renew their pharmacist license over the Internet.
The Texas State Board of Pharmacy is the latest to join Te x asOnline, the official website of the State of Texas.
Eligible pharmacists may renew their licenses online anytime, seven days a week during the 60-day renewal period prior to the expiration date of the license.
Payment is submitted using a major credit card.
TexasOnline may be reached at www.Te x asOnline .com or through the Board's website at www.tsbp.state.tx.us.
a Class A Pharmacy in Houston, Texas, falsified response to warning notice; failed to maintain inventory records and complete prepackaging records; and failed to properly label medications removed from original stock containers.
A g r eed Boar d Or der accepted b y licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license reprimanded.
Navneet Dev, Applicant for Licensure, Fort Worth, TX. Alleged violation: action b y another state boar d of pharmacy.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-0 7 - 0 2: license gr anted and reprimanded.
Queva Carmella Palmo, License No. 17385, San Diego, CA. Alleged violation: action by another state board of pharmacy.
Agreed Board Order accepted by licensee and entered by the Board on 08-07-02: license restricted for a period of time to run concurrent with sanction imposed by California disciplinary order.
REHABILITATION ORDERS Section 564.002 and 564.003 of the Pharmacy Act exempts from the Open Records Act, the records of the Board concerning pharmacists who have or
have had an alcohol or drug dependenc y or who ha v e de veloped an incapacity of a nature that prevents a pharmacist fr om engaging in the practice of pharmacy with reasonable skill, competence, and safety to the public.
Thus, Board Orders entered as a result of such impairments are confidential.
Because of this confidentiality, only the number of rehabilitation orders, which have been entered by the Board, will be published; the names of the pharmacist (and any pharmac y that is involved) are not published.
Twenty-three such Orders have been entered by the Board since the last board meeting in August 2002.
This number includes the following types of orders: (1) n e w or der s entered on pharmacists who have or have had a chemical dependency, or mental or physical impairment; (2) subsequent orders on these individuals; and (3) orders entered on a pharmacy license as a result of violations or alleged violations by a pharmacist with an impairment.
As of August 31, 2002, the Board is now monitoring 97 individuals who have been the subject of a Rehabilitation Order.
Texas State Board of Pharmacy William P. Hobby Building Suite 3-600 333 Guadalupe Street, Box 21 Austin, Texas 78701-3942 512/305-8000 www.tsbp.state.tx.us
Newsletter www.tsbp.state.tx.us Printed on Recycled Paper
PRSRT STD U.S. POSTAGE PAID Permit No. 373 Austin, Texas
Fall 2002
BOARD MEMBERS Roger W. Anderson, Dr.P.H., R.Ph. President Houston Doyle E. High, R.Ph. Vice-President Haskell Oren M. Peacock, Jr., R.Ph.
Treasurer Sachse W. Michael Brimberr y, R.Ph., MBA Austin Kim A. Caldwell, R.Ph. Plano Rosemary Forester Combs El Paso Wiki Erickson, M.A. Waco Donna Burkett Rogers, M.S., R.Ph. San Antonio Gay Dodson, R.Ph.
Executive Director/Secretar y Austin
