CHAPTER 8 ALTERNATIVES TO ASSISTED LIVING If you are thinking about moving to assisted living you may want to consider what options may suit your particular circumstances.
Other options can include home health care, adult day care, continuing care retirement communities, nursing homes, and senior communities.
Each of these alternatives is described briefly in this Chapter.
However, before you read about these alternatives it is important for you to know about two resources that can help you choose the right solution for you: (1) Adult Evaluation and Review Services and (2) Geriatric Care Managers.
Adult Evaluation and Review Services (AERS) AERS's purpose is to help you remain in the community while functioning at the highest possible level of independence and personal well being.
An AERS team consists of professional nurses, social workers, and doctors, if needed.
Your team will develop a plan of care that recommends any services needed to help you remain at home.
If you cannot remain at home, the plan will recommend the most appropriate services for your situation.
AERS teams are part of your local county or city health department and their evaluation services are free.
See Chapter 9 for the AERS team closest to you.
Geriatric Care Managers Geriatric care managers are professionals who are trained in gerontology, social services, psychology, nursing, or counseling.
They help you and your family manage the daily decisions which may keep you in your own home, or help decide when to make a change to a more protected setting.
Geriatric care managers can assess your health, emotions, and ability to handle the activities of daily living.
Geriatric care managers can help find home health care providers, monitor how a provider is working, and make recommendations to you or your family about public benefit programs that can make life easier.
They can provide crisis counseling and help find the best place to move if you decide to move to a more protected setting.
Some geriatric care managers also provide money management, individual therapy, and Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 49 guardianship services.
Geriatric care managers charge an hourly fee for their services, which usually range from $60 to $125 per hour.
There is a national association that certifies geriatric care managers.
To find a certified geriatric care manager near you, call the National Association of Professional Geriatric Care Managers, 655 N. Alvernon, Suite 108, Tucson, AZ 85711, at 520-881-8008.
You may also visit them on the internet at www.caremanager.com .
You may also find local geriatric care managers by calling your local area agency on aging.
See Chapter 9 for telephone numbers.
Home Health Care Services Home health care services are designed to promote, maintain, or restore health, or to minimize the effects of illness or injury on your ability to cope with activities of daily living, while living at home.
Home health care can include skilled nursing care and home support services.
Skilled nursing care services are prescribed by a physician.
You receive the skilled nursing services from a registered nurse after your doctor has prescribed them.
Registered nurses and licensed practical nurses monitor your medicines, help with catheters, administer wound care, teach you and your family members how to perform certain medical services, and provide other skilled services.
Some specialized therapists may perform physical, speech, occupational, and respiratory therapy to you at home.
Support services include personal care to you, such as bathing, dressing, eating, and exercising; some homemaker services, such as meal preparation, laundry, light housekeeping, and shopping; and companion services.
Usually, these services are performed by home health aides.
Home health agencies may be private or public.
You may also hire someone privately to provide care.
Some public agencies are the local agencies on aging, Departments of Social Services, and Health Departments.
See Chapter 9 for the telephone numbers of these agencies.
Under a new Maryland program, Medicaid may pay for some home health care.
To apply for this benefit, go to your local area agency on aging.
See Chapter 9 for telephone numbers for agencies on aging.
Staff will help you get what you need to establish your medical condition, and will help you fill out the application.
If you are denied Medicaid home health care, you can appeal the decision.
The Legal Aid Bureau may be able to help you.
See Chapter 9 for your local Legal Aid Bureau office.
50 - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know Medicare may pay for home health care after you come home from the hospital.
Medicare covers a limited number of home health visits and some support care as well.
Some Medigap insurance policies also cover home health visits.
However, in most cases, home health care has to be paid for entirely from a person's personal income.
Adult Day Care Adult day care provides a place for you if you cannot stay alone at home during the day.
Adult day care usually provides transportation to and from the center, as well as meals, medications, and some nursing and social services.
One of the biggest benefits of adult day care is the activities.
You can mingle with others in a safe environment.
When considering adult day care, you should visit the center and determine whether the center is clean and well kept, whether it meets fire and safety regulations, and whether it is comfortable.
Observe the staff in action.
Are they friendly and encouraging? Is the staff courteous and respectful, and do they treat the participants as adults? Ask about the activities.
Watch to see if people are encouraged to join in.
Read the contract carefully and decide if the center is right for you.
Also consider the cost of adult day care; there are some subsidy programs, some for Veterans and some for low income people, but usually costs are paid privately by you or your family.
Call your local area agency on aging for a list of adult day care providers in your area.
See Chapter 9 for the address and telephone number of your local area agency on aging.
Senior Communities Senior communities are for active older adults who do not want the worries of caring for a house and grounds.
They include apartment complexes, condominium communities, and single family developments.
They screen prospective residents for age.
They also may provide more security than other complexes.
Independent living and senior apartment communities may offer various activities: cultural activities, shopping trips, and longer outings.
They may offer transportation, and many have sport centers.
Most independent living communities do not offer healthcare services, but do offer meals in a community dining room.
If you are planning to move to a senior community, consider the services you think you will need, and their cost.
You usually pay a flat monthly charge to cover basic services to residents, with additional services available for an added fee.
Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 51 Some public housing apartments are available for elders and those with disabilities.
In addition, many counties have some subsidies for senior housing and for those with disabilities.
Call your local agency on aging to ask if there is a subsidy and if there is a waiting list.
See Chapter 9 for your local agency on aging and its telephone number.
Continuing Care Retirement Communities (CCRCs) Continuing care retirement communities are a special type of senior community.
They offer a variety of living arrangements, from independent living in apartments, to assisted living, to nursing home care.The idea behind continuing care retirement communities is that once you go to live at the CCRC, you will not have to leave the community, even if your health declines.
Most CCRCs offer assisted living and nursing care on-site.
CCRCs generally charge a hefty entrance fee, from $100,000 to $300,000 depending on the type of contract one signs.
There is also a monthly fee, and there are often additional fees for optional services.
CCRCs screen the age, health, and cognitive status of prospective residents to determine whether residents are able to live alone when they enter the facility.
Most CCRCs want their residents to be able to live independently for some period of time when they first enter the facility.
There are approxi- mately thirty CCRCs in Maryland, offering a different range of facilities and services.
They are owned and managed by a variety of non-profit and for-profit businesses.
Three Basic Contracts There are three basic CCRC contract models: Type A--"Life care" or "Extensive" contract Although many CCRCs promote and advertise themselves as "life care communities," only about oneWHEN CONSIDERING third offer A CCRC this type of contract.
Call the Maryland Department of Aging at Under this 410-767-1118 and ask for a CCRC plan, the Consumer Package.
In addition, be sure anticipated to request the following papers from each costs of your CCRC you are considering: its continuing future health care agreement, its annual disclosure care needs statement, and its most recent annual are built into audited financial statement.
Read the the entrance agreement carefully.
You should have an fee and attorney look over the agreement.
You monthly fees.
may also want to speak with The finances a qualified financial advisor of the comto determine if your permunity are sonal financial situation structured so fits the financial structure the monthly of the CCRC. fee remains relatively constant whether you are in an independent living apartment, an assisted living unit, or nursing home bed.
The fees are periodically adjusted to cover changing - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know operating costs and inflation.
Most facilities also offer optional services (such as meals, housekeeping, laundry, and beauty and barber services) on a fee-for-service basis.
Type B--"Modified" contract Under a "modified contract" the entrance fee and monthly fees cover shelter and various resident services and amenities.
Assisted living and nursing care are provided at no increased fee, but only for a specified period of time (such as 90 days).
In a Type A or Extensive Contract there is no time limit.
If you need more assisted living or nursing home care than the number of days provided for in a Type B agreement, you have to pay whatever the prevailing daily rate is at the time you receive the service.
Optional services are provided on a feefor-service basis.
Type C--"Fee for Service" contract Many CCRCs in Maryland offer a feefor-service contract.
Under this plan, the entrance fee and monthly fees only cover shelter and some basic services that are not related to health care.
If you need assisted living services, nursing care, or any other optional service, you have to pay whatever the prevailing rate is when you receive the service.
The monthly rates for assisted living and nursing home care are substantially more expensive than they are for independent living.
Refunds Many communities now advertise "refundable entrance fees" which are refunded to the resident when the resident leaves.
You should read the contract carefully to determine whether the entrance fee is: non-refundable; refundable on a declining basis over time; or partially refundable on a percentage basis.
There are no truly 100% refundable agreements in Maryland as of 2002.
While some CCRCs advertise a fully refundable entrance fee, there is always some refurbishing or other fees they assess before paying the refund.
You should also determine when a refund will be paid.
A common clause in most CCRC contracts requires you to wait until a new resident moves into your space before you receive a refund.
The American Association of Homes and Services for the Aging (AAHSA) publishes a directory on CCRCs.
The Continuing Care Accreditation Committee of AAHSA has accredited many CCRCs in several states.
You can call AAHSA at (202) 783-2242 and ask for Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 53 the booklet.
The address of AAHSA is 901 E Street NW, Suite 5000, Washington, DC 20004-2837 or look on the internet at www.aahsa.org.
You can also call the Maryland Department of Aging at 410-767-1118 to get a consumer guide to CCRC's.
This packet of information includes a list of all CCRCs in Maryland.
Nursing Homes and Rehabilitation Centers Nursing homes and rehabilitation centers provide nursing care around the clock to you if you do not need the services of an acute care hospital.
Nursing professionals provide care under the direction of a physician.
Some nursing homes also offer shortterm care if you are recovering from an injury or an illness or need rehabilitation therapy after an accident or stroke.
If considering a nursing home call your local agency on aging to get a copy of "Nursing Homes: What You Need to Know," which is a publication similar to this one, but geared to nursing homes.
You can also get it from Maryland Attorney General's internet web page at www.oag.state.md.us/consumer/ nurshome.htm.
How to Pay for Alternatives Some of the ways to pay for assisted living described in Chapter 3 may also help pay for the alternatives described in this Chapter.
For example long term care insurance and the Maryland Medcaid Waiver for Older Adults will pay for personal care in your home in certain circumstances.
A reverse mortgage might enable you to convert the equity in your home to cash, which you could use to pay for home health services that would allow you to stay in your home.
If you need help figuring out how you can pay for a particular alternative, contact your local area agency on aging.
The address and phone number for your local agency is in Chapter 9.
The agency may have staff who can help you directly or it may refer you to some financial planners or elder law attorneys who can advise you on your financial options.
54 - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know
