Winter 2002 Volume 2, Issue 4 MVH VOICE "Ser ving Those Who Ser ved" Editors: Gretchen Slaughter and Terry J. Peterson
Administrator's Column by Alan Saatkamp
Inside This Issue: Resident /Family Council Update: Stay informed with the latest developments in your Resident and Family Councils........................2 Birthdays/New Residents: Find out whose birthday is coming up and put a name to some of those new faces you've been seeing around the Home.....................................3 Recreation Activities: Read here about upcoming recreation activities and outings, then be sure to mark your calendars!!..................4 Recreation Highlights: Find out what's been happening in Recreation Therapy and on your unit.......................................5 Things You Want to Know: Here you'll find the times and locations of some of your favorite places to visit...........................6 Chaplain's Corner: Words of comfort and spiritual growth...................................8 In Memory......................10
haring our gifts--no, this isn't a fundraising pitch, although monetary gifts certainly play a key role and support numerous activities at the Minnesota State Veterans Home in Minneapolis.
I'm speaking in the broadest sense-- gifts include our time and our talents, as well as our treasures.
With the holiday season winding down and anew year upon us, it's a good time to take a quick glance back at 2001.
Through the support of many individuals and groups, our Home continued to provide a wide variety of programs and activities for over 400 residents.
Fishing outings, shopping, plenty of good food, music, and entertainment highlight the list.
Service organizations also sponsor clothing and transportation programs through their generous gifts.
Volunteers contributed thousands of hours of time to make life more enjoyable for the residents.
We have room to grow in our methods of expressing appreciation for those gifts and will strive to improve in this area.
I also believe that the efforts and dedication of our staff are gifts.
There are far more job opportunities than people available to provide long term care in the Twin Cities metro area.
Continuity of care for our residents improves when people get to know each other better and teamwork improves.
We strive to make this a good place to work, where people's diverse backgrounds and gifts are valued.
It helps the staff to know that they too are appreciated and that we want them to stay.
During the month of January we recognize members of the staff who reach milestones for longevity and to service to the citizens of the State of Minnesota.
Family Council sponsors employee appreciation each year to help in this effort.
The bottom line is this--no matter what your talent, the men and women who make this their home need your support.
Many people who attended our Veterans Day celebration last November 11th said it was among the finest celebrations they could remember.
Let's make that motto "every day is Veterans Day at the Minneapolis campus" a reality this year too.
S
Page 2
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Resident Council Update by Karen Knudsen The Resident Council is made up of residents from buildings 6 and 17.
All residents are invited to attend general meetings on the third Wednesday of the month at 3:15pm This is usually right after Bingo in the main dining room.
There are no dues.
You do not have to speak, but it is nice if you listen to others.
If you come once or twice, you are not obligated to come every month.
You may find out that others have the same problems as you - or they have solved the same problems! You may have an idea that could solve some one else's problem.
These last few months we have been getting food from a new vendor.
Some items have the same name, but are quite different.
Others may have a new name, but be a very similar food.
We have been helping the dietary staff by critiquing various items and giving Julie Kronabetter our opinions.
(If she doesn't know our tastes, she cannot effectively plan our meals.)
New residents are encouraged to come and give their NEW point of view on food items.
We have discussed the pros and cons of the "aging in place" plan several times and will probably discuss it's ramifications as time goes on.
We were kept up to the progress on the elevators in 17, the road and patio work outside, and the changes in Holiday gift distributions and opportunities.
Resident Council is a good place to ask "how come...?" At a couple of meetings, we discussed the importance of taking the correct pills.
We know that nurses always try to give us the correct medications, but anyone can make a mistake once in awhile.
So residents encouraged each other to count pills; ask about unfamiliar pills; and ask why a particular pill was ordered.
Nurses will often know, but can always look them up.
Residents learn about MVH, make friends and improve their situation by attending Resident Council.
See You there!
Family Council Update by Leisa Thill October brought Family Council officer elections for the year 2002.
Returning as Chair will be Marna Garrett, Vice Chair will be held by V i rg ini a Mi lb er t, Renee MacDonald and J. R. Jedlicka will con t i n ue a s Secret ar y and Treasurer, respectively, and Liesa Thill will serve as Alternate.
Veterans Day landed on a Sunday this year, but that did not dampen the pride and honor displayed at the annual Veterans Day Program.
S e vera l o r g a ni za tion s and individuals supported the event, including AmVets, Department of Minnesota, Minnesota Veterans H o m e - M i n n e a p o l is , F a m ily C ouncil, D o r o th y H a tha w a y , Richfield American Legion Post 435, and Rebecca Kaup.
Gene DeGier of AmVets served as Master of Ceremonies, and music was provided by the American Legion Post 435 band and vocalist Rebecca Kaup.
Chaplain Ken Salsbury, also of AmVets, gave the Benediction.
Many were overhead to proclaim this year's as the best Veterans Day event ever.
A special thank you to the Family Council members who attended and helped serve coffee, punch and treats.
It wouldn't be the holidays without a little Scrooge, and the Family Council was pleased to again sponsor a resident outing to the Guthrie Theater to enjoy "A Christmas Carol."
Thanks to the staff and volunteers that made it possible! Spreading more holiday cheer, Council members were busy "elves," assisting with the holiday gift shop December 13th and 14th, and wrapping gifts December 22nd for the resident parties.
Many thanks to all volunteers who found a little extra time to contribute during an always hectic season.
The Council celebrated the close of another eventful year with a potluck holiday party on December 15th and is gearing up for an even busier 2002 with plans for sponsoring more resident programs.
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Page 3
Happy Birthday to You! Bernard Arthur Omar Darnell Ruby Edward Lee Douglas Robert Ralph Kenneth Raymond Roy Robert James Robert Gordon Theodore Herbert Peter Brad Raymond John Lyle Leander Lester Richard Douglas Ruben Raymond August Marvin John
January
Achterling Ahlquist Anderson Anderson Anderson Behrends Blumer Elander Gallatin Gustafson Hagebak Hawkenson Hepola Hill Houglum Jacobson Johnson Kane Kuhlmey Lazar Le May Lyss Melville Olufson Petty Ravers Rogstad Roseth Ruedy Smith Steck Traver Wilson
Marcella George Joseph Charlie Leonard Leroy Robert Henry Valentine Todd Ernest Robert Iver Maurice Edward Timothy Duane Lowell Peter Burton Pearl Gregg Thomas Ole Daniel Richard Joseph Anthony Clarence Harry Joann James Edward Alfred Stephen David John Thomas Louis
February
Alifano Carpentier Decker Dennis Detlefsen Ehlers Espersen Gatzke Gawarecki Halvorson Johnson Johnson Johnson Keaveny Kirkevold Klawiter Knutson Larson Leitel Lindau Measner Michelson Morrison Olsen Podlewski Rausch Romie Roy Schouvielle Schultz Shade Sherman Siegienski Smeby Swenson Volker Winkler W ojciechowski Young
George W erner Ralph Richard Ronald Gait Mary Ellen Todd Anthony Floyd Dale Sigrid Jerry Patrick Lyle Wilfred Francis Irwin Norman Merlin James E. Ronald David Ralph Filmore Richard Theodore Leroy Arthur Vernon Paul Robert Dale
March
Anderson Bauer Berg Cameron Cool Copp Deloach Dobesh Dotty Elliott Erickson Glasrud Hansen Harter Herrmann Hockert Hughes Idso Johnson Johnson Klingner Labar Larson Lentz Pesola Pierce Ramlet Ruffcorn Schulz Spofford Urberg W ichman Zack
New Admissions Loren Clark Lucian Terrance Dale George Michael Delroy Raymond Gerald David John Otto Anderson Beaks Beardsley Bergren Brown Buckner Connelly Cooper Donley Erickson Freeman Irwin Jones Herbert James Burton Raymond Daniel Martin Richard W illiam Vernon Carl Francis Robert Charles Kuhlmey Leslie Lindau Mittelstadt Moats Rasmussen Rausch Schrenkler Spofford Swanson Vavreck Wichman Wolf
Page 4
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
January:
11th: Tara Brueske Concert @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room th 14 : Notable Singers Concert @ 7:00 pm in Main Dining Room th 18 : Shawn Sweeney Concert @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room th 20 : Mpls.
Creative Guild Gospel Music @ 2:00 pm in Chapel of Peace rd 23 : Rhythmaires Concert @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room 25th: Social w/ 2001 Winter Carnival Senior Royality @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room
Upcoming Recreation Highlights
3rd: AM Vets Super Bowl Party @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room 15th: LeRoy Larson Concert @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room nd 22 : Casino Day @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room
February:
Richfield American Legion Jr.
Auxilary Ice Cream Social @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room th 11 : Leagueaires Concert @ 2:00 pm in Main Dining Room th 18 : Chapel Strings Concert @ 7:00 pm in Chapel of Peace nd 22 : Passion Play at Highland Catholic School
3rd:
March:
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Page 5
Left: Alan Saatkamp shares his model train display with residents and staff.
Right: Resident Gaun Cochran rolls out lefse dough during a December cooking class.
Below: Residents Len Detlefsen and Ralph McDonough don 3D glasses to watch the IMAX Theater's presentation of the Nutcracker
Left: Bloomington Unit 550 invited Dee Tande (center) Public Affairs Director of the Minnesota Veterans Home to speak at their meeting concerning the Home's Transitional Housing Project.
A $500.00 check was presented by Unit President Jenifer Zaiher (third from right).for a needed ping-pong table and accessories for the project.
The Unit previously donated $1,750.00 towards much needed fitness equipment for the Resident Fitness Gym.
Page 6
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Recreation Highlights NOVEMBER: As with the enjoyable weather, Residents of the Minnesota Veterans Home enjoyed a variety of programs on campus in November.
Resident outings in included: Target and Wal-Mart shopping trips, a home cooked breakfast in the recreation room, lunch outings to various American Legion and VFW restaurants and Thanksgiving dinner at the Charles R. Knaeble VFW in Crystal.
Many thanks to the wonderful volunteers who prepared the feast of turkey, dressing, potatoes and pie.
Musical entertainment was provided by the Army National Guard Band on November 10th, the Mahtomedi High School Jazz band performed November 15th in the main dining room, the Minnesota Sinfonia performed a holiday concert on November 16th and Fiddlin' Feet performed at the monthly birthday party on November 30th.
In November, Residents continued to enjoy bingos, unit socials, music concerts on the units, VFW and American Legion distributions and Sing-A-Long.
Thank you to the ladies who held the Daughter's of the American Revolution Social in the main dining room on November 9th.
November ended with the first signs of the holiday season... unit decorating.
DECEMBER: With great anticipation, the many Holiday traditions at the Minnesota Veterans Home were as wonderful as ever.
Music, food, gifts and laughter filled the Home.
The Barbary Coast Dixieland Band began the month on December 3.
Word has it that the band brought residents to feet dancing.
Tuesday afternoon concerts included: Bob Hindal in the Chapel of Peace, Christ the King/St.
Thomas the Apostle Concert Jazz Band performed in the main dining room and the Choralaires completed Tuesdays in December with their holiday concert for all to enjoy.
Additional m u sical en ter t ai nm ent included: Curtis and Loretta in Victorian Holiday spirit at the monthly birthday party, the MVH choir performed in concer t D e ce m b e r 10 th followed by a sing-a-long December 20th in the Chapel of Peace.
Continued on page 10....
V olu nt ee Sp ot l i g h t r
Volunteer Spotlight
This quarter's Volunteer Spotlight features a pet therapy dog named Raylyn.
Raylyn is a pure bred Parti Pup Cocker Spaniel.
Raylyn has been visiting the Veterans Home since April.
Raylyn's birthday is December 29th and she lives in Apple Valley.
Residents have had the opportunity to see Raylyn grow into a larger and smarter puppy.
She enjoys walking with the residents down the hall, finding what goodies she can on the floors and sleeping next to Resident's chairs during recreation programs.
Raylyn visits the home Thursdays and enjoys every minute of it.
Raylyn's owner says the best things about her visiting MVH are the smiles, laughter and stories that are shared.
Thank you Raylyn for sharing your energy and love with the staff and residents at the Minnesota Veterans Home.
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Page 7
Things You Want to Know Coffee Shop Hours: (Building 6, Room G16) "RESIDENTS" (Monday thru Friday) 8-10:30 a.m. 
"STAFF" (Monday thru Friday) 10:30 a.m.-1 p.m.
Clothing Room Hours: (Building 6, Room G50) Monday: 8 a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Tuesday: 8 a.m.-11:00 a.m.
Wednesday: 8 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Thursday: 8 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Friday: 8 a.m.-3:30 p.m. Library Hours: (Building 9) Monday-Friday: 8-11 a.m., 12-4 p.m. 
Cashier Window Hours: Monday/Wednesday/Friday: 9:30-11:30 a.m. 
American Legion Distribution: (Building 15 Auditorium Lobby Area) Open Every Other Friday: 8:30-11 a.m.
Barber Shop Hours: (Building 6, Room G34-B) Monday: 9:00 a.m.--4:00 p.m. Wednesday: 9:00 a.m.--4:00 p.m. *Appointments need to be made through nursing staff on each unit.
VFW Distribution: (Building 6) September-May Open 2nd 
Chapel of Peace Saturday Mass: 10:00 Sunday Worship: 10:00
Page 8
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Chaplain's Cor ner Winter in Minnesota reminds me of a spiritual crisis.
In our culture, people are valued according to what they do.
Productivity and worth are woven together so tightly that it is hard to separate one's significance from one's usefulness.
But what happens when an individual is no longer working? Often, when illness or limitations come upon us, we struggle not only with all the grief and pain of losing our health and lifestyle.
We also grapple with feelings of worthlessness.
We may think, "If I am not doing something of value, then maybe I am no longer valuable."
Winter is a fallow time.
There is no planting, growing, or harvesting.
The entire season is given over to stillness and emptiness.
The only consistent praise winter receives is that winter leads to spring.
Yet in Minnesota, our winters can easily last five months.
That is far too much time to dismiss as simply as waiting for spring.
And what about those living in the winter of their lives? We can not simply discard this phase of life, even if we proclaim that our spiritual winters will lead us to our spiritual springs.
Winter is important, in and of itself.
It is far more than a time to get through.
In the same manner, the period of time during which a person is not productive is important in and of itself.
It is not merely to be endured.
Coming to terms with our worthiness, apart from what we do, is a time of spiritual crisis.
It is a holy process.
We may know in our intellect that we are important for who we are rather than what we do.
But we may not believe this in our hearts.
The winters of our lives are central to our coming to know this truth.
It is only within the emptiness of winter, the frustration and grief in the loss of health and ability that we come face to face with this spiritual crisis.
We experience in the love of God and the love of others the truth about our value.
We do not need to earn love.
We are loved because we are.
And once we embrace this time for what it is, then we can receive the gift -- it is within the barren winters of our lives that we can know the security of our worth.
Winter blessings.
Chaplain Shelley Dugan
MVH VOICE "Serving Those Who Served"
Page 9
All I Want For Christmas............
Pictured Below: Residents from 17/3 enjoy a visit from Santa.
Above: 17/2 Main Dining Room Holiday Party.
Below: Resident Art Schulz (6/3) with wife Bertha.
Above: Resident Bill Traeger MVH Volunteer Vandell Rich Below: Brothers Kermit and (6/1) share a special moment
(17/4) and ardson.
Ed Kirkevold together.
Left: 17/4 Social Worker Lyn Bradley and resident Ellis "Bob" Rice (6/1)
In Memor y......
Frank Harold Clarence John Victor Palmer Eugene Edward Roy Hilbert Torsten Harvey Clarence Black Boxsted Cunningham Esslinger Farness Glad Gordon Haas Jacobson Jensen Kaukola Larson Larson Shirley Leonard Leonard Robert Charles Clare Kenneth James Frank Roy Jerry James Lautt Lundblad Mitrenga Olson Ost Overholt Ruud Snedeker Sprague Travers Widegren Wodnick
Recreation Highlights
(continued from page 6)...........
Many thanks to the service organization volunteers and recreation volunteers that made it possible for the residents to continue enjoying the holidays in the community.
The MVH Family Council sponsored a matinee showing of the "Christmas Carol" at the Guthrie Theater on December 5th.
Residents also enjoyed a trip the IMAX Theater in Apple Valley to see the "Nutcracker" in 3D, supper and a holiday lights tour in South St. Paul, Holiday dinner at the TriCity American Legion and a showing of "Schooner" at the Minnesota History Theater.
December was no different as bingo and unit socials provided fun for residents in the evening.
The Columbia Heights VFW sponsored a holiday party
where residents received gift bags of candy and fruit.
Many thanks to the Various Service Organizations and Individuals who helped sponsor the 2001 Resident Gift Shop.
As with past holiday seasons at the Minnesota Veterans Home, the unit holiday parties on December 24th were a huge success.
Residents enjoy the buffet of holiday foods, musical entertainment, gifts and a visit from Santa Claus.
Dedication and hard work by MVH staff and volunteers is what made 2001 a memorable year for all!
