Propwash January, 2002 Volume 2, Issue 1 MARYLAND NATIONAL GUARD AND MARYLAND'S CIVIL AIR PATROL WING SIGN MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING Maj. Gen. James F. Fretterd, Adjutant General of the Maryland National Guard, announced today the signing of a Memorandum of Understanding between the Maryland National Guard and the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol.
The document, which was officially signed by representatives of both organizations, took place at the Maryland National Guard's historic headquarters at the Fifth Regiment Armory in Baltimore.
"The men and women of the Civil Air Patrol have been providing a tremendous service for the citizens of Maryland for more than half a century," said Maj. Gen. Fretterd.
"I'm extremely pleased as both a National Guardsman and a life-long Marylander to have the opportunity to recognize this tremendously talented organization through this momentous document," Fretterd said.
Under the Memorandum of Understanding, the Maryland National Guard has formally agreed to continue to make its facilities available to members of the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol for training and other official events.
Additionally, the Maryland National Guard will continue to provide technical expertise upon request by the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol.
Col. Lawrence L. Trick, Commander of the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol said, "The Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol looks forward to an even closer relationship with the Maryland National Guard.
This agreement recognizes a longstanding working relationship between two groups with rich traditions of service to the state of Maryland and the United States of America."
Commenting further on the agreement, Maj. Gen. Bruce F. Tuxill, Assistant Adjutant General for the Maryland Air National Guard, said, "This Memorandum of Understanding simply formalizes the relationship that has existed for years between the Maryland National Guard and the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol."
He added, "The Maryland National Guard remains totally committed to providing whatever training support may be requested by the leadership of Maryland's Civil Air Patrol now and into the future."
Lt. Col. Frederic Smalkin, Chief Judge for the U.S. District of Maryland, and Assistant Government Relations Advisor for the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol, said, "It has been a pleasure to work with Major Generals Fretterd and Tuxill to draft this Memorandum of Understanding formally establishing a program of cooperation and mutual assistance between the Maryland National Guard and the Maryland Wing of the Civil Air Patrol.
Its signing today marks a new milestone in the relationship between our two organizations, both of which depend upon the patriotism and dedication of those who volunteer to give something extra of themselves in service to their communities."
The Maryland National Guard is comprised of more than 9,000 full time and traditional citizen soldiers and airmen representing both the Army and Air National Guard.
MARYLAND AND NATIONAL CAPITAL WINGS CELEBRATE 60 YEARS OF CAP Over 400 members of the Maryland and National Capitol Wings gathered at Andrews AFB on November 30 to celebrate Civil Air Patrol's 60th Birthday.
Maryland Wing Commander Col Lawrence L. Trick, CAP and National Capitol Wing Commander Col Franklin J. McConnell, CAP were joined by the CAP-USAF Senior Air Force Advisor Col Albert A. Allenback, USAF and Middle East Region Commander Col Robert T. Townsend, CAP.
Members were treated to performances by the Maryland Wing Honor Guard under the direction of Lt Col Jett Mayhew, CAP and the USAF Drill Team under the command of MSgt Eric Brown of Baltimore, MD.
The evening featured music by the USAF Band Airman of Note, created in 1950 to carry on the tradition of Glenn Miller 's Army Air Corps dance band.
Music for the dance following the dinner was provided by Maryland Wing Music's swing band under the direction of Maj George Carroll, CAP.
Maryland Wing was founded on December 1, 1941 as one of the original Civil Air Patrol wings.
Maryland Wing's first commander, Lt Col Arthur C. Hyde, led the wing through the World War II years during which the wing participated in what is now called "homeland defense."
All Cadets who are 17 years old and have earned the Amelia Earhart Award are invited by CAP' s National Commander to apply for the 2002 International Air Cadet Exchange (pronounced I-A-C-E).
Cadets must not have reached their 21st birthday by 02 August 2002.
Escorts must be at least 25 years old and must have earned at least the senior rating in the cadet programs specialty track.
Due to the rather rigorous and demanding schedules, events, and activities, all applicants must be in excellent health and meet CAP physical and grooming standards.
Approximately 70 cadets will be selected to participate in this year 's exchange.
Seventeen senior member escorts will be needed to accompany cadets.
Individuals will be selected to visit one of the following countries: Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Israel, Japan, the Netherlands, Sweden, Turkey, or the United Kingdom.
In addition to being the guests of a foreign country, participants selected will spend two days in Washington, D.C.
The International Air Cadet Exchange is designed to promote international understanding, goodwill, and friendship among young people in different countries who have a common interest in aviation.
Civil Air Patrol is but one member of an international IACE Association.
IACE is one of seventeen national cadet special activities including the Engineering Technologies Academy, Advanced Technology Cadet National Academy, Air Force Flight Training Familiarization Course, Air Force Pararescue Orientation Courses, Air Force Space Command Familiarization Course, Air Force W eather Agency Familiarization Course, Airline Training Familiarization Course, Cadet Officer School, National Blue Beret, National Emergency Services Academy, National Powered Flight Academies, and National Glider Flight Academies.
Two of the seventeen, the National Honor Guard Academy and the National Military Music Academy, have their origins in the Maryland Wing.
Propwash
Col Lawrence L. Trick, CAP, Commander Lt Col James H. Steinmeier, CAP Vice-Commander Lt Col Larry Buck, CAP, Chief-of-Staff Capt Kay Joslin Walling, CAP, Public Affairs Officer
Propwash
Maryland Wing Civil Air Patrol United States Air Force Auxiliary PO Box 18341 Baltimore, MD 21240-8341
Feb 2 
Upcoming Events is a publication of the Maryland Wing Civil Air Patrol, United States Air Force Auxiliary.
January, 2002 Volume 2, Issue 1
