Feedback Southwest Refuges Index Southwest Regional Home Page National Wildlife Refuge System USFWS National Home Page Fws_col2.gif (2468 bytes) U.S. Fish 
Roger Di Rosa, Manager 1611 North Second Avenue Ajo, Arizona 85321 Phone: 520/387-6483 Fax: 520/387-5359 FW2 RW CabezaPrieta@fws.gov Getting There: From Phoenix, take I-10 west to exit 112, follow Highway 85 south to Gila Bend, continue south on 85 approximately 40 miles to Ajo.
From Tucson, take Highway 86 (Ajo Way) west across the Tohono O'odham reservation to Why, follow Highway 85 north to Ajo.
From Yuma, take I-8 east to Gila Bend, follow Highway 85 south approximately 40 miles to Ajo.
The refuge office is on the west side of the highway at the north end of town.
flowers.jpg Wildflowers in bloom at Cabeza Prieta NWR.
Refuge Quick Facts
When was it established? 1939 How big is it? 860,010 acres Why is it here? For the conservation of natural wildlife resources.
[Welcome] [Español]
bluegoos.gif (5600 bytes) Welcome to Cabeza Prieta NWR Sonoran Desert Wilderness
sugauro.jpg (104457 bytes) Harris hawk nesting in a saguaro.
Boundless desert surrounds you in Cabeza Prieta, the third largest national wildlife refuge in the lower 48 states.
Here, seven rugged mountain ranges cast shadows over barren valleys once swept by lava.
Saguaros loom in stark profile above the baked earth.
A 56-mile, shared border with Sonora, Mexico, might well be the loneliest international boundary on the continent.
Imagine the state of Rhode Island without any people and only one wagon track of a road.
Cabeza Prieta NWR is that big, that wild and also incredibly hostile to those who need lots of water to live.
Yet, within a landscape at once magnificent and harsh, life does persist, even thrives.
Temperatures may top 100 degrees F for 90 to 100 straight days from June to October.
Summer thundershowers and winter soaking rains average about 3 inches on the western part of the refuge and up to 9 inches on the east side, 60 miles away.
The winter and summer pattern of rainfall in the Sonoran desert stimulates the growth of more plant species than in most deserts.
You'll find creosote and bursage flats, mesquite, palo verde, ironwood, and an abundance of cacti, including ocotillo, cholla, and saguaro on the bajadas (southwest colloquialism for sand, silt, and gravel deposited by running water on the slopes of mountain ranges).
Endangered Sonoran pronghorn and lesser long-nosed bats call this parched land home, as do desert bighorns, lizards, rattlesnakes, and desert tortoises.
Elf owls peer from holes carved in saguaros by Gila woodpeckers.
Every plant and animal has adapted to life we would find uninhabitable.
Far from a barren desert, Cabeza Prieta NWR harbors as many as 391 plant species and more than 300 kinds of wildlife.
Cabeza Prieta Name
Cabeza Prieta, Spanish for "dark head," refers to a lava-topped, granite peak in a remote mountain range in the western corner of the refuge.
A Fragile Wilderness
Over 90 percent of the refuge was designated as wilderness by the 1990 Arizona Wilderness Act.
To help maintain the wilderness character of Cabeza Prieta NWR, no vehicle traffic is allowed except on designated public use roads.
Vehicles may be parked up to 50 feet from the center of the roads in areas previously used by other vehicles.
All other off-road travel is prohibited.
Visitors should practice a "leave no trace" ethic, keeping in mind that the desert ecosystem is fragile, and tracks made by vehicles or people can remain for hundreds of years.
[Back to Index]
Wildlife Lessons in Desert Life Skills
Sonoran wildlife possess a "chest of tools" to beat the desert's heat and hang in there for months without rain.
Burrowing, nocturnal living, and astonishing water conservation techniques are just a few of the ways animals adapt to life here.
The only water sources around are natural rock basins, called tinajas, that catch rainwater, a few artificial water storage areas, flowing washes after rains, and one intermittent seep.
Burrow Comfort
Desert tortoises, inhabiting the entire refuge, become dormant in burrows during the hottest and coldest times of the year.
In fact, almost three-quarters of all desert animals are burrowers.
Temperatures fluctuate only two degrees F just 18 inches below the surface.
Kangaroo rats, pocket mice, ground squirrels, snakes, and badgers all find underground shelters.
[Back to Index] baquail.jpg (71978 bytes) Desert tortoise
bighrn2.jpg (122071 bytes) Bighorn sheep Night Life
The sun sets.
The desert cools and a host of animals stir.
Ringtail cats prowl.
Coyote, kit fox, and gray fox all hunt for pocket mice and kangaroo rats.
Eleven species of bats navigate starry skies far from city lights.
The endangered lesser long-nosed bat feasts on saguaro flower nectar in spring and its fruit in summer, first pollinating then spreading the cactus seeds.
Outfitted for Heat
Light-colored fur helps mammals like mountain lions reflect, not `soak' in the heat.
The scales of lizards help them deflect heat too.
Perhaps most incredible are the built-in water saving abilities of many desert animals.
Collared peccaries, also known as javelina, can decrease water evaporation from their body by 68 percent.
Some of Cabeza Prieta NWR's bighorn sheep may go for weeks or months without visiting one of the refuge's water developments.
The sheep draw some moisture from food and rainwater pooled in rocks and can lose up to 30 percent of their body weight.
When water is plentiful, the bighorns quickly recover from dehydration.
Reptile Hot Spot
Cold-blooded reptiles like hot, dry climates.
Lizards and snakes dash and slither throughout the refuge.
Side-blotched lizards turn up just about everywhere.
Basin whiptails brave the heat of the day in search of termites and other insects.
Desert horned lizards hunt for ants in valleys and washes.
Like something out of a science fiction movie, these lizards will defend themselves by squirting blood from their eye sockets.
At least 24 species of snakes live here, including six kinds of rattlesnakes.
Three of those rattlesnake species are common.
The sidewinder, recognized at once by its sideways locomotion and "horns" above its eyes, ranks as a common species.
The western diamondback rattlesnake, largest of the bunch, lives primarily in the lower hills.
The Mojave rattlesnake possesses highly toxic venom and rarely rattles, even when disturbed.
Snakes would rather leave you alone, if you leave them alone.
They play an important role as predators in the desert community.
Before heading out, pick up information on snake bite prevention from the refuge office.
[Back to Index]
Birds Passing Through
Birds have the distinct advantage of being able to fly to find desert water.
You'll find the best birdwatching from February to May and August to November during migration.
Look for warblers, swallows, flycatchers, and phoebes along vegetation-lined washes.
Red-tailed hawks soar year-round.
Coveys of Gambel's quail make the refuge their permanent home as well.
Near Ajo, you'll find good birdwatching habitats within easy walking distance from your vehicle on Charlie Bell Road near Little Tule Well and Daniel's Arroyo and near the established campgrounds at Papago Well and Tule Well.
Lending a Hand for Wildlife
Refuge staff haul water to artificial catchments and guzzlers throughout Cabeza Prieta NWR to give desert bighorns and other wildlife a little bit more water than what nature provides.
The refuge also takes the lead role in Sonoran pronghorn recovery.
This endangered species with international significance ranges across the Sonoran desert in small, scattered bands.
The prehistoric Indians who survived here as hunters and gatherers knew how to reap the riches of the desert.
They collected cactus fruit, desert annuals, and mesquite beans and hunted bighorn sheep and small game.
[Back to Index]
Species Lists
Birds of Cabeza Prieta NWR
Mammals of Cabeza Prieta NWR
Reptiles of Cabeza Prieta NWR
Plants of Cabeza Prieta NWR Pcktmous.jpg (66374 bytes) Desert Pocket Mouse History Striking it Rich?
Those who came later had a different vision of desert riches.
In 1540, Melchoir Diaz made a name for himself as the first European to travel through the area, 90 years before the Mayflower landed at Plymouth Rock.
A member of Coronado's expedition, Diaz was searching for the lost city of Cibola, a legendary city of gold.
El Camino del Diablo, or "the Devil's Highway," crosses the refuge.
Jesuit Padre Eusebio Francisco Kino pioneered the trail, which stretched from Mexico to California, from 1699-1701.
It earned its name from travelers who died in route to the California gold fields.
In the twentieth century, numerous prospectors combed the mountains in search of precious metals.
The discovery of rich copper deposits led to the opening of the Ajo mines in 1916.
[Back to Index]
Things to do at the Refuge
A visitor center and short interpretive trail near the refuge office offers a first introduction to the ecology of the Sonoran desert.
For the well prepared, the refuge offers plentiful hiking, photography, wildlife observation, and primitive camping.
Please do not linger near water holes.
Wildlife depend on them for survival.
Pick up a Permit First
Before entering the refuge, you must obtain a valid Refuge Entry Permit and sign a Military Hold Harmless Agreement.
Free permits are available from the refuge office or they can be sent through the mail.
Most of the refuge falls within the air space of the Barry M. Goldwater Air Force Range.
Numerous low-flying aircraft cross the refuge on their way to air-to-air bombing and gunnery ranges located to the north.
Some military training exercises over the refuge may require limitations on travel and even short periods of closure of the refuge to the public.
Military schedules are known in advance, so refuge staff can help with your schedule.
See Tips for Watching Wildlife for suggestions to make your visit more enjoyable.
Special Events
The Cabeza Prieta Natural History Association features bi-weekly presentations from November to March on the natural history of the refuge.
The evening talks are free.
Check with the refuge staff for dates and specific topics.
Other special events and tours are scheduled throughout the year.
[Back to Index]
butterfly.jpg Butterfly on Refuge Wildflowers
Camping
You may select your own campsite.
Papago Well, Tule Well, and Christmas Pass camping areas have some facilities and are recommended for larger groups.
State laws prohibit camping within 1/4 mile of water holes.
Your presence at water holes prevents wildlife from quenching their thirst.
Hunting
Cabeza Prieta NWR's limited, desert bighorn sheep hunt offers a high quality hunting experience in a desert wilderness setting.
Long hikes are necessary just to arrive at the base of many of the mountain ranges.
Hunters must carry in their own food and water.
Please contact the refuge for more specific information about the bighorn sheep hunt.
Safety
The military has used this area as a gunnery and bombing range since World War II.
Many types of ordnance remain on the refuge, some buried and some on the surface.
You may encounter unexploded ordnance.
If you do, please:
*Do not touch it.* *Note its location.* *Report it to refuge staff.*
Plan Ahead for a Desert Trip
There are no facilities for gasoline, sanitation, or potable water on Cabeza Prieta NWR.
Plan on bringing two gallons of water per day, per person.
Wear a broad-brimmed hat, long sleeves, and pants for sun protection.
Be prepared to carry out all trash and debris, including toilet paper and other non-biodegradable waste.
Bring your own charcoal for fires and plan to use a firepan to protect the fragile soil.
You'll Need 4-wheel Drive
If you desire to travel on the refuge, 4-wheel drive vehicles are required on all routes except Charlie Bell Road where 2-wheel drive high-clearance vehicles may be driven.
Vehicles are restricted to public use roads and can be parked up to 50 feet of the center line of the roads in areas previously used by other vehicles.
Visitors should refrain from travel during wet conditions due to possible damage to refuge roads.
Driving in wet areas is prohibited.
All vehicles and operators must be licensed for highway driving.
Make sure you carry two spare tires and other spare mechanical parts in case of a breakdown.
[Back to Index]
Help Protect the Refuge
To protect the fragile desert ecosystem, we do not allow any of the following activities: * Dumping of litter, sewage, or liquid waste on the refuge.
* Firearms, except as authorized in writing by the refuge manager.
* Prospecting, removal, or disturbance of sand, rock, gravel, or minerals.
* Rock hounding.
* Excavating or removing objects of antiquity, cultural artifacts, or paleontological artifacts.
* Trapping.
* Collecting, possessing, molesting, disturbing, injuring, destroying, removal, or transportation of any plant, or animal, or part of the natural flora and fauna on the refuge is prohibited.
(Exceptions to the above are legally taken game).
* To protect scarce desert wood, only charcoal campfires are permitted.
* Pets must be leashed and under control at all times.
Visit the Leave No Trace website for more information about outdoor ethics.
Volunteer Opportunities
Interested in volunteering for Cabeza Prieta NWR? The following volunteer positions are available: * Biological Assistants--ecological studies and research * Biological Specialists--surveys and monitoring of wildlife * Ecological Data Assistants--mapmaking, photopoint data collection, etc.
* Recreation Impact Specialists--sign maintenance, road reclamation, etc.
* Refuge Research Assistant--set up office library and catalog system, organize slides, library research, etc.
* Visitor Contact Specialist--greets visitors, answers telephone, issues permits, etc.
* Maintenance Assistant--groundskeeping, clean-up, carpentry, vehicle maintenance, fence building * Refuge Interpreter--teaches Leave No Trace techniques, leads nature hikes, performs school programs * Also need volunteers for other special projects, including photography, computers, artwork, etc.
Volunteers are needed October to May.
The refuge has a bunkhouse with room for five and a trailer or motor home site.
Reservations and a minimum of 40 hours per week required for housing.
Work in the field usually requires a four-wheel drive vehicle.
Please contact the refuge at r2rw_cp@fws.gov or 520/387-6483 for more specific information about volunteering.
See Arizona Links for more information about natural areas and tourism in Arizona.
Top of the Page
Last Updated May 20, 2002
Disclaimer
