USGS Logo Citizen Knowledge and Perception of Black-tailed Prairie Dog Management: Executive Summary Natalie Sexton Ayeisha Brinson Phadrea Ponds Kurt Cline Berton L. Lamb
Citation: Sexton, N., A. Brinson, P. Ponds, K. Cline, and B.L. Lamb, 2001, Citizen Knowledge and Perception of Blacktailed Prairie Dog Management: Report to Respondents, 27 p.
Executive Summary
Background
The Survey
Question Summaries
Rural/Urban Summaries
Glossary of Terms
References
What do citizens know about black-tailed prairie dogs, and where do they get their information? When management decisions need to be made regarding an animal such as the black-tailed prairie dog, an understanding of the species and its relationship to humans is necessary.
This includes knowing the biology of the animal, where it lives, and how it interacts with other animals.
But it is equally important for those making decisions about the species to understand citizens' knowledge and perceptions so managers can effectively communicate with the public and help the public participate in planning and decision making activities.
Unfortunately, what is known about public knowledge, perception, and preferences concerning prairie dog management is limited to data from only a few areas.
This study attempts to answer the question: What do people in the short-grass prairie region of the United States know and think about black-tailed prairie dogs?
In the summer of 2000, we sent a survey by mail to citizens of rural, urban, and suburban counties in the Shortgrass prairie region of the United States.
This area includes all or part of 11 states: Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming (see Figure 1, p. 4).
A total of 1933 citizens completed the survey for a 56% response rate (Table 1).
This report provides a summary of the answers for all the questions in the survey.
The results show that although people do not believe prairie dogs are a big environmental issue, they favor a balanced approach when dealing with such problems.
When asked about their views on environmental policy, respondents reported being more conservative than liberal: 40% reported slightly conservative or conservative environmental views, 24% reported moderate environmental views, and 19% reported slightly liberal or liberal environmental views.
Nineteen percent (19%) said they did not know or had not thought about their environmental values.
When asked how important black-tailed prairie dogs are compared to other environmental problems, 69% said they are less important than other issues or not an issue at all.
Thirty one percent (31%) said prairie dogs are about the same or more important than other issues.
However, when given options for preserving or developing prairie dog habitat and natural resources in general, respondents thought that a balance was best (38% thought "Protection of the environment and the growth of the economy should be given equal consideration in deciding what to do with natural resources").
Thirty three percent (33%) of respondents thought "Protection of the environment should be the most important, but not the only, consideration in deciding what to do with natural resources," and 18% thought "Growth of the economy should be the most important, but not the only, consideration in deciding what to do with natural resources."
According to respondents, the most important issues concerning black-tailed prairie dog management are disease prevention (42%), ranch and farm practices (25%), and habitat protection (11%).
Regarding their interaction with black-tailed prairie dogs, 66% of respondents either do not see them at all in a given month or do not see them very often (1-5 times/month).
Sixteen percent (16%) see them more than 20 times/month.
The majority of respondents (59%) live at least ¼ mile from a prairie dog town.
This would indicate that interactions between prairie dogs and the general population are relatively infrequent.
However, many respondents indicated that they do recreate near prairie dog towns; recreation activities mentioned at least once per year were wildlife/nature viewing (45%), hunting (35%), camping (29%), and hiking/backpacking (25%).
Although only about a third said they have tried to influence land use decisions, respondents reported the most common ways they have been involved are by signing a petition (37%) or attending a public hearing (36%).
Other forms of policy influence were much less frequently reported.
The major part of this study focused on what people know about prairie dogs.
We tried to learn what people know by asking two sets of questions.
First, respondents were asked about the meaning of some terms specific to black-tailed prairie dogs and their management.
Respondents were asked if they knew the meaning, had heard of but did not know the meaning, or had not heard of a term.
Respondents said they knew the meaning of such terms as burrowing (90%), Endangered Species Act (85%), urban sprawl (68%), prairie ecosystem (61%), biological vulnerability (54%), and habitat conversion (54%).
They had heard of but did not know the meaning of or had not heard of the following terms: extirpated (86%), diurnal (84%), random demographic events (72%), habitat fragmentation (58%), and Sylvatic plague (51%).
We have placed a glossary of terms at the end of this report.
Second, respondents were asked six multiple-choice questions about prairie dogs.
A majority of respondents (56%) knew that prairie dogs are active only during the daytime.
Almost half (49%) knew that prairie dogs are usually killed with poison when removed and just over 40% knew that plague is a disease that can be transferred from prairie dogs to people.
Respondents were less knowledgeable about other facts.
Only 29% knew that prairie dogs are related to chipmunks and fewer than 10% knew that prairie dogs have only one litter per year or live in groups called "coteries."
Just as important as understanding what people know is where they learn this information.
For information about prairie dogs, respondents have learned some or a great deal in the past year primarily from personal experience (43%) and friends and neighbors (27%).
Only about a quarter of respondents said they learned some or a great deal about prairie dogs from traditional information sources, such as newspapers and television.
Of those who said they used newspapers for information, about half (51%) said they relied on local newspapers.
Other important, but less frequently reported sources of information were radio (13%), scientific/technical media (12%), mailings (11%), and county extension agents (11%).
Although people receive information from many sources, the most important seem to be personal experience and local sources.
In order to understand the dynamics of people's knowledge, it is important to understand what factors make a difference in what people know.
Ethnicity, age, occupation, gender, income, ideology, and values orientation are important factors.
For example, policy makers need to know whether citizen knowledge is associated with age or ideology.
Understanding these relationships is the primary way in which the results can be used to help managers and policy makers better communicate with the public.
We will summarize those relationships in our final project report.
For this summary report, we can describe who responded to our survey.
Their average age was 53.
Although more men (72%) than women (28%) completed the survey, a sufficient number of women responded (531) to allow a reliable characterization of their answers.
Most respondents were white (94%) and not of Hispanic or Latino ethnicity.
Fifty six percent (56%) of respondents have completed at least some college or higher degree.
The occupation of most respondents is in professional/technical (26%), agriculture (19%), or retired (21%) categories.
The average income of respondents is $40,000-49,000/year.
A few earlier researchers have investigated people's knowledge of prairie dogs (Kellert 1985; Reading 1999; Zinn and Andelt 2000).
Those studies only covered local areas, but they found differences between urban and rural respondents.
Therefore, we divided our sample into rural, suburban, and urban counties (Table 1) and received enough responses to reliably characterize each group: rural (721), suburban (673), urban (539).
Our study found some important differences between rural and urban respondents.
While rural respondents are more likely to know where the nearest prairie dog town is located and see them more often, urban respondents tend to be more protective of prairie dogs.
Not only do residents of urban counties believe protecting the animals is a higher priority, they also see more social benefits arising from this protection.
Respondents from urban counties also favor the use of environmentally oriented management options in protecting prairie dogs.
Rural and urban respondents agreed on their choices of the most important issue (disease prevention) and the least important issue (tourism and recreation opportunities) concerning the management of prairie dogs.
However, urban and rural respondents differed in their levels of reported and factual knowledge.
Urban respondents reported knowing more terms related to the management of prairie dogs, while rural respondents possessed higher levels of factual knowledge about prairie dogs.
TOP OF PAGE
