SA.GOV HOME | SERVICES | LIVING IN SA | BUSINESS IN SA | GOVERNMENT | VISITING SA | SEARCH About the Library | News 
Featuring Great Speeches, This Day in History, and History Hotlist, you can also choose Exhibits and link to Alex Haley's powerful story "Roots."
For educational purposes, teachers could choose Classroom to find historical films for classroom use.
The History Net - With this site, choose from a wide range of history topics such as World History, American History, or Homes, Heritage and Antiques.
To find personal accounts of historical events, or biographical information on historical figures, choose either Eyewitness Accounts or Personality Profiles.
Today in History - On the day that you connect to this Library of Congress site, you will discover what happened on that particular day in history.
The information is greatly enhanced with daily historical facts from the Library's American Memory collections.
Users of this site can also view Library materials relating to that particular day.
WORLD HISTORY Cold War
Historical Text Archive - To find historical information on specific world regions, choose links such as Africa, Asia, or Europe from the Regional or National History area.
If you are searching topically, choose links such as Women or Native American from the Topical History area.
This site also includes miscellaneous links to historical Bibliographies, Directories, or Archives.
Horus' Web Links to History Resources - Also known as H-GIG (Horus Gets in Gear), this site allows you to search for world history resources by specific country.
Choose Histories of Specific Countries, or Times and Places; or search topically such as Native-American, Women, or choose Persons.
You can also search by historical periods; e.g., Ancient, Medieval, Early Modern, Modern and 20^th Century.
HyperHistory Online - Presenting 3,000 years of world history, this site includes graphics, lifelines, timelines, and maps.
With this online version of the printed World History Chart, click on People, and reach back in time from 1000 B.C. to the present, or choose other connections such as Events, History, or Maps.
Scholars' Guide to WWW - This varied site extends far beyond History.
Click on History:General and find topics such as Slavery Studies, or Medical History on the WWW.
If you choose History:USA, you will discover studies like African-American Mosaic, an excellent resource guide for the study of African-American history and culture; or the Martin Luther King Project at Stanford University.
Welcome to Egypt-The Valley of The Kings - For researching ancient Egypt, this site is superb.
It includes information on the pharaohs and their tombs, and also numerous additional links on Egypt.
Cold War
Cold War - CNN's Perspectives series presents Cold War documents, maps, culture, espionage, and links to biographies of prominent people of the era.
Concrete Curtain: Life and Death of the Berlin Wall - This site is from a museum exhibition depicting well-captioned photographs and information about the Berlin Wall.
It includes a chronology of the Berlin Wall and links to other information.
UNITED STATES HISTORY General | Decades | Archives | Documents | Newspapers
General
American Memory/Historical Collections for the National Digital Library - Organized by the Library of Congress, this comprehensive site brings a virtual library to all researchers.
You can search for a specific topic, or browse the wide-ranging collection..
Some of the numerous choices are Photos and Prints, Documents, and Panoramic Maps.
The American Presidency: A Glorious Burden - Click on the presidents' portraits to learn more about them, or choose from topics such as The Campaign Trail or Life and Death in the White House.
Activities, resources and teachers' materials are also offered on this site from the Smithsonian.
American Presidents - Facts about the private lives and presidencies of every U.S. President.
There are links to presidential museum sites as well.
Archiving Early America - The main focus of this site is primary source material from eighteenth-century America such as original newspapers, maps and writings.
Another important feature is the Gallery of Early American Portraits.
This site also includes tips on how to read a 200 year old document.
Democracy in America: Alexis de Tocqueville - Join Alexis de Tocqueville's historical travels to America in the 1830's which resulted in his important book, Democracy in America.
Learn about life in America at the time by clicking on Everyday Life: 1831, or research the lives of women in America by choosing American Women: 1820-1842.
From Revolution to Reconstruction - Use this site to research Early America, or find articles taking you Toward the 21^st Century.
According to research requirements, choose from numerous Original Essays, Original Biographies, or a List of Available Source Transcripts.
Lewis and Clark Online Base Camp - This interactive site from National Geographic lets you journey west from St. Louis with Lewis and Clark.
There are choices of action to make, and excerpts from journal entries from the expedition.
Real History Archives - Alternative interpretations of important political events in U.S. history over the past 50 years are offered in essay formats.
The JFK assassination, Watergate, the Iran-Contra affair and other controversial topics are examined from viewpoints outside the mainstream accounts.
Updates, humor and satire are also featured.
User's Guide to the Declaration of Independence - An annotated version of the Declaration of Independence is provided by the Claremont Institute.
There is also a timeline, discussion of issues surrounding the document, and lists of references and sources used.
The Founder's Library offers additional documents from the era of the American Revolution, including British and U.S. government documents; letters, tracts and essays of the founders; writings by clergy of the day; and the text of the Federalist Papers.
Decades The 1890's | The 1920's | The 1930's | The 1960's
The 1890's
The 1890s Society - Links to collections of 1890's materials, net resources (including The Victorian Web), journals and other topics.
The 1920's
Twenties Reconstruction Society - This site focuses on primary documents and authenticity.
Photographs and illustrations from newspapers are available.
Topics covered include prohibition, automobiles, music, movies, and the after-effects of World War I.
A timeline covering the years 1917 - 1933 is also provided.
The 1930's
Voices from the Thirties - Life histories from the Federal Writers Project.
The 1960's
American Cultural History: 1960-1969 - An overview of the cultural trends that defined this decade.
Major events, political changes, art, music and fashion are featured.
Archives and Manuscript Collections
American Heritage Project - This site is a shared database of archival finding aids from several American universities.
The purpose of these finding aids is to provide access to numerous archival collections documenting American history and culture.
Select Browse Finding Aids, or search for specific Papers 
Historic Documents
Documents from the Continental Congress and the Constitutional Convention, 1774-1789 - Consists of 274 broadsides, or broadsheets (large sheets of paper usually printed on one side) documenting the debate on issues pertaining to the founding of our nation from colonial resistance to British rule and the Revolutionary War.
U.S. Historical Documents - Organized chronologically, this site includes U. S. documents dating from the pre-Colonial era to the present.
Some examples are The Mayflower Compact (1620); The First Thanksgiving Proclamation (1676), and Give Me Liberty or Give Me Death by Patrick Henry (1775).
U.S. Historical Documents Archive - This document site begins in the late 18^th century with the U.S. Constitution.
It also includes presidential inaugural and farewell addresses , as well as pictures of the original documents.
Historic Newspapers
History Buff's Home Page: The American Newspaper Archive - This site concentrates on newspaper coverage of happenings in American history.
Categories are varied and include the Old West, Baseball, the Civil War, and many more.
Virginia Newspaper Project - This is an on-going project, and covers over 3,700 newspapers dating back to the nation's Colonial period.
Historical newspapers from nearly all 50 states are represented.
This is a considerable resource, and can be used to highlight topical subjects.
TEXAS HISTORY
Lone Star Junction - With this site, search The Archives to discover People, Places, Documents, and Events of early Texas.
In addition, this site includes a Genealogy Register, Commentary on Texas books, and other connections to sites of interest to researchers.
San Antonio: A Bibliography by Decade - A bibliography of original accounts put together by the San Antonio Public Library's Texana/Genealogy Department.
San Antonio: A Chronology - A listing of important events from 1691 to 1997.
Put together by the Texana/Genealogy Department of the San Antonio Public Library.
Texas History Sources - This site is basically a one-page listing of Texas history sources.
Although not alphabetical, it is easily scanned.
Some examples are the Austin Colony, Historical Churches of San Antonio, Historical Indian Tribes of Texas, Texas Maps, Early Texas Leaders, and Texas Trivia.
BORDERLANDS HISTORY (Southwestern United States and Mexico)
Borderlands History - Included are connections to resources such as BLAC (Nettie Lee Benson Latin American Collection); Bancroft (Bancroft Library at U.S. Berkeley); or H-LatAm (Forum for scholarly discussion of Latin American History).
Under the Genealogy heading, you can link to GenMex (Mexico Genealogy Web); Heritage (large resource for Borderlands history and genealogy) plus many more.
NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORY See Native American Resources
MILITARY General | War with Mexico (1846 - 1848) | Civil War | Spanish-American War (1898-1899) Philippine-American War (1899-1902) | WW I | WW II | Korean War | Vietnam War
General Military History
U.S. Army Military History Institute - This is the web site for the U.S. Army Central Repository for historical materials.
With this site you can search for items such as American Civil War Unit Bibliographies, the Normandy Photos Database, U. S. Army Unit Bibliographies, or the Photo Collection Database.
War with Mexico (1846 - 1848)
War with Mexico - Full content of U.S. President James K. Polk's "Message on the War with Mexico," issued May 11, 1846.
American Civil War (1861-1865)
The American Civil War Homepage - This site is a gateway to electronic files about the Civil War.
Click on Resources and find links to Specific Battles, Graphic Images, or State/Local Studies.
This site also includes links to other Civil War sites.
Rutgers University Civil War Links - Links are included for topics related to the Civil War, such as abolitionism, political cartoons of the era, letters and diaries from people of the period, and reconstruction documents.
Selected Civil War Photographs - From this site you can search the collection of over 1,000 Civil War photographs.
These include scenes of military personnel, battle preparations, and battle results.
Choose portraits of both Confederate and Union officers plus a selection of enlisted men.
U.S. Civil War Center - With this superb site, you can browse the index and discover links to Civil War documents and books, or the Frederick Douglass Papers.
Choose Researching People of the Civil War Era, and find excellent genealogical instructions on how to proceed plus links to various state archives.
Another choice - Statistical Summary of America's Major Wars - could be very useful.
Spanish-American War (1898-1899)
The World of 1898: The Spanish-American War - The Hispanic Division of the Library of Congress presents a chronology of the Spanish-American War by date and by country.
Essays from and about each country involved (the United States, Cuba, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, and Spain) are featured, along with literature of the period, maps, personal narratives, and subject lists of people, places and events involved in this conflict.
Philippine-American War (1899-1902)
The Philippine-American War - The text of U.S. President William McKinley's "Benevolent Assimilation Proclamation," letters from soldiers, contemporary editorials on the battle of Balangiga, and information regarding the participation of African-American soldiers is presented by the Philippine Revolution and Philippine-American War Centennial.
World War I (1914-1918)
World War I Document Archive - This site covers primary documents from World War I. Choose Conventions, Treaties 
World War I/Trenches on the Web - From the Reference Library link , a good starting point, you can choose Armory for information on weapons, Timelines for narratives, or Biographies.
Choose either the Allied or Central Powers involved in the war for detailed information on each country.
World War II (1939-1945) Hiroshima | Holocaust | Japanese-Americans
Color Photographs from the FSA and OWI - These color photographs, produced by the Farm Security Administration (FSA) and Office of War Information (OWI) from 1939 to 1945, depict life in the U.S. during these war years, and also focus on women, factories and other aspects of World War II mobilization.
Rutgers Oral History Archives of World War II - Transcripts of the personal experiences of men and women who served in the military both overseas and in the United States during World War II have been collected by the Rutgers University history department.
Stone 
Click on Books, Armies, or choose Links to find other gateways to WW II resources.
World War II (Hiroshima)
Hiroshima Archive - This site was originally established to commemorate the 50^th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima during World War II.
From the site's home page you can select resources in the Hiroshima Directory, or search for photographs in the Gallery.
World War II (Holocaust)
The Holocaust History Project - An online archive of essays, documents, and reproductions of works about the Holocaust.
The transcripts of the Nuremberg Trials, and answers to questions submitted by the sites users are also included.
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum - In addition to extensive information about the museum, this site covers Guidelines for Teaching about the Holocaust.
Also available is an Archive of Historic Photographs and a Registry of Holocaust survivors.
World War II (Japanese-Americans)
National Japanese American Memorial Foundation - Japanese American of World War II are commemorated.
Korean War (1950-1953)
Korean War Veterans Memorial - Basic facts about the Korean War and its memorial.
Vietnam War
Vietnam War - This comprehensive site includes links to Combat Casualties, Vietnam War Photos, Artillery, Insignia and Medals/Awards and Maps.
The Wars for Vietnam: 1945 to 1975 - This site is an excellent overview of the Vietnam War.
You can link to documents and historical and tactical maps of Vietnam, or simply expand your knowledge of Vietnam's history and politics.
WOMEN'S HISTORY
Chronology of the Equal Right Amendment - The ERA's history is followed from 1923 through 1996, with the focus on the involvement of the National Organization for Women.
Links to notable people and organizations are provided.
Distinguished Women of Past and Present - Although not comprehensive, this site includes biographical information on women writers, educators, scientists, heads of states, politicians and artists among others.
Choose to search by Field of Activity or Name.
History of the Suffrage Movement - This topic is covered from the 1848 origins in antebellum reform through the ratification of the 19th Amendment in 1920.
National Women's History Project - For research in Women's History, this web site is far-reaching.
Choose Important History Links to locate additional sites on Women's Rights, African-American Women, or choose women in Aviation, Math and Science, Art and Music, Athletics or War and Peace.
HISTORIC RULERS See also: American Presidents
Rulers - Use this site to find biographical information on heads of states of currently existing countries and territories.
Foreign ministers are also included as well as subdivisions of some countries and international organizations.
Birth and death years are provided.
HISTORIC MAPS
Historical Maps: The Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection - With this site, select historic maps from places throughout the world such as Africa, The Americas, The Middle East, or Europe.
Choose The United States link to find Texas maps.
From this site, you can also link to historical maps in other collections.
Map Collections: 1544 - 1999 - The Library of Congress's collection includes maps on the topics of discovery and exploration; military battles; cities and towns; conservation and the environment; cultural landscapes; and transportation and communication.
A zoom feature allows viewing of details.
Rare Map Collection - This rare map collection at the Hargrett Library, University of Georgia, maintains a collection of about 800 historic maps spanning nearly 500 years from the 16^th century.
Select early maps of Colonial America or maps depicting historic sites and battles of the Civil War.
INSTRUCTIONAL SITES
Oral History Techniques - Instructions on how to organize and conduct oral history interviews are provided by Barbara Truesdell of Indiana University.
Legal Information on the use of permission forms and bibliography are also included.
FUN HISTORY SITES
History of the Table Fork - The Society for Creative Anachronisms (SCA) provides this overview of the development of the table fork.
Solemates: The Century in Shoes - Women's shoes from the 1900s through the 1990s are depicted.
Posted/Updated: 03/12/2003 Report broken links to: librarywebadmin@sanantonio.gov.
600 Soledad · San Antonio, TX 78205 · PH (210) 207-2500 · TTY (210) 207-2534 · librarywebadmin@sanantonio.gov
SERVICES | LIVING IN SA | BUSINESS IN SA | GOVERNMENT | VISITING SA
COMMUNITY PORTAL HOME | PRIVACY POLICY AND DISCLAIMER | TEXT ONLY Website best viewed using Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.0 and above or Netscape 6.2 with screen resolution settings of 800x600.
