Committees Hearings and Testimony Legislative History Legislative Update Hot Topics and More Information How To Reach Us Back To Home Page Congressional Activities for the 108th Congress September 10, 2003 RESEARCH ISSUES EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES Relevant bills and resolutions: S. 189 - 21st Century Nanotechnology Research and Development Act * Introduced by Senator Ron Wyden (D-OR) on January 16, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation * A bill authorizing appropriations on nanoscience, nanoengineering, and nanotechnology * The bill would establish a National Nanotechnology Research Program across several Federal agencies, among them NIH.
It authorizes NIH funding for research in this area in the amount of $49.7 million for FY2004 * Senator Wyden sponsored a virtually identical bill, S. 2945, in the 107th Congress.
That bill was reported favorably by the same Committee.
* Markup held, amendments adopted and report ordered on June 19, 2003
H. R. 766 - Nanotechnology Research and Development Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY) on February 13, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Science * Markup held and amendments adopted and report ordered on May 1, 2003 * Passed the House on May 7, 2003 * Referred to Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation on May 8, 2003 * Mandates a Federal program designed to stimulate nanotechnology research, development, education, and commercial application, and coordinate nanotechnology research across Federal agencies
STEM CELLS AND CLONING
The President and Congress focused intense attention and debate on the ethical issues surrounding human cloning and the use of human stem cells for treatment of disease.
After the President's August 9, 2001 announcement making funding available for limited research using stem cells, the Congress launched earnest deliberations on stem cell issues, but did not reach a consensus.
Announcements by private companies that their scientists have cloned human cells for the purpose of producing stem cells spurred renewed interest, and linked stem cell and cloning issues irrevocably.
There are two major camps of legislators who are particularly interested in this issue: one group wants to prohibit cloning for any reason, and the other wants to ban cloning for reproductive purposes while preserving the abilities of scientists and clinicians to use cloning technology in research and therapeutic pursuits.
On May 22, 2003, Senator Arlen Specter (R-PA) held a hearing on stem cell research.
The hearing was held to provide NIH with the opportunity to provide an update on the status of embryonic stem cell research with respect to reports of stem cells being grown in mediums other than mouse feeder cells.
Relevant bills and resolutions:
H. R. 234 - Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative Dave Weldon (R-FL) on January 8, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce * A bill to amend Title 18, United States Code to prohibit human cloning * The bill would prohibit human cloning for any reason and impose criminal and civil penalties for violators * Included is a provision for a GAO study within 4 years of enactment to determine if the Act should be amended in light of new evidence (see H. R. 534)
S. 245 - Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 * Introduced by Senator Sam Brownback (R-KS) on January 29, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
* A bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to prohibit human cloning * The bill would prohibit human cloning for any reason and impose criminal and civil penalties for violators * During the 107th Congress, Senator Brownback offered two bills, S. 790 and S. 1899, with similar provisions.
S. 1899 was identical to a cloning bill that was passed by the House.
* Largely similar to H. R. 534, which passed the House on February 27, 2003
S. 303 - Human Cloning Ban and Stem Cell Research Protection Act of 2003 * Introduced by Senator Orrin Hatch (R-PA) on February 5, 2003 and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary * A bill to prohibit human cloning and protect stem cell research * The bill would prohibit cloning for reproductive purposes, but would permit therapeutic cloning as long as certain ethical requirements are met
H. R. 534 - Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative Dave Weldon (R-FL) on February 5, 2003 and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary; marked up by the Committee on February 12, 2003; report filed from the Committee on February 25, 2003; considered and passed by the full chamber (by a vote of 241-155) on February 27, 2003; placed on the Senate calendar on March 3, 2003.
* A bill to amend Title 18, United States Code to prohibit human cloning * The bill would prohibit human cloning for any reason and impose criminal and civil penalties for violators * Identical to H. R. 234, (although as introduced, the bill omitted a provision for a GAO report, within 4 years, assessing the need for any amendment to the bill, if passed; that provision was added back during deliberations in the House) * Largely similar to S. 245, for which it is now considered a companion
H. R. 801 - Cloning Prohibition Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative James Greenwood (R-PA) on February 13, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce * Amends the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to prohibit the use of human somatic cell nuclear transfer technology with the intent to create a pregnancy and imposes civil and criminal penalties on violators * Requires researchers using this technology to register with DHHS * Calls for an IOM study on the state of the science on stem cells derived from embryonic tissues vs. those derived from adult tissues
RESEARCH PRIORITIES
Relevant bills and resolutions:
H. R. 1002 - Training and Research in Urology Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative James Leach (R-IA) on February 27, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce * Amends the Public Health Service Act, Section 428 (NIDDK's section) to divide the current Division of Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic Diseases into the Division of Urologic Diseases and the Division of Kidney and Hematologic Diseases * Authorizes appropriations, in addition to those already authorized, for inter- and intra-agency research in urology conducted and coordinated by NIH in the amount of $5,000,000 for FY2004 through FY2008, and such sums as necessary thereafter
DRUG DEVELOPMENT
Relevant bills and resolutions:
H. R. 828 - Pharmaceutical Fiscal Responsibility Act of 2003 * Introduced by Representative Carolyn McCarthy (R-NY) on February 13, 2003 and referred to the Committee on Energy and Commerce * A bill to amend the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to allow certain applicants for approval of a generic drug to be eligible for a 180-day period of protection from competition * Section 4 of the bill directs NIH to award grants or contracts to defined "small entities", including universities, to support Phase I or Phase II clinical studies toward the development of new drugs.
Eligible institutions would be determined by NIH to lack the resources to conduct this work, and priority is given to drugs used for diseases for which fewer funds have been obligated than for other diseases in a given fiscal year.
The bill authorizes appropriations for carrying out this section in the amount of $750,000,000 for FY2004 * Section 5 requires that NIH recoup some expenditures from awards under Section 4 by receiving payment from the awardee of 5% of the profits during the patent period
Previous Page | Index | Next Page
Home Page | Committees | Hearings and Testimony | Legislative History | Legislative Update Hot Topics and More Information | How to Reach Us
National Cancer Institute Home Page
This site is provided as an informational service for advisory committee members, patient groups, members of the public, and employees, and does not constitute the endorsement of the NCI, NIH, or DHHS of any legislative proposal.
No inference should be drawn from the coverage or lack of coverage of any pending legislation herein.
