[daiywash.gif] *EPF108 02/12/01 Text: Scientists Report on Human Genome Sequence (Genetic code for different ethnic groups nearly identical) (2100) Researchers report that the sequence of the human genome -- the genetic blueprint for a human being -- reveals an ancient script that is strikingly common across all ethnic groups.
According to a February 10 news release by the American Association for the Advancement of Science, the human genome sequence being published in the February 16 issue of the journal Science is based on the work of J. Craig Venter, president of Celera Genomics, and 282 other investigators from institutions based in the United States, Australia and Spain.
(Science's human genome issue is immediately available at the following Web site: http://www.sciencemag.org) The human genome consists of two sets of 23 giant DNA molecules, or chromosomes -- one set inherited from each parent.
Inside the chromosomes, sugar-phosphate chains are linked by pairs of chemical bases, which form the "steps" within DNA's ladder-like structure, and carry the code for synthesizing new proteins and creating life.
Genes are discrete sections of DNA that carry coded instructions and determine individual characteristics such as hair color, height and body structure.
The newly-published sequence, accurately covering 95 percent of the genome -- sets the total number of genes at roughly around 30,000 -- which means people have only about 13,000 more genes than the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster.
"Genes exist largely in islands or clusters separated by large deserts millions of base pairs in length that have few or no genes," the report says.
The sequence also shows that every person on Earth shares 99.99 percent of the same genetic code with all other people.
In fact, it shows that people from different racial groups can be more genetically similar than individuals within the same group.
In their research, the Celera team analyzed DNA samples from a group of five people that included one African-American, one Asian-Chinese, one Hispanic-Mexican and two Caucasians.
Understanding the human genome promises to revolutionize the practice of medicine, with researchers expecting in time to develop an array of diagnostics and treatments tailored to individual patients, some of which will exploit the body's own mechanisms of self-repair.
Following is the text of the AAAS release: (begin text) American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) 10 February 2001 Science Paper Reveals Human Genome Sequence, Including "Hot Spots," Vast Deserts and Surprisingly Few Genes The human genome sequence published in the journal Science - estimated to have an average sequencing accuracy of 99.96 percent and color-coded to propose functions for two-thirds of all identified genes - reveals an ancient script that's strikingly common across all ethnic groups, and only about twice as large as a fruit fly's genetic blueprint.
Accurately covering 95 percent of the genome, the sequence sets the total number of human genes somewhere between 26,383 and 39,114.
If the final tally lies somewhere in between, say, around 30,000, then people have only about 13,000 more genes than the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, according to the Science paper, by lead author J. Craig Venter of Celera Genomics and 282 others.
This range is surprisingly low: Some researchers had predicted up to 140,000 genes in the human genome.
"This stunning accomplishment, representing the most accurate human genome sequence ever completed, offers new and exciting prospects for targeting new medical improvements," said Science Editor-in-Chief Donald Kennedy.
"It can tell us much about our place in the diverse panorama of life."
Also revealed by the Science paper are vast stretches of desert-like regions, where the human genome sequence contains relatively few or no protein-coding genes.
About one-fourth of the genome could be considered deserts, with lengthy gene-free segments.
Gene density is greatest along chromosomes 17, 19 and 22, but chromosomes X, 4, 18, 13 and Y are comparatively barren.
"Genes exist largely in islands or clusters separated by large deserts millions of base pairs in length that have few or no genes," the paper concludes.
More than a third of the genome (35.3 percent) contains repetitive sequences, suggesting that this so-called "junk DNA" deserves further study.
In fact, chromosome 19 is 57 percent repetitive.
In addition to repeated segments, the Science paper identifies 2.1 million genetic sequence oddities or variations.
Known as SNPs, or single nucleotide polymorphisms, these differences between people are usually harmless, the Celera team reported, since less than 1 percent result in potentially dysfunctional proteins.
Preliminary evidence suggests that these differences are not random events because they are distributed unevenly across chromosomes.
Every person on Earth shares 99.99 percent of the same genetic code with all other people.
In fact, people from different racial groups can be more genetically similar than individuals within the same group.
Individual variations represent about 0.10 percent, or 1 in 1,250 different "letters" in the entire sequence, the Science paper confirms.
These genetic instructions are all contained within 46 large DNA-containing molecules called chromosomes-23 from each parent.
Inside chromosomes, sugar-phosphate chains are linked by pairs of the chemical bases: A, C, G and T (adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine).
Together, these letters form the "steps" within DNA's ladder-like structure.
They also carry the code for synthesizing new proteins and creating life.
IMPLICATIONS The completed human genome sequence is expected to promote medical advances such as diagnostic tests, pharmaceuticals that reflect individual genetic variations, and perhaps gene therapies targeting segments of code responsible for disease.
SNPs will help scientists identify the basis of many genetic diseases, and therefore provide targets for new treatments.
They also may help us resolve academic questions about our common ancestry, as well as the movement of people and cultures around the world.
"The challenge now will be to stop thinking about one gene at a time and start trying to understand the whole set at once as a complex system-to think about how such a small number of genes can generate a fly or a person," commented Barbara Jasny, a supervisory senior editor at Science who handled the Celera manuscript.
"Ongoing research should further investigate the functions of repetitive DNA, the regulation of gene expression, protein interactions, signaling, effects of the environment and other mechanisms that may contribute to an organism's complexity."
Indeed, "There are no 'good' genes or 'bad' genes, there are merely networks that exist at various levels and at various connectivities, and at different states of sensitivity to perturbation," concluded Venter, Celera's president and chief scientific officer.
"The notion that one gene equals one disease, or that one gene produces one key protein, is flying out the window."
The Science paper reveals, for example, that the genome includes "recombination hot spots," where the rate at which genetic elements occurring on paired chromosomes recombine with one another may be much higher than in other regions.
Venter's research group cautioned, however, that human health, behavior and characteristics are influenced by many factors.
Genetic information must therefore be used wisely.
"This assembly of the human genome sequence is but a first, hesitant step on a long and exciting journey towards understanding the role of the genome in human biology," the Celera group concluded.
"There are two fallacies to be avoided: determinism, the idea that all characteristics of a person are 'hard-wired' by the genome; and reductionism, that now the human sequence is completely known, it is just a matter of time before our understanding of gene functions and interactions will provide a complete causal description of human variability."
In the future, they wrote, "The real challenge of human biology, beyond the task of finding out how genes orchestrate the construction and maintenance of the miraculous mechanism of our bodies, will lie ahead as we seek to explain how our minds have come to organize thoughts sufficiently well to investigate our own existence."
RESEARCH METHODS The Celera team-including some 282 investigators with institutions based in the United States, Australia and Spain representing 12 different academic, not-for-profit and commercial organizations-obtained DNA samples from five people: three women and two men.
This group included one African-American, one Asian-Chinese, one Hispanic-Mexican and two Caucasians.
After being filtered for contaminants and assembled into DNA libraries, chunks of genetic code from these donors were analyzed.
Central to this analysis was the "shotgun" strategy, which last year allowed Celera to complete the genome sequence for the fruit fly with 99.998 percent accuracy.
(See Science, 24 March, 2000, Vol. 287, pp. 2185-95.)
This highly computerized approach starts by breaking the genome into a random set of pieces with a known length-2,000 base pairs, 10,000 base pairs and 50,000 base pairs long.
Mathematical algorithms are then used to assemble the fragments into contiguous blocks and assign them to the correct location in the genome.
By comparison, another commonly used method duplicates larger chunks of human code, in the form of clones of bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), which can then be mapped onto the genome in the appropriate region.
(This approach, used by publicly funded Human Genome Project researchers, focuses more time and effort on clone and map generation at the beginning, whereas the Celera approach is more computationally intensive at the end.)
At Celera, a factory of 300 automatic sequencing machines (ABI PRISM(r) 3700 DNA Analzyers), operated by 65 production staff members, analzyed DNA samples from the five donors, producing some 175,000 readings each day over a nine-month period.
Celera used the shotgun method to sequence DNA, thereby covering the whole genome five times (5.1).
Next, existing genome information from BACs-deposited into the public database, GenBank-was chopped into very short segments of 550 letters and loaded into Celera's shotgun formula, to cover the genome another 2.9 times, providing total coverage of 8X.
The research group then assembled the human genome sequence several times, using two mathematical formulas or algorithms: a Whole Genome Assembly (WGA) approach, which allowed researchers to work with the entire sequence at once, and a Compartmentalized Shotgun Assembly (CSA) effort designed to clarify specific segments.
The Compartmentalized Shotgun Assembly (CSA) was a more "localized" process, Jasny explained.
The WGA and CSA methods both produced sets of "scaffolding," or large regions of correctly ordered DNA sequence, containing a total of about 2.91 billion base pairs.
Finally, these two sets of genome scaffolding were compared with each other to scrub any structural inconsistencies.
Researchers identified transcriptional units within genes, and they also were able to predict molecular functions for approximately 60 percent of the identified genes.
For example, they proposed identities for many genes that code for different enzymes, the body's chemical catalysts.
Another large group of genes are involved in producing proteins that serve as chemical communicators, sending signals from one cell to another.
Still another category generates proteins for nucleic acid binding.
Gene identification was handled by an automated method-human curation and additional analysis will be required to confirm this initial look at the genes.
Finally, the researchers compared the human genome information with the previously completed genome sequences for a particular fruit fly and a worm.
It was possible to identify core functions that are shared.
Key differences observed in the protein domains among the three genomes had to do with developmental regulation, neuronal function, hemostasis, acquired immune response and cytoskeletal complexity.
ACCURACY The Celera sequence covers over 95 percent of the genome.
According to Celera, about 85 percent of the genome is in correctly ordered segments of at least 500,000 base pairs.
The sequence provides good evidence for 26,383 protein-coding genes, and weaker evidence for another 12,731 hypothetical human genes.
Thus, the total may be as high as 39,114, but could be as low as 26,383.
To double-check the accuracy of their sequence, researchers compared their work with highly completed sequences for chromosomes 21 and 22, and found that "there was excellent agreement," Venter said.
When compared with sequence for all other chromosomes, including chromosome 8, for example, the analysis suggested that "there are many more breakpoints [misassemblies or genetic variations] for the [publicly funded project]
The average size of "gaps" in the sequence was 2,000 letters, but about half of all gaps (49 percent) cover sections smaller than 500 letters long.
About two-thirds of all gaps (62 percent) were shorter than 1,000 letters.
In a Science article by David Galas of the Keck Graduate Institute of Applied Life Sciences, the effect of these gaps was compared with a reconstructed Grecian urn, which may have some blank clay segments holding pieces together, so that the picture can be seen, even if some parts are still missing.
(end text) (Distributed by the Office of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State.
Web site: http://usinfo.state.gov) NNNN __________________________________________________________________
Return to Washington File Main Page Return to the Washington File Log
