text only skip navigation National Cancer Institute Cancer.gov dictionary site map search home cancer information clinical trials statistics research programs research funding about NCI Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors (PDQ®): Treatment printable version Two versions of this document are available.
Select a tab below to switch between versions.
Date Last Modified: 11/19/2003
patient health professional
Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
* General Information About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors * Stages of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors * Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors * Treatment Option Overview * Treatment Options By Stage
* Stage I Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
* Stage II Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
* Stage III Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
* Stage IV Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Changes to This Summary (11/19/2003)
To Learn More
About PDQ
return to top
General Information About Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Key Points for This Section * Ovarian germ cell tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the germ (egg) cells of the ovary.
* Possible signs of ovarian germ cell tumor are swelling of the abdomen or vaginal bleeding after menopause.
* Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian tissue are used to detect (find) and diagnose ovarian germ cell tumor.
* Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery and treatment options.
Ovarian germ cell tumor is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the germ (egg) cells of the ovary.
Germ cell tumors begin in the reproductive cells (egg or sperm) of the body.
Ovarian germ cell tumors usually occur in teenage girls or young women and most often affect just one ovary.
The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system.
They are located in the pelvis, one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows).
Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond.
The ovaries produce eggs and female hormones (chemicals that control the way certain cells or organs function).
Ovarian germ cell tumor is a general name that is used to describe several different types of cancer.
The most common ovarian germ cell tumor is called dysgerminoma.
(Refer to the PDQ summaries on Ovarian Epithelial Cancer Treatment and Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors Treatment for information about other types of ovarian cancers.)
Possible signs of ovarian germ cell tumor are swelling of the abdomen or vaginal bleeding after menopause.
Ovarian germ cell tumors can be difficult to diagnose (find) early.
Often there are no symptoms in the early stages, but tumors may be found during regular gynecologic examinations (checkups).
A woman who has swelling of the abdomen without weight gain in other places should see a doctor.
A woman who no longer has menstrual periods (who has gone through menopause) should also see a doctor if she has bleeding from the vagina.
Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian tissue are used to detect (find) and diagnose ovarian germ cell tumor.
The following tests and procedures may be used: * Pelvic exam: An exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum.
The doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and the other hand is placed over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries.
A speculum is also inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.
A Pap test or Pap smear of the cervix is usually done.
The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas.
* Laparotomy: A surgical incision made in the wall of the abdomen to check the inside of the abdomen for signs of disease and to remove tissue and fluid for examination under a microscope.
* Lymphangiogram: A procedure used to x-ray the lymph system.
A dye is injected into the lymph vessels in the feet.
The dye travels upward through the lymph nodes and lymph vessels, and x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages.
This test helps find out whether cancer has spread to the lymph nodes.
* CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.
The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine.
A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.
This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography.
* Blood tests: Tests to measure the levels of alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) in the blood.
AFP and HCG are substances that may be signs of ovarian germ cell tumor when found at increased levels.
Certain factors affect prognosis (chance of recovery and treatment options.
The prognosis (chance of recovery) and treatment options depend on the following: * The type of cancer.
* The size of the tumor.
* The stage of cancer (whether it affects part of the ovary, involves the whole ovary, or has spread to other places in the body).
* The way the cancer cells look under a microscope.
* The patientâs general health.
Ovarian germ cell tumors are generally curable if found and treated early.
return to top
Stages of Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Key Points for This Section * After ovarian germ cell tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body.
* The following stages are used for ovarian germ cell tumors:
* Stage I
* Stage II
* Stage III
* Stage IV
After ovarian germ cell tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body.
The process used to find out whether cancer has spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body is called staging.
The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease.
It is important to know the stage in order to plan the best treatment.
Certain tests are used in the staging process.
Many of the tests used to diagnose ovarianÂ germ cell tumor are also used to determine the stage of the disease.
Unless a doctor is sure the cancer has spread from the ovaries to other parts of the body, surgery is required to determine the stage of cancer in an operation called a laparotomy.
The doctor must cut into the abdomen and carefully look at all the organs to see if they contain cancer.
The doctor will cut out small pieces of tissue and look at them under a microscope to see whether they contain cancer.
The doctor may also wash the abdominal cavity with fluid and then look at the fluid under a microscope to see if it contains cancer cells.
Usually the doctor will remove the cancer and other organs that contain cancer during the laparotomy.
The following stages are used for ovarian germ cell tumors:
Stage I
Stage I is divided into stage IA, stage IB, and stage IC as follows: * Stage IA: Cancer is limited to one ovary.
* Stage IB: Cancer is found in both ovaries.
* Stage IC: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and one of the following occurs: + Cancer has spread to the outside surface of one or both ovaries; or + The outer covering of the tumor has ruptured (broken open); or + Cancer cells are found in the fluid of the peritoneal cavity or in washings of the peritoneum (tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers most of the organs in the abdomen).
Stage II
Stage II is divided into stage IIA, stage IIB, and stage IIC as follows: * Stage IIA: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread into the pelvis and/or to the uterus and/or fallopian tubes.
* Stage IIB: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread to other tissue within the pelvis.
* Stage IIC: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries, has spread to the uterus, fallopian tubes, and/or to other tissues in the pelvis, and one of the following occurs: + Cancer is on the surface of one or both ovaries; or + The outer covering of the tumor has ruptured (broken open); or + Cancer cells are found in the fluid of the peritoneal cavity or in washings of the peritoneum.
Stage III
Stage III is divided into stage IIIA, stage IIIB, and stage IIIC as follows: * Stage IIIA: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and the pelvis, and microscopic cancer cells are found in the peritoneum.
* Stage IIIB: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread to the peritoneum.
The peritoneal tumors are no larger than 2 centimeters (about 3/4 inch).
* Stage IIIC: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread beyond the pelvis to the peritoneum.
The peritoneal tumors are larger than 2 centimeters and/or cancer is found in lymph nodes in the pelvis.
Cancer that has spread to the surface of the liver or has spread to the small bowel or omentum (a fold of peritoneum that encloses the bowel) is also considered stage III disease.
Stage IV
In stage IV, cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has metastasized (spread) not only to the pelvis and abdomen but also to other parts of the body.
Cancer is found in the tissues of the liver.
return to top
Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
RecurrentÂ ovarianÂ germ cell tumor is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated.
The cancer may come back in the other ovary or in other parts of the body.
return to top
Treatment Option Overview
Key Points for This Section * There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian germ cell tumors.
* Three types of standard treatment are used:
* Surgery
* Chemotherapy
* Radiation therapy
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
These include the following: * High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow transplantation
* New treatment options
There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian germ cell tumors.
Different types of treatment are available for patients with ovarianÂ germ cell tumor.
Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer.
When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the âstandardâ treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment.
Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Choosing the most appropriate cancer treatment is a decision that ideally involves the patient, family, and health care team.
Three types of standard treatment are used:
Surgery
Surgery is the most common treatment of ovarian germ cell tumor.
A doctor may take out the cancer using one of the following types of surgery.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove one ovary and one fallopian tube.
* Hysterectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the uterus and cervix.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina, the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen, the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision (cut) in the abdomen using a laparoscope, the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy.
* Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove both ovaries and both fallopian tubes.
* Tumor debulking: A surgical procedure in which as much of the tumor as possible is removed.
Some tumors may not be able to be completely removed.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing.
When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy).
When chemotherapy is placed directly in the spinal column, a body cavity such as the abdomen, or an organ, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas.
The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells.
There are two types of radiation therapy.
External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer.
Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer.
The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
Even if the doctor removes all the cancer that can be seen at the time of the operation, some patients may be offered chemotherapy or radiation after surgery to kill any cancer cells that are left.
Treatment given after the surgery to increase the chances of a cure is called adjuvant therapy.
Following radiation or chemotherapy, an operation called a second-look laparotomy is sometimes done.
This is similar to the laparotomy that is done to determine the stage of the cancer.
During the second-look operation, the doctor will take samples of lymph nodes and other tissues in the abdomen to see if any cancer is left.
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
These include the following:
High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow transplantation
High-dose chemotherapy with bone marrow transplantation is a method of giving very high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood-forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment.
Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen for storage.
After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion.
Over a short time, these reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the bodyâs blood cells.
New treatment options
Combination chemotherapy (the use of more than one chemotherapy drug to fight cancer) is being tested in clinical trials.
This summary section refers to specific treatments under study in clinical trials, but it may not mention every new treatment being studied.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Treatment Options By Stage
Stage I Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment depends on whether the tumor is dysgerminoma or another type of germ cell tumor.
Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: * Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with or without lymphangiography (an x-ray study of the lymph system, the tissues and organs that filter and destroy harmful substances and help fight infection and disease) or CT scan (a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, created by a computer linked to an x-ray machine).
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by observation (closely monitoring a patientâs condition without giving any treatment until symptoms appear or change).
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by radiation therapy.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
Treatment of other germ cell tumors may be either: * unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by careful observation; or * unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, sometimes followed by combination chemotherapy.
Stage II Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment depends on whether the tumor is dysgerminoma or another type of germ cell tumor.
Treatment of dysgerminoma may be either: * hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by radiation therapy or combination chemotherapy; or * unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
Treatment of other germ cell tumors may include the following: * Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by combination chemotherapy.
* Second-look surgery (surgery performed after primary treatment to determine whether tumor cells remain).
* A clinical trial evaluating new treatment options.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Stage III Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment depends on whether the tumor is dysgerminoma or another type of germ cell tumor.
Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: * Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
Treatment of other germ cell tumors may include the following: * Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
Chemotherapy will be given before and/or after surgery.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
* Second-look surgery (surgery performed after primary treatment to determine whether tumor cells remain).
* A clinical trial evaluating new treatment options.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Stage IV Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment depends on whether the tumor is dysgerminoma or another type of germ cell tumor.
Treatment of dysgerminoma may include the following: * Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy, with removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
Treatment of other germ cell tumors may include the following: * Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, with removal of as much of the cancer in the pelvis and abdomen as possible.
Chemotherapy will be given before and/or after surgery.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy.
* Second-look surgery (surgery performed after primary treatment to determine whether tumor cells remain).
* A clinical trial evaluating new treatment options.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors
Treatment depends on whether the tumor is dysgerminoma or another type of germ cell tumor.
Treatment of dysgerminoma may be: * Chemotherapy with or without radiation therapy.
Treatment of other germ cell tumors may include the following: * Chemotherapy.
* Surgery with or without chemotherapy.
* A clinical trial of high-dose chemotherapy followed by bone marrow transplantation.
* A clinical trial evaluating new treatment options.
This summary section refers to specific treatments under study in clinical trials, but it may not mention every new treatment being studied.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Changes to This Summary (11/19/2003)
The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.
This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above.
Editorial changes were made to this summary.
return to top
To Learn More
Call
For more information, U.S. residents may call the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Deaf and hard-of-hearing callers with TTY equipment may call 1-800-332-8615.
The call is free and a trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions.
Web sites and Organizations
The NCI's Cancer.gov Web site provides online access to information on cancer, clinical trials, and other Web sites and organizations that offer support and resources for cancer patients and their families.
There are also many other places where people can get materials and information about cancer treatment and services.
Local hospitals may have information on local and regional agencies that offer information about finances, getting to and from treatment, receiving care at home, and dealing with problems associated with cancer treatment.
Publications
The NCI has booklets and other materials for patients, health professionals, and the public.
These publications discuss types of cancer, methods of cancer treatment, coping with cancer, and clinical trials.
Some publications provide information on tests for cancer, cancer causes and prevention, cancer statistics, and NCI research activities.
NCI materials on these and other topics may be ordered online or printed directly from the NCI Publications Locator.
These materials can also be ordered by telephone from the Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237), TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
LiveHelp
The NCI's LiveHelp service, a program available on several of the Institute's Web sites, provides Internet users with the ability to chat online with an Information Specialist.
The service is available from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Eastern time, Monday through Friday.
Information Specialists can help Internet users find information on NCI Web sites and answer questions about cancer.
Write
For more information from the NCI, please write to this address:
NCI Public Inquiries Office Suite 3036A 6116 Executive Boulevard, MSC8322 Bethesda, MD 20892-8322
return to top
About PDQ
PDQ is a comprehensive cancer database available on Cancer.gov.
PDQ is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database.
Most of the information contained in PDQ is available online at Cancer.gov, the NCI's Web site.
PDQ is provided as a service of the NCI.
The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health, the federal government's focal point for biomedical research.
PDQ contains cancer information summaries.
The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine.
Most summaries are available in two versions.
The health professional versions provide detailed information written in technical language.
The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language.
Both versions provide current and accurate cancer information.
The PDQ cancer information summaries are developed by cancer experts and reviewed regularly.
Editorial Boards made up of experts in oncology and related specialties are responsible for writing and maintaining the cancer information summaries.
The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made as new information becomes available.
The date on each summary ("Date Last Modified") indicates the time of the most recent change.
PDQ also contains information on clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another.
Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory.
Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients.
During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about new treatments, the risks involved, and how well they do or do not work.
If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard."
Listings of clinical trials are included in PDQ and are available online at Cancer.gov.
Descriptions of the trials are available in health professional and patient versions.
Many cancer doctors who take part in clinical trials are also listed in PDQ.
For more information, call the Cancer Information Service 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237); TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
return to top
______________ Advanced submit search New NCI-FDA Strategic Initiatives Announced CCOP Celebrates 20 Years of Research Past Highlights Press/NewsCenter CIS DIRECTOR'S CORNER [spacer.gif] Welcome Director's Update [bottom_center_dircorner.gif]
Resources Publications Locator and Catalog NCI Calendar of Scientific Meetings NCI Thesaurus Links to Other Web Sites
LiveHelp información en español Text
HOME SEARCH SITE MAP CONTACT US HELP ACCESSIBILITY PRIVACY POLICY National Institutes of Health Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov.gov
