DOT News Masthead TSA 70-02 Friday, August 2, 2002 Contact: Nico Melendez or Chris Rhatigan Phone: 202-385-1312 or 202-385-1090 Secretary Mineta Names 47 New Federal Security Directors U.S. Secretary of Transportation Norman Y.
Mineta today announced the selection of 47 federal security directors (FSDs) who will assume responsibility for 149 airports.
"These FSDs will be our personal representatives, responsible for ensuring the safety of our skies and fulfilling the Transportation Department's role in the war on terrorism."
Secretary Mineta said.
"These experienced professionals will be on the front lines in the war on terrorism and are integral in furthering the Transportation Security Administration's (TSA) commitment to first-class security and first-class customer service."
The position of federal security director was created by the Aviation and Transportation Security Act, signed by President Bush on Nov. 19, 2001.
Secretary Mineta said the new FSDs will fill a crucial gap in aviation security by providing, for the first time, a clear line of authority for security at our nation's airports
Little Rock National Airport, AR: Jerry Henderson recently retired after a 20-year career in the U.S. Navy.
The former commander most recently served as the director of the naval science department for Arnold High School in Panama City, FL, where he was responsible for implementing the new Navy Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) unit.
Prior to that he commanded the Naval Reserve Center Detroit, where he directed and coordinated counter-terrorism training with the FBI for personnel deploying overseas.
Henderson also served as the commander, Anti-Submarine Forces Pacific, where he directed threat assessment and intelligence operations.
He holds a Bachelor of Science in business administration from Colorado State University and a Master of Business Administration in aviation from Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Daytona Beach, FL. Henderson will also assume FSD responsibilities at airports in Fort Smith and Bentonville, AR.
Birmingham International Airport, AL: Lyndel Hardy served as the special agent in charge of the U.S. Secret Services Birmingham, AL, Field Office.
Her career also includes assignments with the Secret Service Presidential Protective Division at the White House.
In that capacity, she served as the emergency preparedness coordinator.
Before that, Hardy was assigned as a special agent in the Candidate / Nominee Protective Division.
A member of the executive council of the Boy Scouts of America, North Alabama, Hardy also is the chairperson of the Birmingham Chamber of Commerce Public Safety and Security Committee.
She is a member of the International Association of Chiefs of Police and a member of the Alabama Sheriffs Association.
Burbank-Glendale-Pasadena Airport, Burbank, CA: Madelyn Sawyer has been in the aviation industry for over 20 years and was most recently the division manager for the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Alaska Region, Civil Aviation Security Branch.
She worked in the Office of Security Policy and Planning which is responsible for the development of security countermeasures and contingency plans affecting U.S. airports, airlines and foreign air carriers, as well as oversight of the agencys security research and development program.
A former Federal Air Marshal, Sawyer also served in the U.S. Navy as an air traffic controller.
She holds a Bachelor of Science degree in business from National Louis University.
She holds a FAA dispatchers license and a Navy Air Traffic Control Certificate.
She will also assume FSD responsibilities for the Long Beach Daugherty Field Airport, CA.
Sacramento International Airport, CA: William Wade is a former colonel with more than 30 years in the U.S. Army National Guard in both part-time and active duty positions.
His most recent assignment was as the assistant division commander for the 40^th Infantry Division in California, Before that he served as the commander for Joint Task Force AEROSAFE, where he was responsible for providing security forces for the 30 commercial airports and four major bridges throughout California as a part of homeland defense.
He holds a bachelors degree from the State University of New York and a masters degree from the American Military University.
Wade is a graduate of the U.S. Army, Navy and Air Force War Colleges, and the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.
Wade will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in McKinleyville, Chico, Crescent City and Redding, CA.
Santa Barbara Municipal Airport, CA: Randy McIntosh has served over 15 years in civil aviation security for the FAA most recently as supervisory special agent in the Western Pacific Region Security Division.
Prior to that he served as regional cargo security program manager in both Western Pacific and Northwest Mountain regions.
McIntosh also served in the FAAs International Security Office in Brussels, Belgium where he worked as a lead agent in conducting aviation security assessments of airports and air carriers throughout Europe, Africa and the Middle East.
He began his work with the FAA as a Federal Air Marshal and Civil Aviation Security Specialist.
Prior to his federal employment, McIntosh worked eight years as a police officer in Washington state.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in San Luis Obispo and Oxnard, CA.
Eagle County Regional Airport, CO: Ray Krebs has served in the aviation industry for over 18 years.
Most recently he worked as the assistant director of aviation at Aspen/Pitkin County Airport, Aspen, CO, where he performed all airport functions that provided for security and safety pertaining to commercial, military and general aviation aircraft.
Prior to his tenure in Aspen, Krebs was the owner and director of THI Safari Company and Travel Agency based in Eugene, OR, and Cape Town, South Africa.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Hayden, Loveland and Aspen, CO.
Daytona Beach International Airport, FL: Nicholas Scott has served with the Federal Aviation Administration as the assistant division manager of the Civil Aviation Security Division, Southern Region.
The division maintained airport and air carrier security requirements at 78 domestic and 60 foreign airports in eight Southeastern states, the Caribbean, South and Central America.
During his eleven years service Scott also directed the Regional Security Crisis Management Response Team during several aircraft highjackings, natural disasters and other aviation incidents.
He represented the FAA on the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games security support group.
Scott will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Sanford and Melbourne, FL.
Ft. Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, FL: Dale Karlen served more than 20 years with the Diplomatic Security Service, most recently as the special agent in charge of the Miami field office.
In that capacity, he directed criminal investigations pertaining to U.S. passport and visa laws and managed the protection of visiting foreign dignitaries and resident foreign officials.
In his previous position as the senior diplomatic security officer in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, he served as the principal security advisor and the embassys representative to the Honduran government concerning security, law enforcement and protection matters.
Karlen also served in positions in Bolivia, Guatemala and Washington, DC, and as a member of the Secretary of States protective detail.
He speaks fluent Spanish and holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from Indiana University in political science.
Karlen will also assume FSD responsibility for the Key West International Airport.
Miami International Airport, FL: Edmundo L. Guevara has over 25 years of service as a special agent with the FBI.
His last assignment was as the special agent in charge, FBI El Paso, TX, Field Office, where he had management and oversight responsibilities for over 300 personnel in 17 counties.
Other tours with the FBI included service as the legal attach� at the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City where had oversight responsibility for all FBI agents in Mexico, the assistant special agent in charge of the FBIs Miami field office, supervisory special agent in the San Juan, PR, field office and a special agent in the New York field office.
His most recent job was as the director of security for Pfizer Corporation where he served as the Latin American regional senior manager for executive protection and physical and information security.
In addition to speaking fluent Spanish, Guevara holds a Master of Arts in education from Adelphi University and a bachelor of arts in education from Hunter College.
Antonio B. Won Pat Guam International Airport, Guam: Adolf Sgambelluri is a native of Guam and has over 25 years law enforcement experience both as a U.S. Marine Corps military police officer and as a civilian police officer.
Most recently Sgambelluri served as the vice president, special projects and programs at Guam Community College (GCC) and concurrently serves as the executive director of the GCCs Pro-Tech Institute, which administers the Basic Law Enforcement Academy and provides administrative support for the Guam commission on peace officer standards training.
He previously served as the director of the Guam Department of Corrections and as the chief of police.
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in police science and administration from Washington State University and a master of business administration from Pepperdine University.
Kahului Airport, Kahului, Maui, HI: Lowrey Leong recently retired after 32 years of service with the U.S. Department of Justice, Drug Enforcement Administration.
His last assignment was as the assistant special agent in charge of the San Francisco Field Division.
Other assignments in his DEA career include senior inspector in charge, Office of Professional Responsibility, Los Angeles; resident agent in charge, Honolulu Resident Office; and Group Supervisor, New York Drug Enforcement Joint Task Force.
Leong holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in administration of criminal justice from San Jose State University.
Leong will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Lanai City and Hoolehua, HI.
Lihue Airport, HI: Robert Schoonmaker has been a federal criminal investigator for approximately 26 years.
Most recently, he served as the special agent in charge of the Los Angeles Field Office, Office of Export Enforcement, Bureau of Industry and Security, U.S. Department of Commerce, in Irvine, CA.
In that capacity, he supervised criminal and administrative investigations of violations of U.S. national security and foreign policy-related export control laws in a six-state area.
Schoonmaker previously served as a special agent with the Office of Investigations, Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in Fort Lauderdale, FL, and the Office of Investigation, Office of Inspector General, U.S. Department of Agriculture, in Chicago, IL.
He holds a Bachelor of Science honors degree from the Florida State University School of Criminology in Tallahassee, FL.
Des Moines International Airport, IA: Timothy McDonald was a special agent with the Iowa Division of Criminal Investigation (DCI) and was assigned to the general criminal investigative unit specializing in homicide investigations in Des Moines and Davenport.
McDonald was promoted to special agent in charge in 1977.
His duties included directly supervising general criminal, intelligence, narcotic and fraud agents in eastern Iowa.
He was promoted to Assistant Director of Administration with the DCI and was assigned to Des Moines headquarters.
In that capacity, McDonald handled personnel and budgeting matters for the DCI and provided management oversight for the Records and Identification Bureau.
McDonald served for four years in the U.S. Air Force.
He holds Bachelor of Arts and Master of Arts degrees in criminal justice administration from Central Missouri State University.
He is a graduate of the FBI Academy and the FBIs Central States Law Enforcement Executive Development Seminar.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for the Waterloo Municipal Airport, IA.
Idaho Falls Regional Airport, ID: James Spinden was sheriff of Washington County, OR, for three terms.
Prior to that he served more than 20 years as deputy, detective, sergeant, lieutenant, captain, and under sheriff in Washington County.
He has served on numerous task forces appointed by the governor, as well as several national committees, and was recognized by his peers as the Oregon Sheriff of the Year for 1996.
He retired as a colonel from the U.S. Army Reserve after 30 years of service.
He served as President of the Aloha-Sunset Rotary Club and President for the Oregon State Sheriffs Association.
He holds a bachelors degree in the administration of justice from Portland State University.
He is a graduate of the FBI Academy, the National Sheriffs Institute, the National Institute of Corrections, and the FBIs Law Enforcement Executive Development Course.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Pocatello, ID, and Jackson Hole, WY.
Greater Peoria Airport, Peoria, IL: Mike Cleveland retired from the U.S. Air Force as a lieutenant colonel with more than 23 years service.
His last assignment was as a test director, Air Force Operational Test 
His military career included extensive experience in emergency actions management.
Cleveland managed a 125 member staff of military and civilian personnel in a high security facility and was responsible for operation of its command and control facility.
He holds a Master of Science in systems management from the University of Southern California and earned a Bachelor of Science degree in history from Bradley University.
Cleveland will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Quincy, Springfield and Decatur, IL.
South Bend Regional Airport, IN: James Roche recently served with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as a federal coordinating officer for a number of disasters, which included Hurricane Floyd in South Carolina and floods and tornadoes in Wisconsin, Michigan and Minnesota.
Prior to joining FEMA, Roche served as the chief of police for the city of St. Charles, IL, for 13 years and before that he served six years with the Crete, NE, police department.
Concurrent with his law enforcement career, Roche served in the United States Army and Army National Guard, retiring as a lieutenant colonel.
During his 25-year career, he held both command and operational assignments in the infantry, military police and field artillery.
Roche is a graduate of both the FBI Academy, and the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Ft. Wayne, Gary and Lafayette, IN.
Wichita Mid-Continent Airport, KS: Billy Keith Osborne retired as a colonel from the U.S. Air Force in February 2002.
Osborne culminated his military career as inspector general and director of staff for the 22^nd Air Wing at McConnell Air Force Base, KS.
He also deployed to Italy in support of Operation Joint Force and Joint Guardian where he directed military and civilian airlift operations into Bosnia and Kosovo.
A 1973 graduate of the U.S. Air Force Academy, Osborne has more than 5,000 military and civilian flying hours.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Dodge City, Garden City, Hays, Liberal and Salina, KS.
Baton Rouge Metropolitan Airport, LA: Dan Beaty has more than 30 years security experience, most recently serving as supervisor of the FAAs civil aviation security field unit in New Orleans.
Before that he served 20 years in the U.S. Air Force security forces.
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice from Troy State University in Alabama.
Beaty will also assume FSD responsibilities at the Lafayette Regional Airport and the Lake Charles Regional Airport, LA.
Shreveport Regional Airport, LA: Michael Boren retired from the U.S. Air Force in 1992.
During his service to the country, Boren served in several command and control positions at bases across the country.
Since retiring, he has worked for Guardsmark, Inc., a private security company, in many positions including, vice president, regional manager and vice president manager in charge.
Boren holds a Master of Arts in management from Webster University and a Bachelor of Science in psychology from Park College.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities at airports in Longview, Texarkana and Tyler-Pounds, TX.
Bangor International Airport, ME: John Booth is a retired commander with more than 20 years service in the U.S. Navy as both a naval aviator and a submariner.
His last military assignment was as director of Automated Information Systems in Newport, RI. Booth holds a Master of Military Arts and Science degree from the U.S. Armys Command and General Staff College and is a graduate of Counter Terrorism training at the U.S. Armys JFK special forces training center at Fort Bragg, NC, where he has also been a guest lecturer.
Booth will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Bar Harbor, Rockland and Presque Isle, ME.
Capital City Airport, Lansing, MI: James Bullock has more than 25 years of law enforcement experience with the Michigan State Police.
As a bomb technician he developed equipment and techniques used worldwide by bomb squads to render explosive devices safe.
As statewide Bomb Squad Commander, he provided on-site leadership and management of critical incidents.
His expertise includes tactical planning, security, threat 
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice from Michigan State University.
Bullock will also assume FSD responsibilities at airports in Flint and Freeland, MI.
Jackson International Airport, MS: Larry Rowlett is a former agent with more than 21 years in the Secret Service.
He last served as the Special Agent in charge of the Reagan Protective Division in Los Angeles, CA. Rowlett also served as the Resident Agent in Charge for the Secret Service Jackson Mississippi Office.
Before that he served with the Presidential Protective Division in Washington, DC, and the Counter Assault Team in Dallas, TX.
He holds a bachelors degree in psychology from Texas A
Rowlett will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Greenville, Meridian, Moselle, Tupelo and Columbus/West Point/Starkville, MS
Missoula International Airport, MT: Mark Randol has worked in civil aviation security for the past 14 years in a variety of assignments including as an analyst with the Office of Intelligence; an inspector in FAAs international field office in Brussels, Belgium; a team leader with the Special Assessment Staff (Red Team); and a member of the Headquarters Special Actions and Litigation Support Staff.
Prior to working with the FAA, Randol served for more than eight years in the U.S. Air Force.
He also worked as a civilian terrorism and counterintelligence specialist on the Army Staff at the Pentagon.
Randol graduated from the University of California at Berkeley with a bachelors degree in social science, and has a masters degree in government with a certificate in national security studies from Georgetown University in Washington, DC.
Randol will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Kalispell, Helena and Great Falls, MT.
Lincoln Municipal Airport, NE: Reno Bamford recently retired as colonel in the United States Marine Corps.
His last assignment was as the commanding officer and professor of naval science at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Navy ROTC.
Before that, Bamford served as the commanding officer Marine detachment and director of the Marine Corps element, U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Ft. Leavenworth, KS. Highlights of his 30-year military career also include service in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where he commanded the Marine Ground Defense Security Force.
Bamford also served in Southwest Asia during Operation Desert Storm.
He later commanded Marines providing security to U.S. embassies located throughout Western Africa.
Following that Bamford commanded a technical assistance team advising the Royal Saudi Marine Force.
He received a Bachelor of Science degree in biology from Kearney State College.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Alliance, Grand Island, Chadron, Kearney, McCook, North Platte and Scottsbluff, NE.
Manchester Airport, NH: Raymond Carolan is the former special agent in charge of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Office of Inspector General New England Region.
During his 30-year career, he helped develop HUDs violent crime strategy.
During his tenure, the New England office successfully completed several violent crime operations which helped create effective partnerships between HUD staff, the local community, public housing providers, prosecutors, and federal, state and local law enforcement officials.
Carolan is a member of the U.S. Attorneys Anti-Terrorism Task Force.
He is a graduate of the University of Massachusetts at Salem and the Federal Law Enforcement Training Center.
Carolan will also assume FSD responsibilities for Pease International Airport, Portsmouth, NH.
Rochester International Airport, NY: Stacy Cross has worked for the Texas Department of Criminal Justice for nearly 14 years and most recently served as the warden at Pam Lychner State Jail and was assistant regional director of state jails for the state of Texas.
He holds a master of arts degree in Counseling from Liberty University a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice from Sam Houston State University, and is nearing completion of a Master of Organization Management degree from the University of Phoenix.
Syracuse-Hancock International Airport, NY: Gary Milano has worked the last 12 years as an assistant U.S. Attorney for the U.S. Attorneys Office, District of New Hampshire.
In the position of chief of the criminal division, he supervised every federal prosecution in the state of New Hampshire.
Prior to working in New Hampshire, Milano served as a trial attorney, U.S. Department of Justice, Criminal Division, Washington, DC, and as an assistant district attorney, Bronx District Attorneys Office, New York City.
He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in philosophy, a masters degree in American history, and a doctor of law degree, all from St. Johns University.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Oneida, Adirondack, Massena, Watertown, and Ogdenburg, NY.
Piedmont Triad International Airport, Greensboro, NC: Ernest Howard recently retired from the Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) after a distinguished 30-year career.
His most recent assignment was as the special agent in charge of DEAs Houston Division where he managed 14 offices and approximately 300 federal and 300 state and local law enforcement personnel along the Mexican boarder.
Before that, Howard served as the special agent in charge of the Phoenix Division, where he oversaw DEA activities in Arizona.
He is a member of the National Association of Black Narcotic Agents, the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives and the International Association of Chiefs of Police.
Howard holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Central State University of Ohio and his masters degree in criminal justice administration from Atlanta University.
Bismarck Municipal Airport, ND: Joel Gutensohn has more than 25 years management and executive experience in government and private industry, most recently serving as president of a domestic and international business and security-consulting firm.
Before that Gutensohn enjoyed a 25-year career as a special agent with the Drug Enforcement Administration, serving in a variety of senior management positions.
His assignments included five major cities, two foreign countries and headquarters responsibilities for nine countries in Southeast Asia.
Gutensohn holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science from Jamestown College, ND.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Dickinson, Minot, and Williston, ND.
Hector International Airport, Fargo, ND: Bruce Towers retired as senior special agent after a 20-year career with the U. S. Secret Service.
In his most recent position he was responsible for all protective, protective intelligence and criminal investigative activities in North Dakota.
Towers held a variety of protective, investigative and specialized assignments with the Secret Service and was responsible for the establishment of one of the first electronic crimes task forces in the nation.
Prior to joining the Secret Service, Towers served over four years as a special agent with the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal justice from Northern Michigan University.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Devil's Lake, Jamestown and Grand Forks, ND.
Will Rogers World Airport, Oklahoma City OK: Larry Kettler served with the United States Navy and is a veteran of the Vietnam War.
After leaving the Navy, he joined the Oklahoma City Police Department where he served for over 30 years.
His last assignment with the police department was as the commander of the Santa Fe Division, which covers approximately one half the city of Oklahoma City.
During his tenure he also played a critical role in the training of more than 1,000 police officers.
Since retiring in 2001, he has served with the U.S. Marshals Service as a district security officer.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities at Enid Woodring Municipal Airport.
Eugene Airport Mahlon Sweetfield, OR: Donald Barker recently retired after a 20-year career in the United States Marine Corps.
His most recent assignment was as the logistics and services operations officer where his duties included managing security, force protection services and security systems for 19 different operations in various domestic and international locations.
His previous assignments include duty as the operations officer for the 3rd Marine Air Wing, where he directed and planned support for three air terminals that included responsibility for 500-plus aircraft and 27 aviation organizations involved in supporting military and government operations, and duty as security officer aboard USS Austin.
Barker holds a Masters Degree in business administration from the University of Phoenix and a Bachelors of Science degree in business for Penn State University.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for the North Bend Municipal Airport.
Erie International Airport, PA: Leo Jones has served in law enforcement for over 25 years, most recently as a lieutenant with the Chautauqua County Sheriffs Office.
He also commands the multi-jurisdictional Southern Tier Regional Drug Task Force in Jamestown, NY.
Before that Jones worked undercover operations in Buffalo, NY. Jones is an instructor at the Chautauqua County Sheriffs Academy.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Jamestown, NY; and Lewis Run, Falls Creek and Venango, PA.
Harrisburg International Airport, PA: Charles Chase has served more than 27 years with the U.S. Department of State, Diplomatic Security Service.
Most recently he served in the bureaus of Near Eastern and South Asian affairs as the director for the physical, procedural and technical security programs.
Chase coordinated the recovery operations at the U.S. Embassy in Nairobi in 1998 after the terrorist attack and he re-opened the U.S. Embassy in Kuwait after Desert Storm.
His overseas postings have also included Pristina, Serbia, Mogadishu, Somalia and Muscat, Oman.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Cumberland and Hagerstown, MD; and University Park and Martinsburg, PA.
Rapid City Regional Airport, SD: Sylvester (Allen) Belcher retired as a Lieutenant colonel after a distinguished career in the U.S. Air Force.
The former navigator has 1,800 fighter hours in the F-111/A/S/F, Tornado and RF-4 Aircraft.
During his 20-year career, Belcher was assigned to the Royal Air Force Base in Lakenheath, England, where he was the Top Gun in the PAVE TAC IR bombing system.
Belcher was later assigned as an operations officer and commander of the combined Air Force Air Liaison and Weather units with the Army at Fort Drum, NY.
During that tour, his unit was deployed to both Somalia for Operation Provide Comfort and to Haiti for Operation Uphold Democracy.
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in mathematics from St. Martins College.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for the Pierre Regional Airport.
Nashville International Airport, TN: David Beecroft is a former U.S. Air Force officer with more than 20 years service.
Most recently he was the wing commander of the 75^th Air Base Wing at Hill Air Force Base, Utah.
The Wing executed security and safety for the 2002 Winter Olympics.
Beecroft has held a number of management and security positions during his career.
These include Director of Security for the USAF Material Command; Senior Assessments Officer in the Joint Chiefs of Staff Combating Terrorism Directorate; Chief of Police; and Inspector General for the Air Mobility Command.
Beecroft holds a Bachelor of Science degree in law enforcement from Western Oregon State College, a master of public administration from Troy State University, and a Master of Science degree in criminal justice from California State University at Sacramento.
Abilene Regional Airport, TX: Arboth (Arb) Rylant most recently worked as the airport director at San Angelo Regional Airport/Mathis Field in San Angelo, TX, and led that airport through the many security requirements and issues since Sept. 11, 2001.
A retired Navy captain, with more than 20 years in uniform, Rylant served in numerous squadrons and aboard many aircraft carriers while serving his country.
He supported combat operations aboard USS Ranger (CV 61) during Operation Desert Storm and served on the staff of the chief of Naval operations.
Rylant has also worked as the superintendent of operations at Snohomish County Airport/Paine Field, Everett, WA and as a pilot of B727s for Continental Airlines.
He holds a bachelors degree from West Texas State University.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for the San Angelo Regional Airport.
Washington-Dulles International Airport, Dulles, VA: Scott McHugh has more than 25-years experience in security and law enforcement operations.
Most recently he served as the director, international security for the Philip Morris Management Corporation where he developed a global security program for operations in 134 nations.
Prior to that, McHugh was the director, corporate security for Iridium, LLC, a satellite communications company.
Before that, McHugh served as a special agent in charge with the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of Diplomatic Security.
In that capacity he performed a number of command, law enforcement and counter-intelligence assignments.
As a police agent with the Baltimore, MD, Police Department, McHugh was assigned to the tactical division on the SWAT Breech team.
He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree in administration of justice from the University of Pittsburgh, a Master of Science degree in national security from the U.S. Defense Intelligence College, and a Master of Arts in political management from the George Washington University.
Richmond International Airport, Richmond, VA: Thomas Davis retired after a distinguished 23-year career with the United States Secret Service.
During his last assignment as the deputy assistant director, Davis led all headquarters investigative activities and provided oversight for 45 field offices.
Before that he served as a special agent in several field offices and in the White House during President Carters administration.
He was also assigned to the Rev. Jessie Jackson presidential campaigns in 1984 and 1988.
After retiring from the Secret Service, Davis worked as the Director of Safety and Security for Virginia Commonwealth University Health Systems.
Before that he was the Director of Security for Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, MD.
He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from Howard University.
Cyril E. King International Airport, Virgin Islands: Lee Duffy is a former lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army where he served as a member of the elite Green Berets.
Most recently Duffy was responsible for combating terrorism operations and comprehensive security for two major Army installations.
Duffy has extensive experience in law enforcement, commando, antiterrorism, and crisis management.
A French linguist, Duffy was assigned to the U.S. Embassy in Paris for five years.
He has a bachelors degree in law enforcement and advanced degrees in education and politics.
Duffy is also a graduate of the French Army War College and the Antiterrorism Officers Course.
Austin Straubel International Airport, Green Bay, WI: Timothy Decker retired as a colonel from the United States Army after 28 years of service.
His last assignment on active duty was as the deputy chief of staff for personnel in Japan, where he served as the force protection officer for 19 installations throughout mainland Japan and Okinawa.
He was responsible for planning and executing force protection measures, counter-terrorism programs and coordinating security planning for joint services.
In addition, Decker managed the military police operations division and oversaw the criminal investigations division in Japan.
He holds a masters degree in management from Webster University, and a Bachelor of Science degree from St. Norbert College.
He is also a graduate of the Army War College.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Rhinelander-Onieta, Ironwood, Escanaba, Kingsford, Calumet, and Gwinn, MI.
Dane County Regional Airport, Madison, WI: Louis Traverzo served 27 years in the Army as a Military Police Officer.
His most recent position was as Provost Marshal/Deputy Director, Joint Security Directorate, U.S. Central Command, MacDill Air Force Base, FL.
In that capacity he advised the command on security, force protection, law enforcement issues, and detainee operations for U.S. Forces in the Middle East, Central Asia, and Horn of Africa.
Previously he served as commander, Military Police Brigade-Hawaii and provost marshal, U.S. Army Pacific, where he directed law enforcement and security operations for the U.S. Army in Hawaii, Alaska, Japan, and Guam.
He holds a Bachelor of Arts degree from St Norbert College, DePere, WI, and a Masters of Public Administration from Shippensburg University, Shippensburg, PA.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Appleton, Oshkosh, and Mosinee, WI.
General Mitchell International Airport, WI: David Knudson has worked for the FAA for more than 16 years, most recently in the Great Lakes Region Civil Aviation Security Division in Chicago.
Before that he was the senior representative for the FAAs Asia Pacific Region in Singapore where he oversaw U.S. civil aviation policies, practices, and procedures for the 17 countries of South and Southeast Asia.
Knudson has also worked as a manager of the FAAs Civil Aviation Security International Field Office, Manama, Bahrain.
Before that he served in London, and Belgium.
Knudson is a former sergeant with the Minneapolis - St. Paul Airport Police Department.
A former member of the U.S. Air Force, Knudson is a Vietnam veteran.
Natrona International Airport, Casper, WY: Gary R. McCurdy retired from the U.S. Air Force after a 30-year career, most recently, as the deputy director for nuclear matters, Directorate of Security at the Pentagon.
In that capacity he served as the principal advisor to the assistant secretary of defense on all nuclear and chemical security policy and physical protection standards for over 25,000 personnel.
During his career he also served as chief of security police at the U.S. Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, CO; and directed security for bases in Germany, Texas, and South Dakota.
He holds a Master of Science degree in criminal justice from Michigan State University and a Bachelor of Arts degree in social science from the University of Northern Colorado.
McCurdy will also assume FSD responsibilities for airports in Gillette, Cheyenne and Laramie, WY.
Reno-Tahoe International Airport, Reno, NV: Steve Pansky has worked for the Federal Aviation Administration for more than 25 years.
Most recently he served in the headquarters in Washington, DC, supporting the development and deployment of new equipment to the National Airspace System and as well as management of the Air Traffic Services Research and Development program.
During his career Pansky has been a certified full performance level air traffic controller in the Great Lakes and Western Pacific regions.
He holds a Bachelor of Science degree in criminal law from the California State University at Los Angeles.
He will also assume FSD responsibilities for the Elko Regional Airport, NV.
FSDs serve under the direction of the Under Secretary of Transportation for Security, and oversee federal security operations at the nation's airports.
The starting salary for executive-level FSDs is $105,000, and that for non-executive-level FSDs is $55,000.
FSDs will be directly responsible for a full range of airport security, enforcement and oversight, including:
* The efficient implementation, performance and enhancement of security and screening standards for airport employees; * Airport security risk assessments; * Supervision of federal law enforcement activity within the purview of the TSA; and * Organizing and implementing the Federal Security Crisis Management Response Plan for each airport.
This announcement brings the total number of FSDs announced to 118.
###
_________________________________________________________________
Briefing Room
