Nihongo Main page i-mode The Ambassador What's new Public affairs For American citizens Visa services American Centers Embassy directory Consulates International security Economics and trade Global affairs U.S. society 
Thai Visitor Dispels "Ridiculous Notions" About Muslims in U.S. September 22 Bangkok Post article
Reprinted with permission from the Bangkok Post
Islam is at peace in America
Anti-American Islamic propagandists have lost the plot.
Non-Muslim Americans don't hate Muslim Americans.
They just hate terrorists -- as indeed do their Muslim neighbours By Varee S.
When I returned to Thailand after a five-week stay in the United States, many friends and acquaintances treated me like I had been on a long, unpleasant and dangerous journey.
The wars are in the news and they illustrate the terrible dangers of stereotypes.
The United States is on great and obvious alert against future terrorist attacks.
Security at airports is tight, and you often hear Americans talking about the threat to their country.
This led many people I know to bolster their false impressions about the United States.
"How could you stand to stay in America?" asked one acquaintance.
"Did you get arrested? Did the police follow you everywhere?" These types of questions would seem silly to any Muslim in America today.
But I have found that in large parts of the Islamic community in Thailand, a lot of people believe and even relish such ridiculous notions.
When I tried to explain to one such Bangkok person that I spent a pleasant time visiting my sister in Colorado, my listener said I was probably just saying that to protect my sister.
Why, I asked him, would my sister stay in such an unpleasant place and need my silence in Thailand so badly? "Everyone knows" that Muslims in America are treated shabbily and must either live in constant, abject fear or suffer arrest and beatings.
So he said.
In varying degrees, I have encountered this from rather sheltered but extremely misled people in Bangkok and in the upper South, where I visit several mosques and where a part of my family lives.
Well, I did have one difficult and unpleasant problem from the Americans early in my trip.
For three days in a row, I couldn't get a taste of Thai food.
And several Americans gave me big problems over my origin.
For example, "How is life in Taiwan?" asked the bus driver who took us from Denver International Airport to Fort Collins, after taking a poll on where his riders came from.
In fact, my trip to America was extremely interesting and edifying.
I went there to put my daughter in a US school and to visit my sister, with whom she will live.
Along the way, both by asking and by osmosis, I picked up a lot of information Americans seem to have failed to tell the world.
It would do everyone good to know some of it.
No questions asked
Many people are unaware of the number of Muslims in America.
So we start with the numbers.
There are more Muslims in America than in Thailand.
So far as I could learn, there are 6 million or 7 million -- or so.
No one seems sure.
It seemed odd that you could just lose a million people -- or so -- and I asked about it.
The answer is that it is almost always illegal for the government to ask people about their religion.
That was when I suddenly realised why I had enjoyed my decidedly non-stressful trip to America.
Almost no one in the government or anywhere else asked me about it, so there was actually little chance they could harass me about my religion, even if they had a mind to.
Not at the embassy, where I went through the sacrificial ritual necessary to obtain the visa.
Not at the immigration post when I entered the country.
Not at any meeting or interview or discussion with the authorities at the school where I placed my daughter -- who also didn't ask her nationality, since all children in America can get free education, no matter where they come from.
My friends who thought I was constantly harassed and mistreated because I am Muslim didn't know half of it.
The secretary at the school where my daughter enrolled looked at her transcripts and asked us if we found life difficult on an island always under pressure from China -- meaning Taiwan.
She hadn't a clue about Thailand.
On the other hand, she does now.
In 1990, the US census counted 5.27 million Muslims
.
That figure has been generally accepted as authoritative.
It has been used to make estimates ever since.
Well, actually, call them guesstimates.
Even starting with that explicit 1990 number, they must take into account a wide number of variables including: -
Islam is the fastest growing religion in America, among Americans, including after the September 11 atrocity; and around 25% of American Muslims are converts.
- Immigrants poured into America over the past 12 years, many of them from Islamic countries -- but also including a significant and frankly unknown percentage of Muslims from traditionally "non-Islamic" countries such as France, Australia and, of course, Thailand.
- Although many Americans flaunt their religion, most consider it a private matter and often are unaware of the religion of their next-door neighbours.
- Large numbers of long-stay visitors are Muslims.
This last group includes workers and the jet set, but also tens of thousands of university students.
In the 20th century, America became the prime country for higher education.
That brings me to Fort Collins, Colorado, the smallish American town where my sister has lived for two years and where I spent much of my recent trip to the US.
Fort Collins has a permanent population of 93,000, plus 22,000 students at lovely Colorado State University who are counted in the city census.
Now let me set the situation in this old cowboy town, 90 minutes north of Denver and just south of Wyoming state.
I came to feel quickly that this huge and diverse country has no "typical" place or setting.
Still, Fort Collins is vaguely familiar from movies about Main Street in Middle America.
It is largely white, pretty quiet, with big and lively parks.
It has an allegedly Thai restaurant but not a Thai food ingredient for 80 kilometres.
There is a better Indian restaurant run by an Afghan immigrant, one large mall and lots of fast food, bar food, snack food and coffee.
Fort Collins has few native Muslims.
In recent years, it has added a relative handful of Muslim arrivals from countries as widespread as Libya and Afghanistan, Saudi Arabia and Pakistan, Indonesia and -- two years ago, thanks to my sister -- Thailand.
On the university campus, a significant but again uncounted number of students are Muslim.
Most are foreign.
They have an official campus group, a small publication office and an informative and thoughtful web site melded into the main Internet site of the university.
The young people have their own Islamic Centre for meetings and activities.
Members of the Muslim community have obtained 7.5 rai of land in the town.
Over a number of years, they have raised $1.5 million to build a new centre of 2,000 to 2,500 square metres.
Islamic students of design at the university have submitted 39 proposals.
There are 1,209 permanent mosques in the United States, more than 60% of them founded since 1982.
More than 90% of the mosques have Asian and Arab and black American members.
The Fort Collins mosque opened in 1980 in a former church.
I learned this is fairly common throughout America.
Christians often sell or even donate their churches to growing communities of Muslims.
This seems to provide coherence and strength to people of the two largest faiths in America, a continuing use of land and buildings for God.
In Fort Collins, and in many other middle-sized US communities, the mosque is not only a place for prayers.
It is a meeting hall, a workshop, a counselling office.
The imam is a long-time resident of Fort Collins who came from South Asia and loved the place.
He and the Muslims of Fort Collins form that wonderful community that Islam fosters so well.
The mosque is humble; its purpose and use and appreciation are as great as any grand mosque.
Unharassed
Many of the Muslims I met in America feared trouble, particularly after the September 11 attacks.
One thing I noticed was that the more recently they had arrived in America, the more nervous.
My sister, two years in the US, said she had no worries.
Others, depending on where they lived and perhaps what they had experienced at home and in the US, were sometimes edgy.
Every Muslim I talked to thought the US government and President George Bush deserved great credit for their actions, their calls for tolerance, and their admission that Islam is a great, attractive and peaceful religion.
Right after the attacks on New York and Washington, DC, Mr. Bush made a high-profile visit to the national mosque in Washington, DC.
At one of the busiest and most anxious moments in American life, he took a lot of time to address both Muslims and non-Muslims in America, saying that all were welcome.
On the first anniversary of the attacks, he held a round-table with Arab and Muslim Americans.
"All Americans must recognise that the face of terror is not the true faith or face of Islam," he said.
It's true there are bigots and prejudiced people in America.
They exist in every country.
In 1996, as Ramadan ended, someone threw a concrete block through the glass front door of the Fort Collins mosque.
Two years later, another concrete block crashed through the repaired front door.
This time, the community raised a $1,000 reward and police received a tip that resulted in the arrest of a 23-year-old Colorado State University student.
He said he did it when he was drunk, and had nothing against Muslims.
The judge awarded him some time, all expenses paid by taxpayers, to reflect on that while locked up.
So if there are hateful people in America, there are an understanding government, concerned communities and strict laws to prevent them from prevailing.
At her new school in America, no official is allowed to ask my daughter about her religion.
Fellow students who show disrespect to her will be punished.
I believe US schools are quite strict about this, in religion and in other matters of harassment of students because of their sex, race, colour or beliefs.
On Sept 12, the Coloradoan newspaper addressed these fears.
Reporters talked to businessman Husni Sayed, a Palestinian immigrant.
After the white terrorist Timothy McVeigh blew up the US federal building in Oklahoma City, someone wrote anti-Muslim slogans on the outside of Mr. Sayed's computer store.
He was fearful then.
Five years on in America, and he was absolutely desperate with fear as soon as he learned of the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, DC.
But he didn't fear hate-mongers; he feared for his own stepson, who was flying on that day from Boston to New York City.
In fact, the boy was safe -- as safe as Mr. Sayed.
America's 'Salad Bowl'
The American constitution includes a bill of rights, and the first item guarantees that the government will protect freedom of religion.
Islam is the second biggest religion in America, but there are many more Christians.
The constitution, America's supreme law, keeps the government out of religion in all important ways.
The US government stays out of religion but also supports and respects religion.
For many years now, the US president has hosted an iftaar dinner to celebrate the breaking of the fast on one evening during the month of Ramadan.
Last year, President and Mrs. Bush hosted this dinner, and one of the honoured guests was Nongnuth Phetcharatana, one of the top Muslims in the Thai Foreign Ministry.
She was serving as charge d'affaires -- acting ambassador -- at the time.
There is no religion in government schools -- but any religion or any group can open its own school, so there are hundreds of Muslim classrooms.
Indeed, about 250 mosques in America have complete, full-time schools.
The government has no religion.
The religious clergy -- whether imam, bishops, rabbis, abbots -- do not have to choose between accepting or opposing the government's religious line as in many countries.
Many people describe America as a melting pot, but a friend in America described it as a salad bowl.
Everyone and every group makes their own contributions without melting.
The Islamic contribution to America is evident to any Muslim.
A main one is the mosques, plus Islamic centres like the one in Fort Collins.
They encourage communities.
Americans cherish their villages and their local communities, and the closeness of Muslims has great appeal to all Americans I met.
Misplaced hatred
My misinformed friends in Thailand -- and I do not include those who simply hate America -- have not got this message.
While I was in the US, the State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said America has been largely successful in assuring the world it is not bent on destroying or opposing Islam.
I am not certain that attitude goes very far past the ranks of government in Islamic countries or, like Thailand, in countries with large Muslim populations.
The US recently sponsored a trip through the South by a Palestinian academic, who lectured on the Middle East.
He was faced every day by a dozen or more foreign missionaries who are brought to Thailand to address the mosques on hatred for America.
These foreigners are tough competition.
They speak to the masses, and reinforce their prejudices, stereotypes and wrong beliefs, like the "fact" that America is "trying to destroy all Islamic countries," in the silly words of the official Iraqi representative in Thailand.
Also while I was in America, the annual Islamic Society of North American convention took place in Washington DC.
American Muslims debated their role in the United States.
They agreed they are part of mainstream America, not alienated from it.
Among Muslims in the part of America I visited, I found parallel concerns.
The first was for the personal safety of themselves and their families.
Taslim Ahmed, a father of two children, was concerned about his safety.
But according to the Coloradoan newspaper, he went about his business on that terrible day -- a haircut, a shopping trip to megastore Kmart, and encountered no problems.
Apprehensive? Certainly.
Overwhelmed? Not at all.
American Muslims were unanimously -- to this visitor -- unsympathetic to the terrorists, as any right-thinking person might be.
On September 11, as the US searched for clues on the identity of the terrorists, Muslims also agreed with Mr. Ahmed.
"Whoever did this doesn't belong to any religion.
They don't belong to any group."
There was that terrible American prejudice again as I checked in for the flight home.
"We'll check your bags all the way through to Taiwan," said the check-in lady at United Airlines.
Well, after a couple of minutes she understood Bangkok is not in Taiwan.
I wish it was as easy to educate equally silly and far more harmful denseness I found in a few people at home.
I don't think any Americans believe their country is perfect, but they are proud of it.
That includes American Muslims, who work very hard for their God and their families and their country.
- Varee S. is a married Bangkok resident with family ties in the capital and in upper provinces of the South.
_________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the Public Affairs Section of the U.S. Embassy, Japan.
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
