PAS Eagle An Outline of American History Public Affairs Section Stockholm Sweden CHAPTER ONE: EARLY AMERICA United States Information Agency May 1994 ________________________________________________________ "Heaven and earth never agreed better to frame a place for man's habitation."
John Smith, 1607
THE FIRST AMERICANS
At the height of the Ice Age, between 34,000 and 30,000 B.C., much of the world's water was contained in vast continental ice sheets.
As a result, the Bering Sea was hundreds of meters below its current level, and a land bridge, known as Beringia, emerged between Asia and North America.
At its peak, Beringia is thought to have been some 1,500 kilometers wide.
A moist and treeless tundra, it was covered with grasses and plant life, attracting the large animals that early humans hunted for their survival.
The first people to reach North America almost certainly did so without knowing they had crossed into a new continent.
They would have been following game, as their ancestors had for thousands of years, along the Siberian coast and then across the land bridge.
Once in Alaska, it would take these first North Americans thousands of years more to work their way through the openings in great glaciers south to what is now the United States.
Evidence of early life in North America continues to be found.
Little of it, however, can be reliably dated before 12,000 B.C.; a recent discovery of a hunting lookout in northern Alaska, for example, may date from almost that time.
So too may the finely crafted spear points and items found near Clovis, New Mexico.
Similar artifacts have been found at sites throughout North and South America, indicating that life was probably already well established in much of the Western Hemisphere by some time prior to 10,000 B.C.
Around that time the mammoth began to die out and the bison took its place as a principal source of food and hides for these early North Americans.
Over time, as more and more species of large game vanished -- whether from overhunting or natural causes -- plants, berries and seeds became an increasingly important part of the early American diet.
Gradually, foraging and the first attempts at primitive agriculture appeared.
Indians in what is now central Mexico led the way, cultivating corn, squash and beans, perhaps as early as 8,000 B.C.
Slowly, this knowledge spread northward.
By 3,000 B.C., a primitive type of corn was being grown in the river valleys of New Mexico and Arizona.
Then the first signs of irrigation began to appear, and by 300 B.C., signs of early village life.
By the first centuries A.D., the Hohokum were living in settlements near what is now Phoenix, Arizona, where they built ball courts and pyramid-like mounds reminiscent of those found in Mexico, as well as a canal and irrigation system.
MOUND BUILDERS AND PUEBLOS
The first Indian group to build mounds in what is now the United States are often called the Adenans.
They began constructing earthen burial sites and fortifications around 600 B.C.
Some mounds from that era are in the shape of birds or serpents, andprobably served religious purposes not yet fully understood.
The Adenans appear to have been absorbed or displaced by various groups collectively known as Hopewellians.
One of the most important centers of their culture was found in southern Ohio, where the remains of several thousand of these mounds still remain.
Believed to be great traders, the Hopewellians used and exchanged tools and materials across a wide region of hundreds of kilometers.
By around 500 A.D., the Hopewellians, too, disappeared, gradually giving way to a broad group of tribes generally known as the Mississippians or Temple Mound culture.
One city, Cahokia, just east of St. Louis, Missouri, is thought to have had a population of about 20,000 at its peak in the early 12th century.
At the center of the city stood a huge earthen mound, flatted at the top, which was 30 meters high and 37 hectares at the base.
Eighty other mounds have been found nearby.
Cities such as Cahokia depended on a combination of hunting, foraging, trading and agriculture for their food and supplies.
Influenced by the thriving societies to the south, they evolved into complex hierarchical societies which took slaves and practiced human sacrifice.
In what is now the southwest United States, the Anasazi, ancestors of the modern Hopi Indians, began building stone and adobe pueblos around the year 900.
These unique and amazing apartment-like structures were often built along cliff faces; the most famous, the "cliff palace" of Mesa Verde, Colorado, had over 200 rooms.
Another site, the Pueblo Bonito ruins along New Mexico's Chaco River, once contained more than 800 rooms.
Perhaps the most affluent of the pre-Columbian American Indians lived in the Pacific northwest, where the natural abundance of fish and raw materials made food supplies plentiful and permanent villages possible as early as 1,000 B.C.
The opulence of their "potlatch" gatherings remains a standard for extravagance and festivity probably unmatched in early American history.
NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURES
The America that greeted the first Europeans was, thus, far from an empty wilderness.
It is now thought that as many people lived in the Western Hemisphere as in Western Europe at that time -- about 40 million.
Estimates of the number of Native Americans living in what is now the United States at the onset of European colonization range from two to 18 million, with most historians tending toward the lower figure.
What is certain is the devastating effect that European disease had on the indigenous population practically from the time of initial contact.
Smallpox, in particular, ravaged whole communities and is thought to have been a much more direct cause of the precipitous decline in Indian population in the 1600s than the numerous wars and skirmishes with European settlers.
Indian customs and culture at the time were extraordinarily diverse, as could be expected, given the expanse of the land and the many different environments to which they had adapted.
Some generalizations, however, are possible.
Most tribes, particularly in the wooded eastern region and the Midwest, combined aspects of hunting, gathering and the cultivation of maize and other products for their food supplies.
In many cases, the women were responsible for farming and the distribution of food, while the men hunted and participated in war.
By all accounts, Indian society in North America was closely tied to the land.
Identification with nature and the elements was integral to religious beliefs.
Indian life was essentially clan-oriented and communal, with children allowed more freedom and tolerance than was the European custom of the day.
Although some North American tribes developed a type of hieroglyphics to preserve certain texts, Indian culture was primarily oral, with a high value placed on the recounting of tales and dreams.
Clearly, there was a good deal of trade among various groups and strong evidence exists that neighboring tribes maintained extensive and formal relations -- both friendly and hostile.
THE FIRST EUROPEANS
The first Europeans to arrive in North America -- at least the first for whom there is solid evidence -- were Norse, traveling west from Greenland, where Erik the Red had founded a settlement around the year 985.
In 1001 his son Leif is thought to have explored the northeast coast of what is now Canada and spent at least one winter there.
While Norse sagas suggest that Viking sailors explored the Atlantic coast of North America down as far as the Bahamas, such claims remain unproven.
In 1963, however, the ruins of some Norse houses dating from that era were discovered at L'Anse-aux-Meadows in northern Newfoundland, thus supporting at least some of the claims the Norse sagas make.
In 1497, just five years after Christopher Columbus landed in the Caribbean looking for a western route to Asia, a Venetian sailor named John Cabot arrived in Newfoundland on a mission for the British king.
Although fairly quickly forgotten, Cabot's journey was later to provide the basis for British claims to North America.
It also opened the way to the rich fishing grounds off George's Banks, to which European fishermen, particularly the Portuguese, were soon making regular visits.
Columbus, of course, never saw the mainland United States, but the first explorations of the continental United States were launched from the Spanish possessions that he helped establish.
The first of these took place in 1513 when a group of men under Juan Ponce de Leon landed on the Florida coast near the present city of St. Augustine.
With the conquest of Mexico in 1522, the Spanish further solidified their position in the Western Hemisphere.
The ensuing discoveries added to Europe's knowledge of what was now named America -- after the Italian Amerigo Vespucci, who wrote a widely popular account of his voyages to a "New World."
By 1529 reliable maps of the Atlantic coastline from Labrador to Tierra del Fuego had been drawn up, although it would take more than another century before hope of discovering a "Northwest Passage" to Asia would be completely abandoned.
Among the most significant early Spanish explorations was that of Hernando De Soto, a veteran conquistador who had accompanied Francisco Pizzaro during the conquest of Peru.
Leaving Havana in 1539, De Soto's expedition landed in Florida and ranged through the southeastern United States as far as the Mississippi River in search of riches.
Another Spaniard, Francisco Coronado, set out from Mexico in 1540 in search of the mythical Seven Cities of Cibola.
Coronado's travels took him to the Grand Canyon and Kansas, but failed to reveal the gold or treasure his men sought.
However, Coronado's party did leave the peoples of the region a remarkable, if unintended gift: enough horses escaped from his party to transform life on the Great Plains.
Within a few generations, the Plains Indians had become masters of horsemanship, greatly expanding the range and scope of their activities.
While the Spanish were pushing up from the south, the northern portion of the present-day United States was slowly being revealed through the journeys of men such as Giovanni da Verrazano.
A Florentine who sailed for the French, Verrazano made landfall in North Carolina in 1524, then sailed north along the Atlantic coast past what is now New York harbor.
A decade later, the Frenchman Jacques Cartier set sail with the hope -- like the other Europeans before him -- of finding a sea passage to Asia.
Cartier's expeditions along the St. Lawrence River laid the foundations for the French claims to North America, which were to last until 1763.
Following the collapse of their first Quebec colony in the 1540s, French Huguenots attempted to settle the northern coast of Florida two decades later.
The Spanish, viewing the French as a threat to their trade route along the Gulf Stream, destroyed the colony in 1565.
Ironically, the leader of the Spanish forces, Pedro Menendez, would soon establish a town not far away -- St. Augustine.
It was the first permanent European settlement in what would become the United States.
The great wealth which poured into Spain from the colonies in Mexico, the Caribbean and Peru provoked great interest on the part of the other European powers.
With time, emerging maritime nations such as England, drawn in part by Francis Drake's successful raids on Spanish treasure ships, began to take interest in the New World.
In 1578 Humphrey Gilbert, the author of a treatise on the search for the Northwest Passage, received a patent from Queen Elizabeth to colonize the "heathen and barbarous landes" in the New World which other European nations had not yet claimed.
It would be five years before his efforts could begin.
When he was lost at sea, his half-brother, Walter Raleigh, took up the mission.
In 1585 Raleigh established the first British colony in North America, on Roanoke Island off the coast of North Carolina.
It was later abandoned, and a second effort two years later also proved a failure.
It would be 20 years before the British would try again.
This time -- at Jamestown in 1607 -- the colony would succeed, and North America would enter a new era.
EARLY SETTLEMENTS
The early 1600s saw the beginning of a great tide of emigration from Europe to North America.
Spanning more than three centuries, this movement grew from a trickle of a few hundred English colonists to a flood of millions of newcomers.
Impelled by powerful and diverse motivations, they built a new civilization on the northern part of the continent.
The first English immigrants to what is now the United States crossed the Atlantic long after thriving Spanish colonies had been established in Mexico, the West Indies and South America.
Like all early travelers to the New World, they came in small, overcrowded ships.
During their six- to 12-week voyages, they lived on meager rations.
Many died of disease; ships were often battered by storms and some were lost at sea.
Most European emigrants left their homelands to escape political oppression, to seek the freedom to practice their religion, or for adventure and opportunities denied them at home.
Between 1620 and 1635, economic difficulties swept England.
Many people could not find work.
Even skilled artisans could earn little more than a bare living.
Poor crop yields added to the distress.
In addition, the Industrial Revolution had created a burgeoning textile industry, which demanded an ever-increasing supply of wool to keep the looms running.
Landlords enclosed farmlands and evicted the peasants in favor of sheep cultivation.
Colonial expansion became an outlet for this displaced peasant population.
The colonists' first glimpse of the new land was a vista of dense woods.
The settlers might not have survived had it not been for the help of friendly Indians, who taught them how to grow native plants -- pumpkin, squash, beans and corn.
In addition, the vast, virgin forests, extending nearly 2,100 kilometers along the Eastern seaboard, proved a rich source of game and firewood.
They also provided abundant raw materials used to build houses, furniture, ships and profitable cargoes for export.
Although the new continent was remarkably endowed by nature, trade with Europe was vital for articles the settlers could not produce.
The coast served the immigrants well.
The whole length of shore provided innumerable inlets and harbors.
Only two areas -- North Carolina and southern New Jersey -- lacked harbors for ocean-going vessels.
Majestic rivers -- the Kennebec, Hudson, Delaware, Susquehanna, Potomac and numerous others -- linked lands between the coast and the Appalachian Mountains with the sea.
Only one river, however, the St. Lawrence -- dominated by the French in Canada -- offered a water passage to the Great Lakes and into the heart of the continent.
Dense forests, the resistance of some Indian tribes and the formidable barrier of the Appalachian Mountains discouraged settlement beyond the coastal plain.
Only trappers and traders ventured into the wilderness.
For the first hundred years the colonists built their settlements compactly along the coast.
Political considerations influenced many people to move to America.
In the 1630s, arbitrary rule by England's Charles I gave impetus to the migration to the New World.
The subsequent revolt and triumph of Charles' opponents under Oliver Cromwell in the 1640s led many cavaliers -- "king's men" -- to cast their lot in Virginia.
In the German-speaking regions of Europe, the oppressive policies of various petty princes -- particularly with regard to religion -- and the devastation caused by a long series of wars helped swell the movement to America in the late 17th and 18th centuries.
The coming of colonists in the 17th century entailed careful planning and management, as well as considerable expense and risk.
Settlers had to be transported nearly 5,000 kilometers across the sea.
They needed utensils, clothing, seed, tools, building materials, livestock, arms and ammunition.
In contrast to the colonization policies of other countries and other periods, the emigration from England was not directly sponsored by the government but by private groups of individuals whose chief motive was profit.
JAMESTOWN
The first of the British colonies to take hold in North America was Jamestown.
On the basis of a charter which King James I granted to the Virginia (or London) Company, a group of about 100 men set out for the Chesapeake Bay in 1607.
Seeking to avoid conflict with the Spanish, they chose a site about 60 kilometers up the James River from the bay.
Made up of townsmen and adventurers more interested in finding gold than farming, the group was unequipped by temperament or ability to embark upon a completely new life in the wilderness.
Among them, Captain John Smith emerged as the dominant figure.
Despite quarrels, starvation and Indian attacks, his ability to enforce discipline held the little colony together through its first year.
In 1609 Smith returned to England, and in his absence, the colony descended into anarchy.
During the winter of 1609-1610, the majority of the colonists succumbed to disease.
Only 60 of the original 300 settlers were still alive by May 1610.
That same year, the town of Henrico (now Richmond) was established farther up the James River.
It was not long, however, before a development occurred that revolutionized Virginia's economy.
In 1612 John Rolfe began cross-breeding imported tobacco seed from the West Indies with native plants and produced a new variety that was pleasing to European taste.
The first shipment of this tobacco reached London in 1614.
Within a decade it had become Virginia's chief source of revenue.
Prosperity did not come quickly, however, and the death rate from disease and Indian attacks remained extraordinarily high.
Between 1607 and 1624 approximately 14,000 people migrated to the colony, yet only 1,132 were living there in 1624.
On recommendation of a royal commission, the king dissolved the Virginia Company, and made it a royal colony that year.
MASSACHUSETTS
During the religious upheavals of the 16th century, a body of men and women called Puritans sought to reform the Established Church of England from within.
Essentially, they demanded that the rituals and structures associated with Roman Catholicism be replaced by simpler Protestant forms of faith and worship.
Their reformist ideas, by destroying the unity of the state church, threatened to divide the people and to undermine royal authority.
In 1607 a small group of Separatists -- a radical sect of Puritans who did not believe the Established Church could ever be reformed -- departed for Leyden, Holland, where the Dutch granted them asylum.
However, the Calvinist Dutch restricted them mainly to low-paid laboring jobs.
Some members of the congregation grew dissatisfied with this discrimination and resolved to emigrate to the New World.
In 1620, a group of Leyden Puritans secured a land patent from the Virginia Company, and a group of 101 men, women and children set out for Virginia on board the Mayflower.
A storm sent them far north and they landed in New England on Cape Cod.
Believing themselves outside the jurisdiction of any organized government, the men drafted a formal agreement to abide by "just and equal laws" drafted by leaders of their own choosing.
This was the Mayflower Compact.
In December the Mayflower reached Plymouth harbor; the Pilgrims began to build their settlement during the winter.
Nearly half the colonists died of exposure and disease, but neighboring Wampanoag Indians provided information that would sustain them: how to grow maize.
By the next fall, the Pilgrims had a plentiful crop of corn, and a growing trade based on furs and lumber.
A new wave of immigrants arrived on the shores of Massachusetts Bay in 1630 bearing a grant from King Charles I to establish a colony.
Many of them were Puritans whose religious practices were increasingly prohibited in England.
Their leader, John Winthrop, openly set out to create a "city upon a hill" in the New World.
By this he meant a place where Puritans would live in strict accordance with their religious beliefs.
The Massachusetts Bay Colony was to play a significant role in the development of the entire New England region, in part because Winthrop and his Puritan colleagues were able to bring their charter with them.
Thus the authority for the colony's government resided in Massachusetts, not in England.
Under the charter's provisions, power rested with the General Court, which was made up of "freemen" required to be members of the Puritan Church.
This guaranteed that the Puritans would be the dominant political as well as religious force in the colony.
It was the General Court which elected the governor.
For most of the next generation, this would be John Winthrop.
The rigid orthodoxy of the Puritan rule was not to everyone's liking.
One of the first to challenge the General Court openly was a young clergyman named Roger Williams, who objected to the colony's seizure of Indian lands and its relations with the Church of England.
Banished from Massachusetts Bay, he purchased land from the Narragansett Indians in what is now Providence, Rhode Island, in 1636.
There he set up the first American colony where complete separation of church and state as well as freedom of religion was practiced.
So-called heretics like Williams were not the only ones who left Massachusetts.
Orthodox Puritans, seeking better lands and opportunities, soon began leaving Massachusetts Bay Colony.
News of the fertility of the Connecticut River Valley, for instance, attracted the interest of farmers having a difficult time with poor land.
By the early 1630s, many were ready to brave the danger of Indian attack to obtain level ground and deep, rich soil.
These new communities often eliminated church membership as a prerequisite for voting, thereby extending the franchise to ever larger numbers of men.
At the same time, other settlements began cropping up along the New Hampshire and Maine coasts, as more and more immigrants sought the land and liberty the New World seemed to offer.
NEW NETHERLAND AND MARYLAND
Hired by the Dutch East India Company, Henry Hudson in 1609 explored the area around what is now New York City and the river that bears his name, to a point probably north of Albany, New York.
Subsequent Dutch voyages laid the basis for their claims and early settlements in the area.
Like the French to the north, the first interest of the Dutch was the fur trade.
To this end, the Dutch cultivated close relations with the Five Nations of the Iroquois who were the key to the heartland from which the furs came.
In 1617 Dutch settlers built a fort at the junction of the Hudson and the Mohawk Rivers, where Albany now stands.
Settlement on the island of Manhattan began in the early 1620s.
In 1624, the island was purchased from local Indians for the reported price of $24.
It was promptly renamed New Amsterdam.
In order to attract settlers to the Hudson River region, the Dutch encouraged a type of feudal aristocracy, known as the "patroon" system.
The first of these huge estates were established in 1630 along the Hudson River.
Under the patroon system, any stockholder, or patroon, who could bring 50 adults to his estate over a four-year period was given a 25-kilometer river-front plot, exclusive fishing and hunting privileges, and civil and criminal jurisdiction over his lands.
In turn, he provided livestock, tools and buildings.
The tenants paid the patroon rent and gave him first option on surplus crops.
Further to the south, a Swedish trading company with ties to the Dutch attempted to set up its first settlement along the Delaware River three years later.
Without the resources to consolidate its position, New Sweden was gradually absorbed into New Netherland, and later, Pennsylvania and Delaware.
In 1632 the Calvert family obtained a charter for land north of the Potomac River from King Charles I in what became known as Maryland.
As the charter did not expressly prohibit the establishment of non-Protestant churches, the family encouraged fellow Catholics to settle there.
Maryland's first town, St. Mary's, was established in 1634 near where the Potomac River flows into the Chesapeake Bay.
While establishing a refuge for Catholics who were facing increasing persecution in Anglican England, the Calverts were also interested in creating profitable estates.
To this end, and to avoid trouble with the British government, they also encouraged Protestant immigration.
The royal charter granted to the Calvert family had a mixture of feudal and modern elements.
On the one hand they had the power to create manorial estates.
On the other, they could only make laws with the consent of freemen (property holders).
They found that in order to attract settlers -- and make a profit from their holdings -- they had to offer people farms, not just tenancy on the manorial estates.
The number of independent farms grew in consequence, and their owners demanded a voice in the affairs of the colony.
Maryland's first legislature met in 1635.
COLONIAL-INDIAN RELATIONS
By 1640 the British had solid colonies established along the New England coast and the Chesapeake Bay.
In between were the Dutch and the tiny Swedish community.
To the west were the original Americans, the Indians.
Sometimes friendly, sometimes hostile, the Eastern tribes were no longer strangers to the Europeans.
Although Native Americans benefitted from access to new technology and trade, the disease and thirst for land which the early settlers also brought posed a serious challenge to the Indian's long-established way of life.
At first, trade with the European settlers brought advantages: knives, axes, weapons, cooking utensils, fish hooks and a host of other goods.
Those Indians who traded initially had significant advantage over rivals who did not.
In response to European demand, tribes such as the Iroquois began to devote more attention to fur trapping during the 17th century.
Furs and pelts provided tribes the means to purchase colonial goods until late into the 18th century.
Early colonial-Indian relations were an uneasy mix of cooperation and conflict.
On the one hand, there were the exemplary relations which prevailed during the first half century of Pennsylvania's existence.
On the other were a long series of setbacks, skirmishes and wars, which almost invariably resulted in an Indian defeat and further loss of land.
The first of the important Indian uprisings occurred in Virginia in 1622, when some 347 whites were killed, including a number of missionaries who had just recently come to Jamestown.
The Pequot War followed in 1637, as local tribes tried to prevent settlement of the Connecticut River region.
In 1675 Phillip, the son of the chief who had made the original peace with the Pilgrims in 1621, attempted to unite the tribes of southern New England against further European encroachment of their lands.
In the struggle, however, Phillip lost his life and many Indians were sold into servitude.
Almost 5,000 kilometers to the west, the Pueblo Indians rose up against the Spanish missionaries five years later in the area around Taos, New Mexico.
For the next dozen years the Pueblo controlled their former land again, only to see the Spanish retake it.
Some 60 years later, another Indian revolt took place when the Pima Indians clashed with the Spanish in what is now Arizona.
The steady influx of settlers into the backwoods regions of the Eastern colonies disrupted Indian life.
As more and more game was killed off, tribes were faced with the difficult choice of going hungry, going to war, or moving and coming into conflict with other tribes to the west.
The Iroquois, who inhabited the area below Lakes Ontario and Erie in northern New York and Pennsylvania, were more successful in resisting European advances.
In 1570 five tribes joined to form the most democratic nation of its time, the "Ho-De-No-Sau-Nee," or League of the Iroquois.
The League was run by a council made up of 50 representatives from each of the five member tribes.
The council dealt with matters common to all the tribes, but it had no say in how the free and equal tribes ran their day-to-day affairs.
No tribe was allowed to make war by itself.
The council passed laws to deal with crimes such as murder.
The League was a strong power in the 1600s and 1700s.
It traded furs with the British and sided with them against the French in the war for the dominance of America between 1754 and 1763.
The British might not have won that war without the support of the League of the Iroquois.
The League stayed strong until the American Revolution.
Then, for the first time, the council could not reach a unanimous decision on whom to support.
Member tribes made their own decisions, some fighting with the British, some with the colonists, some remaining neutral.
As a result, everyone fought against the Iroquois.
Their losses were great and the League never recovered.
SECOND GENERATION OF BRITISH COLONIES
The religious and civil conflict in England in the mid-17th century limited immigration, as well as the attention the mother country paid the fledgling American colonies.
In part to provide for the defense measures England was neglecting, the Massachusetts Bay, Plymouth, Connecticut and New Haven colonies formed the New England Confederation in 1643.
It was the European colonists' first attempt at regional unity.
The early history of the British settlers reveals a good deal of contention--religious and political--as groups vied for power and position among themselves and their neighbors.
Maryland, in particular, suffered from the bitter religious rivalries which afflicted England during the era of Oliver Cromwell.
One of the casualties was the state's Toleration Act, which was revoked in the 1650s.
It was soon reinstated, however, along with the religious freedom it guaranteed.
In 1675 Bacon's Rebellion, the first significant revolt against royal authority, broke out in the colonies.
The original spark was a clash between Virginia frontiersmen and the Susquehannock Indians, but it soon pitted the common farmer against the wealth and privilege of the large planters and Virginia's governor, William Berkeley.
The small farmers, embittered by low tobacco prices and hard living conditions, rallied around Nathaniel Bacon, a recent arrival from England.
Berkeley refused to grant Bacon a commission to conduct Indian raids, but he did agree to call new elections to the House of Burgesses, which had remained unchanged since 1661.
Defying Berkeley's orders, Bacon led an attack against the friendly Ocaneechee tribe, nearly wiping them out.
Returning to Jamestown in September 1676, he burned it, forcing Berkeley to flee.
Most of the state was now under Bacon's control.
His victory was short lived, however; he died of a fever the following month.
Without Bacon, the rebellion soon lost its vitality.
Berkeley re-established his authority and hanged 23 of Bacon's followers.
With the restoration of King Charles II in 1660, the British once again turned their attentions to North America.
Within a brief span, the first European settlements were established in the Carolinas and the Dutch driven out of New Netherland.
New proprietary colonies were established in New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Pennsylvania.
The Dutch settlements had, as a general matter, been ruled by autocratic governors appointed in Europe.
Over the years, the local population had become estranged from them.
As a result, when the British colonists began encroaching on Dutch lands in Long Island and Manhattan, the unpopular governor was unable to rally the population to their defense.
New Netherland fell in 1664.
The terms of the capitulation, however, were mild: the Dutch settlers were able to retain their property and worship as they pleased.
As early as the 1650s, the Ablemarle Sound region off the coast of what is now northern North Carolina was inhabited by settlers trickling down from Virginia.
The first proprietary governor arrived in 1664.
A remote area even today, Ablemarle's first town was not established until the arrival of a group of French Huguenots in 1704.
In 1670 the first settlers, drawn from New England and the Caribbean island of Barbados, arrived in what is now Charleston, South Carolina.
An elaborate system of government, to which the British philosopher John Locke contributed, was prepared for the new colony.
One of its prominent features was a failed attempt to create a hereditary nobility.
One of the colony's least appealing aspects was the early trade in Indian slaves.
Within time, however, timber, rice and indigo gave the colony a worthier economic base.
Massachusetts Bay was not the only colony driven by religious motives.
In 1681 William Penn, a wealthy Quaker and friend of Charles II, received a large tract of land west of the Delaware River, which became known as Pennsylvania.
To help populate it, Penn actively recruited a host of religious dissenters from England and the continent -- Quakers, Mennonites, Amish, Moravians and Baptists.
When Penn arrived the following year, there were already Dutch, Swedish and English settlers living along the Delaware River.
It was there he founded Philadelphia, the "City of Brotherly Love."
In keeping with his faith, Penn was motivated by a sense of equality not often found in other American colonies at the time.
Thus, women in Pennsylvania had rights long before they did in other parts of America.
Penn and his deputies also paid considerable attention to the colony's relations with the Delaware Indians, ensuring that they were paid for any land the Europeans settled on.
Georgia was settled in 1732, the last of the 13 colonies to be established.
Lying close to, if not actually inside the boundaries of Spanish Florida, the region was viewed as a buffer against Spanish incursion.
But it had another unique quality: the man charged with Georgia's fortifications, General James Oglethorpe, was a reformer who deliberately set out to create a refuge where the poor and former prisoners would be given new opportunities.
SETTLERS, SLAVES AND SERVANTS
Men and women with little active interest in a new life in America were often induced to make the move to the New World by the skillful persuasion of promoters.
William Penn, for example, publicized the opportunities awaiting newcomers to the Pennsylvania colony.
Judges and prison authorities offered convicts a chance to migrate to colonies like Georgia instead of serving prison sentences.
But few colonists could finance the cost of passage for themselves and their families to make a start in the new land.
In some cases, ships' captains received large rewards from the sale of service contracts for poor migrants, called indentured servants, and every method from extravagant promises to actual kidnapping was used to take on as many passengers as their vessels could hold.
In other cases, the expenses of transportation and maintenance were paid by colonizing agencies like the Virginia or Massachusetts Bay Companies.
In return, indentured servants agreed to work for the agencies as contract laborers, usually for four to seven years.
Free at the end of this term, they would be given "freedom dues," sometimes including a small tract of land.
It has been estimated that half the settlers living in the colonies south of New England came to America under this system.
Although most of them fulfilled their obligations faithfully, some ran away from their employers.
Nevertheless, many of them were eventually able to secure land and set up homesteads, either in the colonies in which they had originally settled or in neighboring ones.
No social stigma was attached to a family that had its beginning in America under this semi-bondage.
Every colony had its share of leaders who were former indentured servants.
There was one very important exception to this pattern: African slaves.
The first blacks were brought to Virginia in 1619, just 12 years after the founding of Jamestown.
Initially, many were regarded as indentured servants who could earn their freedom.
By the 1660s, however, as the demand for plantation labor in the Southern colonies grew, the institution of slavery began to harden around them, and Africans were brought to America in shackles for a lifetime of involuntary servitude.
=================================================================
SIDE BAR: THE ENDURING MYSTERY OF THE ANASAZI
Time-worn pueblos and dramatic "cliff towns," set amid the stark, rugged mesas and canyons of Colorado and New Mexico, mark the settlements of some of the earliest inhabitants of North America, the Anasazi (a Navajo word meaning "ancient ones").
By 500 A.D. the Anasazi had established some of the first identifiable villages in the American Southwest, where they hunted and grew crops of corn, squash and beans.
The Anasazi flourished over the centuries, developing sophisticated dams and irrigation systems; creating a masterful, distinctive pottery tradition; and carving intricate, multi-room dwellings into the sheer sides of cliffs that remain among the most striking archaeological sites in the United States today.
Yet by the year 1300, they had abandoned their settlements, leaving their pottery, implements, even clothing -- as though they intended to return -- and seemingly disappeared into history.
Their homeland remained empty of human beings for more than a century -- until the arrival of new tribes, such as the Navajo and the Ute, followed by the Spanish and other European settlers.
The story of the Anasazi is tied inextricably to the beautiful but harsh environment in which they chose to live.
Early settlements, consisting of simple pithouses scooped out of the ground, evolved into sunken kivas that served as meeting and religious sites.
Later generations developed the masonry techniques for building square, stone pueblos.
But the most dramatic change in Anasazi living -- for reasons that are still unclear -- was the move to the cliff sides below the flat-topped mesas, where the Anasazi carved their amazing, multilevel dwellings.
The Anasazi lived in a communal society that evolved very slowly over the centuries.
They traded with other peoples in the region, but signs of warfare are few and isolated.
And although the Anasazi certainly had religious and other leaders, as well as skilled artisans, social or class distinctions were virtually nonexistent.
Religious and social motives undoubtedly played a part in the building of the cliff communities and their final abandonment.
But the struggle to raise food in an increasingly difficult environment was probably the paramount factor.
As populations grew, farmers planted larger areas on the mesas, causing some communities to farm marginal lands, while others left the mesa tops for the cliffs.
But the Anasazi couldn't halt the steady loss of the land's fertility from constant use, nor withstand the region's cyclical droughts.
Analysis of tree rings, for example, shows that a final drought lasting 23 years, from 1276 to 1299, finally forced the last groups of Anasazi to leave permanently.
Although the Anasazi dispersed from their ancestral homeland, they did not disappear.
Their legacy remains in the remarkable archaeological record that they left behind, and in the Hopi, Zuni and other Pueblo peoples who are their descendants.
.
________________________________________________________
Embassy of the United States of America Dag Hammarskjölds Väg 31, SE-115 89 Stockholm
Home | Table of Contents PAS | US Mission | Commercial Service | Agricultural Service Consular Information | Fulbright | U.S. State Department | Defense Department webmaster@usemb.se
Last Updated: Friday, 12-May-2000 11:26:46 CEST
