National Park Service Great Smoky Mountains National Park The park is home to a wondrous diversity of life.
nature 
NON-NATIVE PLANTS A primary goal of the national park service is to preserve native plants and animals in the great smoky mountains.
unfortunately, hundreds of Non-native or exotic plants have been introduced by human activities.
Exotics often out-compete natives and can displace them from the park.
Exotic plants are species that have been introduced to an ecosystem by human activities.
Usually exotics come from other countries or continents, but they may also come from other regions of the United States.
Because exotics grow in new environments that may lack natural controls (diseases, predators, parasites, climate, etc.) they often have an advantage over native species and can easily out-compete them for habitat.
This threatens the survival of native plants and animals and may cause irrevocable changes to an ecosystem.
Exotic plants also take an economic toll.
Nationwide, it is estimated that exotics cost the U.S. over $50 billion per year in reduced crop yields, livestock range loss, and lawn, garden, and golf course maintenance expenses.
EXOTIC PLANTS IN THE GREAT SMOKY MOUNTAINS Several factors make Great Smoky Mountains National Park especially vulnerable to invasions by exotic species.
The parks climate is relatively mild with abundant rainfall.
Mountains, with their varying elevations and aspects, offer diverse habitats suitable for a wide variety of plants, both native and exotic.
Climate and habitats in the Smokies also closely resemble those in parts of eastern Europe and central Asia.
Consequently, plants introduced from these areas usually thrive in the Great Smoky Mountains.
In fact, botanists have identified over 380 species of exotic plants in the park.
Some were brought in by early settlers; others were transported by wind, water, or animals from infested areas.
Still others came in on fill dirt used in construction projects or were accidentally transported in by park visitors.
While the majority of the parks exotic plants do not significantly alter the landscape or spread rapidly, 35 species are aggressive and do pose serious threats to the parks natural ecosystems.
These aggressive exotics include kudzu, mimosa, multiflora rose, bush honeysuckle, Japanese grass, Japanese spirea, and garlic mustard.
Some are capable of growing and spreading rapidly and can completely dominate natural landscapes.
Certain exotics also have the potential to cross-pollinate with similar native plants, thereby threatening the genetic integrity of the natives.
CONTROLLING AGGRESSIVE EXOTICS The parks exotic plant control crew works to contain 35 species of invasive exotics at over 600 sites in the Smokies.
The following section describes those species of greatest concern to Park Service exotic plant management staff.
Kudzu is a fast-growing Asian vine that covers some seven million acres of land (an area larger than Vermont) in the southeastern United States.
Prior to 1953 the plant was widely grown as livestock forage and as a means of controlling erosion.
Park crews have largely contained the spread of kudzu in the Smokies, though they continue to monitor 116 sites and treat them as needed.
Japanese Grass is pervasive in disturbed lowlands.
It can rapidly replace native ground cover in moist, fertile areas such as Cades Cove and Sugarlands.
Presently there is no efficient means of controlling Japanese grass over a large area and the plant will continue to gain ground until new treatments are developed.
Privet is native to Europe, Asia, and North Africa, but has been planted widely in this region as a hedge.
Birds and other wildlife spread the seeds far and wide.
Once sprouted, privet can form dense thickets which displace native plants.
Park crews spend up to 550 work hours each year removing privet thickets.
Multiflora Rose was introduced over 40 years ago for wildlife cover, living farm fences, windbreaks, and roadside crash fences.
It spreads rapidly and can form thickets which displace native species.
Birds and other wildlife spread its prolific seeds (up to 1 million per plant).
Multiflora rose is native to China and Japan.
Japanese Honeysuckle is a woody vine introduced for erosion control, wildlife cover, and as an ornamental.
In the Smokies it is capable of out-competing native ground cover and overtopping shrubs and small trees.
Its persistent green leaves photosynthesize in winter, increasing its ability to dominate native plants.
Mimosa is a medium-sized tree that is a continual problem along some roadsides and streams in the Smokies.
It seeds prolifically and resprouts quickly when cut.
Mimosa seeds may remain viable for 50 years or more.
The tree is native to Asia and was introduced to this country in 1745.
Park crews have spent up to 600 work hours per year controlling mimosa.
Garlic Mustard is a ground layer plant that can tolerate shade, making it especially threatening to the parks densely forested environment.
When introduced to disturbed areas or streamsides it can completely dominate the ground layer within ten years.
It can also move from disturbed roadsides or trailsides to undisturbed forest.
Garlic mustard is native to Europe.
It can be controlled with prescribed fire as well as herbicides, cutting, and hand pulling.
Oriental Bittersweet is a serious threat to native plant communities due to its high reproductive rate and rapid growth.
As a climbing vine it damages or kills native plants by girdling and shading.
It can also hybridize with American bittersweet, leading to the natives loss of genetic integrity.
Oriental bittersweet is native to Japan, Korea, and China.
Musk Thistle is an herbaceous plant that can quickly invade disturbed areas such as roadsides, landscape scars, and flood plains.
One plant can produce over 100,000 seeds.
This native of Europe poses a threat to the parks grassy balds and is a common contaminant in fill dirt.
LANDSCAPING WITH NATIVE PLANTS Using native plants in gardens and landscaped areas preserves biological diversity and promotes our natural heritage.
Natives are also better adapted to regional conditions and may require less watering, pesticides, fertilizer, and other maintenance.
In addition, native plants provide food and shelter for a wide array of wildlife, including butterflies and migrating song birds.
The following list includes a variety of attractive plants suitable for landscaping which are native to the area surrounding Great Smoky Mountains National Park.
Most are readily available from native plant nurseries in Tennessee and North Carolina.
Do not dig plants from the wild.
TREES Red maple Acer rubrum Sugar maple Acer saccharum Yellow buckeye Aesculus flava Pignut hickory Carya glabra White ash Fraxinus americana Black walnut Juglans nigra Red cedar Juniperus virginiana Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipfera White pine Pinus stroba Sycamore Platanus occidentalis Chestnut oak Quercus prinus Northern red oak Quercus rubra Sassafras Sassafras albidum SMALL TREES Serviceberry Amelanchier arborea Redbud Cercis canadensis Flowering dogwood Cornus florida Silverbell Halesia carolina Witch-hazel Hamamelis virginiana American holly Ilex opaca Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum Staghorn sumac Rhus typhina American mountain ash Sorbus americana SHRUBS Sweetshrub Calycanthus floridus Hearts-a-bustin Euonymus americanus Wild hydrangea Hydrangea arborescens Mountain laurel Kalmia latifolia Spicebush Lindera benzoin Flame azalea Rhododendron calendulaceum Rosebay Rhododendron Rhododendron maximum Mapleleaf viburnum Vibernum acerifolim FLOWERS Columbine Aquilega canadensis Jack-in-the-pulpit Arisaema triphyllum Butterfly weed Asclepias tuberosa White wood aster Aster divaricatus Later purple aster Aster patens Blue cohosh Caulopyllum thalictroides Pink turtlehead Chelone lyonii Bleeding heart Dicentra eximia Joe-Pye weed Eupatorium fistulosum Wild geranium Geranium maculatum Sharp-lobed hepatica Hepatica acutiloba Cardinal flower Lobelia cardinalis Alumroot Heuchera americana Turks-cap lily Lilium superbum Cardinal flower Lobelia cardinalis Bishops cap Mitella diphylla Solomons seal Polygonatum biflorum Fire pink Silene virginica Bird-foot violet Viola pedata Long-spurred violet Viola rostrata
ParkNet U.S. Department of the Interior FOIA Privacy Disclaimer FirstGov
