FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE May 20, 2003 North Korea: `A mafia masquerading as a government?' Defectors, experts shed light on allegations that North Korea has turned to drugs, other crimes, to fund its nuclear weapons programs WASHINGTON, DC...U.S. Senator Peter G. Fitzgerald (R-IL) described North Korea as a "crime syndicate with nuclear bombs" at a Senate subcommittee hearing Tuesday that shed important new light on how that government finances its growing military threat.
Fitzgerald cited testimony from U.S. government officials and a former high-ranking North Korean official that indicates the North Korean government runs a drug production and trafficking business that functions as a state-level crime syndicate.
"North Korea is essentially a crime syndicate with nuclear bombs," Senator Fitzgerald, the subcommittee chairman, said.
"The role of a government is to protect its citizens from criminals.
But, in the case of North Korea, it appears the government is the criminal."
Money from the sale of illegal drugs, counterfeited currency, and smuggling of counterfeited goods is used to finance the North Korean military and its exportation of dangerous weapons to other nations
, according to testimony before the Governmental Affairs subcommittee on Financial Management, the Budget and International Security.
The drug issue was highlighted April 20 when the Australian government seized a North Korean freighter with 110 pounds of almost pure heroin.
"North Korea must be the only country on earth to run a drug production-trafficking business on a state level," said the former high-ranking North Korean official, who defected to South Korea in late 1998 and testified Tuesday behind a screen to protect his identity.
Another defector whose identity was protected at the hearing testified that as a missile scientist he was directly involved in the exportation of weapons systems to other countries.
Today marks the first time the two North Korean defectors have testified on Capitol Hill about the North Korean government's criminal activities.
Testimony also centered on the many arrests and detentions of North Korean diplomats over the years for smuggling drugs.
Senator Fitzgerald agreed with an earlier characterization of the North Korean regime describing it as "The mafia masquerading as a government."
Also testifying at the hearing were senior officials from both the Department of Defense and Department of State, top scholars from think tanks such as the American Enterprise Institute and Heritage Foundation and the former State Department envoy on the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
"It is clear that any illicit trafficking involving North Korea is a potential threat to the security of the U.S. and its friends in Asia and elsewhere," said Andre Hollis, Deputy Secretary of Defense for Counternarcotics.
"Given the tight controls in place throughout North Korea," added the State Department's William Bach, Director of the Office of Asia, Africa and Europe for the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement, "and the continuing seizure of amphetamines and heroin suspected of originating from North Korea, one wonders how any entity other than state itself could be responsible for this high-volume drug trafficking."
Bach also made reference to strong evidence of North Korean officials engaging in counterfeiting of currency and smuggling of counterfeited goods.
"Thus, like the regime of Saddam Hussein, the Kim Jong Il regime resembles a cult-based, family-run criminal enterprise rather than a government," added Larry Wortzel, Ph.D, Vice President and Director, The Kathryn and Shelby Cullom Davis Institute for International Studies, the Heritage Foundation.
###
Back to North Korea
