New Hampshire State Library The Once and Future Librarian Newsletter CIRCULATION BOOSTERS compiled by Margaret Perry, Assistant Director, Hampstead Public Library Circulation figures getting you down? Tired of the same old, same old? Here are some ideas to give those statistics a boost! Alton - Alladin TeleSensory Machine "donated by the Lions Club.
It is a magnifying machine for those with poor eyesight.
It also has different color combinations for those with sight disabilities.
We loan this out to the town on voting days.
It's a little too heavy for people to simply check out at will, but we do make arrangements when possible."
Ashland - Tape players with headphones
Bethlehem - Ice skates (donated)
Candia - Chess pieces, board, and beginner chess books
Hampstead - Wheelchair (good for visiting elders who come by plane); kit of items for resident grandparents who expect visiting grandchildren.
Kit was a plastic bin holding materials on a single theme: dinosaurs, farm animals, vehicles.
The materials included books, toys, a tape or two, puppets, etc. relevant to the theme.
These were popular for quite awhile, but have now been discontinued.
Hampton - Umbrellas on rainy days (library cards with bar codes are attached to each)
Holderness - Board games, including Trivial Pursuit and Scrabble; box of rock and mineral samples; Tarot card set; wooden puzzles for children; jigsaw puzzles for older; some computer games and programs; for in-library use - a set of Duplos (large Legos for little kids, no small parts), several stuffed animals, and many computer games and programs
Jaffrey - Puppets.
"We have a collection of about 100, add new ones and pull and discard as needed.
We've had them available for more than 20 years and the kids just love them.
Each has a bar coded card for checkout, and there are cloth drawstring bags to transport home."
Jigsaw puzzle exchange: "It's not formal at all, just take one you want and bring it back whenever (or not), or bring back a different one.
We also have an ongoing puzzle laid out for whoever likes to settle down awhile to work on it."
Kensington - Polaroid camera (patron buys the film) - popular for birthday parties and such
Milford - Slide projector, overhead projector, and an LCD projector (with heavy restrictions).
They also have a rack in the lobby where patrons can bring in magazine issues to swap with each other - no requirements, help yourself.
Newton - 3' x 8' tables with folding legs and 40 folding chairs
North Conway - Games such as Trivial Pursuit
Northfield - Knitting needles, yarn, puzzles, none of which have to be returned
Ossipee - Telescope, tape recorder
Peterborough - Slide projector, typewriter, headphones, calculator, framed prints
Sandown - Cake pans (old theme pans, donated) - popular for awhile, then died out; dog and cat with cage, camera, notebook, food dish, and crayons - "Each STUFFED animal has its own travel cage.
The child is only supposed to take two pictures which, when we develop them, are pasted with whatever they wrote in the bookstarted this during the summer reading program Reading Cats and Dogs.
A few animals were retired and raffled off.
It has started to slow down, but we had a list for a long time."
Washington - Tape player for kids to play audiotapes (or for any other age), tent awning for a church fair, folding chairs and tables
left arrow Previous Next right arrow
The Once and Future Librarian
New Hampshire State Library Library Development Services
