December 6, 2002 Weinzapfel reveals plan to can spam...the e-mail variety INDIANAPOLIS -- State Rep. Jonathan Weinzapfel (D-Evansville) announced today that he will file legislation aimed at protecting Hoosiers from unsolicited e-mail, better known as "spam."
Weinzapfel said he will file the bill, based on a law already in effect in the state of Washington, for consideration during the 2003 session of the Indiana General Assembly, which resumes on January 7.
"Thousands of Hoosiers have taken advantage of the state's 'no call' list to avoid the constant irritation caused by telemarketers," Weinzapfel said.
"It seems to me to be a logical extension to take steps to provide protections for those people who are plagued by spam in their e-mail systems.
"Since e-mail has become a common means of personal and business contact, many commercial entities have taken to using this system as a way to hawk their wares," he continued.
"Problems can arise when some of these entities misrepresent who is actually sending the e-mail or when they provide misleading information in the subject line of the e- mail in order to get a person to open the message."
Weinzapfel's proposal would not prohibit the sending of unsolicited commercial e-mail.
It would, however, prohibit anyone from transmitting a commercial electronic mail message if they misrepresent or obscure any information that identifies the point of origin of the e-mail.
Also, it would require anyone sending an unsolicited commercial e-mail to provide a code in the subject line identifying it as an advertisement or an advertisement targeted to adults only.
Violations would be actionable under the state's deceptive consumer sales statutes, which could lead to fines of up to $500 per offense.
"In addition, anyone sending unsolicited commercial e-mail must remove a person's name from any electronic mail list if that person requests the change, and spammers must give them every chance to delete their names from the list," Weinzapfel said.
"Senders also will be prevented from selling addresses if that is requested by a person receiving the e-mail."
Similar provisions and restrictions are contained in Washington's law, which has been upheld by that state's supreme court.
"While I recognize the right of people to sell items over the Internet and through e-mail, I also believe these spammers should be held to standards of truthfulness that we require of anyone who operates a business," Weinzapfel said.
"We simply will be trying to eliminate fraud and deception."
State Rep. Peggy Welch (D-Bloomington) will serve as a co-author of the legislation.
