FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 2, 2003 Fitzgerald urges Chinese help to stop North Korean criminal activities, weapons proliferation Senator held hearing on North Korean crime syndicate earlier this year WASHINGTON, DC...U.S. Senator Peter G. Fitzgerald (R-IL) today urged the Bush Administration to pressure the Chinese government to do more to help stop North Korea's criminal activities - such as drug trafficking and counterfeiting - and its weapons proliferation.
In a letter to Secretary of State Colin Powell, Fitzgerald applauded recent State Department efforts to promote a multilateral strategy to curtail North Korea's criminal activities, including two summits to address the problem.
However, the senator expressed concern that China, which borders North Korea, has played no role in ongoing discussions and planning.
Given that China is North Korea's main trading partner - and Chinese assistance is likely keeping Kim Jong-Il's regime from economic collapse - Fitzgerald believes China must play a critical role for such efforts to be successful in curbing North Korea's illicit activities.
"China has an obligation to play a pivotal role and must be encouraged to become more involved in putting a stop to North Korea's criminal activities and weapons proliferation," Fitzgerald wrote to Powell.
"China's pronounced absence suggests that it is not only unwilling to meet its obligations in the region, but that it also is willing to permit North Korea's ongoing violation of widely recognized international rules of conduct."
"I urge you to raise these concerns with the Chinese, especially in high-level meetings with Chinese officials, and to encourage them to meet their obligations to put a stop to the North Korean government's drug trafficking, counterfeiting, and weapons trade, as well as its nuclear weapons program," Fitzgerald concluded.
Fitzgerald, who heads the Senate Governmental Affairs subcommittee on Financial Management, the Budget, and International Security, recently held a hearing that raised international awareness about the extent of North Korea's illicit enterprises.
At the hearing, two North Korean defectors, a former high-level official in the North Korean government and a former missile scientist, detailed their direct involvement with North Korea's drug trafficking and production and missile program.
# # #
Back to North Korea
