[prairdog.gif] Guadalupe Mountains National Park Mammals [grayline.gif]
In fact, many visitors will see none.
The reasons for this are relatively easy to understand.
Most mammals are active during the night, or during the twighlight hours of dawn or dusk.
During the day they lay up in dens or shaded areas to conserve moisture and avoid predators.
By far, the most commonly seen mammal is the mule deer which are abundant throughout the park, active during much of the day, large and conspicuous, and accustomed to the presence of humans.
They are often seen around the Headquarters Visitor Center and campgrounds as well as on most trails.
They regularly feed along the shoulders of U.S. 62/180 and are all too frequently victims of fatal encounters with passing vehicles.
The only other large mammals likely to be seen by visitors are elk.
Perhaps 30-70 Rocky Mountain elk live in the park, decendents of a herd introduced in the late 1920s.
Look for elk along the highway between Guadalupe Pass and the Frijole Ranch, especially in the early morning hours.
They are also often observed along the entrance road to McKittrick Canyon.
Mountain lions and black bears are present in the park, but are rare and seldom seen.
Smaller mammals occasionally seen by visitors, usually along the highway, and usually at night, include coyotes, jack rabbits, desert cottontails, ringtails, and gray foxes.
Rock squirrels are common throughout the park and are sometimes seen around buildings and on rocky outcrops along the trails.
Several species of bats may be observed at dusk.
The presence of mammals is most often detected by signs they leave behind; tracks, scat, rubbings and diggings.
Pay close attention as you hike throughout the park and you just might see some of these signs or even get a glimpse of the elusive creatures who leave them behind.
[grayline.gif]
Felidae - Cats
Mountain lions (Felis concolor), or cougars, roam throughout the Guadalupe Mountains.
Although they have occasionally been spotted near the campground or along one of the trails, your chances of seeing one of these secretive, nocturnal animals are rare.
Male cats may grow from 5 to 9 feet including the tail, stand two and a half feet tall, and weigh 125 to 200 pounds.
Despite their large size they are very fast and very agile.
Males are solitary and require large territories (10 to 20 square-miles represents a common range.)
Female cats raise a litter of 2 to 5 young.
The kittens, born primarily in late winter or early spring, remain with their mother until around two years old.
Mule deer are their favored food, though in times of scarcity they may also eat rodents, rabbits, porcupines, and javelina.
The reclusive behavior of cougars and their tendency to live in remote areas explain why we know relatively little about these graceful cats.
They once ranged from northern Canada through South America and from coast to coast.
Probably no other land mammal in this hemisphere had a more extensive range.
Due to hunting and habitat loss, mountain lions have been primarily restricted to the west since the 1920s.
For many, the cougar is the symbol of wilderness, a large animal ranging freely in wild areas, independent of human interference.
Mountain lions are the largest carnivore in the Southwest.
At the end of food chain they serve as an indicator of ecosystem's health.
Bobcats (Felis rufus) are larger than domestic house cats, and can be identified by their yellowish-gray or tan coats that sport dark spots and black tiger stripes.
They have a very short tail, and noticeable ear tufts.
Ordinarily, a bobcat will spend most of the day in a well hidden retreat among the rocks or in the brush; their activities are mainly nocturnal.
Bobcats are capable of fast speed, but only for a short distance and therefore rely on patience not pursuit to catch prey.
Their keen eyesight, hearing, and sharp claws allow them to catch cottontails, jackrabbits, rodents or insects for food.
Females have one litter per year of 2-4 kittens, and raise their young without the help of the males.
Males may kill the young, a habit associated with the cat family.
Bobcats and mountain lions are the only felines native to the Guadalupes.
Canidae - Dogs
The Gray Fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus) as the name suggests wears a beautiful gray coat that is orange or red at the sides.
This fox has a large bushy tail with a black tip.
The gray fox prefers a habitat that has both open meadows and forested areas.
Their diet consists of rodents and other small mammals, birds and bird eggs, amphibians and reptiles.
Like bears and coyotes, it is omnivorous and also eats berries, cactus fruits, and various tubers.
The gray fox patiently waits for ambush as it lacks speed for pursuit.
It is the only American canid with climbing ability and occasionally forages and takes refuge in trees.
[coyote.jpg] Coyotes (Canis latrans) are common and widespread throughout the park.
Physiologically, they have adapted well to the heat and arid conditions of the desert.
Desert coyotes weigh only about twenty pounds and have much shorter and thinner fur which allows them to dissipate excess heat easier.
Their fur is paler in color and helps to camouflage them with the desert surroundings.
In feeding, the coyote is an opportunist, eating rabbits, mice, squirrels, birds, lizards, insects and carrion, in addition to a variety of plants.
Coyotes work together in small packs when hunting larger game, but hunt alone or in pairs when scavenging otherwise.
They are the best runners among the canids.
They can cruise normally at 25-30 mph and leap 14 feet.
The famous coyote "song", the quick yaps followed by the long drawn out howl, brings these animals together before or after a hunt.
Coyotes may often be heard during the night.
The Kit Fox (Vulpes macrotis) is the smallest member of the canid family.
It weighs only about 5 pounds, and is about the size of a house cat.
Kit foxes are yellowish-gray above, with lighter underparts, and white under the throat.
The tail is tipped in black.
Both males and females raise the young.
A litter of three or four is born in early spring.
The male kit fox is dedicated to his mate and consistently brings food to the young as soon as they are weaned.
If the female is not present the male may raise the young alone.
Kit foxes are well adapted to the heat and dry conditions desert.
These nocturnal animals live in cool, underground burrows.
They hunt at night for rodents and rabbits using cat-like agility and speed to catch their prey.
They have large eyes and ears that allow them to "see" in the dark.
Like the jackrabbit, their large ears also help dissipate excess body heat.
Ursidae - Bears
[bear.jpg] The family's only member in the Guadalupes is the Black Bear (Ursus americanus).
This beautiful animal was once widespread throughout the state, but now remnant populations exist only in the mountainous regions of the Trans-Pecos.Though scat or tracks of bears may be seen in the highcountry, the animal itself is rarely ever seen.
Unable to cope with human impact, black bears are shy and reclusive.
Bears do not hibernate and here some do not even den.
The lack of snow during most of the winter enables them to find enough food.
Their diet is extremely varied; they are known to feed on the nest contents of wild bees and ants, insects, many types of berries, pine nuts, acorns, grasses, fish, roots and tubers, carrion, and small rodents.
Bears breed in June or July.
The cubs, usually two, are born in late January.
They weigh 8 ounces when born and stay with their mother for the first two years.
Mustelidae - Weasels
The Badger (Taxidea taxus) could be mistaken for a large rodent because of its burrowing habits, but in fact is a member of the weasel family.
Badgers possess the irritability and predatory nature of that family.
Badgers are broad heavy animals with short legs.
Their front feet have long, sharp claws.
Badgers have course yellowish-gray body fur.
A distinctive white stripe runs from the nose across the back of the head to the shoulders, and they have white stripes along their cheeks.
Like skunks and weasels, badgers have glands which produce a potent and repugnant odor.
Their scent, sharp teeth, dangerously sharp claws, loose skin and threatening disposition allow them to defend against enemies.
Badgers prey on large rodents, using their claws to easily dig into most burrows.
They will also prey on ground-dwelling birds, and their eggs as well as reptiles and insects.
Badgers have been known to cooperate with coyotes for survival.
While the badger has outstanding digging ability, it is too slow to catch anything that has the chance to run.
As a team, the badger does the digging, the swiftness of the coyote assures the capture of the prey that is shared by both animals.
Striped Skunks (Mephitis mephitis) and Hog-nosed Skunks (Conepatus mesoleucus) are common in the park and are widespread in distribution, while Spotted Skunks ( Spilogale gracilis) live primarily in desert habitat and are uncommon.
All three are dark in color (black or dark brown), with striking white stripes.
The striping pattern of each is distinctive.
The diet of striped and spotted skunks may consist of small rodents, eggs of ground nesting birds, cactus fruits, and insects.
The hog-nosed skunk is a rooter, whose diet consists mainly of insects.
Its long, pig-like snout and long claws are well adapted for digging beetles, grubs and worms.
When threatened, skunks release a powerful and repugnant scent that is secreted by glands near the base of the tail.
This odor is usually enough to repel any of their natural enemies.
Although sometimes feared, skunks use their repugnant musk spray only when threatened.
Skunks are nocturnal and all one may spot is a ghostly white stripe moving around.
Procynoidae - Raccoons
Raccoons (Procyon lotor)can be recognized by two outstanding characteristics, a black mask and brushy, ringed tail.
Raccoons are common in the park near the riparian areas.
Dependent on the running water, they do not stray far from it.
Raccoons like to den in trees, but if suitable locations are not available they may also use rock crevices.
Adults commonly share the den with young who are able to forage on their own, making for crowded living conditions.
A litter of one to seven is born in April or May.
Baby raccoons are raised entirely by their mothers.
Raccoons are nocturnal and omnivorous.
After dark they search for food primarily near running streams.
Their diet includes fish and frogs, but they may also eat mesquite beans, cactus fruits and berries.
If other food is not available, they may prey on rodents and other small game.
Raccoons have remarkable dexterity and use their feet to wash food and for climbing.
Their tracks are very distinctive; they look like a tiny child's footprint.
The shy Ringtail (Bassariscus astutus) reminds us of a cat with a very long bushy tail, alternately black and white banded.
Strictly nocturnal, ringtails are rarely seen in the daytime.
Instead they are asleep in the semi-darkness of a rock crevice or may hide in a hollow branch of a tree.
They have large ears and eyes, well adapted to their nighttime hunting activities.
Ringtails prefer rocky habitats, especially along the cliffs of desert canyons.
They move with ease along the ledges and crevices while searching for food.
Their diet is varied and includes rabbits, squirrels, rodents, snakes, lizards, frogs, scorpions and centipedes, but may also include native fruits and berries.
Scat observed along the trail that contains red berries, is usually that of a ringtail.
Sciuridae - Squirrels
The forest-dwelling Gray-footed Chipmunk(Tamias canipes V. Baily) occurs in Texas only in Guadalupe Mountains and in the Sierra Diablos.
Its favorite habitats are stands of mixed timber (oaks, pines, and firs) and brushy slopes where rocks offer retreat from potential enemies.
Its diet includes fir and pine seeds, acorns, berries, mushrooms, and insects.
In the lower desert, the Texas Antelope Squirrel (Ammospermophilius interpres) can be spotted running with its tail held over the back, exposing white underparts.
The characteristic habit of carrying the tail over the back gives us a good field identifier.
This small, round, ground squirrel has one narrow white stripe on each side of the back from the shoulder to the rump.
According to its habitat, the antelope squirrel feeds mainly on fruits and seeds of cacti and other succulents.
Antelope squirrels are one of the few mammals that are able to remain active in the heat of the day.
When they retreat to the shade they lay "spread-eagle" with their bellies exposed to the cooler ground.
This enables them to quickly dissipate excess body heat, while maintaining a safe body temperature.
Breeding begins in February, and one litter of 5 to 14 is reared each year.
It is possible for a mother to raise a second litter.
The babies remain with their mother until they are about one quarter grown, then they begin foraging on their own.
[squirrel.jpg] The Rock Squirrel (Spermophilus variegatus) is the largest ground squirrel in its range.
It is a uniform gray color without stripes.
As the name implies, the rock squirrel prefers open rocky areas such as canyons and washes.
It is most active in the early morning and late afternoon, and may be seen sitting on rocks.
Rock squirrels are good climbers and forage in trees for fruits and seeds.
Their sharp teeth and claws allow them to climb even the native agave stalks to reach the seed pods.
In lower elevations they frequent the edges of canyons where the black walnut grows.
Rock squirrels are voracious eaters.
Other foods in their diet include acorns, pine nuts, mesquite beans, cactus, and saltbrush .
Insects contribute to their diet too, and they are fond of flesh, such as small birds.
Spotted Ground Squirrels (Spermophilus spilosoma) are uncommon in the park and seldom seen.
These squirrels are extremely shy.
They are most active in the early morning or late afternoon and retreat to underground burrows to avoid the heat of the day.
They don't stray far from their burrows, which provide protection from predators.
Spotted ground squirrels prefer a dry and sandy habitat.
They can be identified by scattered, small, square, light spots on their backs.
Their fur is a light gray or light fawn color, with white underparts.
Spotted ground squirrels eat green vegetation and seeds, specifically, cactus, mesquite beans, or saltbrush seeds.
They also eat grasshoppers and beetles.
Leporidae - Rabbits
Desert Cottontails (Sylvilagus audubonii) are small animals with short ears and a white tail.
Desert cottontails are common and abundant throughout all of the southwestern states.
Though their enemies include many carnivores and most birds of prey, their populations do not seem to diminish.
They are able to adapt to a variety of conditions, and mothers have several litters each year.
In the Midwest, cottontails live in the thick underbrush.
They make nests in hollows and line them with soft grass.
In the desert though, the extreme climatic conditions force them to live in underground burrows.
These burrows insulate them from the heat, and keep them safe from predators.
Though cottontails are fast, they escape by dashing in a zigzag pattern that confuses and tires their pursuers.
Black-tailed Jack Rabbits (Lepus californicus) are common in the lower elevations of the park.
The black-tailed jack rabbit is really a hare, and is easy to identify by its long ears with black tips.
It has a black stripe on the tail that extends onto the rump.
Jack rabbits avoid desert heat by spending much of the day in the shade and protection of the shrubs.
Female jack rabbits make a scratched-out nest for their young in the brush.
This nest also provides shelter in the winter months.
Jack rabbits are most active at dusk, and continue feeding well into the night.
Their large ears and eyes are well adapted to the darkness.
Their large ears also dissipate excess body heat.
Jack rabbits eat cactus, sagebrush, mesquite and numerous grasses and herbs.
Their natural enemies include, large birds of prey and carnivores such as coyotes, badgers, foxes, and weasels.
Unlike cottontails that may "freeze" as a predator nears (and run only after knowing they have been spotted), jack rabbits rely on speed and keen senses of hearing and eyesight to avoid their enemies.
Cervidae - Deer
Mule Deer (Odocoileus hemionus) are very common in the park.
They have large ears which move independently, and give this species its name, hemionus, or "burro."
Because they are often seen both in the park and the surrounding vicinity, one may conclude that their numbers are not suffering.
They have, however, been declining since the 1960's.
This decline may be natural in part, but certainly has been influenced by hunting (and overharvesting), loss of habitat to livestock, and reduction of available browse.
Mule deer are larger in size than Sonora white-tailed deer.
They can be further distinguished by their large ears and short-haired, whitish tails, that have black tips.
Mule deer bound through the desert scrub when scared; a characteristic not shared by white-tailed deer.
Mule deer are browsers.
They prefer the leaves and twigs of shrubs to grasses.
They nibble only a little from each plant, thus allowing individual plants to remain healthy.
Also by constantly moving around, mule deer aren't as vulnerable to predators.
Their coloration provides excellent camouflage, as they blend in perfectly with the drab desert colors.
A group usually consists of a doe with her fawns and yearlings.
They are easily spotted along trails, especially near water.
Elk (Cervus merriami) native to this area, lived only in the southern part of the Guadalupe Mountains.
But by the turn of the century, they had been hunted into extinction.
In 1928, rancher J.C. Hunter imported 44 Elk (Cervus elaphus Erxleben) from the Black Hills of South Dakota and released them in McKittrick Canyon.
Initially they multiplied, and began moving throughout the mountains.
By 1938 the population was estimated at 400.
In 1959 elk were added to the list of game that could be hunted.
Today the population is estimated to be under 40 animals.
In spite of their large size, elk are surprisingly agile.
When frightened, they will run full speed a short distance, regroup, and if necessary continue at a trot, usually single file.
At this pace, they can continue for several hours.
Though their senses of hearing and eyesight are well developed, it seems they rely heavily on their keen sense of smell to detect danger.
Elk are both grazers and browsers.
Shrubs such as mountain mahogany, ceanothus, agaves and several species of grass provide their food.
The males shed their antlers each year beginning in February, and new growth begins shortly after the scars are healed.
Point size for elk antlers is generally five or six.
Bugling signals the beginning of mating season.
Dominant bulls group with their harems of five to fifteen cows.
The cows are drawn to the bulls as they come into heat.
A single calf is born to the cow at 8 1/2 months.
Though very helpless for the first few days, a calf begins eating grass at the age of one month.
Females reach sexual maturity in their second year, while males begin actively rutting in their third year.
Dicotylidae - Peccaries
Javelinas (Dicotyles tajacu) are small, dark, pig-like animals with coarse salt and pepper colored fur.
A lighter band of hair around the neck gives us the common name "collared peccary."
Both sexes grow tusks and have a large musk gland on their back near the rump.
Javelinas feed on shrubs, grasses, mesquite beans, cactus, and roots or tubers.
They prefer habitat that allows them to hide amongst the thick brush, which provides shade and cover from predators.
Javelinas feed in loose groups, the babies always near the mothers.
At the first sign of danger, they remain perfectly still but release strong musk from their glands, a repellent to many predators.
If cornered, they will often charge, but may also flee in every direction.
Other Mammals
The park provides suitable habitat for 16 species of bats, including two species of free-tailed bats.
Bats are nocturnal, shy, and small in size, making observation difficult.
Relatively little is known about hundreds of species.
Bats are the only true flying mammals.
They are well adapted for flying with lightweight bones and a thin skin membrane that makes up the wing.
When flying, they can reach an altitude of 10,000 feet.
At that height they take advantage of tail winds to fly at speeds in excess of fifty miles per hour.
As winter approaches and insects become scarce, many species of bats such as the Brazilian free-tail bats (Taderida brasiliensis), migrate south for hundreds of miles, remaining within milder climate zones.
Other species hibernate throughout the winter; some remaining in large colonies in caves, abandoned mines, or under bridges, while others hibernate singly in cracks and crevices in the rocks or in trees.
During hibernation, a bat's temperature may drop to near freezing and metabolism slows dramatically allowing reserved fat storage to sustain their survival for many months.
Though most southwestern bats are insectivorous, some like the Pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus) eat lizards and small rodents in addition to scorpions and other insects.
Bats normally use echolocation (the transmission of high frequency sounds that bounce back to their sensitive ears) to locate objects and food.
Contrary to popular myth, bats are not blind and also use sight and smell to aid in catching prey.
Of the mice, rats, and pocket gophers that inhabit different areas of the park, many species are uncommon, and most are never seen.
Underground, protected burrows and nocturnal habits allow them to survival harsh desert conditions and keep them safe from predators.
The Botta's pocket gopher (Thomomys bottae) spends 90% of its time underground, living in an extensive burrow system that has main galleries and many side chambers.
The side passages are used for food storage and fecal waste.
Tunnel systems commonly can be more than 150 meters in length.
In winter the tunnels may extend into snow, allowing the gophers to forage for food above ground in safety.
The Banner-tailed kangaroo rat (Dipodomys spectabilis) is a large, four-toed kangaroo rat that has a long tail with conspicuous black stripes and distinctive white tuft.
If caught by the tail, the tuft will break off and be regrown.
Banner-tailed kangaroo rats can survive without any water, thanks to an outstanding metabolism, and behavioral adaptations to harsh desert conditions.
Their kidneys concentrate salts and urea ten to twenty times, reducing moisture loss through urination.
When they exhale, their breath is cooled by elongated nasal passages, allowing them to recapture the moisture.
Kangaroo rats forage at night, when temperatures are cooler.
They collect seeds in their cheek pockets, but return to underground burrows before feeding.
By remaining underground much of the time they avoid predators such as badgers, foxes. coyotes and bobcats.
If pursued their swiftness and agility makes them a challenge for any predator.
Banner-tailed kangaroo rats build large mounds with multiple openings, and intricate galleries.
The large mounds of these rats are unmistakable.
They are generally found on rocky slopes with creosote and acacia.
Within the park boundaries, two exotic species may occasionally be seen: Barbary sheep (Ammotragus lervia) and Mouflon sheep (Ovis spp.)
Introduced by sheep ranchers, they remain in the montane areas.
Return To Wildlife Return To Natural Resources | Return To Website Visitor Center
home Guadalupe Mountains National Park Home
NPS National Park Service Home
[brnline3.gif] [wren.gif]
