U.S.
Must Continue Pressure on North Korea by U.S. Senator Peter G. Fitzgerald
On July 27, we marked the 50^th anniversary of the armistice that ended the Korean War.
We must continue to honor the sacrifice of those who fought and died in the "Forgotten War" by continuing our vigilance on the Korean Peninsula.
North Korea started the "Forgotten War" June 25, 1950, when it invaded South Korea.
Before the conflict ended, 34,000 Americans died, including 5,535 from Illinois.
More than 100,000 Americans were wounded in the three-year war.
Sadly, the threat posed by North Korea persists today.
The
brutal military dictatorship has no legitimate economy, a horrid human rights record, and, the public is now learning, a government-sponsored drug and counterfeiting enterprise.
Of course the biggest threat to the region and the world is North Koreas development of nuclear weapons and missiles that can deliver these weapons to the United States.
Since the war ended on July 27, 1953, the two countries have embarked on widely divergent paths.
South Korea, one of the poorest nations on earth at the time of the armistice, today is a thriving democracy with the 13th largest economy in the world.
North Korea, meanwhile, is a totalitarian dictatorship with its economy in shambles and its citizens still reeling from the effects of a famine that killed nearly two million citizens in the 1990s and forced thousands others to flee to China to survive.
Under the brutal rule of Kim Jong-Il, the North Korean people face a grim future of human rights abuses and scant economic hope.
U.S. political will backed by military strength has made it possible for democracy and free enterprise to flourish in South Korea.
The United States committed troops to South Korea 50 years ago and has kept them there ever since.
The 38,000 U.S. troops who are stationed there today keep alive the commitment 6.8 million Korean War veterans including 300,000 from Illinois started in 1950.
Our political will must not abandon us now.
North Korea, under the despotic leadership of Kim Jong-Il and his father Kim Il Sung before him, poses a serious military threat to countries in the region.
It also has become a country that sponsors drug production and trafficking, tolerates drug smuggling by its diplomats and uses the money it gains from these criminal enterprises to produce weapons of mass destruction.
I chaired a hearing earlier this year in Washington where defectors from North Korea painted a grim picture of that regimes criminal activities.
Most governments exist to protect their citizens from harm.
In North Korea, the leaders are in effect a crime syndicate masquerading as a government.
One of the defectors testified that the North Korean government requires each collective farm in the country to devote 25 acres to raising poppies, which the government manufactures into heroin for sale abroad.
Testimony also indicated that most of the countrys hard currency receipts come from drug and missile sales.
The world witnessed a graphic example of North Koreas role in drug trafficking in April when Australian police arrested 26 crew members of a North Korean ship, the Pong Su, after the ship was observed trying to off-load approximately $80 million of heroin to a fishing boat off the coast of Australia.
Australian officials have now identified one of the crew as a senior member of the North Korean Workers' Party, and continue to investigate the links between the captured freighter and the North Korean government.
I have urged the Bush administration to enlist neighboring Asian countries such as China and Japan to help us detect, monitor and ultimately choke off the flow of any illegal drugs the North Korean government is exporting.
We must also press those same countries to avoid becoming unwitting accomplices to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and missile technology.
I urged Secretary of State Colin Powell to speak to Japanese leaders about testimony from a former North Korean missile scientist who said 90 percent of that countrys missile program used illegally sourced Japanese electronic equipment.
Tougher export controls could prevent such a dangerous flow of technology in the future.
With its one million active troops and approximately 4.7 million reserves, North Korea has a foreboding military presence in Northeast Asia.
And it has resorted to criminal activity to make up for its lack of a legitimate economy.
We have to work with other countries in the region to neutralize the military threat and curb the flow of drugs and counterfeiting.
Fifty years after the end of the "Forgotten War" our message to all Americans who served their country in that conflict is that we have not forgotten you.
We remember and honor your sacrifice and heed the lesson of that conflict that our nation must remain vigilant in confronting the threat posed by North Korea.
# # #
Back to North Korea
