Annual Report COMMONWEALTH OF VIRGINIA 2002 Table of Contents Executive Summary ......................................................................
..................ii State-wide Reach ............................................................................iii Future Direction ..................................................................................................... iv Activities of the Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention ...............1 Statutory Authority ................................................................................................1 GOSAP Organization and Operation .....................................................................1 Funding ..................................................................................................................2 GOSAP Philosophy and Guiding Principles .........................................................2 Approaches ............................................................................................................3 GOSAP Collaborative............................................................................................3 Collaborative Activities .........................................................................................3 GOSAP Web site ...................................................................................................4 Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act (SDFSCA) Program ........5 Background ...........................................................................................................5 SDFSCA Principles of Effectiveness....................................................................5 SDFSCA Grants ....................................................................................................6 Virginia State Incentive Grant (SIG) Project .....................................................7 Background ...........................................................................................................7 Grants to Local Prevention Coalitions ..................................................................7 SIG Advisory Council...........................................................................................8 Capacity Building Initiative ..................................................................................9 Youth Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Project (YADAPP).....................10 Future Direction ...................................................................................................11 Virginia's Plan for Substance Abuse Prevention ...............................................11 KIDsafe Virginia................................................................................................11 APPENDIX A. GOVERNOR'S SDFSCA GRANTS AND CONTRACTS .......12 APPENDIX B. COMMUNITY SIG AWARDEES .............................................16 APPENDIX C. YADAPP 2002 TEAMS AND LOCALITIES ............................20
i
Executive Summary During FY 2001-2002, the Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention (GOSAP) extended its state-wide reach and, consistent with its statutory charge, established a solid foundation for maximum coordination of substance abuse prevention resources at the state, county and municipal levels of Virginia government.
GOSAP has provided technical assistance, program guidance, opportunities for interagency collaboration and financial support to scores of Virginia-based prevention programs serving dozens of communities and thousands of citizens in every area of the Commonwealth.
Among these major accomplishments have been: Launching the KIDsafe Virginia program to make the general public aware of the critical causal link between substance abuse and the incidence of crime in Virginia's communities, while taking the prevention message and safety education to children in every locality within the Commonwealth.
Working with James Madison University to provide technical assistance, training for substance abuse prevention professionals, and program guidance for applicants and recipients of funding under the State Incentive Grant or the Safe and Drug Free Schools and Communities Program.
Using a training curriculum developed under a grant to JMU, this innovative Capacity-Building Initiative conducted training for almost 300 individuals in 12 regional workshops, with a number of additional substance abuse prevention professionals completing these courses online.
Offering project-specific consultation and assistance for Second-Chance Grants.
This extra support of worthy projects and program proposals made the difference for applicants whose initial proposals were deemed technically insufficient, but whose proposed services were otherwise judged to be important for their local community's prevention efforts.
Redesign of the GOSAP Web site (www.gosap.state.va.us), to become a general information and advocacy resource for prevention professionals, youth and parents, while making substance abuse prevention information and services readily accessible for all Virginians.
Establishing a regional scope for the Youth Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Project (YADAPP).
YADAPP will be expanded to include youth leadership training opportunities in multiple regions throughout the Commonwealth.
Expansion of the State Incentive Grant Advisory Council, on which 40 member representatives from state and local government agencies, private companies, educational institutions, non-profit organizations and substance abuse experts regularly collaborate for the purpose of sharing "best practices."
This Council will be instrumental in development and implementation of GOSAP's State-wide Prevention Strategic Plan, to be published during FY 2002-2003.
ii
GOSAP'S STATE-WIDE REACH
GOVERNOR'S SAFE AND DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES GRANT LOCALITIES 2002-2003
SDFSCA Grant Localities
See Appendix A for the complete list of programs and communities being served.
STATE INCENTIVE GRANT (SIG) LOCALITIES 2001-2004
SIG Localities
See Appendix B for the complete list of programs and communities being served.
iii
Beginning in the late fall of 2002, GOSAP's state-wide reach was greatly expanded with implementation of the KIDsafe Virginia program, Governor Mark R. Warner's comprehensive approach to preventing substance abuse, enhancing the overall safety environment for young people, and imparting personal safety and crime prevention skills to all Virginia schoolchildren.
Using strategies of communication, education and collaboration with numerous new and existing programs operating throughout the Commonwealth, KIDsafe Virginia supplements ongoing prevention efforts and provides a central coordinating office at the highest level of government to ensure public awareness, community preparedness, citizen participation and parental involvement.
Key elements of KIDsafe Virginia include the involvement of teachers, school resource officers, administrators and law enforcement personnel in almost 1,900 Virginia public schools; the free public distribution of approximately 100,000 Child Identification DNA Kits by more than 160 automobile dealerships state-wide; a toll-free safety hotline for the public reporting of incidents and unsafe conditions that pose a threat to any child, school or community; an informative web site co-hosted with the GOSAP web site; an Internet accessible email box for receiving safety suggestions from Virginia's general public, and significant corporate underwriting for major program expenses.
Future Direction GOSAP will continue to support effective state and local prevention efforts through its two grant programs and its capacity-building initiatives.
Additionally, it will: · Conduct a substance abuse prevention program survey to more accurately document current prevention activities and assess costs, benefits and needs.
Findings will inform decisions about the coordination of prevention activities and priorities for resource allocation.
Complete and implement Virginia's strategic plan for substance abuse prevention.
Use of an interagency agreement will ensure coordination of prevention activities in accordance with §2.1-118, Code of Virginia.
Coordinate and expand Governor Warner's KIDsafe Virginia program.
·
·
iv
Report of Activities of the Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention
Statutory Authority The Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention (GOSAP) is authorized under §2.1-118, Code of Virginia, enacted by the 2000 General Assembly.
This annual report of activities is submitted in accordance with statutory requirements.
The statute sets forth the responsibility of the Governor "to administer the substance abuse prevention program within the Commonwealth and to authorize, direct, and coordinate activities of agencies of the Commonwealth in such program."
The responsibilities of the Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention are "to assist in the coordination of substance abuse prevention activities of the Commonwealth, review substance abuse prevention expenditures by agencies of the Commonwealth, and determine the direction and appropriateness of such expenditures."
The statute further specifies that "the Governor shall cooperate with federal, state and local agencies, private and public agencies, interested organizations, and individuals in order to prevent substance abuse within the Commonwealth."
In addition to its responsibilities for developing a more unified and effective approach to prevention at the state level, GOSAP also administers two major grant programs: the Governor's Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program and the State Incentive Grant Program.
These federal funds, awarded to the Governor's Office, support numerous local prevention initiatives throughout the Commonwealth.
These grant programs and the many initiatives they support are described in greater detail in this report.
GOSAP Organization and Operation Governor Warner located GOSAP in the Office of the Secretary of Public Safety where it operates as a separate entity but utilizes available research and technology resources.
The location provides enhanced visibility and support for prevention strategies and emphasizes the important role of substance abuse prevention in the Commonwealth's overall public safety mission.
In April 2002, Governor Warner appointed Marilyn P. Harris as Assistant Secretary of Public Safety and Director of the Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention.
1
Office location and contact information are: 202 North Ninth Street, Sixth Floor Richmond, Virginia 23219 Telephone: (804) 786-9072 FAX: (804) 786-1807 Email: gosap@gov.state.va.us Web site: www.gosap.state.va.us
FUNDING GOSAP operations are maintained by two federal funding streams it manages: 1) the State Incentive Grant (SIG) awarded by the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention, a subsidiary of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and 2) the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program (Governor's portion) authorized through the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, Title IV, Part A of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001.
For FY 2002-2003, GOSAP received $ 2,804,000 through the State Incentive Grant and $1,792,638 through the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program.
GOSAP Philosophy and Guiding Principles The Governor's Office for Substance Abuse Prevention (GOSAP) serves the citizens of the Commonwealth by collaborating with state agencies and private entities to coordinate Virginia's substance abuse prevention activities for efficient and effective use of resources.
Two federal grants that GOSAP administers support substance abuse and violence prevention efforts in communities across the Commonwealth.
Collaboration with active partners who coordinate prevention efforts at the state and local levels is central to the GOSAP mission.
Approaches used by GOSAP are informed by, and consistent with, emerging research that provides valuable insight into what practices do and do not work.
Prevention research has demonstrated the need for a strong prevention infrastructure at the state level, where efforts and resources can be best coordinated to achieve a more unified and effective approach.
GOSAP laid the foundation for a strong prevention infrastructure at the state level by establishing a GOSAP Collaborative and by actively building consensus around a strategic plan for prevention.
These activities are described in greater detail in this report.
Prevention research also supports the use of programs and strategies that have been demonstrated to be effective.
In its administration of both the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program and the State Incentive Grant
2
Project, GOSAP has awarded funding only for programs that have been demonstrated to be effective.
Furthermore, through these grant programs, GOSAP has promoted the use of community-based needs assessments and planning processes that contribute to the development of strong local prevention infrastructures.
Additionally, GOSAP has supported an ongoing training initiative designed to build prevention capacity throughout the Commonwealth.
Activities supported by these grant programs are described in this report.
Approaches The GOSAP Collaborative A GOSAP Collaborative has been established, comprising key leadership representatives from state agencies and organizations responsible for prevention.
Membership includes representatives from the Virginia Departments of Education, Social Services, Health, Alcoholic Beverage Control, Motor Vehicles, Juvenile Justice, Criminal Justice Services, and Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services.
The GOSAP Collaborative is undergoing expansion to include additional key prevention providers.
This leadership group provides valuable advisory consultation to the Governor's Office and serves as a primary vehicle for prevention collaboration among state agencies.
With consultation from the Collaborative, GOSAP will undertake a substance abuse prevention program survey to document current prevention activities and assess costs, benefits, and needs.
Collaborative Activities GOSAP has undertaken a variety of collaborative activities with other state agencies, including these: With the Department of Education...
· · · Developed a consolidated application to the U.S. Department of Education for Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act funding.
Funded a D.A.R.E. specialist position.
Participated in "Understanding No Child Left Behind: Safe and Drug-Free Schools," a "DOE Hour" public television production.
With the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control... · Co-sponsored the one-day workshop "Communicating Strategically through the Media about Underage Drinking."
3
With the Department of Criminal Justice Services's Center for School Safety... · · Co-sponsored the Youth Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Project.
Supported printing and state-wide distribution of the Juvenile Law Handbook for School Administrators, 2002 Update and the Virginia Drug Identification Guide for Professionals.
With the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services...
· Obtained feedback from local Community Services Boards regarding the Virginia plan for substance abuse prevention.
With Department of State Police...
· Purchased D.A.R.E. workbooks.
With James Madison University's Office of Substance Abuse Research...
· Funded Capacity-Building Project to train prevention professionals throughout the state regarding the latest prevention knowledge.
GOSAP Web site The GOSAP Web site (www.gosap.state.va.us) has been redesigned to become a general information and advocacy resource for prevention professionals, youth and parents.
In addition to providing information about the Office and its activities, the Web site will highlight prevention successes in the Commonwealth and provide links to valuable information and resources.
The site currently features information about the Governor's Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program and the State Incentive Grant Program, including grantee bulletin boards and downloadable reporting forms.
4
Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Program Background The Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 2001 (SDFSCA) is Title IV of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB).
The purpose of the SDFSCA is to support programs that prevent violence in and around schools; prevent the illegal use of alcohol, tobacco and drugs; involve parents and communities; and are coordinated with related federal, state, school, and community efforts and resources.
By fostering a safe and drug-free learning environment, the SDFSCA supports student academic achievement.
SDFSCA funds have been allocated to Virginia since 1987 (previously under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act).
In accordance with the formula set forth in statute, 80 percent of Virginia's SDFSCA funds are administered through the Virginia Department of Education for grants to local school divisions, and 20 percent is set aside as Governor's SDFSCA funds.
The Governor's SDFSCA funds are to be used to implement drug and violence prevention activities, including: · · · activities that complement and support local educational agency activities, including developing and implementing activities to prevent and reduce violence associated with prejudice and intolerance; dissemination of information about drug and violence prevention; and development and implementation of community-wide drug and violence prevention planning and organizing.
GOSAP worked in partnership with the Virginia Department of Education to develop the SDFSCA portion of Virginia's consolidated application for NCLB funding from the U.S. Department of Education.
Under NCLB, a strong emphasis is placed upon well-coordinated, SDFSCA-funded program activities between each state's principal education agency and the Office of the Governor.
SDFSCA Principles of Effectiveness The Governor's SDFSCA awards must be based on "the quality of the program or activity proposed and how the program or activity meets the principles of effectiveness."
Funded Programs must comply with the SDFSCA Principles of Effectiveness that require each one of them to: · · be based on an assessment of data regarding the incidence of violence and illegal drug use in those schools and communities served; include an analysis of data on risk factors, protective factors, or other variables in the school and community;
5
· · · ·
be based on an established set of performance measures aimed at ensuring that schools and communities served have a safe, orderly and drug-free learning environment; be based on scientifically based research that provides evidence that the program to be used will reduce violence and illegal drug use; include meaningful and ongoing consultation with parents in the development of the application and administration of the program or activity; and undergo periodic evaluation to assess progress toward reducing violence and illegal drug use, employing these evaluation results to refine, improve and strengthen programs.
SDFSCA Grants In July 2002, GOSAP awarded 35 competitive grants to public and private organizations serving 36 localities across the Commonwealth.
A list of SDFSCA awardees, localities served and brief project descriptions are included as Appendix A. Grants were awarded in four categories: 1.
Community Needs Assessment - Grants of up to $15,000 were awarded for the support of comprehensive community prevention needs assessments.
Communities awarded Needs Assessment Grants are collecting and using objective data from a variety of sources, determining the availability of prevention resources, and developing action plans based on actual needs.
Evaluation - Grants of up to $15,000 were awarded for a rigorous evaluation of an existing, well-established, locally developed program that has demonstrated some credible evidence of effectiveness.
Projects funded in this category use a very rigorous evaluation design to determine whether the program produces quantifiable outcomes.
Community Comprehensive Plan - Grants of up to $50,000 were awarded for the support of a community's comprehensive prevention plan.
The local plan developed by a local coalition/advisory council must have been based on a current needs assessment.
Continuation - A limited number of grants were awarded for the continuation of 2001 - 2002 Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities projects that had been successfully implemented and demonstrated preliminary evidence of effectiveness.
2.
3.
4.
6
Grant-Writing Workshop and Technical Assistance In the spring of 2002, GOSAP conducted two "Successful Grant-Writing" workshops for agencies and organizations interested in applying for SDFSCA funds.
Workshops offered in collaboration with James Madison University's Office of Substance Abuse Research (OSAR) were conducted in Roanoke on April 15 and in Richmond on April 17.
Follow-up technical assistance has been provided to grantees to support the successful implementation of their projects.
Furthermore, in an effort to support localities in their prevention efforts, GOSAP provided technical assistance to those whose initial proposals were insufficient.
Following technical assistance, five "second chance" applicants were awarded funding based upon their improved project proposals.
Virginia State Incentive Grant Project Background In October of 2000, Virginia entered into a three-year cooperative agreement with the federal Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) and was awarded a $9 million State Incentive Grant (SIG).
CSAP's State Incentive Grant Program is intended to reduce substance abuse among 12- to 17-year-olds through prevention programs that have demonstrated effectiveness and have enhanced prevention systems at the state and local levels.
At the end of FY 2001, CSAP had awarded State Incentive Grants to a total of 41 states.
States awarded SIG funding are required to direct 85 percent of it to the implementation of local community projects; the remaining 15 percent of funding is to be used to coordinate prevention funding at the state level and to develop a state-wide prevention strategy.
The Virginia SIG Project uses a three-pronged approach, as described below: 1) providing grants to local community prevention coalitions, 2) directing a SIG Advisory Council that assists in the development of the strategic plan, and 3) managing a capacity-building initiative.
Grants to Local Prevention Coalitions In October of 2001, 20 local prevention coalitions were awarded three-year grants of up to $360,000 to implement model prevention programs, to implement environmental strategies to change local norms and policies related to alcohol, tobacco and other drug use, and to enhance local prevention planning efforts.
Funded local projects serve a total of 43 Virginia localities.
Brief project descriptions, and a list of all local SIG awardees and the communities served, are included as Appendix B.
7
GOSAP has provided ongoing technical assistance to local coalitions, as well as training of local project staff, to increase their ability to provide outcome-based prevention programming.
Local project staff also received training in the Prevention Based Performance System, a web-based data-reporting system that has received national recognition as an example of state-of-the-art prevention technology.
The reporting system for Virginia SIG projects was developed by Kit Solutions, under a contract with GOSAP.
A comprehensive evaluation of the Virginia SIG initiative is being conducted by Caliber Associates, a nationally recognized firm based in Fairfax, Virginia.
SIG Advisory Council A SIG Advisory Council has provided advice and consultation during implementation of the Virginia SIG Project.
The Council provided guidance in the SIG grant award process, and it has begun work on a strategic plan for substance abuse prevention, as required by the CSAP.
Membership in the SIG Advisory Council has grown to 40 representatives from public- and private-sector prevention organizations, ranging from state agencies with prevention responsibilities to non-traditional prevention providers, such as the Commonwealth Girl Scouts, Boys and Girls Clubs, the Action Alliance for Children, and the United Way.
The SIG Advisory Council has identified nine "core elements" that form a framework for a strategic plan for substance abuse prevention.
The "core elements" are: Work Force Development - building capacities to recruit, develop, and retain substance abuse prevention providers.
Ethical Prevention Practice - to assist in the promotion and assurance of prevention standards of practice by prevention providers.
Science-Based Practice promoting the use of, and building the capacity for, science-based practice.
Environmental Change increasing the focus on the shared environment related to community norms, regulations, policies and data collection.
Collaboration establishing organized prevention partnerships at the state and local levels to foster consistent planning, programming and data collection.
Resource Development securing a consistent and efficiently integrated funding stream for substance abuse prevention efforts.
8
Legislative Issues enacting public policies that clearly reflect what research shows to be effective in promoting successful outcomes in substance abuse prevention.
Public Awareness heightening awareness of prevention goals, messages and initiatives at the local, state and national levels.
Advocacy fostering prevention advocacy development at the local and state levels.
Capacity-Building Initiative GOSAP and the Office of Substance Abuse Research within James Madison University's Department of Health Sciences have established a partnership to make information, training, and technical assistance available to prevention professionals throughout the Commonwealth.
This project is designed to increase the capacity of prevention professionals to select, and to successfully implement, scientifically sound prevention programs.
Information and training are made available to all prevention professionals, regardless of organizational affiliation.
Technical assistance has been provided to local SDFSCA and SIG grantees.
A three-level curriculum has been developed to include: Prevention Basics, Level I (PB I) - Prevention Theory and Research ­ Basic prevention theory, research and practice for prevention practitioners and those who wish to update their knowledge of prevention science.
Prevention Basics, Level II (PB II) - Skills for Assessing Needs and Evaluating for Results - Designed for those involved in prevention coordination and program development.
Prevention Basics, Level III (PB III) - Building Capacity for Sustainability Designed to develop skills in community-based planning and implementation at the broader community-wide level.
During 2001-2002, PB I was provided for 133 participants in six regional workshops.
PB II was provided for 153 participants in six regional workshops.
Six individuals completed an online PB I offered through James Madison University.
The training schedule for 2002-2003 is: PB I PB II PB III Three regional workshops to be offered (October, March, and June) Six regional workshops to be offered (October, January, March, May, June, August) Six regional workshops to be offered (November (twice), December, May, July, August)
9
Youth Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Project (YADAPP) GOSAP has provided Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act funding to the Youth Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention Project (YADAPP).
YADAPP summer conferences have been held annually for the past 18 years as a way to promote youth-led prevention efforts in Virginia schools.
High schools and communities from throughout the Commonwealth send teams of four students and one adult sponsor; between 90 and 100 teams typically attend.
The first YADAPP was co-sponsored by the Virginia Department of Education and the Department of Motor Vehicles.
Subsequent conferences have been supported by a variety of state agencies and organizations.
Currently, the Department of Criminal Justice Services sponsors the YADAPP project with supplemental support from GOSAP, the Departments of Education, Motor Vehicles, and Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Also collaborating are the Virginia State Police and other law enforcement agencies.
YADAPP 2002 was held at Longwood University the week of July 22.
The week included a mix of general sessions, topical sessions, and action planning to develop STAN (Strategies To Act Now) plans for each team represented.
YADAPP aims to "empower Virginia's high school students with the ability to assume positive peer leadership roles toward the goal of safe and drug-free schools and communities."
Adult sponsors are provided training in prevention, grant writing and program evaluation, and they participate in valuable networking sessions to share ideas.
A particularly noteworthy feature of YADAPP is the series of progressive leadership opportunities that are provided for youth.
After attending the conference for one year, participants are invited to apply to return in a more advanced role as Youth Leaders (limited to 40).
After serving as a Youth Leader, a young person may apply to become a Junior Staff (limited to 25).
After two years on Junior Staff, up to six intern positions are available.
These internships are the ultimate opportunity to put into practice the skills learned during their tenure with YADAPP.
Former "YADAPPers" who have moved into leadership positions in state government, law enforcement, and other public service roles have attested to the strong influence of YADAPP in their decisions to pursue career opportunities in public service.
Under Kidsafe Virginia, YADAPP youth training is being expanded to incorporate regional sessions during the school year, in addition to its usual summer program.
10
Future Direction GOSAP will continue to support effective state and local prevention efforts through the two grant programs it administers and through its capacity building project.
Additionally, the following is planned: Virginia's Plan for Substance Abuse Prevention With consultation from the expanded GOSAP Collaborative, a substance abuse prevention program survey will be undertaken for the purposes of documenting current prevention activities and assessing costs, benefits and needs.
It is anticipated that findings will inform decisions about the coordination of prevention activities and priorities for resource allocation.
GOSAP plans to use an interagency agreement to implement Virginia's strategic plan for substance abuse prevention.
The interagency agreement will delineate the respective roles that state agencies will play in the plan's implementation, ensuring coordination of prevention activities in accordance with §2.1-118, Code of Virginia.
The GOSAP Collaborative, comprising key leadership representatives from state agencies and organizations responsible for prevention, will play a central role in developing the interagency agreement and successfully implementing Virginia's plan.
KIDsafe Virginia GOSAP has provided leadership for the collaborative, interagency development of a comprehensive approach for keeping Virginia's children and youth safe.
Governor Warner's KIDsafe Virginia is intended to support the coordinated efforts of parents, educators, public safety professionals and students throughout Virginia.
The initiative features educational programs, informational resources for parents and professionals, enhanced youth leadership development opportunities, a hotline for students, and an online suggestion box.
An evaluation mechanism will be developed to determine program participation, effectiveness, and utilization of instructional materials.
A significant element of KIDsafe Virginia is the extension of YADAPP youth leadership development opportunities to the regional level.
These expanded opportunities will broaden the impact of YADAPP by involving additional schools and youth during the school year.
11
APPENDIX A. GOVERNOR'S SAFE AND DRUG-FREE SCHOOLS AND COMMUNITIES GRANTS AND CONTRACTS SDFSCA Award Recipient Central Virginia Community Services
Localities Served City of Lynchburg
Project Highlights (July 1, 2002 - June 30, 2003) Reconnecting Youth - A Peer Group Approach to Building Life Skills ­ implementing a school-based prevention model program for youth in grades 9 to 12 who are at risk of school dropout.
Evaluation of the RELATE Project ­ conducting a comprehensive evaluation of the Relationship Leading Adolescents Toward Empowerment Project, a peer-to-peer education project dedicated to preventing sexual and peer violence among teens.
Violence is Preventable ­ targeting students prone to violent behavior, implementing VIP, a program designed to decrease institutional disturbance and teach appropriate social skills to juveniles.
Al's Pals ­ teaching preschool children social skills, self-control, caring about others, conflict resolution, and decision making skills using Al's Pals in Hopewell Head Start classes.
Project Charlie ­ using Project Charlie to increase student knowledge of the harmful consequences of chemical use and to increase their decision making skills necessary to say "no" to using drugs.
Evaluation of Use, You Lose! ­ conducting comprehensive evaluation of Use, You Lose!, a locally developed campaign designed to increase student and parent awareness of alcohol and drug standards, laws and norms in schools and the community.
Evaluation of School-Based Student Assistance Support Groups ­ conducting a comprehensive evaluation of school-based support groups in Winchester, Frederick and Clarke Public Schools.
Evaluation of Substance Abuse and Violence Prevention Program ­ conducting a comprehensive evaluation of substance abuse and violence prevention services currently provided throughout Prince William County Public Schools.
Amount of Award (1 yr.)
$48,795.00
Newport News Office on Youth Development
Cities of Newport News and Hampton
$14,345.00
Virginia Department of Correctional Education District 19 Community Services Board West Point Public Schools
Bon Air Juvenile Correctional Center
$33,633.00
City of Hopewell
$9,720.00
Town of West Point
$18,750.00
Chesterfield County Youth Services
Chesterfield County
$15,000.00
Winchester Public Schools
City of Winchester; Counties of Frederick and Clarke Prince William County
$15,000.00
Prince William County Public Schools
$11,250.00
Charlottesville Redevelopment and Housing Authority
City of Charlottesville
CRHA Community Needs Assessment -
$13,452.00
conducting the Center for Disease Control and Prevention's Youth Risk Behavior Survey with youth in grades 7 through 12 in each of the public housing development sites in Charlottesville.
Project SMART Moves ­ addressing issues of family cohesion, alcohol, tobacco and other drug use, $9,248.30
Boys and Girls Club of Harrisonburg and
City of Harrisonburg
12
SDFSCA Award Recipient Rockingham Chesapeake Community Services Board Loudoun County Public Schools Roanoke County Public Schools
Localities Served Rockingham County City of Chesapeake
Project Highlights (July 1, 2002 - June 30, 2003) Teen pregnancy, and HIV awareness through science-based B/G Club's SMART Moves program.
Evaluation of Substance Abuse Prevention Programs - conducting a comprehensive evaluation of programs in the local prevention plan of the Chesapeake Community Services Board.
Get Real About Violence - training 40 additional guidance counselors in the Get Real About Violence program, a science-based model program.
Amount of Award (1 yr.)
$16,000.00
Loudoun County
$17,833.00
Roanoke County
Student Assistance Program and Community Collaboration - increasing student assistance
$47,339.00
program services in the area of Glenvar schools, Northside Middle, and RC Career Center in order to decrease substance abuse and violent behavior among students.
Fairfax-Falls Church Community Services Board Fairfax County; Cities of Fairfax and Falls Church Girl Power Partnerships ­ implementing Girl Power, a substance abuse prevention program for 10-15 year old girls; program focuses on education and skill building, community service, alternative activities, and a parent/caregiver component.
Second Step, Life Skills Training, and Class Action ­ implementing three programs to reduce impulsive and aggressive behavior in young children and increase their level of social competence.
Substance Abuse and Violence Education (SAVE) Program - continuing two science-based programs, Get Real About Violence and Here's Looking at You to support academic success, social competence, and a positive view of the future.
No More Bullying! ­ reducing the level of violence at Harrowgate Elementary School by restructuring the school environment to reduce and prevent bullying/victims problems.
Reconnecting Youth ­ collaborating with Richmond Public Schools to implement the Bullying Prevention Program in Blackwell and Fairfield Elementary Schools.
Outcomes will include a reduction of violence, increased parental involvement and the adoption of a school-wide bullying prevention policy.
Rural Virginia Preparing for the Drug-Free Years Program (RVPDFY) ­ preventing and reducing youth substance abuse by strengthening family management skills and family bonding through implementation of the science-based Preparing for the Drug-Free Years Program.
$24,500.00
Washington County Public Schools
Washington County
$22,817.00
Nelson County Middle School
Nelson County
$37,500.00
Chesterfield County Public Schools
Chesterfield County
$5,300.00
City of Richmond, Human Services Commission
City of Richmond
$25,772.00
Middle PeninsulaNorthern Neck Community Services Board
Counties of Essex, Gloucester, King and Queen, King William, Lancaster, Mathews, Middlesex, Northumberland, Richmond, and Westmoreland Giles County
$24,400.00
New River Valley
Life Skills Training - teaching Life Skills Training to
$23,138.00
13
SDFSCA Award Recipient Community Services
Localities Served
Project Highlights (July 1, 2002 - June 30, 2003) all 6th and 7th graders at three Giles County middle schools.
The program develops skills important to building resiliency, including communication, decision-making, problem solving, and assertiveness.
Amount of Award (1 yr.)
New River Valley Community Services Middle PeninsulaNorthern Neck Community Services Board
Montgomery County Counties of Essex, Gloucester, King and Queen, King William, Lancaster, Mathews, Middlesex, Northumberland, Richmond, and Westmoreland Grayson County
Bullying Prevention ­ implementing Olweis's science-based bullying prevention program at Shawsville Middle School.
UP with Youth Project ­ implementing the Rural Virginia UP (Use Prevention) With Youth Project designed to delay the age at which youth begin drinking, reduce alcohol use among youth who have already tried drinking, and limit the number of alcohol-related problems youth experience.
$22,104.00
$46,800.46
Grayson County Public Schools
Life Skills Training ­ teaching Life Skills Training to all middle and elementary students (5th grade) in nine surrounding communities.
The program develops skills important to building resiliency including communication, decision-making, problem solving and assertiveness.
Hampton's Heart 2 Hands Project ­ using the Community of Caring program to impact students who attend selected schools by creating a caring and respectful learning environment, which supports a drug- and violence-free lifestyle.
DSL for Teens - DSL (Diversity, Service, and Leadership) for Teens will provide numerous teens from diverse backgrounds the opportunity to gain leadership skills while developing communitybased service learning in the area of substance abuse and violence prevention with an emphasis on developing alternative recreation programs.
Teenage Health Teaching Modules ­ implementing a comprehensive curriculum designed to teach students to make healthy choices about their bodies, including zero tolerance for drugs and alcohol.
Girl Power - Continuing science-based prevention programming throughout Fairfax County utilizing existing partners established in the Girl Power program.
SMART Steps - will offer SMART Moves and provide adult mentors to youth living in mobile home park identified as having substance abuse problems.
Girl Power - expanding the Girl Power program into the Franconia and Culmore areas of Fairfax County.
Journeys to Strength - utilizing the Leadership and
$42,970.00
Alternatives, Inc.
City of Hampton
$43,241.00
Prince William County Office on Youth
Prince William County
$50,000.00
Essex County Public Schools
Essex County
$29,500.00
United Community Ministries
Fairfax County
$25,000.00
Big Brothers/Big Sisters of Harrisonburg and Rockingham Alternatives House Danville-Pittsylvania
City of Harrisonburg; Rockingham County Fairfax County City of Danville;
$48,669.66
$22,327.00 $47,741.00
14
SDFSCA Award Recipient Community Services Board Mountain View Youth and Family Services
Localities Served Pittsylvania County
Project Highlights (July 1, 2002 - June 30, 2003) Resiliency model program to reduce further court involvement by youth ages 13 to 15 referred by the Danville Court Services Unit.
Youth Substance Abuse and Violence Prevention Plan ­ developing a community-based process to implement the Carroll County Action Plan and implement Life Skills Training for all 6th and 7th grade students in Carroll County.
Buckingham Youth Alliance ­ will offer Creating Lasting Family Connections, Second Step, and a youth conference and town forum.
Expansion of the Family Intervention Project ­ this project is dedicated to supporting families in intervening with their at-risk child or children while reducing substance abuse, violence, and other problems.
Fairfax County After-School Network and Forum ­ will offer science-based prevention activities for Fairfax youth during non-school hours.
SerenityQuest Violence Prevention Project ­ will offer Get Real About Violence and other technology-rich programs to reduce violence in five public housing communities in Richmond.
Project NOAH ­ a violence prevention program utilizing the components of Nurturing Parenting Programs.
Amount of Award (1 yr.)
Carroll County
$47,667.00
Buckingham County Public Schools CLEAN, Inc.
Buckingham County
$35,217.00
City of Winchester; Frederick and Clarke Counties
$36,301.00
Fairfax Partnership for Youth, Inc.
Garfield Childs Memorial Fund
Fairfax County
$34,756.00
City of Richmond
$38,000.00
SeeUs ReGroup, LLC
Gloucester County
$33,150.00
15
APPENDIX B. COMMUNITY STATE INCENTIVE GRANT (SIG) AWARDEES SIG Awardee Coalition The Unified School Community Coalition
Localities Served County of Fairfax
Project Highlights (Oct. 1, 2001 ­ Sept. 30, 2004)
(3 yr. Total)
Amount of Award
Middle School Promising Programs - implementing three after-school, science-based prevention programs: Get Real About Violence, Life Skills, and Creating Lasting Connections.
Parents will be participating in the Preparing for Drug-Free Years.
FAST/Operation Store Front ­ implementing Families and Schools Together program (FAST), an eight-week program and a longer-term support group entitled FASTWORKS.
In Operation Store Front, teams of youth conduct assessments of local tobacco outlets to reduce underage access to tobacco products.
Substance Abuse Educational and Environmental Project ­ implementing Al's Pals for young children, Life Skills with middle school youth and Strengthening Families in targeted neighborhoods.
Also launching a media campaign to address alcohol and drug use by youth.
Creating Lasting Connections - implementing Creating Lasting Connections, a 20-week program designed to enhance family bonding and communication, and reduce the risks of youth and family substance abuse.
Also implementing a social norms marketing campaign.
Substance Abuse Prevention Initiative ­ implementing programs and strategies that address prioritized risk factors and fill identified gaps in services, including the Structural Family Therapy program, Adolescent Transition program, Project Towards No Drug Abuse, and Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol.
The Rural Virginia United Coalition's Creating Resilient Youth ­ implementing a multi-sector, multi-strategy approach using seven science-based programs ­ Girl Power, Preparing for the Drug Free Years, Al's Pals, Smart Alternatives, Reconnecting Youth, Creating Lasting Connections, and Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol.
$360,000.00
City of Virginia Beach Youth Opportunities Team
City of Virginia Beach
$359,396.00
Historic Triangle Substance Abuse Coalition
Cities of Williamsburg and Poquoson; Counties of James City and York County Counties of Appomattox and Campbell
$360,000.00
Community-Wide Youth Collaborative Coalition
$360,000.00
Community 
City of Winchester and Clarke and Frederick Counties
$360,000.00
Rural Virginia United Coalition
Counties of Essex, Gloucester, King and Queen, King William, Lancaster, Mathews, Middlesex, Northumberland, Richmond, and Westmoreland
$360,000.00
Hampton Neighborhood Youth Advisory Board
City of Hampton
Across Neighborhoods, Across Ages ­ implementing Across Ages, a science-based mentoring program throughout the city; Project Towards No Drug Use with students in grades 8 12 who have been suspended or expelled for alcohol/drug use; Hampton Connections, a vendor training to reduce the youth access to alcohol; and
$358,045.00
16
SIG Awardee Coalition
Localities Served
Project Highlights (Oct. 1, 2001 ­ Sept. 30, 2004)
(3 yr. Total)
Amount of Award
training to build the capacity of local advisory groups.
Healthy CommUnity Council/PEAS Board City of Harrisonburg and County of Rockingham City of Martinsville and Henry County Parenting Education and Support PEAS Program ­ implementing The Incredible Years, a program for the parents of children 2 to 11; Parents Who Care, a program for parents of children 12 to 17 years of age; and a strategic media advocacy program.
Mobilizing a Community Toward Positive Choices implementing two model programs: 1.Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol uses a community-organizing intervention to reduce youth accessibility to alcohol.
2.
Life Skills Training teaches middle school students personal and social skills that promote individual competence and reduce their vulnerability to substance abuse.
Leadership and Resiliency Program ­ implementing a multi-component leadership and resiliency program for adolescents ages 12-16 who are atrisk for ATOD and violence involvement.
The coalition is also implementing a "Change the Outcome" media campaign to heighten parental awareness and to reduce the purchase of alcohol by parents for youth.
I CARE Community Builders Collaborative implementing a network of neighborhood-based prevention programs for youth and their families that promote resilience, healthy choices, and the reduction of youth alcohol, tobacco and other drug use.
Three primary strategies are 1) comprehensive after-school programming for middle school youth, 2) a social norms marketing campaign designed to reduce youth tobacco use, and 3) a training/technical assistance program to engage grass-roots community groups who will implement two proven programs, SMART Moves and Responding in Peaceful and Positive Ways (R.I.P.P.).
Roanoke County Substance Abuse Prevention Initiative ­ implementing a multi-faceted community initiative designed to address substance abuse among youth in the Roanoke area, including two proven programs: Preparing for the Drug-Free Years and Communities Mobilizing for Changes on Alcohol.
The Youth Enhancement Project ­ implementing the Al's Pals program to increase protective factors for young children, the Across Ages program to target middle school age youth currently at greatest risk for substance abuse, and a Know Your Neighbor campaign, an environmental strategy to improve community norms and increase $360,000.00
Youth Interagency Network
$269,781.00
Community Youth Coalitions United
Pittsylvania County
$337,374.00
I CARE Youth Development Council
Hanover County
$358,725.00
Roanoke County School/Community Prevention
Roanoke County
$348,953.00
Community Builders Network
City of Newport News
$356,101.00
17
SIG Awardee Coalition PIN Prevention Work Group
Localities Served City of Portsmouth
Project Highlights (Oct. 1, 2001 ­ Sept. 30, 2004)
(3 yr. Total)
Amount of Award
protective factors citywide.
The Right Path ­ implementing a comprehensive approach to reducing family management problems and early initiation of problem behaviors through implementation of Al's Pals in 48 classrooms in public and private school settings and the accompanying parent course, Here, Now and Down the Road.
Also conducting training and compliance monitoring to reduce youth access to alcohol and tobacco and providing a Web site for community access.
RAYSAC Community Partnership Project implementing 1) Second Step, violence prevention program, 2) Mediation Training, 3) Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol, an environmental strategy to reduce youth access to alcohol, and 4) Preparing for the Drug-Free Years, a prevention education program for parents.
Advisory Commission on Youth Prevention Project targeting under-served middle school youth, this project is implementing two science-based prevention programs, Life Skills Training and Get Real About Violence.
A summer camp and an antitobacco youth campaign also will be implemented.
Project Thrive - project focuses on developing community support and awareness and strengthening protective factors through implementation of Reconnecting Youth and the Strengthening Families programs.
Also implementing a merchant and vendor reward program that positively recognizes licensees, who abide by policy in order to discourage underage drinking.
Alcohol and Drug Change Project - implementing two school-targeted adolescent transition programs and the Project Towards No Drug Abuse as well as the Strengthening Families program addressing behavior problems including substance abuse.
Also implementing Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol, an environmental strategy that includes media activities, promoting model ordinances, and alcohol compliance checks.
Families and Communities Partnership - seeks to build on family strengths, provide a school-based, family focused program designed to increase selfesteem and improve school performance by implementing the Families and Schools Together (FAST) program and FAST WORKS.
Also promoting community and vendor awareness of substance abuse through merchant training.
SIG Prevention Grant - fills a gap in the early childhood prevention programming by providing $360,000.00
Roanoke Area Youth Substance Abuse Coalition
Cities of Roanoke and Salem and Counties of Craig and Botetourt
$349,500.00
Loudoun County Advisory Commission on Youth
Loudoun County
$287,443.00
Bristol/Washington County Prevention Planning Coalition
City of Bristol and Washington County
$359,412.00
Warren Community Health Coalition
Warren County
$360,000.00
Charles City/New Kent County Prevention Coalition
New Kent County
$263,508.00
Substance Abuse Taskforce in Rural
Tazewell County
$323,095.00
18
SIG Awardee Coalition Appalachia
Localities Served
Project Highlights (Oct. 1, 2001 ­ Sept. 30, 2004)
(3 yr. Total)
Amount of Award
Al's Pals: Kids Making Healthy Choices to all pre-k, kindergarten and Head Start children; accompanying parent program Here, Now and Down the Road will also be provided.
A large-scale public education campaign, increased compliance checks, and merchant/vendor training will be implemented as environmental strategies.
19
APPENDIX C. YADAPP 2002 TEAMS AND LOCALITIES 2002 YADAPP TEAMS Appomattox High School Yorktown High School Wakefield High School Bath County High School Parry McCluer High School Washington- Lee High School Virginia High School Buckingham County High School Charles City High School Churchland High School Great Bridge High School Menchville High School Woodside High School Monacan High School Clover Hill High School James River High School Lloyd C. Bird High School Matoaca High School Meadowbrook High School Midlothian High School Thomas Dale High School Colonial Heights High School Covington High School George Washington High School Essex High School West Springfield High School Floyd County High School Office on Youth Greensville County High School Halifax County High School Denbigh High School Warwick High School Atlee High School Henrico High School JR. Tucker High School Windsor High School King George High School Osbourn High School LOCALITY Appomattox County Arlington County City of Arlington Bath County Botetourt County City of Bristol City of Bristol Buckingham County Charles City County City of Chesapeake City of Chesapeake City of Newport News City of Newport News Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County Chesterfield County City of Colonial Heights City of Covington City of Danville Essex County Fairfax County Floyd County Frederick County Greensville County Halifax County City of Newport News City of Newport News Hanover County Henrico County Henrico County Isle of Wight County King George County City of Manassas
20
2002 YADAPP TEAMS Stonewall Jackson High School Woodbridge Senior High School Mathews High School Middlesex Prevention Coalition Heritage High School Norview High School Woodrow Wilson High School Nottoway High School Powhatan High School Tidewater Academy Gar- Field High School Prince William County Office on Youth Radford High School Radford Office on Youth Rappahannock High School John F. Kennedy High School John Marshall High School Open High School James River High School William Fleming High School Robert E. Lee High School Sussex Central High School Youth Leaders in Action City of VA Beach Parks 
LOCALITY City of Manassas City of Manassas Mathews County Middlesex County City of Newport News City of Norfolk City of Norfolk Nottoway County Powhatan County Prince George County Prince William County Prince William County City of Radford City of Radford Rappahannock County City of Richmond City of Richmond City of Richmond City of Roanoke Roanoke County City of Staunton Sussex County City of Virginia Beach City of Virginia Beach Town of West Point City of Winchester
21
