North Carolina Historic Sites 2001 Events January 13 Fort Fisher.
136th Anniversary Program.
Small event with special guided tours and weapons demonstrations.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M.; Artillery demonstrations: 11 A .M., 1:30 P.M., and 3 P.M. January 19-20 Aycock Birthplace.
Charles B. Aycock's North Carolina: Politics, Education, and Race Relations in the Progressive Era.
Gov. Charles B. Aycock Birthplace State Historic Site and Wayne Community College will host this educational symposium.
Speakers include Dr. Je ffrey Crow, director of the Division of Archives and History; Dr. Willliam Link, UNC- Greensboro, Dr. Jim Leloudis, University of North Carolina, and Dr. John Haley, UNC- Wilmington.
The symposium will coincide with the 100th anniversary of the inauguration of Governor Aycock.
Major support provided by the North Carolina Humanities Council.
Registration required.
Fee for meals.
February North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Black History Month Program.
During the month of February local school children can learn about black inventors related to transportation history.
Groups may schedule Tuesday- Friday throughout the month.
February 5 Edenton.
Regional History Bowl.
The History Bowl is an academic competition among eighth- grade students studying North Carolina history.
Regional winners advance to the state championship.
9 A .M.- 4 P.M. February 10 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Sweethearts.
Come learn about country courtship customs of long ago.
Play parlor games and make a sweetheart card.
"Spoonin'" and "Sparkin'" on the horse- drawn wagon rides will be overlooked by our chaperones.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
11 A .M.- 4 P.M. February 12 Aycock Birthplace.
Regional History Bowl.
Cosponsor: CSS Neuse.
9 A .M .- 5 P.M .
February 17-18 Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Civil War Living History Program.
Civil War reenactors will demonstrate small arms, artillery firing, and camp life to visitors.
Several guns will fire approximately every half- hour throughout the event.
Book signing and presentation by Dr. Chris Fonvielle.
10 A .M.- 3 P.M. February 19 James K. Polk Memorial.
President's Day Program.
In honor of President's Day the James K. Polk Memorial will host a program at the site featuring a talk on Polk and his administration by a historian.
The program also will feature a reception, book signing, and museum open house.
Donations accepted.
6:30- 8:30 P.M.
Space is limited to 50 people, pre- registration is suggested.
February 24 Bentonville Battleground.
Regional History Bowl.
9 A .M.- 4 P.M.
The compet ition will be held at nearby Mill Creek Church.
March 12 Duke Homestead.
Regional History Bowl.
Cosponsor: Bennett Place.
9 A .M.5 P.M. March 17-18 Bentonville Battleground.
136th Anniversary ­ Commemorative Living History Program.
Reenactors will present uniform and equipment talks, demonstrate soldier and camp life, and discuss tactics used during the Civil War.
The program will also include artillery demonstrations.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. daily.
March 24 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
German Heritage Festival.
This program will focus on foods, stories, traditions, and other contributions Germans have made to the United States, with particular emphasis on North Carolina.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
Noon- 4 P.M. March 26 Vance Birthplace.
Regional History Bowl.
Eight teams from western North Carolina compete in the History Bowl.
9 A .M.- 4 P.M. March 27 Aycock Birthplace.
Daffodil Festival Open House.
The kick- off event of the Daffodil Festival.
A petting zoo, wagon rides, and other 19th- century activities.
9:30 A .M .- 2 P.M .
March 31 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Senior Day.
Seniors 60 and older can participate in a community day with special train rides, guided tours of the roundhouse, and an opportunity for a picnic- style lunch to discuss old times.
$1.00 per senior for train ride.
Train rides: 11 A .M., 1 P.M., 2 P.M., and 3 P.M. March 31 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Steam Train Rides Begin.
Starting Saturday, March 31, weekend steam- powered train rides will operate through the end of October.
$5.00 adults, $4.00 children and seniors.
Saturdays, 11 A .M., 1 P.M., 2 P.M ., and 3 P.M .; Sundays, 1:30 P.M ., 2:30 P.M ., and 3:30 P.M .
Both 2- 8- 0 locomotive No. 604 and 70- ton Shay 1925 will operate on alternate months.
April and May (Wednesdays except April 4) Aycock Birthplace.
Living History Demonstrations.
The site will offer three different demonstrations of 19th- century farm and domestic skills.
Groups must schedule in advance.
9:30 A .M.- 2 P.M. April 4-5 Edenton.
Easter Eggs the Natural Way.
Learn how to color Easter eggs using a variety of natural dyes obtained from flowers, vegetables, and other plants.
Supply your own eggs for dyeing.
Reservations requested.
9 A .M.- 2:30 P.M. April 7-8, 13 -14 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Easter Bunny Express.
The Easter Bunny will visit the museum to meet children and pass out candy on the train.
Opportunity to have posed photographs with the Easter Bunny for a small fee. $3.00 ­ train ride; $5.00 ­ photograph.
Train rides: Saturday, 11 A .M., 1 P.M., 2 P.M., and 3 P.M.; Sunday, 1:30 P.M., 2:30 P.M., and 3:30 P.M.
April 12 Historic Halifax.
Halifax Day.
Celebration of the 225th anniversary of the adoption of the Halifax Resolves, the first call for independence from Great Britain.
Includes the Historic Halifax Restoration Association awards ceremony, tours of restored buildings, and other activities.
April 14 Duke Homestead.
Herb and Garden Festival.
Historical outdoor herb festival that features traditional herbal use displays and a wide variety of herb vendors.
Several herbal workshops will be offered throughout the day and refreshments will be available.
Guided tours of the 1852 Homestead will be offered.
Donations accepted.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M.
Groups of more than 20 should call for reservations.
April 14 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Studebaker Car Show.
Antique Studebakers owned by members of the Studebaker Drivers Club will be on display.
10 A .M .- 4 P.M .
April 14-15 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Before Easter Baskets, There Were Rabbits' Nests.
Children of all ages will enjoy coloring eggs with natural dyes and practicing the old custom of making nests for the Easter Hare. Egg- rolling and egg hunts will also be featured.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
Saturday, 11 A .M.- 4 P.M.; Sunday, 1- 4 P.M .
Bring a basket to carry your eggs home with you.
April 15 Historic Bath.
Bath Fun Day.
Historic building tours, demonstrations, crafts, and music.
Noon- 5 P.M. April 21-22 Fort Dobbs.
Militia Encampment.
Activities include an 18th- century militia encampment with artillery and small arms demonstrations.
Also campsite activities.
Saturday, 1- 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1- 4 P.M. April 21-22 James K. Polk Memorial.
Mexican War Encampment, 1847.
The site will host a living history program featuring costumed interpreters from the 12th U.S. Infantry and the 1st U.S. Dragoons.
Costumed interpreters will take visitors back in time to the spring of 1847 when United States Army recruiters were scouring the North Carolina countryside looking for voluntee rs to enlist and serve in the war against Mexico.
Visitors will see uniform and equipment demonstrations, musket firings, and a camp of infantry and dragoon soldiers.
Visitors will also be able to "enlist" in the army and drill with the troops.
Donations accepted.
Saturday, 9 A .M.- 5 P.M.; Sunday, 9 A .M.- 1 P.M. April 22 Vance Birthplace.
Spring Pioneer Living Day.
Demonstrations of domestic skills associated with the operation of an 1830s mountain farmstead.
1- 4:30 P.M. April 28-29 Bennett Place.
136th Anniversary Surrender Observance.
Commemoration of Gen. Joseph E. Johnston's surrender to Gen. William T. Sherman on April 26, 1865.
Includes guided tours through scripted scenarios depicting the surrender negotiations and a camp area where demonstrations o f soldier and civilian life will be presented.
10 A .M.4 P.M. daily.
April 28-29 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Rail Days.
Celebration of North Carolina railroad history through train rides, children's activities, and music.
Special slide show on Friday evening showcasing North Carolina railroads.
Fee. 9 A .M.- 5 P.M. daily.
April 29 House in the Horseshoe.
Spring Living History Day.
Numerous demonstrations of 18th- century skills such as blacksmithing, pottery, woodworking, weaving, and militia drill by costumed interpreters.
Also tours of the historic Alston House, gift shop, and food vendors.
Noon- 5 P.M.
May 5 Bentonville Battleground.
Confederate Memorial Day.
A memorial service will be held near the Confederate mass grave.
The Harper House- Bentonville Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy and Bentonville Battleground will host the service.
11 A .M.- noon.
May 5 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
From Sheep to Shawl.
Activities include hand- shearing the sheep, cleaning and spinning wool, dyeing yarn, quilting, and sewing.
Also displays of antique and reproduction clothing and quilts.
11 A .M.- 4 P.M.
May 10 Fort Fisher.
Confederate Memorial Day/Spring Artillery Demonstrations.
Special ceremony featuring an artillery salute to Confederate soldiers.
May 16 Alamance Battleground.
230th Anniversary of the Battle of Alamance.
An evening of commemorative activities featuring a wreath- laying ceremony, covered- dish picnic, and a guest speaker.
6- 9 P.M.
May 19 Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Artillery Demonstrations.
Reenactors will present demonstrations of Civil War weapons at Fort Anderson.
10 A .M.- 3:30 P.M.
May 19-20 Alamance Battleground.
18th- Century Live- in and Militia Muster.
Demonstrations of colonial- era skills, trades, and weapons.
Saturday, 10 A .M.- 5 P.M.; Sunday, 1- 5 P.M.
May 19-20 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Military Memorial Program.
Highlights North Carolina military history through exhibits, seminars, and special displays.
June (Saturdays) Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Heritage Tours at Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Throughout the month of June costumed interpreters will give guided tours of either colonial Brunswick or Fort Anderson.
Approximately four or more tours will be given each Saturday in June.
June 2-3 Vance Birthplace.
Civil War Encampment.
The 26th North Carolina Regiment will be encamped at the site portraying recruitment practices typical of western North Carolina during the early war years.
Activities
will include enlistment of new recruits, patriotic speeches, infantry drills, and more.
June 10, 24, July 4, 15, 29 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Toe- Tappin' Afternoons in June and July.
Bring a lawn chair and come listen to local bands from the area play traditional music.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
2- 4 P.M. June 23-24 Town Creek Indian Mound.
Indian Heritage Festival.
Native American crafts will be on display along with demonstrations of Indian dancing and lifestyles.
Summer.
Historic Bath.
Past Times.
Geared to 8- 12- year- old children, this series of historic demonstrations and hands- on activities will be held one day a week throughout the summer.
$1.00 per session.
10- 11 A .M. July 14 Aycock Birthplace.
Farmer's Day.
Farm chores and domestic skills will be demonstrated to celebrate the lives of 19th- century farm families.
12:30- 4:30 P.M. July 14 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Puddle Jumpers, Bubble Blowers, and Pumpkin Whistles.
Country children of 1900 had to create their own toys and games.
Come out to the farm and learn to make simple playthings, including a cat's cradle, a thaumatrope, and a corncob dart.
Contests and games throughout the day.
11 A .M.- 3 P.M. July 14-15, 21-22 Bentonville Battleground.
Summer Seasonal Living History Program.
Costumed interpreters will demonstrate various activities of soldier life and the civilian side of the 19th century.
Saturdays, 10 A .M.- 4 P.M.; Sundays 1- 3 P.M. July 21 Bentonville Battleground.
Artillery Demonstration.
Uniformed interpreters demonstrate a Civil War artillery drill on a full- scale three- inch ordnance rifle, a common fieldpiece of the period.
1- 4 P.M. July 22 Fort Fisher.
Summer Artillery Program.
Several pieces of Confederate artillery will be fired.
1:30- 4 P.M. August 4-5 House in the Horseshoe.
Annual Battle Reenactment.
Reenactors recreate the late summer attack of the notorious David Fanning on the home of Whig partisan Philip Alston.
Includes about 200 reenactors in period dress and numerous demonstrations including chair making, weaving, cannon fir ing, fireside cooking, gun making, and gun engraving.
Sutlers and refreshment vendors will be on hand.
August 11 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Old - fashioned Ice Cream Social.
Features homespun fun for the entire family.
Activities include homemade ice cream, children's games, various contests, and more.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
Noon- 4 P.M. August 11 James K. Polk Memorial.
Mexican War Encampment, 1848.
The site will host a living history program featuring costumed interpreters from the 12th U.S. Infantry and the 1st U.S. Dragoons.
Costumed interpreters will take visitors back in time to the
summer of 1848 when the war with Mexico had just ended and North Carolina troops were returning home after serving in the war.
Visitors will see uniform and equipment demonstrations, musket firings, and a camp of infantry and dragoon soldiers.
Donations accepted.
9 A .M.- 5 P.M. August 11-12, 25-26 Bentonville Battleground.
Summer Seasonal Living History Program.
Costumed interpreters will demonstrate various activities of soldier life and the civilian side of the 19th century.
Saturday, 10 A .M.- 4 P.M.; Sunday, 1- 3 P.M. August 25 Bentonville Battleground.
Artillery Demonstration.
Uniformed interpreters demonstrate a Civil War artillery drill on a full- sca le three- inch ordnance rifle, a common fieldpiece of the period.
1- 4 P.M. August 25 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Old - fashioned Day.
Wear your finest early- twentieth- century dress today.
Enjoy hand - cranked ice cream, play outdoor children's games, and participate in parlor games.
Prizes awarded for costumes, including most authentic and most complete.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
11 A .M.- 4 P.M. August 31-September 1 Somerset Place.
Somerset Homecoming.
A celebration of the history and culture o f the people who lived and worked at Somerset Place.
The dedication of two reconstructed buildings will also take place.
The public is invited to attend.
Saturday, 10 A .M.- 7 P.M.; Sunday, 2- 7 P.M. September 1 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Plymo uth Car Club Show.
See antique Plymouth automobiles from the 1920s to the 1960s on display.
September 8 James K. Polk Memorial.
The 1805 Militia Muster.
A living history program where costumed interpreters will take visitors back in time to 1805 on the Polk farm when James K. Polk's father Samuel was a captain in the Mecklenburg County militia.
Visitors will see period children's games and activities, historic cooking, clothing and costume demonstrations, musket firings and drills, and stump speeches from politicians of the time.
Donations accepted.
9 A .M.- 5 P.M. September 12 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Senior Day.
Seniors 60 and older can participate in a community day with special train rides, guided tours of the roundhouse, and an opportunit y for a picnic- style lunch to discuss old times.
$1.00 for train ride.
Train rides: 11 A .M., 1 P.M., 2 P.M., and 3 P.M..
September 15 Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Artillery Demonstrations.
Fort Anderson will present reenactors demonstrating Civil War weapons.
10 A .M.- 3:30 P.M. September 15 Duke Homestead.
Tobacco Harvest Festival.
Traditional tobacco harvesting, stringing, and curing will be demonstrated by costumed interpreters.
Tobacco grading and tying tobacco twists will also be displayed.
An outdoor mock tobacco auction will be held, musical entertainment featured, and refreshments available.
Donations accepted.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M.
Groups of more than 20 should call for reservations.
September 15 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
From Peel to Pie.
Activities include making cider, apple peeling contests, fruit drying, and making apple butter and fried pies.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. September 15 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Antique Truck Show.
See antique trucks from the 1900s to the 1960s.
Sponsored by the Antique Truck Historical Society.
Donations accepted.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. September 22­23 Vance Birthplace.
Fall Pioneer Living Days 
Citizen militia muster with demonstrations of small arms drills, camp life, and other domestic skills.
1- 4:30 P.M. September 29 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Steamfest.
Town of Spencer festival with train rides, children's activities, and an antique/craft show and sale.
Train rides: $3.00.
October and November (Wednesdays except November 21) Aycock Birthplace.
Living History Demonstrations.
The site will offer three different demonstrations of 19thcentury farm and domestic skills.
Groups must schedule in advance.
9:30 A .M.- 2 P.M. October 5 Edenton.
Happy 250th Birthday James Iredell! Join in the celebration of the 250th anniversary of the birth of James Iredell (1751- 1799), attorney general of North Carolina during the American Revolution and U.S. Supreme Court justice from 1790 to 1799.
Birthday cake, spec ial tours, and exhibits in his honor.
9 A .M.- 5 P.M.
Last tour at 4 P.M .
Sponsored by Historic Edenton State Historic Site and the James Iredell Association.
October 6 Bennett Place.
Fall Living History Program: Soldiers and Civilians.
This program will depict home- front life in piedmont North Carolina at the end of the Civil War.
The event will include guided tours through semi- scripted scenarios showing the interdependent relationship of soldiers and civilians.
Also domestic skills and soldier life presentations.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. October 8 ­ 12 Alamance Battleground.
Colonial Living Week.
Costumed interpreters demonstrate eighteenth- century skills.
9 A .M.- 2 P.M. daily.
Early-to-mid October Edenton.
Colonial Living History Days.
Demonstrations of ga mes, chores, and domestic skills that were familiar to children of the late 18th century.
Participants will have hands- on experiences in the various activities and an opportunity to make and take home some of their handiwork.
Reservations required.
$1 fee for supplies.
9 A .M.- 2:30 P.M. October 13 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Antique Car Show.
Antique cars from the 1900s to the 1960s will be on display from the Antique Automobile Club of America's local chapter.
Donations requested.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M.
October 13 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
"Produce for Victory."
Opening of the Smithsonian Institution exhibit of victory posters from World War II.
Exhibit runs through November 25.
October 14 Fort Dobbs.
Colonial Living Day.
Demonstrat ions of backcountry life by costumed staff and volunteers.
1- 4 P.M. October 20 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
11th Annual traditional frolic featuring the harvesting, shucking, shelling, and cider making, quilting, cooking, woodworking, wagon rides, and Numerous turn- of- the - century craft demonstrations also featured.
drinks.
10 A .M.- 5 P.M. Cornshucking Frolic.
A grinding of corn.
Also traditional music.
Fee for food and
October 27 Duke Homestead.
An Evening at the Homestead.
Visit the Homestead and share in an evening of typical fall activities--apple cider pressing, fall foods, music, and a few ghost stories around the bonfire! Sponsored by the Duke Homestead Junior Interpreters.
Donations accepted.
4- 7 P.M. November 2-4 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Boy Scout Weekend.
Boy Scouts can work toward earning the railroading merit badge throughout the three- day weekend.
$8.00 per person.
November 3 James K. Polk Memorial.
President Polk Birthday Celebration.
The site will host a living history program featuring costumed interpreters bringing the late 1790s in Mecklenburg County to life.
Visitors will see late 18th- century children's games and activities, cooking demonstrations, farm animals, musket firings, and several other activities.
See what life was like in Mecklenburg County when James K. Polk, the 11th president of the United States, was born in November 1795.
Donations accepted.
10 A .M.4 P.M. November 17-18 CSS Neuse.
Naval Camp of Instruction.
The program will show how the crew of the Neuse trained for their job aboard the ironclad.
These demonstrations will include musket and artillery drills, cutlass and boarding drills, and seamanship.
Civilians on the home front helped to support the troops: activities by civilian reenactors will be candlemaking, bandage rolling, and making shirts.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. daily.
November 17 Horne Creek Living Historical Farm.
Plow Day.
Come experience farming the old- fashioned way before the tractor took over-- when the mule was king and the horse in style.
Watch members of the North Carolina Draft Horse and Mule Association, along with Horne Creek Farm's staff, carry on a tradition that still captures the heart.
Nominal fee for refreshments.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M. Early December Fort Fisher.
Christmas Program.
Compare Christmas during the Civil War (1864) and World War II (1941).
Special weapons demonstrations with rifles and a cannon.
A World War II Jeep will be on display.
10 A .M.- 4 P.M..
December 1 Bentonville Battleground.
Christmas Open House.
The site will hold an open house showing how Christmas was celebrated during the Civil War.
1- 4 P.M. December 2 Somerset Place.
Christmas Open House.
Local churches using period techniques will decorate the site's buildings.
Free food prepared by Somerset staff members.
1- 4 P.M. December 4 
Christmas Candlelight Tours.
Costumed interpreters describe Christmas traditions of the 19th century.
Primitive Baptist singers perform a cappella in the visitor center.
Children's program in the schoolhouse.
6:30- 9 P.M .
December 6 
Christmas by Lamplight.
Experience the warmth of a rural turn- of- the- century Christmas.
Music and food of the era will be featured.
Nominal fee for food and drinks.
4- 8 P.M. Reservations required.
December 7-8 James K. Polk Memorial.
Polk Christmas Celebration.
The site will host a Candlelight Tour of the historic area.
Donations accepted.
6:00- 9:00 P.M. December 7 
Christmas by Candlelight.
The 1852 Homestead will be decorated as the Washington Duke family would have celebrated Christmas.
The event features evening tours of the house led by costumed interpreters, special music, and refreshments.
Donations accepted.
7- 9 P.M.
Groups of more than 20 should call fo r reservations.
December 9 Alamance Battleground.
Christmas Puddings.
Display and sampling of traditional puddings.
1- 5 P.M. December 9 Historic Bath.
Christmas Open House.
Four decorated colonial and 19thcentury buildings, special music, and refreshments.
1- 5 P.M. December 9 Bennett Place.
Christmas Open House: A Homemade Christmas.
A Christmas program depicting how the holidays were celebrated during the Civil War.
Refreshments will be served.
1- 4 P.M. December 9 House in the Horseshoe.
Celebra tion of a Colonial Christmas.
The house will be decorated with natural materials and illuminated by candlelight at twilight.
Costumed interpreters will talk about the house and life in colonial North Carolina.
A cannon will be fired to salute the neighbors.
Refreshments will be served.
Donations accepted.
Noon- 5:30 P.M. December 9 Vance Birthplace.
Christmas Open House and Candlelight Tours.
Tours of the reconstructed Vance house decorated for the season in the style of the 1830s.
1- 6 P.M. with candlelight tours starting at 4 P.M.
December 14 Edenton.
Caroling on the Green.
Join us for community Christmas caroling on the green in front of the 1767 Chowan County Courthouse.
6- 7 P.M.
The Green is located between East Water Street and East King Street alo ng the Edenton waterfront.
December 14-15 Edenton.
Iredell House Groaning Board.
Eighteenth- century- style Christmas decorations, harpsichord music, and a holiday groaning board.
Tables are so heavily laden you can almost hear the boards "groan."
1- 5 P.M. daily.
Co- sponsored by the James Iredell Association and Historic Edenton State Historic Site.
December 15 Brunswick Town/Fort Anderson.
Artillery Demonstrations.
Fort Anderson will present reenactors demonstrating Civil War weapons.
10 A .M.- 3:30 P.M. December 15-16, 22-23 North Carolina Transportation Museum.
Santa Train.
Visitors can bring Santa Claus their lists and receive candy and oranges on the train.
The Polar Express will also be read in the Master Mechanic's Office.
$3.00 for train rides.
Train rides: Saturday, 11 A .M., 1 P.M., 2 P.M., and 3 P.M.; Sunday, 1:30 P.M., 2:30 P.M., and 3:30 P.M. December 17 Edenton.
Period Christmas Decorations Workshop.
Learn how to use natural materials to decorate for the holidays.
Make your own to take home .
Reservations required.
$5.00 to cover cost of materials.
1- 4 P.M.
