Appendix L Specific Management Recommendations for Desert Bighorn Sheep BIOLOGY AND SOCIAL BEHAVIOR Desert bighorn sheep are social animals that associate in small groups most of the year.
Larger groups are observed during August and September, which is the peak of the breeding season.
Rams form bachelor groups after the breeding season and tend to use less rugged terrain and habitats not used by ewes and sub-adults, reducing competition for available resources (Bleich 1993).
Desert bighorn ewes typically breed when they are 2.5 years of age and give birth to one lamb after a gestation period of six months.
The majority of lambs are born in February and March, although lambing may occur through July.
The extended lambing season may be advantageous in the unpredictable desert environment in which adverse conditions could eliminate an entire lamb crop if they were produced in only one month.
Adult ewes produce a single lamb and twinning is extremely rare which makes their reproductive potential low; however, bighorn sheep are long-lived, which may compensate for their low reproductive rate.
Bighorn sheep surviving their first year often reach 10-12 years of age (Turner and Hansen 1980).
Bighorn sheep transfer home range knowledge from one generation to the next and rarely recolonize ranges where they have been extirpated.
Rams may naturally move long distances between mountain ranges in search of ewes during breeding season, and normally return to their natal home if they do not locate other bighorns.
Ewes rarely follow rams on these journeys (Geist 1971).
Therefore, transplants are necessary to establish populations in new areas.
Some transplanted bighorn sheep are highly exploratory and may establish metapopulations through intermountain movements.
Metapopulations are defined as populations of bighorns which may be widely separated and inhabit separate mountain ranges; however, interchange occurs because of exploratory movements of individuals and are considered as part of a larger population.
The Sierra Diablo/Baylor/Beach Mountains are a system of interchanging bighorn populations or metapopulation as described by Hanski and Gilpin (1991).
These movements may re-establish patterns that were previously lost when populations were extirpated.
The designation of the Sierra Diablo/Baylor/Beach Mountains metapopulation of bighorn sheep is a logical approach for managing the long-term viability of this population.
This approach recognizes the importance of intermountain areas providing for interchange of individuals between populations and the potential for colonizing vacant habitats.
Management of movement corridors between populations is critical to ensure the long-term persistence of desert bighorn sheep and will entail greater coordination between agencies and landowners for management of single populations (Bleich et al. 1990, Bailey 1992).
92
One hundred bighorn within a population or metapopulation is considered the minimum number for long-term survival based on Berger's (1990) analysis that populations of this size persisted up to seventy years.
Smaller populations are more vulnerable to extinction than are large populations.
However, recent information indicates that many populations numbering less than fifty have survived for more than fifty years.
Wehausen (1995) suggests that populations of this size may be worth establishing, especially if they are part of a larger metapopulation.
HABITAT REQUIREMENTS The most important habitat requirement of desert bighorn sheep is open, mountainous or canyon habitats close to escape terrain (cliffs of 60% slope or greater).
Bighorn rely on keen eyesight and open terrain to detect predators and elude them by fleeing to escape terrain.
Escape terrain is particularly important for ewes when lambing and rearing young.
Rams will use denser vegetation and stray further from escape terrain than will maternal groups.
The amount of habitat available to bighorn sheep is ultimately determined by the amount of escape terrain close to open landscapes (McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Shrubs dominate the diet of desert bighorn in the Chihuahuan Desert of Texas.
However, bighorn consume a wide range of plants and vary their selection based on the most nutritious plants available seasonally.
Bighorn favor newly emergent grasses and forbs during the summerfall rainy season whereas use of shrubs is greatest in winter and early spring as grass quality declines.
The quality and diversity of available plants are considered important to desert bighorn sheep (Sandoval 1979, Bavin 1982, and Elenowitz 1983).
Water is used year-round by desert bighorn sheep.
Although some indigenous populations may have depended solely upon ephemeral water sources and succulent plants, water is readily used when provided and is an important factor in the selection of home ranges (McCarty and Bailey 1994).
IMPACTS Domestic sheep and goats Abundant evidence implicates domestic sheep as one cause of bighorn declines and localized population extinctions from historical times to present.
These domestics and their feral relatives use the same habitats as desert bighorn, compete for forage, and carry diseases that are lethal to desert sheep (Foreyth and Jessup 1982, Jessup 1985, McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Domestic goats are also considered a potential health threat to bighorn sheep.
Although domestic sheep and goats do not occur in currently occupied bighorn range, the occurrence of feral animals are a constant concern.
Cattle Bighorn sheep generally do not compete for forage with domestic cattle under normal grazing systems because bighorn tend to occupy rugged habitats that cattle avoid.
Periodically, grazing areas may overlap.
Bighorn may range into flats during the spring to obtain the earliest green forbs and cattle may range into rugged terrain not normally used if they cannot find enough forage in less rugged terrain.
In contrast to domestic sheep, cattle have not been implicated in causing the die-off of bighorns, nor has disease transmission from cattle to bighorn been 93
conclusively shown.
Cattle do carry diseases that are believed to be transmissible to bighorn ( Jessup 1985, McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Exotic Ungulates Aoudad sheep (Ammotragus lervia) are occasionally sighted in desert bighorn habitats.
The aoudad has a higher reproductive potential than bighorn sheep, the ability to subsist on lower quality forage, and a preference for habitat similar to that of bighorn (Seegmiller and Simpson 1979).
Aoudads are socially aggressive when they encounter bighorn and have been observed to herd female bighorn.
Aoudad are capable of moving extensive distances and may be potential reservoirs of parasites and diseases detrimental to desert bighorn and other ungulates.
Their potential to transmit diseases to bighorn is unclear (McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Forty-five aoudads were collected for sampling in Brewster County, Texas from 1985-1986.
Serum samples tested positive for eleven diseases including epizootic hemorrhagic disease (EHD), bluetongue (BT), bovine viral diarrhea (BVD), visticular stomatitis virus, infectious bovine rhinotracheitis, bovine herpesvirus-1, brucellosis, leptospirosis, Q-fever, rocky mountain spotted fever, and lyme disease (Johnson 1986).
Deer In most western states desert bighorn sheep generally do not compete for forage with mule deer because deer use less rugged terrain and more heavily vegetated areas than do desert bighorn.
In Texas the habitats of desert sheep and mule deer often overlap, creating some potential for forage competition during extended dry periods.
Mule deer will share watering holes and mineral licks with bighorn sheep, and could be a potential source of disease.
Water facilities developed for bighorn sheep in areas previously devoid of water may encourage deer use of bighorn habitat (Smith and Krausman 1988).
Predators The mountain lion is the principal predator of bighorn sheep in Texas.
Bighorn are also potential prey for coyotes, bobcats, black bears, and golden eagles.
Predation is not considered a limiting factor in large, free-ranging populations.
However, predation can be a significant mortality factor in fenced, recently introduced, or small populations (Wehausen 1992).
Additionally, populations that habitually use habitat far from escape terrain or in dense vegetative cover are more vulnerable to predation (McQuivey 1978).
Currently, the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) selectively removes predators from state-owned bighorn sheep ranges.
Fire Suppression The suppression of fire over the last 100 years has allowed shrubs and stands of pinyon-juniper to encroach onto once open habitat, decreasing suitability for bighorns.
Prescribed burns can be used to open more areas and increase the amount of suitable bighorn range (Wright and Bailey 1982).
Recreation Desert bighorn by their nature are relatively intolerant of humans and the associated disturbances.
Their flight distance increases in proportion to how secure they feel.
Bighorn generally do not 94
react to moving or parked vehicles and are not stressed by aircraft unless actively pursued.
When bighorn are in escape terrain, they will tolerate people as close as 200 yards.
If the bighorns are in less rugged terrain, they may flee when people are as far as a half mile away.
Recreational use of bighorn habitat can be harmful, especially if the disturbance persists or occurs frequently.
When bighorn are continually disturbed they may abandon habitat and water sources, resulting in decreased numbers and distribution (reviewed by McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Lastly, increased recreational activity increases the potential for intentional human harassment and illegal kill.
No use of llamas and goats as pack animals should be allowed in areas occupied by desert bighorn sheep, as there is potential for disease transmission.
Mining Bighorn may temporarily abandon habitat while it is being mined, which could be critical if mining occurs on lambing grounds or near water sources.
Roads for mining activities may provide access into previously undisturbed areas and increase potential negative impacts of people in bighorn habitat (McQuivey 1978).
Illegal Harvest The relative impact of poaching on a population depends on the sex and numbers of animals taken.
Illegal harvest of rams decreases the ram:ewe ratio and the availability of rams for future legal harvest.
Additionally, black market trophy hunting may increase as populations increase in size and distribution.
Man-made Barriers Barbed and net wire fences restrict movements and are a hazard to desert bighorn sheep because they are poorly adapted for jumping and may die if they become entangled (Elenowitz 1983).
Bighorns will readily cross two-lane roads that dissect their habitat, but four-lane highways may inhibit movement and cause higher mortality from accidents with vehicles.
Housing developments also disrupt travel corridors, fragmenting use of desert mountain complexes by metapopulations.
Isolation from human services currently limits housing development in most desert bighorn habitats.
As the state's human population increases and traditional uses such as ranching potentially decline, urbanization will encroach further into desert bighorn habitat.
Disease Desert bighorn are more susceptible to diseases and parasites than other native big game species.
Bighorn are particularly susceptible to diseases carried by domestic sheep and typically develop bacterial pneumonia following contact (Jessup 1985, McCarty and Bailey 1994).
This is the basis of strict guidelines for separating wild and domestic sheep adopted by the Bureau of Land Management (Desert Bighorn Council Technical Staff 1990).
In contrast to domestic sheep, cattle have not been implicated in the die-off of bighorn sheep nor has disease transmission from cattle to bighorn been conclusively proven.
Cattle do carry diseases that are transmissible to bighorns (Jessup 1985, McCarty and Bailey 1994).
Logically it follows that bighorns could be a potential source of infectious agents to cattle; there is no documentation of disease transmission to cattle.
As a precaution, desert bighorn sheep are screened and tested for diseases before release from out of state to avoid introducing infectious 95
agents into new areas.
Literature Cited and References Bailey, J. A. 1992.
Managing bighorn habitat from a landscape perspective.
Bienn.
Symp.
North.
Wild Sheep and Goat Counc.
8:49-57.
Bavin, B. 1982.
Post-release study of desert bighorn sheep in the Big Hatchet Mountains, New Mexico.
Desert Bighorn Counc.
Trans.
24:12-14.
Berger, J. 1990.
Persistence of different-sized populations: An empirical assessment of rapid extinctions in bighorn sheep.
Conserv.
Biol. 4:91-98.
Bleich, V. C. 1993.
Sexual segregation in desert-dwelling mountain sheep.
Ph.D.
Thesis, University of Alaska, Fairbanks.
126pp. _________, J. D. Wehausen, and S. A. Holl. 1990.
Desert-dwelling mountain sheep: conservation implications of naturally fragmented distribution.
Conserv.
Biol. 4:383-390.
Carson, B. 1941.
Man the greatest enemy of desert bighorn mountain sheep.
Texas Game, Fish and Oyster Commission.
Bull.
21, Austin.
23pp.
Desert Bighorn Council Technical Staff.
1990.
Guidelines for management of domestic sheep in the vicinity of desert bighorn habitat.
Desert Bighorn Counc.
Trans.
34:33-35.
Elenowitz, A. S. 1983.
Habitat use and population dynamics of transplanted desert bighorn sheep in the Peloncillo Mountains, New Mexico.
M.S. Thesis.
New Mexico State Univ., Las Cruces.
185pp.
Foreyth, W. J., and D. A. Jessup.
1982.
Fatal pneumonia of bighorn sheep following association with domestic sheep.
J. Wildl.
Dis. 18:163-168.
Geist, V. 1971.
Mountain sheep, a study in behavior and evolution.
Univ.
Chicago Press, Chicago.
383pp.
Hanski, I., and M. Gilpin.
1991.
Metapopulation dynamics:brief history and conceptual domain.
Biol.
J. Linnean Soc. 42:3-16.
Jessup, D. A. 1985.
Disease of domestic livestock which threaten bighorn sheep populations.
Desert Bighorn Counc.
Trans.
29:29-33.
Johnson, L. L. 1986.
Parasites and selected diseases of barbary sheep (Ammotragus lervia) in the Glass of the
96
Mountains of Brewster County, Texas.
M.S. Thesis.
Sul Ross State Univ., Alpine.
76pp.
McCarty, G. W., and J. A. Bailey.
1994.
Habitat requirements of desert bighorn sheep.
Colo.
Div. of Wildl.
Spec.
Rep. No. 69, Denver, 27pp.
McQuivey, R. P. 1978.
The desert bighorn of Nevada.
Nevada Dep. of Fish and Game Biol.
Bull.
6, Reno.
81pp.
Sandoval, A. V. 1979.
Preferred habitat of desert bighorn sheep in the San Andres Mountains, New Mexico.
M.S. Thesis.
Colorado State Univ., Fort Collins.
314pp.
Seegmiller, R. F., and C. D. Simpson.
1979.
The barbary sheep: some conceptual implications of competition with desert bighorn.
Desert Bighorn Counc.
Trans.
23:47-49.
Smith, N. S., and P. R. Krausman.
1988.
Desert bighorn sheep: a guide to selected management practices.
U.S. Fish and Wildl.
Serv., Biol.
Rep. 88(35).
27pp.
Turner, J. G., and C. G. Hansen.
1980.
Reproduction.
Pages 145-151 in G. Monson and L. Sumner, eds.
The desert bighorn:its life history, ecology, and management.
Univ.
Ariz.
Press, Tucson.
Wehausen, J. D. 1992.
Demographic studies of mountain sheep in the Mojave Desert:report IV.
Final Rep. Submitted to the Calif.
Dep. of Fish and Game, Agreement No. FG9239.
54pp. ________.
1995.
Rapid extinction of mountain sheep populations revisited.
Unpubl.
Paper presented to Desert Bighorn Counc.
Meeting 1995.
Wright, H. A., and A. W. Bailey.
1982.
Fire Ecology.
John Wiley 
97
Appendix M
Specific Management Recommendations for Javelinas
The javelina, or collared peccary, evolved in South America and migrated north, arriving in Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona relatively recently (past several hundred years).
Javelina bones are not found in archaeological sites in the United States, and early settlers made infrequent references to their occurrence.
It is probable that the javelina expanded into south and west Texas simultaneously with the encroachment of brush and cacti into Texas' native grasslands.
Biology Adult javelinas generally weigh 35 to 60 lbs., with the male being slightly heavier than the female.
Behavior toward predators and humans suggest that javelinas can see fairly well up to about 75 yards.
They rely heavily on their sense of smell, not only for foraging but also for avoidance of danger.
Their primary activity periods are early morning and late evening.
When temperatures are cool, the herds become more active throughout the day.
Although somewhat active at night, their night-vision is believed to be only fair.
Javelinas are extremely territorial, and the boundaries of the territory are marked by scent emitted from the conspicuous musk gland located on the animal's rump.
Home ranges of adjacent javelina herds may overlap slightly, but the "common ground" is normally used by only one herd at a time.
The average gestation period is about 145 days, considerably longer than the common pig (112 to 116 days).
Litters range from one to five piglets, with an average litter size of two.
The young are born throughout the year, with a peak occurring in early summer.
Newborn javelinas weigh about one pound, and they continue to grow until they reach adult height in about 10 months.
At this age, javelinas are reproductively mature.
They are capable of breeding throughout the year, the only wild ungulate in the western hemisphere with a year-long breeding season.
This long breeding season, early sexual maturity, and the ability to have two litters each year gives them the greatest reproductive potential of any North American big game animal.
Home Range Herd territories may extend over 700 to 800 acres.
A South Texas study found that size of territories was associated with brush density.
Territories averaged 250 acres in dense brush, 400 98
acres in moderately dense brush, and 700 acres in relatively open brush.
A study in New Mexico reported herd home ranges that ranged from 140 to 700 acres.
In Arizona, size of territories was extremely variable, ranging from 250 to 1,150 acres.
The reported mean home range for collared peccaries in Big Bend National Park was 533 acres.
Recent research in the Davis Mountains indicated home ranges that varied between 400 and 600 acres.
Mortality Winter snows, ice storms, and extremely cold weather can result in substantial mortality among javelinas.
However, because their distribution is restricted to southern climes, they are seldom exposed to extended, severe winter weather.
Of much greater significance to herd survival is habitat loss and habitat degradation (eg., herbicidal prickly pear control, mechanical brush clearing, etc.).
Sport hunting is another source of mortality, but javelina hunting in west Texas seldom occurs at an intensity that will impact herd numbers.
The primary predator of javelinas in west Texas is the mountain lion.
Although limited in numbers and distribution, black bears are efficient predators of javelinas when the opportunity occurs.
Coyotes and bobcats will occasionally prey on javelinas, although the usual targets are the young.
However, adult javelinas are extremely protective, and preying on their young is a dangerous and probably infrequent undertaking for mid-size predators like coyotes and bobcats.
Although not a frequent occurrence, golden eagles will sometimes prey on young javelinas.
Diet Javelinas will consume a wide variety of forage types, including cacti, fruits, tubers, bulbs, beans, nuts, and forbs.
A diet study in the Trans-Pecos indicated that lechuguilla was extremely important to javelinas in this region, representing as much as 50% of the diet in some seasons.
Acorns were also very important on a seasonal basis (fall and early winter), providing a key source of energy.
Other important foods were mesquite pods, sotol, woody plants (browse), and grasses.
A minimal amount of animal matter was found in the diets, although worms and insects were taken on occasion.
Probably the most important food item to the javelina in Texas and throughout its range is prickly pear (represents 30-80% of the annual diet).
However, its importance does not stem from palatability or nutritional quality.
In fact, prickly pear is somewhat deficient in protein, carbohydrates, and most minerals.
It appears that the cacti's importance is associated with its water content, its availability, and the javelina's ability to survive on the plant until forage conditions improve.
Prickly pear cladophylls (pads) consist of up to 90% water, and can easily provide the daily water needs of javelinas.
Cactus plants are fairly abundant in most areas of the Trans-Pecos, and adequate quantities can be taken with a minimum of energy expenditure.
Javelinas prefer quality forages such as forbs, bulbs, tender grass shoots, and fruits/mast from woody plants, and they can easily meet their nutritional requirements on a diet of these quality forages.
However, in the arid conditions of the TransPecos, quality forages are rarely abundant and are usually available (i.e., green) only for a brief period.
This is why prickly pear is a critical component of javelina habitat in the desert southwest.
Prickly pear and other cacti could be referred to as "emergency" foods, but this seems a misnomer in the Chihuahuan Desert where these forage emergencies are the prevailing situation rather than the exception.
Prickly pear becomes less important as a habitat component in areas with higher annual rainfall (eg., Edwards Plateau), where quality forages are more abundant and available for longer periods of time.
99
Water Requirements Javelina water requirements are influenced by temperature, humidity, diet, and physiological state.
They will use water if available, but its presence is not essential if succulent vegetation (i.e., green forbs, grass shoots, prickly pear, other cacti) is available.
An adult javelina can meet its daily water requirements by consuming 3.5 lbs./day of green cactus in the summer and about 3 lbs./day of green cactus in the winter.
Javelinas minimize water requirements in summer (i.e., water loss from thermoregulation) by seeking shade in dense woody cover.
Herd Management As with any wildlife species, habitat quality is the overriding influence on the presence and productivity of javelina herds.
For reasons described above, prickly pear, lechuguilla, sotol, and several species of cacti are important components of javelina habitat.
Not only are they important as key forages, but they are the predominant source of water for javelinas, especially on ranges where other forms of water are absent.
When controlling prickly pear with a herbicide such as picloram, leaving several clumps of untreated plants within key areas is important in maintaining healthy herds of javelinas.
When moisture conditions are more favorable, forbs, grasses, and browse are important in boosting the nutritional plane of javelinas.
Therefore, livestock grazing can have a significant impact on the condition and productivity of javelina herds.
Sheep and goats may compete with javelinas for limited forages, and at heavy stocking rates or during drought, even cattle can compete for available forage.
Another critical habitat component is dense thickets of woody cover.
Dense woody vegetation is important in providing shade and loafing areas in summer and protective cover from inclement winter weather.
When implementing broad scale brush management programs, managers can inadvertently destroy prime javelina habitat by failing to identify and protect a few key areas of dense, protective cover for javelinas.
A certain amount of brush is desirable for screening cover as javelinas move about and forage, but even more important for survival are the dense thickets used for escape cover, shade, and protection from winter storms.
The size of herd territories will depend on brush density and overall habitat quality.
But given that most herds will range over about a mile, one watering site per 2,000-2,500 acres will allow each herd access to free-standing water (if water is a concern).
Particularly in areas where water sources are absent and prickly pear and other cacti are in short supply, watering facilities will probably provide realistic benefits to javelina herds in the area.
Concerning the impact of predators on javelina numbers, once again the greatest factor of influence is the quality of the habitat.
If there is adequate screening cover, escape cover, and year-round nutrition to support good reproduction, the herd can sustain a reasonable amount of pressure from mountain lions, bobcats, and coyotes.
The only time predators may present a problem is in the rare circumstance when predator numbers (especially lions) are abnormally high and habitat components are marginal for javelinas.
A similar relationship exists for sport hunting as a potential threat to javelinas.
The greater the habitat quality, the lesser the likelihood that hunting will impact javelina numbers.
On ranches where javelinas are intensively hunted, it is recommended that herd numbers and average herd size be monitored annually to ensure that the population is not declining.
Reproductive success will vary from year to year, depending on drought and resulting forage conditions; but a conservative harvest rate of 15% of the fall 100
population will generally not impact herd numbers.
Appendix N
Specific Management Recommendations for Black Bears istorically, the black bear (Ursus americanus) was found in most ecological regions in the state of Texas.
During the 1920's and 1930's, bears were fairly common in the pine-oak woodlands of western Texas.
Unregulated hunting, loss of habitat, and extensive predator control programs sanctioned by the government were all factors that contributed to the black bear's decline in Texas.
By the 1940's, bear sightings were few with most reports coming from the rugged canyons and mountains of the lower Big Bend Region.
This area was the last stronghold of the black bear in Texas, but by the 1950's the black bear was essentially extirpated.
An occasional bear sighting was still reported from the lower Big Bend area, which tended to be associated with wildfires in the adjacent Mexican mountains.
According to Baker (1956), bear numbers had drastically declined in Mexico with only remnant populations in the mountains of northern Coahuila.
In 1986 Mexico placed the black bear on their endangered species list and closed the hunting season indefinitely.
Texas followed suit in 1987, placing the bear on the state endangered list.
At this point, it appeared that the black bear was gone from Texas with no plans for reintroduction.
Recovery Natural recovery by a wildlife species into former historical range rarely occurs without the intervention of man.
Yet, an amazing reestablishment of black bears into portions of their former range in Texas is occurring.
During the 1980's bear sightings became more frequent, especially in Big Bend National Park (BBNP) and on the adjacent Black Gap Wildlife Management Area (BGWMA).
In 1988 a tourist in BBNP photographed a sow with three cubs, and in 1994 a hunter on the BGWMA also photographed a sow with three cubs.
Observations of bears and their sign are increasing, and people on private lands as well as the federal and state lands in western Texas now find themselves living in "bear country."
To the south in the state of Coahuila, Mexico the bear population has recovered and is increasing.
It is likely that the black bear will continue to disperse into western Texas from viable populations in northern Mexico.
Biology Black bears are typically thought of as forest creatures.
However, they will use other habitats where food is available.
In the Chihuahuan Desert of western Texas, black bears are found in the pine-oak woodlands of the mountains and in the lower desert elevations.
Black bears are stocky with powerful legs and short tails, and they walk slightly pigeon-toed.
Despite the name "black bear," their pelage may be various shades of brown.
Some bears have 101
H
tan muzzles, and may or may not have a white blaze on their chest.
Adult males can weigh almost 400 pounds.
Females (sows) are smaller, weighing from 100 to 200 pounds.
Typically, adult bears measure about 36 inches at the shoulder and are 4 to 6 feet tall when standing upright.
Black bears are solitary creatures except during the breeding season in summer, or when a sow is with her cubs.
Sows normally breed when they are 3 to 4 years old.
They usually breed every other year and will have 1 to 4 cubs, with 2 or 3 cubs being most common.
The cubs are born in late winter/early spring and remain with the sow through 2 spring seasons.
In west Texas bears do not enter a true state of hibernation during the winter.
Instead, they enter brief periods of denning.
They may choose a den site in a rock pile, brush pile, cliff overhang, or cave.
During the denning period, bears may waken and move about short distances to water and feed.
When the cubs are born, the sow will remain with them in the den, emerging only after the cubs are large enough to travel with her.
Home ranges vary, depending on habitat, availability of food, and geographical location.
Home ranges of males are typically much larger than females.
Bears may travel great distances in search of food, mates, and suitable habitat.
Food Habits Black bears spend a large portion of their time seeking food.
In the pine-oak habitat at higher elevations, important bear foods include madrone, juniper and algerita berries; acorns; Mexican squawroot; pinyon nuts; and a variety of grasses, insects, and carrion.
In the lower desert elevations important bear foods are acorns, prickly pear fruits, Texas persimmons, Spanish dagger, sotol and yucca hearts, mesquite beans, and grasses.
During the winter and early spring, bears are somewhat lethargic and their appetite diminishes.
In the lower elevations of west Texas, acorns, remnant persimmons, insects, and the hearts of Spanish dagger, sotol, and yucca comprise a major portion or the winter/early spring diet.
In pine-oak habitat at higher elevations, predominant food items are acorns, pinyon nuts, juniper berries, madrone berries, and insects.
During summer bear diets will reflect the availability of fruiting plants in their home range.
Bears feed heavily on mesquite beans, which contain 11-13% crude protein and are extremely high in energy.
The fruits of prickly pear, Texas persimmon (late summer), and algerita are also important components of the summer diet.
The summer diet is supplemented with the hearts of Spanish dagger, sotol and yucca.
The greatest foraging season for bears is fall when they need to build up a fat supply to last them through the winter.
Weight gain is considerable prior to the winter months.
Acorns are the single most important food item in the diet during the fall.
Although acorns are relatively low in crude protein (4-6%), they are one of the best energy foods available.
Acorns are followed in importance by madrone berries at the higher elevations and remnant persimmons in the lower elevations.
During low acorn-production years in the higher elevations, madrone and juniper berries tend to be the major food items in the fall diet.
Research on bear diets in the pine-oak habitats of west Texas and northern Mexico (Doan-Crider 102
1995) has shown a relatively low percentage of animal matter in the diet (7-8%).
Mammals represented a very small portion of the diet (1-2%).
The remains of 5 mammals were identified as deer, javelina, coyote, skunk, and a rodent.
It is unknown whether these animals were taken through predation or fed upon as carrion.
Several scats contained bear hair but were suspected to have occurred as the result of grooming activity.
In the lower desert elevation, over 400 black bear scats (dried feces) were analyzed.
One scat contained mule deer hair, and one scat contained black-tailed jackrabbit hair (McKinney and Pittman 1999).
Foods that may attract bears are dog food, cat food, livestock feed, hummingbird feeders, garbage, and lard.
Occasionally, a bear will kill and feed on livestock.
Predation by bears tends to occur more often during drought when vegetation and other natural foods are limited.
Predation on calves and young horses is extremely rare, while black bear predation on goats or sheep is more common.
Because bears will feed on carrion, they are often blamed for livestock deaths that they did not cause.
Incidents of bears preying on their own species have been documented numerous times, with cubs being the primary target of this intraspecies predation.
This phenomenon tends to be more of a problem in areas where bear numbers are relatively high.
In such situations, cubs as well as adult females are sometimes killed by rogue males and may or may not be fed upon.
Water Water use and its importance to bears in west Texas has not been documented.
Based upon observations and preliminary research, it is likely that water is critical for establishing black bear populations.
When forage conditions are good and succulent herbaceous vegetation and fruits are abundant, bears can probably survive for some time without standing water.
Ripe fruits and green grasses and forbs contain from 70-90% water, and during certain seasons bears can probably obtain adequate water from these forages.
However, most of the time the Trans-Pecos is hot and dry, and forages are less than succulent.
Bears will seek standing water not only to replenish daily water loss but also to cool off, especially in the summer months.
Habitat Management Recommendations Bears prefer shady, cool places (canyons and mountain slopes with trees), but will live anywhere there is adequate food and water.
Canyons tend to be good bear habitat not only because of their cooler temperatures but because they tend to support a variety of plants for both food and cover.
Whether for protection of cubs or because of the availability of food, sows with small cubs will often "hole up" in isolated canyons.
These timbered canyons are key habitats that may require protection during certain management activities such as aerial herbicide, mechanical brush removal, etc.
These areas may also require periodic rest from livestock grazing.
Promoting the growth of native, mast-producing shrubs and trees in these canyons and other key habitat sites may help to improve the quality of bear habitat on your property.
Riparian areas support an abundance of herbaceous vegetation and woody cover, and usually support some of the best mast-producing trees and shrubs.
These are key habitat sites that are used by bears (and most other wildlife species) for foraging and as travel corridors.
Protection of riparian areas will help to maintain the quality of food and cover for a variety of wildlife species currently residing on your property, as well as for a gradually recovering bear population.
103
Fencing along riparian areas can be extremely valuable in controlling the intensity and duration of livestock grazing.
The distribution and survival of bears is highly dependent on food availability, and any management practice that maintains or improves the diversity and availability of food will increase the potential for bears to successfully reside on the property.
Grazing management strategies that incorporate periodic rest for pastures while maintaining light to moderate stocking rates can improve the quantity and quality of foods for bears and other wildlife.
Infrequent prescribed burning can stimulate the germination and/or growth of a variety of plants, including key mast producers.
Bear habitat can be improved by removing invasive woody species such as creosote, tarbush, and dense mesquite while maintaining mature mesquites, oaks, Texas persimmons, juniper, Spanish dagger, sotol, and yucca species.
Water conservation and erosion control practices can also make subtle, long-term improvements (or prevent degradation) in the availability of food and cover.
Availability of water can be an important component of bear habitat.
Water in catchments, guzzlers, troughs and tanks should be maintained to ensure availability of water for bears and other wildlife.
Bears love to play in water; therefore, large or deep catchments and storage tanks should have a means of escape.
This can be done by placing a ladder or escape log in storage tanks.
One end of the escape log (at least 4-5" in diameter) should be wired to the edge of the tank while the other end is allowed to float with the water level.
If water storage tanks with lids are used, the lids should be secured with a latch to ensure that bears can not pry the lids open and climb into the tank.
Bears will damage float valves in livestock troughs and bite holes in aboveground plastic pipe.
Burying plastic pipe and welding a metal cage over float valves can prevent these problems.
When rotating livestock herds or temporarily destocking, water facilities in vacant pastures should be in operation and maintained for the benefit of bears and other wildlife.
Establishing permanent water sources in remote locations can reduce the potential for bear/livestock conflicts.
Coexisting With The Black Bear Many states in the United States have black bear populations, and people coexist with them on a daily basis.
In the southwestern United States and northern Mexico, black bears are found on many ranches and farms, as well as in parks and on state and federal lands.
In western Texas black bears are gradually increasing in number, and few bear/livestock or bear/human conflicts have occurred.
Several successful black bear relocations have been conducted recently by TPWD.
Bears are very intelligent and curious.
Sometimes their natural curiosity and opportunistic feeding habits cause them to lose their natural fear of human activities.
The result is a nuisance bear that is a potential threat to humans.
Occasionally, bears can be relocated successfully many miles from the area where they were creating problems.
But often, these nuisance bears must be destroyed.
Supplemental feeding of bears is not recommended.
Bears that are fed can lose their desire to forage on natural foods and can quickly become nuisance bears.
A bear may not be considered a nuisance by the individual who was feeding it, but it will inevitably become a nuisance (and possibly a danger) to someone.
Ultimately, a nuisance bear will have to be relocated, if not destroyed.
104
If you have black bears on your property, there are some specific actions and management techniques that can be used to prevent bear damage and conflicts, and allow the black bear to continue its natural recovery in western Texas.
1.
Do not feed bears.
They learn quickly and will begin to expect free handouts.
This can quickly create a problem bear.
This type of bear can become a threat to humans and may have to be destroyed.
2.
Keep a safe distance; do not approach or harass a bear.
Black bears are wild animals and are fast, powerful, and unpredictable.
3.
Maintain clean, garbage-free grounds.
Keep garbage in containers with locking lids and dispose of garbage by burning or burying it.
4.
Keep pet and livestock foods in buildings with closed and latched doors.
5.
Burn livestock carcasses, and during the hunting season burn game hides and viscera to prevent bears from feeding on them.
The black bear is currently listed as a "state threatened species."
TPWD is responsible for the protection and conservation of black bears in the state.
TPWD is currently monitoring the distribution and status of bears throughout the state and is actively conducting research on reestablishing populations.
TPWD is also committed to assisting landowners with bear problems and will help to resolve any bear-related conflicts that may occur.
If you have a nuisance bear on your property, do not attempt to trap or shoot the bear.
If you see a bear on your property or experience a problem with a bear, please notify: Texas Parks and Wildlife Department 1-800-792-1112 Black Gap Wildlife Management Area (915) 376-2216 or 376-2273 Elephant Mountain Wildlife Management Area (915) 364-2228 Or call your local TPWD game warden or wildlife biologist.
Literature Cited Baker, R. H. 1956.
Mammals of Coahuila, Mexico.
Univ.
Kansas Publ., Mus. Nat. Hist., 9(7): 125-335.
Doan-Crider, D. L. 1995.
Food habits of the Mexican black bear in Big Bend National Park, Texas and the Serranias del Burro, Coahuila, Mexico, 1991-94.
Spec.
Report Big Bend Nat.
Park, TX. 40 pp. McKinney, B. R., and M. T. Pittman.
1999.
Habitat use, diet, home range, and movement of resident, and relocated black bears in a lower Chihuahuan Desert habitat.
Wildlife Diversity Group, Project WER39 STATE.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin, Texas.
42 pp. 105
TPWD, San Angelo Regional Office (915) 651-4748 TPWD Alpine District Office 915) 837-2051
Additional References Anderson, Tom.
1992.
Black Bear: Seasons in the Wild.
Voyageur Press, Inc.
Stillwater, Minnesota.
120 pages.
Brown, Gary.
1993.
The Great Bear Almanac.
Lyons and Burford.
New York, N.Y. 325 pages.
Cox, Daniel J. 1990.
Black Bear.
Chronicle Books.
San Francisco, California.
96 pages.
Fair, Jeff.
1990.
The Great American Bear.
Northwood Press, Inc.
Minocqua, Wisconsin.
192 pages.
Hererro, Stephen.
1985.
Bear attacks: their causes and avoidance.
Lyons and Burford.
New York, N.Y. 287 pages.
Prepared by Bonnie McKinney Revised by Calvin Richardson
106
