Chapter 5 5 Industry Specific Processes Textiles Food Metal Finishing TEXTILES* FIGURE 28 Water Use in Textile Processing Processing Subcategory Wool Woven Knit Carpet Stock/Yarn Nonwoven Felted Fabrics Water Use Minimum, gal/lb of production 13.3 0.6 2.4 1.0 0.4 0.3 4.0 Water Use Median, gal/lb of production 34.1 13.6 10.0 5.6 12.0 4.8 25.5 Water Use Maximum, gal/ lb of production 78.9 60.9 45.2 19.5 66.9 9.9 111.8 * Excerpts from Best Management Practices for Pollution Prevention in the Textile Industr y, EPA, 1996.
74 Chapter 5 Water Consumption in Textiles Subcategory Water use can var y widely between similar operations as well.
For example, knit mills average 10 gallons of water per pound of The amount of water used varies widely in production, yet water use ranges from a the industr y, depending on the specific low of 2.5 gallons to a high of 45.2 processes operated at the mill, the equipgallons.
These data ser ve as a good ment used, and the prevailing managebenchmark for determining whether ment philosophy concerning water use.
water use in a particular mill is excessive.
Reducing water consumption in textile processing is important for furthering Unit Process pollution prevention efforts, in part because excess water use dilutes pollutants Water consumption varies greatly among and adds to the eff luent load.
unit processes, as indicated in Figure 29.
Certain dyeing processes and print afterMills that currently use excessive quantiwashing are among the more intensive ties of water can achieve large gains from unit processes.
Within the dye categor y, pollution prevention.
A reduction in certain unit processes are particularly low water use of 10 to 30 percent can be in water consumption (e.g., pad-batch). accomplished by taking fairly simple measures.
A walk-through audit can Machine Type uncover water waste in the form of: Dif ferent types of processing machiner y use different amounts of water, par ticun Hoses left running.
larly in relation to the bath ratio in n Broken or missing valves.
dyeing processes (the ratio of the mass of n Excessive water use in washing water in an exhaust dyebath to the mass operations.
of fabric).
Washing fabric consumes n Leaks from pipes, joints, valves, greater quantities of water than dyeing. and pumps.
Water consumption of a batch processing n Cooling water or wash boxes left machine depends on its bath ratio and running when machiner y is shut also on mechanical factors such as agitadown. tion, mixing, bath and fabric turnover n Defective toilets and water coolrate (called contact), turbulence and other ers. mechanical considerations, as well as physical f low characteristics involved in In addition, many less obvious causes of washing operations.
These factors all water waste exist.
These causes are preaffect washing efficiency.
sented below by subcategor y, unit process, and machine type.
In general, heating, wash, and dyebaths 73 Water is used extensively throughout textile processing operations.
Almost all dyes, specialty chemicals, and finishing chemicals are applied to textile substrates from water baths.
In addition, most fabric preparation steps, including desizing, scouring, bleaching, and mercerizing, use aqueous systems.
Textile operations var y greatly in water consumption.
Figure 28 summarizes the water consumption of various types of operations.
Wool and felted fabrics processes are more water intensive than other processing subcategories such as wovens, knits, stock, and carpet.
Chapter 5 FIGURE 29 Water Consumption by Unit Process Processing Subcategory Yarn 
Therefore, low bath-ratio dyeing equipment not only conser ves water but also saves energy, in addition to reducing steam use and air pollution from boilers.
Low-bath-ratio dyeing machines conser ve chemicals as well as water and also achieve higher fixation efficiency.
But the washing efficiency of some types of low-bath-ratio dyeing machines, such as jigs, is inherently poor; therefore, a correlation between bath ratio and total water use is not always exact.
FIGURE 30 Water Consumption for a Typical Bleach Range Stage Saturators Steamer and J Boxes Washers Desize Scour Bleach Dry cans Total Water, gph 550 150 3,700 3,100 3,100 450 11,050 Percent, % 5 1.4 33.5 28.1 28.1 4.1 100 Process Water Conservation Washing Washing and rinsing operations are two of the most common operations in textile manufacturing that have significant potential for pollution prevention.
Many processes involve washing and rinsing stages, and optimizing wash processes can conser ve significant amounts of water.
In some cases, careful auditing and implementation of controls can achieve wastewater reductions of up to 70 percent.
The washing and rinsing stages of preparation typically require more water than the other stages (e.g., bleaching, dyeing).
Several typical washing and rinsing processes include: n Drop and fill batch washing.
n Ove r f low batch washing.
n Continuous washing (countercurrent, horizontal, or inclined washers).
A report on water consumption for a typical continuous bleach range found that consumption was more than 11,000 gallons per hour, or 270,000 million gallons per day.
(See Figure 30.)
Washing stages accounted for 9,900 gallons per hour, or 90 percent of the total.
The application of the following simple, lowtechnology methods of water conser vation reduced water use: n Properly regulating f lows: 300 gallons per hour savings.
n Counter f lowing bleach to scour: 3,000 gallons per hour savings.
n Counter f lowing scour to desize: 3,000 gallons per hour savings.
The total water savings without process modification was 150,000 million gallons per day, or 55 percent of water use.
A process modification such as a combined one-stage bleach and scour also would save 6,200 gallons of water per hour, or an additional 150,000 million gallons per day, along with energy savings.
77 Chapter 5 FIGURE 31 Water Use in Batch Washing Process Description 1 Standard - 3 step drop/fill 2 Reduced bath - seven step drop/fill 3 Continuous overflow 4 Continuous overflow reduced bath 5 Three-step drop/fill, reuse bath 2 6 Three-step, reuse baths 2 and 3 Bath Ratio Water Use, gal/lbs % Change from Standard 1:8 1:5 1:8 1:5 1:8 1:8 1.62 1.26 2.38 1.49 1.19 0.75 ---22.2 46.9 -8 -26.5 -53.7 Drop-Fill Versus Overflow Washing In the drop/fill method of batch washing, spent wash water is drained and the machine is refilled with a fresh wash bath.
The fabric or other substrate in the machine retains much of the previous bath, perhaps as much as 350 percent owg.
This percentage can be reduced by mechanical means (e.g., extraction, blowdown).
Comparison of several methods of washing after bleaching shows the benefits of countercurrent wash methods, see Figure 31.
Methods five and six, which implement countercurrent washing, produce savings of 26 and 53 percent compared with the standard drop/fill method.
These results are based on comparisons of washing processes that would produce the same degree of reduction of fabric impurities using computer models.
Countercurrent washing processes require the addition of holding tanks and pumps.
78 The capital cost of setting up such a reuse system typically is less than $50,000 and generates estimated savings of $95,000 annually.
In many cases, reducing wastewater also reduces the need for expensive waste treatment systems.
Reusing Wash Water Many strategies can be applied for reusing wash water.
Three of the most common strategies are countercurrent washing, reducing carr yover, and reusing wash water for cleaning purposes.
Countercurrent Washing The countercurrent washing method is relatively straightfor ward and inexpensive to use in multistage washing processes.
Basically, the least contaminated water from the final wash is reused for the nextto-last wash and so on until the water reaches the first wash stage, after which it is discharged.
This technique is useful for washing after continuous dyeing, printing, desizing, scouring, or bleaching.
Chapter 5 An important variant of the countercurrent principle is horizontal or inclined washers.
Horizontal or inclined washing is more efficient because of the inherent countercurrent nature of water f low within the process.
The mechanical construction of an inclined or horizontal countercurrent washer has to be much better than a traditional ver tical washer, ho w e v e r. Sloppy roll settings, weak or undersized rolls, unevenness, bends, bows, biases, bearing play, or other misalignments within the machine are much more important in a horizontal or inclined washer because the weight of water pressing down on the fabric can cause it to sag, balloon, or stretch.
If properly constructed and maintained, horizontal or inclined washers can produce high quality fabrics while saving money and wat e r. squeeze rolls or vacuum extractors typically extract water between steps.
Equipment employing vacuum technology to reduce dragout and carr yover of chemical solutions with cloth, stock, or yarn is used to increase washing efficiency in multistage washing operations.
In one case histor y, a processor installed vacuum slots after each wash box in an existing multistage continuous washing line and was able to reduce the number of boxes from eight to three .
Wash boxes with built-in vacuum extractors are available for purchase, as well as washers for prints that combine successive spray and vacuum slots without any bath for the fabric to pass through.
Because the fabric is never submerged, bleeding, marking off, and staining of grounds is minimized, and water use decreases.
Another washer configuration with internal recycling capabilities is the ver tical counter f low washer, which sprays recirculated water onto the fabric and uses rollers to squeeze waste through the fabric into a sump, here it is filtered and recirculated.
The filter is unique, consisting of continuous loops of polyester fabric that rotate continuously and are cleaned of filtrate at one end with a spray of clean water.
This construction allows for maximum removal of suspended solids from water before discharge or reuse in another process.
High-efficiency washing with low water use results.
Energy use decreases greatly because less water must be heated.
Reducing Carryover Because the purpose of washing is to reduce the amount of impurities in the substrate, as much water as possible must be removed between sequential washing steps in multistage washing operations.
Water cont aining cont aminants that is not removed is carried over into the next step, contributing to washing inefficiency.
Proper draining in batch drop/fill washing and proper extraction between steps in the continuous washing process are important.
Often, 350 percent owg is carried over in typical drop/fill procedures.
This amount can be reduced in some batch machines (e.g., yarn package dyeing, stock dyeing) by using compressed air or vacuum blowdown between washing steps.
In continuous washing operations, Reuse for Cleaning Purposes In many types of can be reused for printing, cleanup formed with used operations, washwater cleaning purposes.
In activities can be perwashwater, including : n Backgray blanket washing.
79 Chapter 5 n Screen and squeegee cleaning.
n Color shop cleanup.
n Equipment and facility cleaning.
A typical preparation department may also reuse wash water as follows: n Reuse scour rinses for desizing. n Reuse mercerizer washwater for scouring.
n Reuse bleach washwater for scouring.
n Reuse water-jet loom washwater for desizing. n Recycle kier drains to saturator.
Inspection of the written procedures showed that the fill step simply said fill.
The wash step simply said wash.
Without training and without a specific operating procedure, operators were left to determine water use on their own.
This case may seem extreme, but even the best mills, which have well-documented production procedures, often do not have documented cleaning procedures.
Cleaning operations that contribute large amounts of pollution to the total waste stream include machine cleaning, screen and squeegee cleaning, and drum washing.
Work Practices Engineering Controls Workers can greatly inf luence water use.
Sloppy chemical handling and poor housekeeping can result in excessive cleanup.
Poor scheduling and mix planning also can require excessive cleanup and lead to unnecessar y cleaning of equipment like machines and mix tanks.
Leaks and spills should be reported and repaired promptly.
Equipment maintenance, especially maintenance of washing equipment, is essential.
Inappropriate work practices waste significant amounts of water; and good procedures and training are important.
When operations are controlled manually, an operations audit checklist is helpful for operator reference, training, and retraining.
In one case histor y, a knitting mill experienced excessive water use on beck dyeing machines.
A study of operating practices revealed that each operator was filling the machines to a different level.
Some operators filled the becks to a depth of 16 inches, others as much as 24 inches.
Also, the amount of water used for washing varied.
Some operator s used an over f low procedure, and others used drop/fill or half baths (repeatedly draining half of the bath, then refilling it).
80 Ever y mill should have moveable water meters that can be installed on individual machines to document water use and evaluate improvements.
In practice, mills rarely measure water use but rely on manufacturers claims concerning equipment and water use.
The manufacturers estimates are useful starting points for evaluating water consumption, but the actual performance of equipment depends on the chemical system used and the substrate.
Therefore, water use is situation-specific and should be measured on-site for accurate results.
The water meters should be regularly maintained and calibrated.
Other important engineering controls, some of which have been discussed in other sections of this chapter, include: n Flow control on washers. n Flow control on cooling water (use minimum necessar y). n Countercurrent washing.
n High extraction to reduce dragout. n Recycle and reuse. n Detection and repair of leaks.
n Detection and repair of defective toilets and water coolers.
Chapter 5 Machiner y should be inspected and improved where possible to facilitate cleaning and to reduce susceptibility to fouling.
Bath ratios sometimes can be reduced by using displacers that result in lower chemical requirements for pH control as well as lower water use.
Process Changes Pad-Batch Dyeing
In pad-batch dyeing, prepared fabric is padded with a solution of fiber reactive dyestuff and alkali, then stored (or batched) on rolls or in boxes and covered with plastic film to prevent evaporation of water or absorption of carbon dioxide from the air.
The fabric then is batched for two to 12 hours.
Washing can be done on whatever equipment is available in the mill.
Pad-batch dyeing of fer s several significant advantages, primarily cost and waste reduction, simplicity, and speed.
Production of between 75 and 150 yards per minute, depending on the construction and weight of the goods involved, is common.
Also, pad-batch dyeing is f lexible compared with a continuous range.
Either wovens or knits can be dyed in many constructions.
Frequent changes of shade present no problems because reactives remain water soluble, making cleanup easy.
This method of dyeing is useful when versatility is required.
Water use typically decreases from 17 gallons per pound to 1.5 gallons per pound, a reduction of more than 90 percent.
water intake system with no adverse effects on production.
In some cases, specific types of wastewater can be recycled within a process or department.
Examples are dyebath reuse, bleach bath reuse, final rinse reuse as a loading bath for the next lot, washwater reuse, countercurrent washing, and reuse for other purposes.
Bleach Bath Reuse Cotton and cotton blend preparation (e.g., desizing, scouring, bleaching) are performed using continuous or batch processes and usually are the largest water consumers in a mill.
Continuous processes are much easier to adapt to wastewater recycling/reuse because the wastestream is continuous, shows fairly constant characteristics, and usually is easy to segregate from other waste streams.
Waste-stream reuse in a typical bleach unit for polyester/cotton and 100 percent cotton fabrics would include: n Recycling J-box and kier drain wastewater to saturators. n Using countercurrent washing.
n Recycling continuous scour washwater to batch scouring.
n Recycling w asher wat er to back gray blanket washing.
n Recycling washer water to screen and squeegee cleaning.
n Recycling washer water to color shop cleanup.
n Recycling washer water to equipment and facility cleaning.
n Reusing scour rinses for desizing. n Reusing mercerizer washwater for scouring.
Preparation chemicals (including optical brighteners and tints), however, must be selected in such a way that reuse does not create quality problems such as spotting.
Processing Bath Reuse Water from many processes can be renovated for reuse by a variety of methods.
Several research efforts are underway.
In a few operations, up to 50 percent of the treated wastewater is recycled directly back from the eff luent to the raw- 81 Chapter 5 Batch scouring and bleaching are less easy to adapt to recycling of waste streams because streams occur intermittently, drains generally go into pits and are not easily segregated, and batch preparation steps frequently are combined.
With appropriate holding t anks, however, bleach bath reuse can be practiced in a similar manner to dyebath reuse, and several pieces of equipment are now available that have the necessar y holding tanks.
The spent bleach bath contains all of the alkali and heat necessar y for the next bleaching operation.
Peroxide and chelates must be added to reconstitute the bath.
Like dyebath reuse, the number of reuse cycles in bleach bath reuse is limited by impurity buildup.
The main impurities are metals, such as iron, that can interfere with the bleaching reaction.
New types of rope bleaching units for knits featuring six to 12-stage jet transpor t systems have made continuous bleaching of most knit styles possible.
These units were introduced in the late 1970s and typically produce 40 pounds per minute of knit fabric or more than one million pounds per month based on a three-shift, six-day operation.
These machines have become ver y popular with large knit processors because of their f lexibility and ability to conser ve energy, water, and chemicals.
They also have complete builtin countercurrent capabilities.
These units are being promoted for use in af ter washing fiber reactive and other types of dyes (e.g., after pad-batch dyeing) in addition to use as continuous knit preparation ranges.
Final Rinse Reuse as Loading Bath for Next Lot One simple technique that saves water and, in some cases, BOD loading is to reuse the final bath from one dyeing cycle to load the next lot.
This technique works well in situations where the same shade is being repeated or where the dyeing machine is fairly clean.
A good example of this technique is acid dyeing of nylon hosier y.
The final bath usually contains an emulsified softener that exhausts onto the substrate, leaving the emulsifier in the bath.
This technique can ser ve as the wetting agent for loading the next batch, thus saving the water, heat, and wetting agent and associated BOD.
