ELA GEE 21 FOCUSED-LEARNING LESSONS: Short Story Conflicts Assessment Component: Reading and Responding STANDARD ONE: Students read, comprehend, and respond to a range of materials, using a variety of strategies for different purposes.
Students read, analyze, and respond to literature as a record of life experiences.
Students apply reasoning and problem-solving skills to reading, writing, speaking, listening, viewing, and visually representing.
STANDARD SIX: STANDARD SEVEN:
PRIMARY BENCHMARKS ASSESSED: ELA-1-H1: using knowledge of word meaning and extending basic and technical vocabulary, employing a variety of strategies (e.g., context clues, affixes, etymology, dictionary, thesaurus) analyze various genres as records of life experiences using comprehension strategies (e.g., predicting, drawing conclusions, comparing and contrasting, making inferences, determining main ideas, summarizing, recognizing literary devices, paraphrasing) in contexts Students should be able to recognize internal/external conflicts and show comprehension of what is read by drawing logical conclusions.
ELA-6-H4: ELA-7-H1:
LESSON FOCUS:
Translating Standards Into Instruction A. Project and read orally this excerpt from Richard Connell's "The Most Dangerous Game" while students follow on their copies.
B. Discuss and mark on the projected copy while students mark their copies with the following: 1.
Conflicts a.
Define and list four conflicts with examples: man vs. man human being in conflict with another human), man vs. himself (a person in conflict with himself), man vs. society (a
GEE 21 ELA Remediation Guide
DRAFT
2.
3.
person in conflict with the group of which he is a member), man vs. nature ( a person in conflict with the forces of nature--weather, terrain).
Classify internal (inside) and external (outer) conflicts. b. Discuss the three conflicts evident in this passage with examples (man--Rainsford being hunted by the General; self--Rainsford calming himself after realizing he is being hunted like an animal; nature--Rainsford using nature to help him) Which are internal? External? c. Break down the excerpt into obvious examples of conflicts backed up with examples.
First section is self(internal) because Rainsford must calm himself.
Next comes nature (external) because Rainsford uses nature to survive.
Then comes man (external) because the General comes after him.
Finally, it returns to self (internal) because Rainsford realizes this is a game to the General.
Characters a.
Roles of each character: 1) General Zaroff--hunter, Rainsford--hunted; 2) Zaroff--cat, Rainsford--mouse; why is the cat/mouse role terrifying to Rainsford? Explain to students what a cat does to a mouse before he finally kills it. (toys, tortures before death) b.
Has Rainsford hunted before? Provide support.
(refers to fox making trails; mentions the unbelievable speed with which the General tracks him) c. How does the reader know that General Zaroff is an excellent hunter? Provide proof.
(Rainsford tells reader that General Zaroff moves rapidly down the trail, following well-disguised tracks; Rainsford calls this ability to track at night uncanny.
(unbelievable) d. Contrast Zaroff's and Rainsford's views about the hunt.
Direct students to Zaroff's viewing it as a game, while Rainsford views it as a mentally and physically exhausting life and death struggle.(A good idea is to make two columns on a transparency--Zaroff and Rainsford--and list statements under each.) e. Based upon their views of the hunt, what does the reader learn about each man as a person? (This is a natural extension of the two-column list from above--Zaroff is cruel, unfeeling, evil--hunting a human as a game; Rainsford has a strong sense of right and wrong and feels the game is actually murder.)
Literary devices a.
Define metaphor.
Point out picture with a frame of water, and Cossack was the cat.
He was the mouse.
A metaphor is a comparison in which one thing is said to be another.
He is on an island surrounded by the ocean.
Zaroff is torturing Rainsford before he kills him.
Why would a writer use this DRAFT
GEE 21 ELA Remediation Guide
kind of comparison? (Usually these comparisons make things more realistic, clearer to the reader.)
b. Define simile (a comparison of two unlike things using the words like or as) Point out the following three comparisons: the night crawled by like a wounded snake; leaves as thick as tapestry; and to hurl himself like a panther.
Ask students for possible meanings of each and what each adds to the total clarity of the story.
(Night moved so slowly because he is so anxious; unbelievably thick leaves--like heavy curtains; to spring or strike from his resting place in the treetop) c. Define personification (giving human characteristics to nonhuman things).
Point out the night crawled slowly by (Night is a living thing moving very slowly.)
and dingy gray was varnishing the sky (Dawn is painting the sky gray--early morning.)
Discuss the meaning of each and what each adds to the story.
C. Writing Samples 1.
Short answer: Give at least three things the reader learns about Rainsford as a person from this excerpt.
Use examples from the excerpt as proof for your statements.
Use 50-75 words for your final copy on the short answer response form.
(good hunter; very human - shows fear, panic; strong sense of right and wrong) 2.
Short answer: In 25-50 words, give at least three reasons why the cat/mouse metaphor is so important to understanding the characters in this excerpt.
Use the short answer response form for your final copy.
(hunter/hunted; game/life-death struggle; General torturing Rainsford before killing him) NOTE: THESE SHORT ANSWER RESPONSES MAY BE USED AS INDIVIDUAL ASSESSMENTS OR GROUP/INDIVIDUAL ASSESS MENTS.
A POSSIBLE RUBRIC FOR EACH IS PROVIDED IN LESSON THREE AND BELOW.)
1.
30 points- The paragraph has a defined topic sentence and clear supporting detail.
Spelling and grammar mistakes are few.
There is one topic sentence and at least four supporting details.
2.
20 points- The paragraph has a topic sentence but supporting details are weak and off-subject.
There is one topic sentence and at least three supporting details.
There are more spelling and grammar mistakes.
3.
10 points- The paragraph has neither a topic sentence nor supporting details.
The paragraph is not clearly organized.
Spelling and grammar mistakes occur throughout the paragraph.
There is no clearly defined topic sentence and only one or two supporting details.
GEE 21 ELA Remediation Guide
DRAFT
Sources of Evidence of Student Learning A. B. D. E. F.
The student participates in classroom discussion.
The student takes multiple choice/true-false/fill-in-blank tests.
The student composes short answer responses.
The student begins writing essay responses.
The student keeps marked handouts of excerpt vocabulary/definitions; examples of literary devices defined and marked; notes.
with
Attributes of Student Work at the "Got-It" Level A. Students will maintain an ongoing portfolio of work, including rough copies, brainstorms, revised, edited, and final drafts of writing samples.
Also included is the highlighted handout of the work read and discussed.
NOTE: SAMPLE RUBRIC FOR PORTFOLIO ASSESSMENT AND A SAMPLE ASSIGNMENT CHECKLIST ARE INCLUDED IN LESSON PLAN THREE.
Class discussion 1.
Teacher will question for comprehension of material covered by rewording, repeating, coaching, monitoring.
2.
The student will attempt to defend statements by answering "Why?" questions.
3.
The teacher will assess comprehension on the logicality of the students' conclusions drawn by pointing out errors, inconsistencies, or misunderstandings.
4.
Students will respond to questions, mark handouts, ask questions, and complete assignments.
5.
The teacher will direct questions about the passage by asking the students to frame responses in regard to real life situations.
B.
Gee 21 Connection Released GEE items provide assessment rubrics used to determine different levels of proficiency.
Recommended Materials A. B. Overhead projector Copies of short story "The Most Dangerous Game"
References: Connell, Richard, "The Most Dangerous Game", Glencoe Literature, Course 4, 2000, p. 67.
GEE 21 ELA Remediation Guide
DRAFT
