Drug Class Review on Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003 Chris Chandler, PharmD Mark Helfand, MD, MPH Produced by Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center Oregon Health 
Additional literature identified through the peer review and HRC committee processes was added between January, 2003 and April, 2003.
This report describes literature identified in an update search conducted in the first week of October, 2003.
New FDA Information No new oral hypoglycemics have been marketed in the U.S. since April, 2003.
New generic products for glipizide and micronized glyburide were approved since April, 2003.
Updates to the glipizide extended release and repaglinide product labels were made since April, 2003: Glipizide extended release: The Adverse Reaction section of the product label was updated on 9/23/03 to include post-marketing reports of abdominal pain.
Repaglinide: Gemfibrozil and itraconazole were added to the list of drugs that have been studied in healthy volunteers with co-administration of repaglinide.
Higher AUC and prolonged half-life Co-administration of gemfibrozil (600 mg) or itraconazole (twicedaily 100 mg) resulted in higher AUCs and longer half-lives for repaglinide 0.25 mg.
Searches We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (2003, Issue 3), MEDLINE (January, 2003 through October Week 1 2003), EMBASE (January, 2003 through 3rd Quarter 2003), and reference lists of review articles.
The original search strategy was repeated for update electronic searches.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers were invited to submit update dossiers.
All citations were imported into an electronic database (EndNote 6.0).
Results The October, 2003 update search identified 238 citations, including 119 from the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, 41 from Medline, 60 from Embase, and 18 from manufacturer dossiers.
Four trials met the eligibility criteria.
Abstracts are included in Appendix A.
DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE
2
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
Glycemic control.
One head to head trial1 of 124 patients found no difference in the effects of repaglinide and glimepiride on glycemic control (HbA1c-lowering) after one year (Abstract 1).
Clinically relevant outcomes.
Repaglinide significantly improved treatment satisfaction and had no effect on well-being or health status after 16 weeks in a 2003 placebocontrolled trial of pharmacotherapy-naïve patients with type II diabetes (n=253) (Abstract 2).2 Drug interactions.
Open label, crossover studies of healthy adults3 found that the action of repaglinide increased when administered concomitantly with ketoconazole and decreased with rifampicin.
Additionally, incidence of hypoglycemic events increased when repaglinide was administered concomitantly with simvastatin or nifedipine (Abstract 3).
Subgroups.
A 2003 trial4 compared glimepiride and placebo in Mexican American patients with type II diabetes (n=70) (Abstract 4).
Glimepiride did not cause significant adverse events in this population that may be underrepresented in other trials.
A 2003 open trial5 of repaglinide found that rates of glycemic control, hypoglycemia, serious adverse events and deaths were similar for groups of type 2 diabetic patients with normal (n=151) and mild-moderately impaired (n=108) renal functioning and those with severe-extreme renal impairment (n=22), fewer of which reached the highest dose level.
It was concluded that repaglinide can be safely titrated according to manufacturer's recommendations in type 2 diabetic patients with any degree of renal impairment.
Conclusions These new data do not change the conclusions of the previous review.
DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE
3
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
References 1.
Derosa, G, Mugellini, A, Ciccarelli, L, et al.
Comparison between repaglinide and glimepiride in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a one-year, randomized, double-blind assessment of metabolic parameters and cardiovascular risk factors.
Clinical Therapeutics 2003;25(2):472-84.
Bech, P, Moses, R, Gomis, R.
The effect of prandial glucose regulation with repaglinide on treatment satisfaction, wellbeing and health status in patients with pharmacotherapy naive Type 2 diabetes: a placebo-controlled, multicentre study.
Quality of Life Research 2003;12(4):413-25.
Hatorp, V, Hansen, KT, Thomsen, MS.
Influence of drugs interacting with CYP3A4 on the pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and safety of the prandial glucose regulator repaglinide.
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 2003;43(6):649660.
Luis Bautista, J, Bugos, C, Dirnberger, G, et al.
Efficacy and safety profile of glimepiride in Mexican American patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: A randomized, placebo-controlled study.
Clinical Therapeutics 2003;25(1):194-209.
Hasslacher, C, Multinational Repaglinide Renal Study Group.
Safety and efficacy of repaglinide in type 2 diabetic patients with and without impaired renal function.
Diabetes Care 2003;26(3):886-891.
2.
3.
4.
5.
DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE
4
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
Appendix A Abstract #1 Repaglinide and glimepiride are relatively new oral hypoglycemic agents.
Few data are available concerning their effects on metabolic parameters other than measures of glycemic control.
OBJECTIVES: In addition to assessing the effects of repaglinide and glimepiride on glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, this study also examined the effects of these agents on 3 metabolic parameters known to be cardiovascular risk factors--lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]), plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), and homocysteine (Hcy).
METHODS: This randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial was conducted at a single center in Italy.
Eligible patients were nonsmokers; had no hypertension or coronary heart disease; were taking no hypolipidemic drugs, diuretics, beta-blockers, or thyroxin; and had normal renal function.
After an initial 4-week placebo washout period, patients were randomized to receive repaglinide 1 mg/d or glimepiride 1 mg/d.
The dose of study drug was optimized over an 8-week titration period, which was followed by a 12-month treatment period.
Measures of glycemic control (glycated hemoglobin [HbA1c], fasting plasma glucose [FPG]
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-four patients (63 women, 61 men) completed the study, 62 in each treatment group.
There were no significant differences in demographic characteristics between groups.
After 6 and 12 months of treatment, FPG levels and HbA1c values were significantly reduced from baseline in both groups (6 months, P 
After 6 months, PPG levels were significantly decreased only in the repaglinide group (P 
No significant changes from baseline in FPI or PPI levels were seen in either group at 6 months, although FPI levels were significantly increased in the repaglinide group at 12 months (P 
Repaglinide significantly lowered levels of Lp(a), PAI-1, and Hcy after 12 months (all, P 
Glimepiride significantly lowered levels of Lp(a) and Hcy after 6 months (both, P 
CONCLUSIONS: Repaglinide and glimepiride improved glycemic control and reduced levels of other metabolic parameters of interest in this population of patients with type 2 diabetes.
It is possible that the reductions in Lp(a), PAI-1, and Hcy were the result of improved glucose metabolism; however, the possibility that repaglinide and glimepiride may have a direct effect on these parameters should not be excluded.
Abstract #2 This prospective, 16-week, randomised, double-blind, parallel-group study assessed the differential impact of the prandial glucose regulating oral hypoglycaemic drug, repaglinide, and placebo upon perceptions of quality of life (QoL) and treatment satisfaction in pharmacotherapy-naive patients with Type 2 diabetes.
In addition, the study assessed whether these outcomes were influenced by the patients' level of
DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE
5
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
glycaemic control.
A total of 253 patients were randomised in a 2:1 ratio of repaglinide: placebo, with doses taken flexibly with main meals (2-4 per day), whenever they were eaten.
Repaglinide was initiated at 0.5 mg per meal, increased to 1 mg after 4 weeks if fasting plasma glucose exceeded 7.8 mmol/l.
QoL and treatment satisfaction outcomes were compared using generic and disease-specific self-assessment measures, previously applied in diabetes: the WHO Wellbeing Questionnaire (WHO-WBQ), WHO Diabetes Treatment Satisfaction Questionnaire (WHO-DTSQ) and EuroQoL EQ-5D.
Over the trial period, repaglinide-treated patients reported a significant 9% improvement in (WHODTSQ) treatment satisfaction score (p 
No significant increase was associated with placebo.
The correlation between decrease in glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) and increase in treatment satisfaction (WHO-DTSQ) was -0.22 (p 
Scores obtained with the other measures did not change significantly during the trial in either group, but the cohort exhibited only a slight reduction in wellbeing (WHO-WBQ) and health status (EQ-5D) at baseline compared with the background population.
In conclusion, flexible mealtime dosing with oral medication appears to be well accepted by pharmacotherapynaive patients with Type 2 diabetes.
The results suggest that repaglinide provides a higher level of treatment satisfaction than placebo, and this may in part relate to improved glycaemic control.
Appendix #3 The object of this study was to analyze drug interactions between repaglinide, a shortacting insulin secretagogue, and five other drugs interacting with CYP3A4: ketoconazole, rifampicin, ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel (in an oral contraceptive), simvastatin, and nifedipine.
In two open-label, two-period, randomized crossover studies, healthy subjects received repaglinide alone, repaglinide on day 5 of ketoconazole treatment, or repaglinide on day 7 of rifampicin treatment.
In three open-label, three-period, randomized crossover studies, healthy subjects received 5 days of repaglinide alone; 5 days of ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel, simvastatin, or nifedipine alone; or 5 days of repaglinide concomitant with ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel, simvastatin, or nifedipine.
Compared to administration of repaglinide alone, concomitant ketoconazole increased mean AUC0infinity for repaglinide by 15% and mean Cmax by 7%.
Concomitant rifampicin decreased mean AUC0-infinity for repaglinide by 31% and mean Cmax by 26%.
Concomitant treatment with CYP3A4 substrates altered mean AUC0-5 h and mean Cmax for repaglinide by 1% and 17% (ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel), 2% and 27% (simvastatin), or 11% and 3% (nifedipine).
Profiles of blood glucose concentration following repaglinide dosing were altered by less than 8% by both ketoconazole and rifampicin.
In all five studies, most adverse events were related to hypoglycemia, as expected in a normal population given a blood glucose regulator.
The safety profile of repaglinide was not altered by pretreatment with ketoconazole or rifampicin or by coadministration with ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel.
The incidence of adverse events increased with coadministration of simvastatin or nifedipine compared to either repaglinide or simvastatin/nifedipine treatment alone.
No clinically relevant pharmacokinetic interactions occurred between repaglinide and the CYP3A4 substrates ethinyloestradiol/levonorgestrel, simvastatin, or nifedipine.
The pharmacokinetic profile of repaglinide was altered by administration of potent inhibitors or inducers, such as ketoconazole or rifampicin, but to a lesser degree than expected.
These results are DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE 6
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
probably explained by the metabolic pathway of repaglinide that involves other enzymes than CYP3A4, reflected to some extent by a small change in repaglinide pharmacodynamics.
Thus, careful monitoring of blood glucose in repaglinide-treated patients receiving strong inhibitors or inducers of CYP3A4 is recommended, and an increase in repaglinide dose may be necessary.
No safety concerns were observed, except a higher incidence in adverse events in patients receiving repaglinide and simvastatin or nifedipine.
Abstract #4 Mexican Americans, the fastest growing ethnic group in the United States, have a 2- to 3fold higher prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus relative to the non-Hispanic white population.
It is estimated that 10% of Mexican Americans 
Objective: The goal of this study was to evaluate the efficacy and safety of glimepiride, a long-acting sulfonylurea, as an adjunct to diet/exercise in Mexican Americans with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Methods: This was a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study.
Mexican Americans with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, defined as a fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level between 120 mg/dL and 225 mg/dL and glycated hemoglobin (HbA
Patients were randomized in a 2:1 ratio (using the lowest available treatment assignment number when eligibility was established) to receive 14 weeks of glimepiride or matching placebo once daily with continued diet/exercise.
The starting glimepiride dose was 1 mg, with titration to 2 mg and 4 mg for FPG levels 
The primary efficacy variable was change in HbA
Secondary efficacy variables were HbA
The tolerability of glimepiride in this study population was determined by evaluating adverse events, hypoglycemic episodes, and physical examination as well as laboratory findings.
All analyses were performed on an intent-totreat basis.
A per-protocol analysis also was conducted to support the primary efficacy analysis.
Results: Seventy patients were randomized to treatment with glimepiride (n = 48) or placebo (n = 22).
The glimepiride and placebo groups were similar with respect to mean (SE) age (48.4 [11.7] and 50.7 [10.0]
However, the glimepiride group had a higher mean body weight (83.3 [17.0] vs 76.3 [18.5]
The mean (SE) HbA
The adjusted mean difference in HbA
More pronounced HbA
Glimepiride-treated patients also achieved a significantly greater improvement in FPG, with an adjusted mean (SE) treatment difference of -46.7 (16.7) mg/dL (P = 0.007).
Glimepiride did not appear to affect fibrinogen and PAI-1 levels but was associated with significantly greater mean increases in fasting insulin (10.2 DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE 7
Oral Hypoglycemics Preliminary Update Report #1 November, 2003
Oregon Evidence-based Practice Center
vs -2.1 [mu]U/mL; P = 0.002) and body weight (2.3 vs 2.1 kg; P 
Glimepiride was well tolerated, with an adverse-event profile similar to that of placebo.
Conclusions: These results indicate that once-daily glimepiride plus diet/ exercise was effective in Mexican Americans with type 2 diabetes whose disease was inadequately controlled with diet/exercise alone.
It appeared to be well tolerated in the population studied.
More weight gain was seen with glimepiride compared with placebo.
Given the high prevalence of type 2 diabetes among Mexican Americans, further clinical studies of glimepiride and other glucose-lowering therapies are needed in this ethnic subset.
Abstract #5 OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the influence of renal impairment on the safety and efficacy of repaglinide in type 2 diabetic patients.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This multinational, open-label study comprised a 6-week run-in period, continuing prestudy antidiabetic medication, followed by a titration period (1-4 weeks) and a 3-month maintenance period.
Patients with normal renal function (n = 151) and various degrees of renal impairment (n = 130) were treated with repaglinide (maximal dose of 4 mg, three times daily).
Safety and efficacy assessments were performed at baseline (end of run-in) and at the end of study treatment.
RESULTS: The type and severity of adverse events during repaglinide treatment were similar to the run-in period.
The number of patients with adverse events was not significantly related to renal function during run-in or repaglinide treatment.
Percentage of patients with hypoglycemic episodes increased significantly (P = 0.007) with increasing severity of renal impairment during run-in but not during repaglinide treatment (P = 0.074).
Metabolic control (HbA(1c) and fasting blood glucose) with repaglinide was unchanged from that on previous antidiabetic medication.
Final repaglinide dose tended to be lower for patients with severe and extreme renal impairment than for patients with less severe renal impairment or normal renal function (P = 0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: Repaglinide has a good safety and efficacy profile in type 2 diabetic patients complicated by renal impairment and is an appropriate treatment choice, even for individuals with more severe degrees of renal impairment.
DRAFT ­ DO NOT CITE
8
