1999 ACO #180 STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION FREDERICK BART, SR., PLAINTIFF, V FEDERAL SCREW WORKS, SELF INSURED, DEFENDANT.
APPEAL FROM MAGISTRATE SHARON L. SMITH.
VALENCIA L. JARVIS FOR PLAINTIFF, MICHAEL T. REINHOLM FOR DEFENDANT.
OPINION SKOPPEK, COMMISSIONER Plaintiff appeals and defendant cross-appeals from the decision of Magistrate Sharon L. Smith, mailed April 20, 1998, denying plaintiff's claim for ongoing benefits due to an alleged work-related right shoulder and "cardiorespiratory" disability.
The magistrate found that, although plaintiff had a work-related shoulder condition, his loss of wages was attributable entirely to his cardiac condition, which she deemed insufficiently work-related to be compensable.
We affirm the magistrate's decision.
Plaintiff commenced his employment with defendant in 1971.
At the time his right shoulder and arm complaints developed, he was performing duties as a furnace operator.
This job required plaintiff to load a hopper with nuts by using a hand truck.
He had to rake any nuts that did not slide into the hopper off a skid.
He also took samples and ground them on a hand grinder, had to lift up a 15 pound steel door, had to pick up spilled nuts off the floor with a shovel, and pull down 50 pound drums of oil to put into the furnace.
He testified that he experienced right shoulder pain on January 18, 1992, while reaching up to get out of a hi-lo.
He continued working, but experienced occasional problems off and on there after.
On January 13, 1996, plaintiff injured his shoulder again, this time while getting onto a hi-lo.
He testified that his shoulder hurt whenever he picked up anything heavy or raised it above his shoulder.
He stopped working on March 2, 1996, however, due to congestive heart failure.
Plaintiff testified that he began having cardiac-related problematic symptoms in 1992 and that during 1996 and 1997 he had a number of hospitalizations because of his heart problems.
DOCKET #98-0279
The magistrate found that plaintiff was not entitled to any weekly benefits upon his departure from employment in early 1996.
She awarded him only medical expenses for treatment of his right shoulder condition, having found a January 13, 1996 injury date.
The magistrate concluded her analysis with the following determination: Based on plaintiff's description of his job, I am persuaded that his employment did play some role in his obstructive cardiomyopathy.
However, considering the totality of plaintiff's exposures, including the heredity factors, his cigar smoking, his alcohol intake, his obesity and other nonwork-related factors noted by Dr. Winkler, I am not persuaded that his employment contributed to his condition in a "significant" manner.
Therefore, plaintiff has failed to establish, by the preponderance of the evidence, the compensability of his cardiac condition as defined by MCL 418.301(2).
I am further persuaded by the totality of this record that plaintiff's employment with defendant ceased only because of his cardiac condition and hospitalization resulting from same on March 2, 1996.
As to plaintiff's right shoulder complaints and limitations, I am satisfied that he has established, by the preponderance of the evidence, work-related injuries which give rise to these complaints but that he has failed to establish actual wage loss due to the right shoulder limitation.
Therefore, in response to the Supreme Court's decision in Haske v Transport Leasing, Inc, [Indiana, 455 Mich 628], (1997), I find that there is no causal link between plaintiff's work-related injury and his subsequent loss in actual wages.
Medical benefits are hereby ordered for the injury sustained to plaintiff's right shoulder and subsequent treatment needed for same with a finding that plaintiff has failed to establish a wage loss due to his right shoulder injury.
The critical finding for disposing of this case on appeal is plaintiff's wage loss was due entirely to his heart condition and was to his right shoulder condition.
Before we discuss what are merely by this dispositive determination, we hold that the record supports this determination which requires the affirming of the magistrate's the magistrate's conclusion that not shown to be due in any way subsidiary issues rendered moot this critical determination.
It is decision.
The magistrate explicitly held that "plaintiff is disabled due solely to his cardio-respiratory problems and that said condition was not established, by the preponderance of the evidence, to be work-related or work aggravated."
There is competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record to support this finding.
MCL 418.861a(3).
Plaintiff openly and unequivocally acknowledged that he stopped working because of his heart problems.
Despite experiencing pain in his shoulder, he continued to perform his regular job as a furnace operator until felled by his heart failure.
The magistrate's utilization of the medical testimony to reach this assessment is reasonable and due our deference.
Miklik v Michigan Special Machine Co, 415 Mich 364 (1982).
2
The challenges by both parties revolve around an apparent conflict in the magistrate's opinion.
Although we recognize the conflict, it does do not require a reversal of the magistrate's dispositive wage loss ruling.
Plaintiff makes much of the magistrate's statement that, because plaintiff's right shoulder was still painful, and despite plaintiff's continued performance of his regular job, plaintiff had established "a right shoulder `disability' as is defined by MCL 418.301(4)."
The magistrate acknowledged the conflicting testimony about whether plaintiff was performing "favored work" at the time he left employment, and she explicitly concluded that plaintiff was not on "favored work with restrictions concerning his right shoulder."
Nevertheless, the magistrate apparently felt that the mere experiencing of pain by plaintiff meant he was "disabled".
She emphasized, however, that "While I am satisfied by plaintiff's testimony that on his last day worked he may have still had some right shoulder pain, I am not persuaded that he is now off work because of said shoulder pain or injuries."
Defendant suggests that the magistrate erroneously reached her right shoulder "disability" determination.
Defendant points out, and plaintiff concurs, that "disability" is defined under Haske, supra as the inability to perform even a single job within the claimant's qualifications and training.
Defendant is also correct, however, that a claimant cannot prove "disability" based merely upon his inability to perform some hypothetical job.
It appears that the magistrate felt plaintiff's performance of his work while experiencing pain somehow produced a restriction.
To the extent that plaintiff did have a theoretical, never officially imposed restriction against lifting above his shoulder, this would still not have an impact on the work within plaintiff's qualifications and training.
Plaintiff was performing the only job he testified to, despite his pain.
There is no competent and substantial evidence in the record that there are any jobs within plaintiff's qualifications and training that he cannot perform, even with the theoretical restriction.
Defendant suggests that "the magistrate must have believed that there was some theoretical job within [plaintiff's] qualifications and training that plaintiff could not do," but "such a finding cannot be used to establish disability."
Defendant correctly points out that plaintiff remained able to perform the only job he established as being within his qualifications and training.
In short, plaintiff had a work-related shoulder injury.
According to the magistrate, this injury produced an "impingement of his right shoulder as of his last day worked, March 2, 1996," and produced "limitations in the right shoulder which caused pain and a diminution in his range of motion."
But this is not the equivalent of a "disability", for as the magistrate also found, plaintiff was not working with restrictions and was "disabled due solely to his cardio-respiratory problems."
There is a conflict in the magistrate's decision, however but for her one minor and inconsequential legal mischaracterization in finding a right shoulder "disability", the rest of the decision consistently and logically points to the determination the magistrate ultimately made.
As noted earlier, the critical determination by the magistrate was that plaintiff failed to show that his wage loss was due to his work-related shoulder condition.
That determination is amply supported by the record.
Based upon that supported determination, the magistrate properly held that plaintiff was not entitled to weekly benefits.
Her decision is therefore affirmed.
3
Commissioners Leslie and Garn concur.
Jürgen Skoppek Richard B. Leslie Marten N. Garn Commissioners
4
STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION FREDERICK BART, SR., PLAINTIFF, V FEDERAL SCREW WORKS, SELF INSURED, DEFENDANT.
This cause came before the Appellate Commission on appeal by plaintiff from the decision of Magistrate Sharon L. Smith, mailed April 20, 1998, denying ongoing weekly benefits.
The Commission has considered the record and briefs of counsel, and believes that the magistrate's decision should be affirmed.
Therefore, IT IS ORDERED that the decision of the magistrate is affirmed.
Jürgen Skoppek Richard B. Leslie Marten N. Garn Commissioners DOCKET #98-0279
