Statement of John C. Horton Associate Deputy Director for State and Local Affairs White House Office of National Drug Control Policy Before the House Committee on Government Reform Subcommittee on Criminal Justice, Drug Policy and Human Resources "Facing the Methamphetamine Problem in America" July 18, 2003 Chairman Souder, Ranking Member Cummings, and distinguished members of the Subcommittee: I appreciate the opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the problem of methamphetamine in America.
While all of the five major drugs ­ marijuana, cocaine, methamphetamine, ecstasy, and heroin ­ pose their own distinctive threat to this nation, methamphetamine is unique in the type and extent of damage it causes to both the user and the community.
The attendant consequences of methamphetamine ­ not merely the terrible toll that methamphetamine use takes on a person's body and mind, but the increase in criminal activity, environmental and economic harm, and danger to children that are exposed to methamphetamine use and production ­ make it a significant drug threat.
My testimony today contains two parts.
First, I will briefly outline the extent of the methamphetamine problem, including what we know about who is using it, how it effects the user, where it comes from, and the impact on local communities, including the lasting impact of toxic methamphetamine labs.
Second, I will describe the government's approach to methamphetamine within the context of the President's National Drug Control Strategy.
Much of the burden of tackling methamphetamine falls on the shoulders of state and local agencies, so I will also address federal support of state and local governments.
Methamphetamine: Extent of the Problem The reasons for methamphetamine's growing popularity stem not only from the immediate effect upon the user ­ which I describe below ­ but also the relative ease of attaining the chemicals to manufacture methamphetamine and sell it for profit.
Like any drug, we know that people use methamphetamine for a very simple reason: it makes them feel good, at least in the immediate, short term.
Users have described the initial allure of methamphetamine as the short, intense rush followed by a sense of euphoria, extra energy, increased libido, and sense of invulnerability lasting up to eight hours.
The medium and long term effects of methamphetamine, however, are nothing short of devastating.
Methamphetamine users begin to exhibit nervousness, paranoia, schizophrenia-like symptoms, irritability, confusion, and insomnia.
Along with increased use comes the propensity
for violence, erratic behavior, and often ­ partly due to association with other methamphetamine users ­ fraudulent activity such as identity theft, forgery conspiracies, and car theft.
There are few more cruelly efficient means of aging an individual than using methamphetamine.
Law enforcement and treatment providers report chronic Percentage reporting methamphetamine use methamphetamine users in their twenties who ­ in addition to having wrinkled, leathery skin, few teeth (2001 Nat'l Household Survey on Drug Abuse) Age Lifetime Annual Past 30 Days left, and open sores ­ appear to be in their fifties.
12­17 1.4% 5.1 4.4 4.5 4.3 0.8% 1.7 0.7 0.3 0.6 0.2% 0.7 0.4 0.1 0.3
Psychologically, withdrawal from methamphetamine produces depression that can last for months.
Both current and former methamphetamine users can exhibit psychotic symptoms that persist for years after the use has ended.
Scope of the National Methamphetamine Threat According to the 2001 NHSDA, just over 28 million United States residents (about 12.6% of the population) used an illicit drug sometime within the past year.
Of these, approximately 1.3 million reported using methamphetamine during the year, and about 9.6 million U.S. residents over the age of 12 had used methamphetamine at least once in their lifetime.
18­25 26­34 35+ 12+ (Total)
Meth mentions (emergency departments) Year 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 1 ½, 2002 st
All drug mentions 549,060 575,718 624,390 669,559 313,181
Meth mentions 17,537 15,933 11,002 17,154 11,486 10,447 13,505 14,923 6,136
According to the 2001 DAWN survey, nearly 15,000 methamphetamine-related emergency room admissions were reported ­ the highest level since 1997.
The West-East phenomenon: LEAs reporting meth as #1 threat Region Pacific West Central Southwest % 83.6 73.9 52.9
One of the most interesting aspects of the Southeast 22.9 methamphetamine threat is its lack of national uniformity.
Great Lakes 20.5 Simply put, according to the National Drug Intelligence Florida/Caribbean 7.0 Center, in some areas of this country, methamphetamine Mid-Atlantic 3.8 use and production is not classified as a significant New York/New Jersey 0.8 problem.
In some regions, it is a significant threat.
The New England 0.0 majority of reporting law enforcement agencies in the Pacific, West Central, and Southwest regions identify methamphetamine as their greatest drug threat.
By contrast, very few law enforcement agencies in the Florida/Caribbean, Mid-Atlantic, New York/New Jersey and New England regions have identified methamphetamine as a primary threat.
While there is also some level of disparity nationwide with respect to the marijuana, cocaine, and heroin threat, the difference is not as stark as with methamphetamine.
Methamphetamine Production and Trafficking: Who is Responsible?
2
Unlike cocaine and heroin, which are rarely produced domestically, methamphetamine is both imported into the United States and produced domestically.
We know that transnational drug trafficking organizations, and especially those headquartered in Mexico, are responsible for the importation into, and much of the distribution of, methamphetamine within the United States.
While some of these organizations are headquartered outside of the United States, they actually operate "super-labs" within our borders.
These are often poly-drug organizations which are served by a vast network of transporters, distributors and money brokers who distribute not only methamphetamine, but also cocaine, heroin, marijuana and MDMA throughout America.
Although the sheer number of small, toxic laboratories (STLs) found throughout the United States is greater than the number of super-labs, the latter are actually responsible for the greater share of methamphetamine being used and distributed throughout our nation.
The most common ingredient in methamphetamine is pseudoephedrine.
STLs typically divert the pseudoephedrine from pharmacies and discount stores.
The large, Mexican-controlled super-labs that make large quantities of methamphetamine for importation and distribution, however, get much of their pseudoephedrine from or through Canada.
My testimony will address our efforts to work with Canada to deprive producers from easy access to bulk quantities of pseudoephedrine.
With respect to domestic production, there are essentially four reasons that methamphetamine is produced within our borders.
The first is simply the market phenomenon of continuing demand as use increases.
The second is the ease of attaining information on making methamphetamine ­ recipes, techniques, and sources are all easily accessible on the Internet, and books on the subject can easily be ordered online.
The third is the ease of purchasing the ingredients for making methamphetamine within the United States.
The fourth reason is more subtle.
For users and dealers, cooking methamphetamine has developed into a social activity where methamphetamine users can share information on methods of cooking and using methamphetamine, who in the "meth world" may be working undercover for police, and what sort of criminal enterprises, such as identity theft, may be feasible to criminally enable the acquisition of the ingredients used in methamphetamine.
Methamphetamine: More Than Just A Drug Methamphetamine, like marijuana, cocaine, and heroin, causes harm to more than just the user.
However, methamphetamine is unique in the extent to which the manufacturing process itself causes harm to neighbors, the environment, property values, and tragically, to innocent victims such as young children.
Environmental damage Methamphetamine is fundamentally an adulterated mixture of pharmaceutical extracts with poisonous materials.
The ingredients in methamphetamine are found in over-the-counter cold medicines and diet pills, household products like lithium camera batteries, matches, tincture
3
of iodine, and hydrogen Chemicals Used in Methamphetamine Production peroxide.
Flammable Chemical Hazards Ingestion of doses greater than 240 mg. causes hypertension, arrhythmia, anxiety, household products, Pseudoephedrine dizziness, and vomiting.
Ingestion of doses greater than 600 mg. can lead to renal including charcoal lighter failure and seizures.
fluid, gasoline, kerosene, Acetone/Ethyl Extremely flammable, posing a fire risk in and around the laboratory.
Alcohol Inhalation/ingestion causes severe gastric irritation, narcosis, or coma. paint thinner, rubbing Inhalation can cause sudden cardiac death or severe lung damage.
Corrosive if alcohol, and mineral spirits, Freon ingested.
are often used in the Anhydrous Inhalation causes edema of the respiratory tract and asphyxia.
Contact with vapors Ammonia damages eyes and mucous membranes. production process.
May explode on contact or friction.
Ignites if heated above 260oF.
Vapor from Corrosive products, such as Red Phosphorus ignited phosphorus severely irritates the nose, throat, lungs, and eyes. muriatic acid, sulfuric Hypophosphorus Extremely dangerous substitute for Red Phosphorus.
If overheated, deadly phosphine (battery) acid, and sodium Acid gas is released.
Poses a serious fire and explosion hazard.
Extremely caustic to all body tissues.
Reacts violently with water and poses a fire or hydroxide from lye-based Lithium Metal explosion hazard.
drain cleaners, also may be A corrosive acid with vapors that are irritating to the respiratory system, eyes, and Hydriodic Acid used.
In rural areas where skin.
If ingested, causes severe internal irritation and damage that may cause death.
anhydrous ammonia is used Gives off vapor that is irritating to respiratory system and eyes.
Solid form irritates Iodine Crystals the eyes and may burn skin.
If ingested, it will cause severe internal damage.
as a fertilizer, farmers are Phenylpropanola Ingestion of greater than 75 mg. causes hypertension, arrhythmia, anxiety, dizziness.
increasingly finding their mine Quantities greater than 300 mg. can lead to renal failure, seizures, stroke, and death.
ammonia tanks have been Source: US Department of Justice, Information Bulletin: Children at Risk (7/2002) tapped by "cooks" using this highly toxic chemical to produce methamphetamine.
These chemicals are not only flammable and corrosive ­ they are poison.
Any property owner whose rental has been converted into a toxic methamphetamine lab knows of the long, expensive process required to make the location safe and habitable again.
Costing thousands of dollars, buildings may actually have to be razed and rebuilt after a methamphetamine lab has been discovered.
Some 15% of methamphetamine labs in this country are discovered as the result of an explosion or fire at the lab ­ a further risk to nearby innocent property owners.
Associated Criminal Activity Additionally, law enforcement in this country has identified a trend associated with the domestic manufacture of methamphetamine: in areas where methamphetamine manufacturing is increasing, so also are car thefts, forgeries, and especially identity theft incidents.
Law enforcement in these areas report that this correlation appears to exist with more frequency than with cocaine, heroin or marijuana use or trafficking.
Methamphetamine: Innocent Victims Last month, the Department of Justice published an important report regarding children who have been raised in homes where methamphetamine labs were discovered.
The results, while preliminary, are disturbing.
Along with an increase in methamphetamine labs was an increase in children found present at the lab sites ­ most of whom resided at the residence where the lab was found.
The inherent dangers to children being raised at or near a methamphetamine lab are severe: inhalation or ingestion of toxic substances including methamphetamine, accidental injection or prick by discarded needles or other paraphernalia; and severe illness after
4
the ingestion of chemicals.
Further, children at methamphetamine labs are more likely to be physically and sexually abused by members of their own family and other individuals at the site.
While withdrawing from a methamphetamine high, some parents fall into a deep sleep for days, during which time their children suffer from neglect, chemical exposure, hunger, and further abuse by other methamphetamine-using individuals.
And in some cases, children have died as a direct result of exposure to the toxicity of a methamphetamine lab.
Year 2000 2001 2002 Meth labs seized Children present Children residing Children affected Exposed to toxic chemicals 8971 13270 15353 1803 2191 2077 216 976 2023 1803 2191 3167 345 788 1373 Injured/killed 12/3 14/0 26/2
DISRUPTING THE METHAMPHETAMINE MARKET: THE FEDERAL RESPONSE The President's National Drug Control Strategy aims to reduce use of all drugs in America by 10% within two years, and 25% within five years.
While not focused exclusively on any specific illicit drug, the Strategy recognizes methamphetamine as one of the primary drug threats to America.
Within the Strategy are three priorities: 1) stopping drug use before it starts, 2) healing America's drug users, and 3) disrupting drug markets.
As a government faced with the challenges of punishing dangerous criminals and taking methamphetamine off the street, we are working hard to ratchet up costs to both the trafficker and the methamphetamine cook at a tempo that prevents the methamphetamine trade from adapting to new pressures or continuing its eastward expansion.
One of the flagship initiatives of this administration which cuts across agencies and programs such as the Drug Enforcement Agency, the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Force and High Intensity Drug Trafficking Areas, is the Priority Targeting Initiative.
Most of the priority drug trafficking organization (DTO) targets are poly-drug in nature, and respond to market forces ­ such as the demand for methamphetamine.
For FY 2004, the administration has requested $39 million for the Priority Targeting Initiative, which includes 329 positions to implement DEA's plan for addressing the nation's illegal drug threats.
This initiative will target priority DTOs involved in the manufacture and distribution of illegal drugs, including those involved in the diversion of precursor chemicals used to manufacture methamphetamine.
With respect to OCDETF, the proposal includes $26 million for 192 positions to generate and advance investigations of command and control targets linked to the Attorney General's priority targeting list.
With respect to HIDTA, in FY 2002, Consolidated Priority Organizational Target (CPOT) initiatives received $5.7 million in funding, and of these initiatives, two were solely methamphetamine-related, and seven were poly-drug.
Of the seven poly-drug initiatives, we classify four as having included a methamphetamine focus.
5
FEDERAL METHAMPHETAMINE SEIZURES 4,000 3,500
All Federal Arrival Zone Southwest Border
SEIZED (KILOGRAMS)
3,000 2,500 2,000 1,500 1,000 500 0 All Federal Arrival Zone Southwest Border 1997 1,099 538 504 1998 2,559 852 807 1999 2,779 1,083 1,063 2000 3,470 1,416 1,390 2001 3,770 1,390 1,173 2002 2,541 1,249 1,223
Of the original 53 priority drug targets, nine were listed as either methamphetamine distributors or poly-drug traffickers who deal in methamphetamine and other drugs.
With respect to agency activities related to methamphetamine, the various activities of the federal government include: Drug Enforcement Administration I am joined today by a senior official from the Drug Enforcement Administration.
In order to avoid overlapping with his testimony, I will be brief with respect to the DEA's role in attacking the methamphetamine problem.
In summarizing the Federal government's efforts to stem the spread of methamphetamine, however, I would note that the DEA is the lead agency in our drug enforcement efforts to investigate, dismantle, and apprehend for prosecution the members of drug trafficking organizations trafficking in methamphetamine.
The DEA's role is multifaceted with respect to methamphetamine: in addition to the identification and investigation of methamphetamine manufacturers and trafficking organizations, DEA plays an important role in providing support to state and local agencies regarding investigations, hazardous waste removal, prevention, public awareness, and training.
Additionally, DEA regulates various chemicals such as iodine, phosphorous and iodine tincture that are used in the manufacture of methamphetamine.
6
Methamphetamine Prosecutions and OCDETF Following up an investigation and arrest with the prosecution and sentencing of methamphetamine manufacturers and traffickers is a key part of our National Drug Control Strategy.
Generally, the 93 United States Attorneys and their Assistant United States Attorneys have the responsibility of providing this follow-through on methamphetamine prosecutions.
In FY 2002, there were 2,171 federal cases filed related to methamphetamine, against a total of 4,208 defendants.
In addition, there were approximately 100 major methamphetamine lab cases filed.
Together, these constituted 12% of all federal drug cases filed in the United States in that year.
Within the context of major drug prosecutions, the Department of Justice's OCDETF program provides a framework for federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies to work together to target well-established and complex organizations that direct, finance, or engage in illegal narcotics trafficking and related crimes.
For FY 2004, the Administration has proposed an increase of $72 million over the previous fiscal year's requested level for the OCDETF program.
With respect to OCDETF-led activity in FY 2002, preliminary reports ­ and they are still coming in ­ indicate that there were at least 36 methamphetamine organizations disrupted (6%, responsible for about 1,969 kilograms of methamphetamine each year) and at least 66 methamphetamine organizations dismantled (11%, responsible for about 7,332 kilograms of methamphetamine each year).
So far in FY 2003, the government has initiated 128 new OCDETF investigations against methamphetamine organizations ­ approximately 26% of all OCDETF investigations.
Additionally, there are nine new cases in FY 2003 (nearly 2% of investigations) involving precursor chemicals.
The Great Lakes and West Central OCDETF regions have recently developed methamphetamine strategies related to the goal of attacking methamphetamine and poly-drug networks.
Methamphetamine at the Border Agencies with responsibilities for protecting our borders continue to see the influx of methamphetamine into our nation.
The seizure statistics on the preceding page shows all federal methamphetamine seizures and specify arrival zone and Southwest Border seizures from 1997 to 2002.
HIDTA The HIDTA program was created in 1990 to focus law enforcement efforts on the nation's most serious drug trafficking threats.
Each year, the 28 HIDTAs submit a variety of drug trafficking initiatives for review and funding approval.
As indicated at the beginning of my testimony, methamphetamine is a serious threat in some regions (and hence for some HIDTAs), but in other areas such as New England, the methamphetamine threat is negligible, and the HIDTA focuses on other drugs.
Regardless of the HIDTA, the program nationwide is refocusing on the highest priority trafficking organizations ­ the wholesale distributors and command-andcontrol targets.
7
In FY 2002, the HIDTA program approved 548 initiatives nationwide.
Of these, 306 initiatives directly related to a specific drug or drugs (as opposed to, for example, money laundering, intelligence, or law enforcement training).
Of these 306 initiatives, some 158 initiatives were poly-drug ­ many involving methamphetamine.
Of the remaining initiatives approved for funding, 82 were focused solely or primarily on methamphetamine ­ more than were focused on any other single drug by itself.
A few examples of how the HIDTA program is responding to the methamphetamine threat in America include: ·
Midwest HIDTA.
In CY 2002, Midwest HIDTA task forces seized 181,125 grams of methamphetamine.
Federal indictments for the six-state region totaled 2,141 (an increase of 10%), with 1,122 being for methamphetamine violations.
Also in CY 2002, 4,989 clandestine lab seizure incidents were reported to El Paso Intelligence Center through the National Clan Lab Seizure System for the six states comprising the Midwest HIDTA, an increase of 28% over CY 2001 incidents of 3,890.
Central Valley HIDTA: In May of this year, agents from a Central Valley HIDTA (California) task force responded to a reported methamphetamine laboratory fire in a rural area of Madera County, California.
Agents discovered evidence of laboratory activity in the residence in front of the workshop: approximately six pounds of finished methamphetamine that had been converted to "ice" crystals (worth up to $78,000), iodine crystals, approximately twenty pounds of red phosphorous, and other chemicals used in methamphetamine production.
An assault rifle, two semi-automatic hand guns and a microwave wireless surveillance system with a monitor and antenna were also found in the house.
Additionally, in July of this year, upon serving a search warrant in Goshen, California, two Central Valley HIDTA task forces recovered twenty-five pounds of methamphetamine.
Two children were also removed from the residence and placed with Child Protective Services.
The methamphetamine seized from the residence, if diluted by 80%, would have represented about $4.5 million ­ a sizable profit for an investment of less than $75,000.
Hawaii HIDTA.
A Hawaii HIDTA-led investigation identified members of an organization operating in North Carolina, Utah, California, Hawaii, Tonga, Fiji, New Zealand, and Australia.
During late April 2002, a portion of the investigation culminated with the execution of 47 arrest warrants, 30 search warrants, and 13 seizure warrants in Utah, California, Hawaii, and Alaska.
In addition, more than $700,000 in cash, three pounds of cocaine, 10 pounds of crystal methamphetamine, several pieces of real property, and 15 vehicles were seized.
National Methamphetamine Chemical Initiative.
HIDTA also funds the National Methamphetamine Chemical Initiative (NMCI), and in FY 2002, provided over $500,000 in support.
This initiative was established and is funded through the Southwest Border HIDTA ­ California Partnership.
The NMCI provides a comprehensive national approach to stop the diversion of chemicals used in the manufacture of methamphetamine by improving support of chemical precursor investigations and coordinating investigations; promoting information sharing and training among law enforcement,
·
·
·
8
prosecutors, judges, probation/parole, and family services; and providing updates on current trends and methods of operation.
The NMCI also supports Drug Endangered Children (DEC) programs that I address below.
NMCI has encouraged and funded DEC training throughout the country, recently conducting classes in Missouri, Idaho, Arizona, and Denver.
Cleaning Up the Aftermath: Toxic Lab Cleanup The aftermath of a methamphetamine lab can last for years, and impacts the environment, the health of persons near the manufacturing site, and the overall safety of the neighborhood.
The Community Oriented Policing (COPS) program is a key national resource in helping combat the spread of methamphetamine and helping communities clean up toxic labs.
Since 1998, COPS has invested more than $223.5 million nationwide in methamphetamine-related initiatives.
The COPS office encourages agencies to focus on community policing approaches to methamphetamine reduction and works with agencies to develop innovative strategies to track and evaluate implementation and disseminate results to other communities confronting similar challenges.
Grant recipients are encouraged to develop partnerships with other agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, fire departments, mental health and child protection services, local businesses, and other local law enforcement, to combat the spread of methamphetamine in their communities.
The COPS office supports various methamphetamine training initiatives, including awareness training and clandestine lab enforcement training.
For example, resources have been dedicated to the California Department of Justice's Western Regional Training Center, which serves California and twelve surrounding states, to provide methamphetamine-related training to law enforcement officers.
COPS has also funded the California Methamphetamine Strategy for continued efforts in combating the methamphetamine epidemic in California.
Additionally, funding through the COPS Methamphetamine initiative has supported DEA efforts to provide awareness training to law enforcement, first responders, and community members, as well as clandestine lab enforcement operations training to state and local law enforcement professionals.
Methamphetamine funding has also supported the DEA's efforts to improve the clandestine lab information gathering capabilities, carry out regional information sharing conferences, and assist state and local law enforcement in the clean up of methamphetamine lab sites.
In FY 2003, the COPS office will invest an additional $57 million to support anti-meth strategies, much of it designated by Congress for initiatives in specified jurisdictions.
Drug-Endangered Children The Department of Justice is reviewing methods of improving assistance to children found at locations where drugs are used, kept, manufactured or sold, such as clandestine methamphetamine lab sites.
One model program, California's Drug Endangered Children (DEC) program, works to reduce the incidence of drug-related child endangerment and to meet the needs of children and communities threatened by exposures to clandestine methamphetamine labs.
The program brings together and assists law enforcement response teams by providing 9
technical assistance, conducting trainings and workshops, developing educational resources, and fostering interagency collaboration.
DOJ and ONDCP are committed to working together to review the effectiveness of these programs and identify opportunities to support similar programs in other areas of the country.
The Methamphetamine Interagency Task Force has provided several recommendations to improve interagency cooperation.
The task force has suggested that jurisdictions take steps including: · Increase information sharing and promote multidisciplinary approaches and partnerships among prevention, education, treatment, and law enforcement agencies at the federal, state, and local levels · Expand collaborations among social services agencies and public health officials · Conduct research on the hazards to which children found in methamphetamine labs are exposed · Develop protocols to support drug-endangered children that should generally address staff training; roles and responsibilities of intervening agencies; appropriate reporting, cross reporting, information sharing, and confidentiality; safety procedures for children, families, and responding personnel; interviewing procedures; evidence collection and preservation procedures; medical care procedures; and community resource development Additionally, legal standards regarding drug-endangered children generally differ by state.
DOJ and ONDCP are working together to identify opportunities to work with state and local legislatures to improve and update state laws regarding child endangerment and neglect.
Methamphetamine Production on Public Lands Increasingly, methamphetamine producers are also using public lands, such as public forests and national parks, for STLs.
In 2002, approximately 348 methamphetamine laboratories were discovered on public lands.
Due to the seclusion from law enforcement, methamphetamine producers not only produce the drug in these remote spaces, but also discard the dangerous byproducts at crude dumpsites, contaminating the land, water, and natural beauty of the area.
Additionally, the toxic waste left behind at methamphetamine production sites poses a significant risk to private citizens, employees, law enforcement personnel and the environment.
Law enforcement agencies at the Departments of Agriculture and Interior shoulder much of the weight of responding to the threat of methamphetamine production on public lands.
Led by the Office of National Drug Control Policy, a task force of relevant agencies meets approximately every six weeks to review developing drug threats on or to our public lands and recommends appropriate responses.
Later this summer, ONDCP Director John Walters will lead a public education campaign to highlight the problem of both marijuana cultivation and methamphetamine production on public lands.
10
Drug Courts For FY 2004, the Administration has proposed an increase in the Drug Courts program of $23.3 million above the FY 2003 enacted level.
By expanding the number of drug courts and increasing retention in and successful completion of drug court programs by methamphetamine users, this program will provide an alternative to incarceration by using the coercive power of the court to force abstinence and alter behavior with a combination of escalating sanctions, mandatory drug testing, treatment, and strong aftercare programs.
Our International Efforts: Canada and Mexico Shutting down methamphetamine super-labs is a high priority of the National Drug Control Strategy.
One of the best ways to do that is to deprive producers of easy access to bulk quantities of pseudoephedrine.
Canada is the dominant source of pseudoephedrine due to the lack of regulatory controls on precursor chemicals.
Certain Canadian drug companies imported large amounts of cheap powdered pseudoephedrine from China, India, and Germany, and pressed the substance into tablets for sale.
Once in tablet form, the pseudoephedrine became legitimate "cold medicine" in Canada and could be exported in huge quantities on large trucks.
This January, President Bush cited his concern over Canadian pseudoephedrine diversion as part of his narcotics certification determination, and Canada promulgated new chemical control regulations.
While an improvement, the regulations are still weak in that they limit law enforcement's access to transaction records and put Health Canada, rather than Canadian law enforcement officials, in charge of implementation.
These new regulations, combined with joint U.S./Canadian law enforcement operations (Operations Mountain Express I, II 
It appears that these operations may also have convinced some criminal groups in Canada to switch from exporting large amounts of pseudoephederine to directly producing and exporting smaller amounts of methamphetamine or MDMA.
Sustained precursor chemical control efforts in Canada, combined with future joint law enforcement investigations, will be necessary to disrupt methamphetamine production in the future.
We continue to build on our successes with President Fox's administration in Mexico.
Our neighbor to the south produces an unknown ­ but certainly significant ­ quantity of methamphetamine each year, in addition to thousands of tons of marijuana and more than seven metric tons of heroin.
Upon entering office, President Fox recognized that his vision for a prosperous Mexico had no place for institutionalized drug cartels and the corruption and lawlessness they foster.
Since taking office in 2000, President Fox has strengthened law enforcement cooperation with the United States and began reforming dysfunctional and sometimes corrupt institutions.
Consequently, a number of major traffickers have been apprehended, more than 300 of their immediate subordinates have been taken off the streets, and the Fox Administration has stepped-up efforts to go after corrupt officials in the government and military.
11
All of these efforts will help stem the flow of drugs, including our nation.
The United States will continue to support Mexico's drug combination of technical and material assistance that focuses on traini for organizational attacks and arrests, disruption of money laundering cocaine and drug interdiction and eradication.
Access to Recovery Treatment Initiative
methamphetamine, into control efforts through a ng and operational support activities, as well as
While not exclusively targeted at methamphetamine, the President's National Drug Control Strategy recognizes that reducing the demand for drugs is an indispensable component of reducing the threat posed by any drug.
With this in mind, the President's Access to Recovery initiative, which requests $600 million over three years for the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMSHA), will help to reduce methamphetamine dependency.
As part of this effort, the FY 2004 budget request includes new funding of $200 million in aid for substance abuse treatment and other supportive services.
People in need of treatment, no matter where they are ­ emergency rooms, health clinics, the criminal justice system, schools, or the faith community ­ will receive an evidence-based assessment of their treatment need and will be issued vouchers for the cost of providing that treatment.
CONCLUSION In conclusion, I am pleased to present to you today the federal government's cooperative efforts to reduce the use, production, and trafficking of methamphetamine in this country.
The drug poses a serious threat to not only the user, but those in contact with the user and/or manufacturer such as children and neighbors.
Due to the extremely toxic nature of methamphetamine and its manufacturing process, we know that neighborhoods and the environment can be adversely affected for significant periods of time.
Within the context of our National Drug Control Strategy, we know that reducing all drug use ­ including methamphetamine use ­ will require a balanced, consistent, and coordinated focus among law enforcement agencies, as well as agencies with the responsibility of helping ameliorate the effects of methamphetamine use and production.
With initiatives such as Access to Recovery, the Priority Targeting Initiative, and our continuing support of law enforcement in cleaning up the toxic after-affects of methamphetamine, we are moving closer to creating an America that is free from dangerous drugs such as methamphetamine.
12
