Mailing Date: AUG 23 2001 PUBLICATION COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE FOR PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE, BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT : : : Citation No. 99-0980
v.
: : :
Incident No. W6-198528 LID - 3783
CHRISTOPHER CLUB OF MOUNT CARMEL 128-134 W. 3^RD STREET MOUNT CARMEL PA 17851-2060 NORTHUMBERLAND COUNTY LICENSE NO.
CC-4951
: : : : : : :
BEFORE: JUDGE FLAHERTY
APPEARANCES:
For Bureau of Enforcement
For Licensee
Thomas M. Ballaron, Esquire
James J. Rosini, Esquire
ADJUDICATION
BACKGROUND:
This proceeding arises out of a citation that was issued on August 2, 1999, by the Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement of the Pennsylvania State Police (hereinafter Bureau) against CHRISTOPHER CLUB OF MOUNT CARMEL, License Number CC-4951 (hereinafter Licensee).
The citation contains two counts.
The first count charges Licensee with violation of Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] and Section 5513 of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.
C.S. §5513] in that on March 13 and April 23, 1999, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries, poolselling and/or bookmaking on the licensed premises.
The second count charges Licensee with violation of Section 401(b) and 406(a)(1) of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-401(b) and 4-406(a)(1)] and Section 5.83(a) of the Liquor Control Board Regulations [40 Pa.
Code §5.83(a)] in that on March 13, 1999, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, sold alcoholic beverages to nonmember without prior arrangement.
The investigation which gave rise to the citation began on March 13, 1999 and was completed on May 11, 1999; and notice of the violation was sent to Licensee by Certified Mail on May 25, 1999.
The notice of violation was received by Licensee.
An evidentiary hearing began on January 27, 2000 and continued on June 20, 2000 in the PA Department of Agriculture, 2130 County Farms Road, Montoursville, Pennsylvania.
Upon review of the transcript of this hearing, we make the following Findings of Fact and reach the following Conclusions of Law:
FINDINGS OF FACT:
COUNTS 1 AND 2
1.
On Saturday, March 13, 1999 Officer Stephanie Ebner of the Bureau entered the licensed premises in an undercover capacity and took a seat at the bar.
(N.T. 7).
2.
At 10:15 p.m., Officer Ebner was served a 12-ounce bottle of Yuengling beer for which she paid $1.25.
The sale was rung up on the cash register.
(N.T. 8).
3.
Officer Ebner was not a member of Licensee club on March 13, 1999, nor had she ever been a member.
She was not questioned as to membership while on the licensed premises, and no one questioned whether she was part of a catered group on that evening.
(N.T. 8-9).
4.
There were approximately fifty people on the licensed premises.
Some of these people were attending a shuffleboard match which was being put on by the Mount Carmel Independent League.
(N.T. 9, 70 and Exhibit L-3).
5.
Officer Ebner observed that there were video machines in an area of the licensed premises behind a lattice work partition.
(N.T. 10-11).
6.
At 10:25 p.m.
Officer Ebner went to the restroom facilities.
At that time she was able to observe the area behind the lattice work partition.
She saw four machines: three video slot machines and one video draw poker machine.
All of the machines were being played.
(N.T. 11-12).
7.
Officer Ebner observed one gentleman, wearing a tweed hat, an orange shirt, a blue tie and a brown jacket playing one of the slot machines.
(N.T. 12).
8.
Officer Ebner returned to her seat at the bar.
At 10:45 p.m. the gentleman in the tweed hat and orange shirt who had been playing the video slot machine, came to the bartender who had been serving Officer Ebner and said, 800 points.
(N.T. 13-14).
9.
The bartender took out a blue bank bag that said, Union National Bank on it.
She took the bag to the gentleman and took out a $20.00 bill and four $5.00 bills.
She handed the $40.00 to the gentleman.
She then wrote something down on a sheet of white paper which she put in the blue bank bag, and she put the bank bag under the bar in front of Officer Ebner.
(N.T. 14).
10.
At 10:55 p.m.
Officer Ebner ordered and was served another bottle of Yuengling Lager beer.
She paid the bartender $1.25 for the purchase.
The bartender, who was not the one who served her the first time, did not ask her for proof of membership or whether she was a member of any catered group or association.
(N.T. 16-17).
11.
At 11:00 p.m., Officer Ebner went back to the area behind the lattice work partition and took careful note of the cabinets of the video machines she found there.
She found the following cabinets: one Grand Prix video slot machine cabinet; two Lucky Eight video slot machine cabinets; and one Hi Lo Double-Up Joker Poker video poker machine cabinet.
All the machines were set up and ready for play.
(N.T. 17-18).
12.
On April 23, 1999, Officer Ebner obtained a search warrant from District Justice Myshach.
The warrant authorized search of the licensed premises in connection with the video machines.
(N.T. 18-19).
13.
On the evening of April 23, 1999, Officer Ebner, together with Officers Kosmer and Nelson of the Bureau went to the licensed premises to serve the search warrant.
(N.T. 19).
14.
During the search pursuant to the warrant, the Officers found the same machines present on the licensed premises that Officer Ebner had observed on March 13, 1999.
The following machines were seized: (a) One New Lucky Eight Lines electronic video slot machine.
(b) One New Cherry 96 electronic video slot machine in a Lucky Eight Lines cabinet.
(c) One High-Lo Double-Up Joker poker electronic video poker machine.
(d) One Magical Odds electronic video slot machine in a Grand Prix cabinet.
(N.T. 22-23).
15.
The machines were taken to and secured in the evidence room at the Bureaus District Six Office.
(N.T. 23).
16.
During the search of the licensed premises pursuant to the search warrant, Officer David R. Nelson went behind the bar to search for gambling records and the blue bank bag that Officer Ebner had seen on March 13, 1999.
When Officer Nelson saw no bank bag in plain sight, he asked the barmaid on duty, Valerie Peeks where it was.
Ms. Peeks went to a safe underneath the counter, opened it and gave Officer Nelson the bank bag.
Officer Nelson asked Ms. peeks what was in the bag.
She replied that it contained money for the machines.
(N.T. 65-66).
17.
On April 27, 1999, Officer Ebner, in the presence of Liquor Enforcement Supervisor Farmer and Officer Kosmer opened the seized machines and took a total of $25.00 from all four machines.
(N.T. 24).
18.
Officer Ebner examined all of the machines and found that they had the following characteristics: (a) Machine Number One was a New Lucky Eight Lines electronic video slot machine.
It is essentially an electronic version of the mechanical slot machines found in casinos.
(N.T. 24).
The machine accepts coins and paper currency in $1.00, $5.00, $10.00 or $20.00 denominations.
Credits are given at the rate of 20 credits per dollar.
(N.T. 24).
The game is played by inserting money into the machine.
The player then presses the bet button to bet the desired number of credits.
At this point the player then presses the start button at which point the video screen simulates the spinning of mechanical reels which stop randomly.
(N.T. 31).
The display is similar to a tic-tac-toe formation with nine spaces in three columns and three rows; and the player wins when identical symbols line up horizontally, vertically or diagonally.
(N.T. 30-33).
No skill is required to play the game, as the positioning of the symbols is determined by random circuitry.
(N.T. 31-32).
The time to complete one play is five to seven seconds.
(N.T. 34).
The machine had a double-up feature which would allow the player to attempt to double the amount of his winnings or lose his winnings.
(N.T. 24-25).
There was a power-interrupt circuit on the machine.
This mechanism retains the credits on the machine if the AC power is disconnected.
(N.T. 25-26).
The maximum number of credits that could be bet on one spin was 32.
(N.T. 25).
The machine had a knock-off device by which the credits accumulated could be removed from the video screen.
This device was activated by pushing the right coin return button and the BIG button.
This would cause the credits to go to zero.
(N.T. 35).
The machine also had a video accounting mode which was brought up on the video screen by connecting a black and white wire underneath the machine on the left side.
The video accounting mode displayed on the video screen the number of games played, the number of points played, the number of points won, the number of points lost for the double-up game and the total credits out.
(N.T. 28).
The machine contained four dip switches which were used to manipulate the odds of winning.
(N.T. 30). (b) Machine Number two was a New Cherry '96 electronic video slot machine having the same features as Machine No. 1.
(N.T. 33-37). (c) Machine Number three was a High Low Double Up Joker Poker electronic video poker machine.
(N.T. 37).
The machine simulated a hand of draw poker.
(N.T. 37).
To play the machine the player inserts money and receives credit at the rate of $.25 per credit.
(N.T. 38).
The player next pushes the bet button to bet the desired number of credits The next step requires the player to push the start button.
At this point electronically generated cards appear on the machine.
The player can keep the cards originally dealt or discard by pushing the discard button.
(N.T. 37-38).
The player may discard all of the five cards originally dealt.
(N.T. 39).
No skill is involved in playing this machine.
The cards come from a computer generated unlimited deck based upon random circuitry.
(N.T. 38-39).
This machine has a knock-off device which was activated by pushing the second discard button and the right coin return button.
(N.T. 40).
Officer Ebner was unable to bring an accounting function up on this machine.
(N.T. 41-42). (d) Machine Number four was a Magical Odds electronic video slot machine in a Grand Prix cabinet.
This machine operated the same and had the same attributes as machines one and two, except that it did not have a double up feature.
(N.T. 42-45).
19.
Licensee paid an amusement device tax of $200.00 per machine to the Borough of Mount Carmel in accordance with Chapter 24, Part 6 of the Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Mount Carmel and received a license for each machine for the year 1999.
(N.T. 71-72, Exhibits L-1, L-2 and C-4).
20.
On January 5, 200 Officer Kosmer checked the records of Licensee club to determine whether there was a record of a catered event on the licensed premises on March 13, 1999.
Officer Kosmer found that the minute book for Licensee club reflected that an event was originally scheduled for March 14, 1999; however, because of a ceremony scheduled by the Knights of Columbus, the event was rescheduled for March 13, 1999.
The minutes reflect that the event was a shuffleboard match.
(N.T. 61-63).
21.
The shuffleboard match is also reflected in a form agreement which is entitled: Knights of Columbus Hall Rental Agreement.
This agreement is undated.
It lists the parties as: The Christopher Club (K of C) and Mount Carmel Independent League (renter).
The agreement does not specify on what date the hall is to be rented and provides that the renter will be responsible for food served.
(N.T. 75-76, Exhibit L-3).
22.
Licensee obtained an opinion letter from the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board Office of Chief Counsel dated September 8, 1997 which says, in essence, that Licensee may serve alcoholic beverages to nonmembers attending catered events which are conducted under the guidelines set forth in Section 5.83 of the Regulations of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board [40 Pa.
Code, §5.83].
(N.T. 75 and Exhibit L-4).
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW:
Counts 1 and 2 of the citation are sustained.
DISCUSSION:
COUNT 1
The record establishes that, more probably than not, on March 13, 1999 a payoff in currency was made for the accumulation of points on a video slot machine or video poker machine on the licensed premises.
Moreover, three of the four machines found on the licensed premises on that date were gambling devices per se.
The fact that Licensee had paid an amusement tax and received electronic device licenses from the Borough of Mount Carmel for the machines does not bar prosecution of Licensee for gambling and related offenses under the due process reliance doctrine.
Consequently, the charge in Count 1 of the citation is sustained.
It is the established rule that under proper circumstances the sanctions provided by Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] may be imposed upon the holder of a liquor license who has violated a gambling statute.
Mar-Kodis Diner, Inc. v. Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, 532 A.2d 940 (Pa.
Cmwlth, 1987).
Section 5513(a) of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.
C.S. §5513(a)] is violated if a person intentionally or knowingly maintains any device to be used for gambling purposes or allows any portion of premises under his control to be used for the purpose of illegal gambling.
In this case, the evidence establishes that, more probably than not, gambling activity took place on the licensed premises.
Officer Ebner observed a gentleman playing one of the slot machines on the licensed premises.
Shortly thereafter the gentleman came to the bar where he told the bartender he had accumulated 800 points.
The bartender retrieved a blue bank bag from the bar and took $40.00 from it which he gave to the gentleman.
(See Findings 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9).
During a search of the premises on April 23, 1999 pursuant to a search warrant Officer David R. Nelson of the Bureau asked the bartender on duty for the blue bank bag.
The bartender retrieved the bag from the safe.
When Officer Nelson asked her what was in it, she replied it contained money for the machines.
(See N.T. 16).
Based upon the foregoing, I conclude that the Bureau has established by a preponderance of the evidence that gambling activity took place on the licensed premises on March 13, 1999.
In addition to the gambling activity, the record also establishes that three of the four machines on the licensed premises were gambling devices per se.
The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania has established that a device will be considered a gambling device per se when the three elements of gambling are present, i.e.: consideration; a result determined by chance rather than skill; and a reward.
Commonwealth v. Two Electronic Poker Machines, 465 A.2d 973 (Pa. 1983).
In this case the element of consideration is clearly present on all of the machines seized since it was necessary to insert money in order to initiate play.
(See Finding 18).
Similarly, the element of chance rather than skill is also present on all four machines as the results of each play are determined by random circuitry over which the player has no control.
(See Finding 18).
The element of reward is established circumstantially on the three video slot machines in this case by the award of points or credits, the presence of a knock-off device, the presence of an accounting mode to determine how many points or credits were knocked off and the presence of dip switches to change the odds.
The appellate courts of Pennsylvania have held that the presence of these features provides sufficient evidence to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that a sufficient reward is present to meet the third element of the test for a gambling device per se.
Com. v. 9 Mills Mechanical Slot Machines, 437 A.2d 67 (Pa.
Cmwlth 1982); Two Electronic Poker Machines (supra).
Before a final determination may be made as to this Count, the issue of scienter must be addressed.
The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania has held that, in those cases where the subject conduct does not directly violate the Liquor Code or intended regulations, some element of scienter on the part of the licensee is required to endanger the liquor license.
Pa.
Liquor Control Board v. TLK, Inc., 544 A.2d 931 (Pa. 1988).
In connection therewith, two principles were established by the court, to wit: 1.
If a licensee knew or should have known of illegal activities of an employe or patron, the licensee is liable.
2.
A licensee may defend his license by demonstrating he took substantial, affirmative steps to guard against a known pattern of illegal activities.
More than a decade ago, this Office indicated in Central Grill, Inc., Citation No. 87-3446, Volume III Sel Op. Page 187 that the nature of machines such as those involved in this case is such that they are very susceptible to use in gambling activities.
Licensee should, therefore, have taken affirmative steps to determine whether or not the machines were gambling devices per se and whether or not gambling activities were taking place on the licensed premises.
Since the machines were clearly being used on the licensed premises, I find that, at the very least, Licensee should have known that gambling devices were present.
At the hearing in this matter, Licensee entered into evidence municipal licenses that it had purchased for each of the machines from the Borough of Mount Carmel pursuant to the Amusement Device Tax Ordinance passed by that municipality.
(See Finding 20).
Licensee claims that having purchased such licenses insulates it from prosecution on the basis of Commonwealth v. Kratsas, Allegheny County CC 9412380, Decided February 26, 1997; affirmed by the Superior Court of Pennsylvania, 726 A.2d 1079 (1998).
A decision of the Pennsylvania Superior Court affirming the decision of the Allegheny County Common Pleas Court cited above was reversed by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court in Commonwealth v. Kratsas, 764 A.2d 20 (Pa. 2001).
Kratsas (supra) involved the prosecution of the proprietors of a business that leases, inter alia, video slot machines and video poker machines to establishments throughout Allegheny County Pennsylvania.
It was alleged in the information that machines leased by the defendants were equipped with knock off devices and accounting devices which made them gambling devices per se.
The defendants filed an omnibus pretrial motion seeking dismissal of the prosecution as violative of the fundamental fairness and the due process clauses of the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions.
The motion alleged that gambling is pervasive in Pennsylvania; local officials and law enforcement officials issued amusement device licenses or permits to the defendants and others authorizing the use of video poker and slot machines with knowledge that such devices were used for gambling; and the fees to license video poker and slot machines were higher than those required for other game machines, because the devices were used for gambling.
After lengthy hearings, the trial court granted the defendants motion and the prosecution was dismissed as violating the due process clauses of the 14^th Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article 1, Section 9 of the Pennsylvania Constitution.
The Commonwealth appealed to the Superior Court.
By memorandum decision the Superior Court affirmed the trial court decision.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court granted the Commonwealths Petition for Allowance of Appeal and reversed the decision of the Superior Court.
Commonwealth v. Kratsas, 764 A.2d 20 (Pa. 2001).
The Supreme Court discussed the application of what has come to be called the Reliance Doctrine as it is applied to pretrial motions to dismiss prosecution and found certain factors provided a useful guide when considering a claim for its application.
These factors are as follows: 1.
There must be an affirmative representation that certain conduct is legal.
2.
The representation should be made by an official or body charged by law with responsibility for defining permissible conduct respecting the offense at issue.
3.
Actual reliance on the official statements should be present.
4.
Reliance must be in good faith given the identity of the government official, the point of law represented and the substance of the statement.
In applying the principles set forth above the Supreme Court found that a valid claim to the due process reliance doctrine had not been established and reversed the ruling of the Superior Court.
In applying the factors enumerated in Kratsas (supra) to this case, I find that the claim of Licensee that prosecution must be barred by the due process reliance doctrine must fail.
There is no evidence in the record to indicate that there was any affirmative representation that use of the video slot machines for gambling activity or that the possession of gambling devices per se was legal.
Secondly, even if sale of amusement device licenses by the Borough of Mount Carmel could be taken as a representation condoning such activity or possession, the Borough does not hold the position of an official or body charged by law with responsibility for defining permissible conduct with respect to the offense at issue.
The gambling statute which Licensee is charged with violating is a Commonwealth Statute which cannot be affected by municipal ordinances or pronouncements.
With the first two necessary factors absent, there is little point in discussing those that remain.
I therefore hold that the due process reliance claim of Licensee must fail.
Based on the foregoing, I conclude that the Bureau has met its burden, and Count 1 of the citation is sustained.
COUNT 2
Licensee has failed to establish that the nonmember served alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises was a participant in the shuffleboard match taking place.
Further Licensee failed to establish that the shuffleboard match was a catered event, as that term is defined by the Liquor Control Board Regulations.
Consequently, the charge in Count 2 of the citation is sustained.
Section 401(b) of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-401(b)] reads as follows: The Board may issue to any club which caters to groups of nonmembers either privately or for functions, a catering license, and the board shall, by its rules and regulations define what constitutes catering under this subsection except that any club which is issued a catering license shall not be prohibited from catering on Sunday during the hours which the club may lawfully serve liquor, malt or brewed beverages.
Section 406(a)(1) of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-406(a)(1)] contains the following language: No club licensee nor its officers, servants, or employes other than one holding a catering license, shall sell any liquor or malt or brewed beverages to any person except a member of the club.
Catering is defined by Section 5.83 of the Liquor Control Board Regulations [40 Pa.
Code §5.83] to wit: (a) Catering for the purpose of this section means the furnishing of liquor or malt or brewed beverages, or both to be served with food prepared on the premises or brought on the premises all prepared for the accommodation of groups of nonmembers who are using the facilities of the club by prior arrangement made at least 24 hours in advance of the time for private meetings or functions such as dances, card parties, banquets and the like, and which is paid for by the nonmembers.
(b) A record shall be maintained showing the date and time catering arrangements were made, the name of the person or organization making the arrangements and the approximate number of persons to be accommodated.
Because the catered event defense instituted in Section 406(a)(1) of the Liquor Code is slated as an exception, I believe it is an affirmative defense; and the burden of proving that defense falls upon Licensee.
The Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania in Commonwealth of Pa Liquor Control Board b. T.J.J.R., Inc., 548 A.2d 390 (Pa.
Cmlwth 1988) states:
When a statute defines the factual basis of an offense or entitlement and then states a further factual element as a basis for an exception the Pennsylvania Supreme Court has treated the exceptional element as a matter for affirmative defense, placing the burden on the defending party to show the affirmative rather than subjecting the other party to proof of a negative proposition
In order to meet its burden and establish the catered event defense, it was incumbent upon Licensee to establish in the record the elements of that defense as set forth in Section 5.83 of the Liquor Control Board Regulations (supra), namely: 1.
The event must have been for the accommodation of a group of nonmembers.
2.
The alcoholic beverages must be served with food.
3.
The group receiving the catering services of the Licensee club must be using the facilities of the club for a private meeting or a function such as a dance, card party, banquet or the like.
4.
The group utilizing the facilities of Licensee club must have made prior arrangements for that use at least 24 hours in advance of the time for the meeting or function.
5.
The group of nonmembers must pay for the function.
6.
The club must maintain a record of the catering arrangements which shall include:
(a) The date and time catering arrangements were made; (b) The name of the person or organization making arrangements; and (c) The approximate number of persons to be accommodated
License has failed to establish all the factors necessary to qualify the shuffleboard match as a catered event.
One of the basic requirements is that the alcoholic beverages must be served with food.
(See Requirement 2 above).
There is nothing in the record which indicates that Licensee provided any food in connection with the match.
Moreover the written agreement between Licensee and the Mount Carmel Independent League specifically states that the League (renter) was to be responsible for food served.
(See Finding 21).
Licensee also failed to meet all aspects of the record keeping requirement necessary to assert the catered event defense.
Licensee produced no evidence that it kept a record of the date and time the catering arrangements were made or the approximate number of persons to be accommodated.
Because of the deficiencies indicated above, I must conclude that the shuffleboard match held on Mach 13, 1999 did not qualify as a catered event.
Licensee argues that service of alcoholic beverages to Officer Ebner during the shuffleboard match falls within the catered event defense as interpreted by the Commonwealth Court of Pennsylvania in Pennsylvania State Police v. American Serbian Club, 750 A.2d 405 (Pa.
Cmwlth 2000).
I disagree.
In American Serbian Club (supra), a dinner dance, which was a legitimate catered event, was being held on the licensed premises.
The group for whom the event was catered, The Serbian National Federation, a group unaffiliated with the licensee, sold tickets to the dinner dance to members of the general public.
These ticket holders were admitted to the licensed premises to attend the dinner dance and were served alcoholic beverages even though they were not members of the Serbian National Federation.
The Commonwealth Court held that service of these ticket holders fell within the catered event exception.
This case differs from American Serbian Club (supra) in several respects.
To begin with the dinner dance in American Serbian Club was a legitimate catered event.
In this case the shuffleboard match was not.
Secondly, Officer Ebner had purchased no ticket to attend the shuffleboard match and was not participating in the shuffleboard match in any manner.
Her status was, therefore different from that of the ticket holders in the Serbian National Federation dinner in American Serbian Club (supra).
Because of these differences I hold that the American Serbian Club is not applicable to the facts of this case.
Licensee also submitted an opinion letter from the Office of Chief Counsel of the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board dated September 8, 1997.
The letter, in essence, says that Licensee may serve alcoholic beverages to nonmembers attending catered events which are conducted under the guidelines set forth in Section 5.83 of the Liquor Control Board Regulations.
(See Finding 22).
Since Officer Ebner was not attending the shuffleboard match and the shuffleboard match was not a legitimate catered event the opinion letter is also inapposite to the facts set forth in this case.
Based upon the foregoing, I conclude that the Bureau has met its burden and Licensee has failed to establish a defense.
The charge in Count 2 of the citation is, therefore sustained.
PRIOR RECORD:
Licensee has been licensed since July 7, 1955, and has had two prior violation(s) since July 1, 1987, the date of establishment of the Office of Administrative Law Judge, to wit: Citation No. 96-1096.
Fine $250.00.
1.
Sales to nonmembers without prior arrangement.
March 9 and 23, 1996.
Citation No. 97-0266.
Fine $450.00.
1.
Possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries on the licensed premises (machines).
January 5, 1997.
PENALTY:
Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] prescribes a penalty of license suspension or revocation or a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 or both for violations of the type found in this case.
Under the circumstances of this case, the penalty imposed shall be as follows: Count 1 1 day suspension Count 2 2 days suspension
ORDER
THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED that the catering club license of CHRISTOPHER CLUB OF MOUNT CARMEL, License No.
CC-49511 be suspended for a period of three days BEGINNINGat 7:00 a.m. on Monday, November 26, 2001 and ENDING at 7:00 a.m. on Thursday, November 29, 2001.
Licensee is directed on November 26, 2001 at 7:00 a.m. to place the enclosed placard of notice of suspension (identified as Form No.
PLCB-1925 and as printed with red and black ink) in a conspicuous place on the outside of the licensed premises or in a window plainly visible from outside the licensed premises and to remove said license from the wall and place it in a secure location.
Licensee is advised if replacement placards are needed for any reason they are available at all Pennsylvania Liquor Stores/Wine 
The Bureau is directed to visit and monitor the aforementioned licensed premises for compliance with this Order.
Licensee is authorized on November 29, 2001 at 7:00 a.m. to remove the placard of suspension and return his license to its original wall location.
Dated this 15th day of August, 2001.
____________________________________ Daniel T. Flaherty, Jr., J.
af
MOTIONS FOR RECONSIDERATION MUST BE RECEIVED WITHIN 15 DAYS OF THE MAILING DATE OF THIS ORDER TO THE OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE AND REQUIRE A $25.00 FILING FEE.
A WRITTEN REQUEST FOR RECONSIDERATION MUST BE SUBMITTED WITH THE FILING FEE.
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
