Update Hot on the Trail of Fire Ants Red imported fire ants keep adapting to life in the United States.
They keep spreading farther and farther north from their foothold in the Southeast, often overtaking native ants along the way to become the dominant species.
But scientists at ARS' Center for Medical and Veterinary Entomology (CMAVE) are hot on their tiny trails, developing new ways to keep their numbers manageable.
Researchers with the Imported Fire Ant and 20 Household Insects Research Unit in Colonies die out after 9 to 18 months.
Gainesville, Florida, have made many CMAVE researchers learned they discoveries since the late 1970s in their could infect colonies by introducing efforts to control fire ant populations.
brood infected with T. solenopsae.
Since Their strategy is to reduce the amount of fire ants will accept brood from foreign chemical treatments needed by developcolonies, the parasite is now established ing self-sustaining biological control in many regions.
But because the transagents. fer of live larvae and pupae is very The red imported fire ant, Solenopsis tedious and not entirely effective, experinvicta, was accidentally introduced into iments are under way to see which life the United States in 1929 from South stages best transmit the pathogen to the America.
Fire ant population there is queen.
Entomologist David Oi recently only 20 percent of that here, probably discovered in fire ant pupae a new T. because North America lacks natural solenopsae spore type that he believes enemies of the ant.
They are particularly might be capable of initiating infection.
disruptive because of their large numbers Some fire ant colonies have only a sinand painful sting; about 40 percent of gle queen, while others have many.
A sinpeople in infested areas are stung each gle-queen colony can have 250,000 year.
Fire ants dramatically reduce popworkers, whereas a multiple-queen colulations of native ants, other insects, and ony can have twice that number.
Multiground-nesting wildlife.
They also dample-queen colonies are easier to infect age many crops and much electrical with T. solenopsae because they will equipment.
Damage and control costs are adopt and raise infected brood from othestimated to be more than $6.5 billion a er colonies.
But, on the downside, says year.
Oi, they are harder to control because Red imported fire ants curtheir large populations limit the rently infest more than 320 milpathogen's impact.
A singlelion acres in 12 southeastern "Single-queen colonies are queen states and Puerto Rico and have more suspicious of outsiders, but colony can recently spread to California and they will raid other colonies and have New Mexico.
Although fire ants take their immature ants," says 250,000 workers keep moving into new areas, a Oi.
"So, we can establish an inrecent ARS model predicts that fection in single-queen colonies, they will not be able to survive but it dies down after awhile."
in areas where soil temperatures The researchers are studying drop to near freezing for more than 2 to another pathogen, Vairimorpha invictae, 3 weeks.
Black imported fire ants, that is more lethal but also more rare than Solenopsis richteri, introduced to the T. solenopsae.
(See "Ouch! The Fire Ant United States in 1918, are less Saga Continues," Agricultural Research, widespread.
A hybrid looks the same as September 1999, p. 4.)
V. invictae is hard the red ants, so laboratory tests are to keep alive in the laboratory, so the needed to tell them apart.
scientists must occasionally have infected colonies sent from ARS' South Effective Infections American Biological Control Laboratory
Two pathogens from South America in Buenos Aires, Argentina--where it is are known to infect fire ant colonies, and being studied in the field--to examine research is continuing into their effecthe pathogen under quarantine in tiveness as biological control agents.
Gainesville.
CMAVE researchers were the first to A new disease has been discovered by discover Thelohania solenopsae in the CMAVE insect pathologist Roberto United States in 1996.
This single-celled Pereira.
It's called yellow head disease protozoan parasite infects colonies when because of the yellow-orange color ant workers transfer it to the queen, possibly heads and other body parts turn when inthrough food exchange.
It reduces the fected with the spindle-shaped spores.
A queen's weight, and she lays fewer eggs.
protozoan from the genus Mattesia was Agricultural Research/February 2003 present in 34 percent of sites and 8 percent of nests studied in Florida.
The pathogen causes extreme changes in appearance, but its full impact as a potential biological control agent is still under investigation.
"Back in the late 1970s, a researcher looking at red imported fire ants found a virus-like particle, but it died in the lab," Williams says.
"There are viruses in ants, but finding them is tedious and laborious work.
They can be extremely virulent if you get the right one."
He believes this untapped area has great potential for new discoveries, and he hopes to bring a molecular biologist to their team soon to aid in the search.
Williams is also evaluating a parasitic ant, S. daguerrei, under quarantine.
It is found only on fire ants in Argentina and Brazil.
The parasite doesn't produce workers, so it relies on its host, taking resources from the queen while the colony feeds and maintains its brood.
Mound densities were 33 percent less in sites with the parasitic ant, and the number of fire ant queens was 47 percent less in parasitized colonies.
Terror from Above Fire ant decapitating phorid flies, from the genus Pseudacteon, are natural enemies of imported fire ants.
Just their presence keeps frightened ants from leaving their mounds.
That alone is good news because it forces a shift in when the fire ants forage and allows native ants to compete better.
A female fly hovers over a mound before she pinpoints a victim, dive-bombs it, and deposits one of her eggs inside it.
The egg, as researchers at the center discovered, eventually produces a larva that eats its way to the head and causes it to fall off.
Entomologist Sanford Porter estimates there are about 20 types of Pseudacteon flies that attack fire ants.
They could be used to complement each other in control efforts.
So far, two phorid fly species--P. tricuspis and P. curvatus--have been Agricultural Research/February 2003 PEGGY GREB (K10233-1) PEGGY GREB (K10229-1) Entomologist Sanford Porter inspects fire ants hiding under cups inside a large attack box for rearing fire antdecapitating flies.
The fire ant queen on the bottom right is healthier and much heavier than the Thelohania solenopsaeinfected one on the top left.
Entomologist David Williams examines an image of a fire ant worker containing a cyst of the microbial pathogen Thelohania solenopsae.
PEGGY GREB (K10222-1) 21 PEGGY GREB (K10236-1) released and established in the United States.
P. tricuspis took hold and is expanding at the rate of 10 to 20 miles a year.
P. curvatus works better on black imported fire ants and the hybrid than on red ones.
It was imported from Argentina and is being used in Alabama, Mississippi, and Tennessee.
A third species, P. litoralis, works especially well on the red ants and has been approved for release in field studies.
Porter and colleagues at ARS' Biological Control and Mass Rearing Research Unit, located near Starkville, Mississippi, developed an attack box that has greatly improved their ability to mass-rear phorid flies.
The boxes are held under environmental conditions that strictly mimic the flies' natural habitat.
Specially designed cups are alternately raised up and down within the box in a cycle every 10 minutes, causing the ants to run from one cup to the other.
This action allows the phorid flies to easily attack and parasitize them.
New flies are continually released into the main attack PEGGY GREB (K10225-1) box from an attached holding box at one end to maximize the amount of eggs deposited.
Because CMAVE reached its capacity to rear the phorid flies, an initiative to mass-produce them was launched with ARS, USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), and Florida's Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
The new facility in Gainesville will eventually produce 6,000 to 12,000 flies a day.
Social Insects Suffer Uninvited Guests Chemist Robert Vander Meer studies semiochemicals, such as pheromones, in an effort to modify ant behavior and control the pests.
Social insects like fire ants use semiochemicals to communicate with each other and influence activities.
Vander Meer wants to see how the ants use these compounds and then disrupt the processes.
One reason fire ants are so troublesome is that they commonly short-circuit electrical equipment of all kinds.
Of course, they electrocute themselves in the process, and large numbers of dead ants are sometimes found piled up in electrical mechanisms.
Vander Meer and Porter discovered that electrocution causes the ants to release alarm pheromones that attract other ants as well as phorid flies.
In response to these pheromones, phorid flies lay more eggs in ants, and fly production increases by 15 to 20 percent.
This knowledge will help them develop new ways to use alarm pheromones in biological control programs.
Vander Meer is involved in other fire ant pheromone projects.
He found that fire ants use their stinger not only for defensive purposes but also for pheromone dispersal.
His knowledge of how fire ants use semiochemicals to recognize intruders enabled scientists to decipher how two parasites (a beetle and a wasp) are able to infiltrate aggressive colonies.
Pioneering work revealed how fire ants locate food and recruit other workers to the source with pheromone trails.
Entomologist Roberto Pereira and technician Susan Reidel examine a red imported fire ant colony for the presence of ants infected with the recently discovered yellow-head disease.
Entomologist David Oi collects infected fire ants from a colony decimated by the fire ant pathogen Thelohania solenopsae.
22 An ARS-funded areawide project began in March 2001 to demonstrate how to keep fire ant populations at very low levels by combining strategic pesticide applications with phorid flies and T. solenopsae .
Diverse demonstration sites--as large as 300 acres--in five states were chosen for the project to represent the fire ant's infestation range, according to Williams.
ARS is coordinating the major activities of four landgrant universities and other organizations associated with the project for 4 to 5 years.--By Jim Core, ARS.
This research is part of Arthopod Pests of Animals and Humans, an ARS National Program (#104) described on the World Wide Web at http://www.nps. ars.usda.gov.
David Williams is with the USDA-ARS Imported Fire Ant and Household Insects Research Unit, CMAVE, 1700 S.W. 23rd Drive, Gainesville, FL 32608-0000; phone (352) 374-5903, fax (352) 3745818, e-mail dwilliams@gainesville. usda.ufl.edu.
Agricultural Research/February 2003
