FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: October 16, 2002 GOVERNOR LAUNCHES STATE MILITARY MUSEUM [thinbar.gif] After 139 years, New York's Military History Collection Gets A Permanent Home Governor George E. Pataki today officially opened the New York State Military Museum and Veterans Research Center in Saratoga Springs, fulfilling a promise made to New York's veterans over a century ago.
The museum is the first facility dedicated expressly to the preservation and public display of New York State's priceless collection of 10,000 military artifacts, some of which date to before the American Revolution.
"In 1865 the State Legislature passed a law establishing the State's collection of military memorabilia and pledged to create a museum to honor its veterans and their contributions to their State and nation.
Today we do what others were either unable or unwilling to do -- honor that long-neglected promise," Governor Pataki said.
"From this moment forward, the State of New York will have a permanent museum dedicated to telling the story of its veterans and educating future generations about their patriotism, courage and sacrifice."
"From the militiamen who shed blood a few miles from here to win our nation's independence, to New York's many soldiers, airmen, sailors and Marines currently waging the war on terrorism, New Yorkers have always led the way to keep our great nation free.
They deserve this living tribute to their service," the Governor said.
The Governor also announced that he has dedicated another $600,000 in State funding for further improvements and advancements at the new facility.
The Governor has devoted over $1 million in funding to preserving the State's military history collection, and over $500,000 has been spent on improvements to convert the Saratoga Springs armory into a working museum.
Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno said, "Over the weekend, thousands of people witnessed the most elaborate reenactment of the Battle of Saratoga ever staged.
They braved bad weather to commemorate the 225th anniversary of one of the most significant battles in our nation's history.
The passion for military history here makes Saratoga the most appropriate location for New York's Military Museum.
I applaud Governor Pataki for his efforts to establish this museum to pay tribute to the State's rich military history and our military heroes."
Congressman John Sweeney said, "History books can't teach as much about our nation's past as someone who was there on the front lines making history.
Our nation's undeniable patriotism is compelling people to revisit our nation's past and this museum serves as a vehicle for people to learn about the personal experiences of our veteran's and commemorate their service."
The initial phase of the museum consists of six display areas, as well as the library and archives of the Veterans Research Center.
With a full-time staff of nine and over two-dozen volunteer guides, the museum will be open to the public Tuesday through Saturday from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m.
The museum will also feature a gift shop, operated by the New York State Military Heritage Institute, a volunteer citizens group dedicated to supporting the museum.
The Institute also recruits and trains museum volunteers and raises funds for the museum.
Senator Hugh Farley said, "We owe our American freedoms to our veterans whose courage and sacrifice in many wars built our Republic and preserved our nation.
It is only fitting that we should preserve these priceless military artifacts here in Saratoga, near the location of the pivotal Battle of Saratoga.
As a veteran myself, I am indebted to Governor Pataki for his commitment to the establishment of this museum.
I am especially pleased that the law I wrote seven years ago to encourage conservation and preservation of the State's military battle flags has now led to one of the centerpieces of this collection."
Senator Thomas Morahan said, "I thank Governor Pataki for his leadership and vision in launching the State Military Museum.
This museum will honor our veterans, past and present throughout New York State, while also serving as a wonderful educational resource for all.
As a fellow veteran I can tell you that this is a very touching tribute to the many sacrifices made by men and women from our State throughout history to establish and preserve the freedom of our great nation."
Robert Hall, Chair, Saratoga County Board of Supervisors, said, "We are so pleased that Governor Pataki has decided to locate the State Military Museum here in Saratoga County -- the Turning Point of the American Revolution.
Freedom has never been free, and it is altogether fitting and proper that we have a special place to honor the sacrifices of the men and women who gave their lives and service to secure it for us.
I salute Governor Pataki for his vision and unfailing support for our military and all New York Veterans."
Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr., The Adjutant General of the State of New York said, "Simply put, this day would have never arrived without the vision and leadership of Governor Pataki -- we at DMNA are proud to have helped him achieve this worthy objective.
As the commander of New York's 24,000 Guard and Militia members and a combat veteran, it is extremely heartening to serve under a Commander in Chief with such an acute appreciation for the contributions made by men and women of the military ? past and present."
The museum features six display areas*:
* An introduction to the New York State Military Museum and Veterans Research Center; * The Origins of the New York State Military Museum and Veterans Research Center; * Revolutionary War Relics and the Creation of an American Identity; * Castles in Our Cities: Armories and the Communities They Served; * On all Fronts: New York National Guard Units in WWII; * Art and Photography from the Collections of DMNA.
The museum's library and archive holdings include a 2000-volume library of military and New York State history, over 6,000 photographs, unit history files, broadsides, scrapbooks, letters and maps.
Highlights of the library and archives material include over 2,300 Civil War photographs, a collection of Civil War era newspaper clippings arranged by New York units and New York National Guard service cards and service records dating from the 1880's to 1965.
The Veterans Research Center also administers the New York State Veteran Oral History Program and the Veteran Questionnaire Program.
The Oral History Program coordinates, conducts and videotapes interviews of New York State veterans from all eras.
The largest part of this collection is of World War II veteran interviews.
The Veteran Questionnaire Program, similar to the Oral History Program, solicits and preserves the written and photographic record of the State's veterans and their experiences.
New York State's military history collection includes uniforms, artwork, weapons, equipment, photographs, documents and other pieces of priceless memorabilia.
It is the largest military artifact collection of any State.
Over the course of many decades however, the collection, formerly housed at the State Capitol and various other locations around the State, fell into disarray due to theft, poor record keeping and lack of concern.
In 1995, Governor Pataki ordered the first comprehensive inventory of the collection.
This effort reassembled most of the collection to a secure location at the Watervliet Arsenal where each item was carefully identified, registered, cataloged, marked and photographed.
Accountability and record keeping for the collection have been brought up to accepted US Army museum standards, not only ensuring the availability of this information to educators, researchers and historians, but also making the museum eligible for federal support.
A detailed description of each exhibit is attached.
Initial Exhibits of the NYSMM
1.
Introduction: Visitors are greeted with background information on the museum, the Veterans Research Center, the Oral History program, the flag conservation project and the Military History Institute.
This area features: A sampling of recent donations that have been made to the Museum and Research Center?some of the items that might be included are a WWII 8th Air Force dress uniform, snapshots of WWII training activities, and the WWII Navy uniform of an Amsterdam NY man who was in the Naval Airship Service.
The 15th New York Engineers regimental flag, one of the Civil War battle flags that has undergone conservation in the flag conservation program.
2.
The Origins of the NYSMM: The New York State Military Museum has a remarkable collection thanks to both the forward thinking efforts of State officials and veterans during the latter part of the Civil War.
This exhibit demonstrates how the collection began growing from a relic display in an office, to an exhibit room at the State Capitol, to the present facility in the Saratoga Springs Armory.
It includes some of the Museum's rarest historical treasures.
Features include: * Original cases and display materials that will be used to recreate exhibits that were in the military museum room at the State Capitol 100 years ago.
* A selection of uniforms worn by New York State soldiers in the Civil War.
* A Civil War cannon and an 18th century swivel gun that had once been on display in the museum room at the Capitol.
* Abraham Lincoln artifacts.
3.
Revolutionary War Relics and the Creation of an American Identity
This exhibit samples the Museum's 18th century objects to explore how Americans began collection of Revolutionary War artifacts and what those objects meant at one time when people were seeking to create a distinct national identity.
The stories that these objects tell were used to inspire a new generation at the time when people who actually remembered the Revolution were dying out.
Among the historical objects included in this exhibit are:
* Muskets captured from the British and Hessians in the war.
* A British drum and Native American War club.
* A cannon captured and brought back by Benedict Arnold's expedition in to Canada.
* A powder horn used by an American militiaman from White Creek, New York.
4.
Castles in Our Cities: Armories and the Communities they Served
Starting in the 1870's, castle-like armories were built in New York and other states.
These were meant not just to provide equipment storage and drill space for National Guard units, but also to serve as symbols of government authority and as fortresses in case of civil unrest.
This exhibit examines how, as the function of the National Guard evolved, armories changed and ultimately became the first civic centers in many communities.
The exhibit will also interpret daily life and guardsman's activities in a New York State armory in the early part of the 20th century.
Features of this exhibit:
* A recreation of a company day room circa 1915, using furniture and decorative objects saved or borrowed from a number of different historic New York State armories in Albany, Syracuse, Saratoga Springs and Binghamton.
* A cannon taken by the Militia from rioters in the New York City "Dead Rabbit" riot of 1857.
* A selection of uniforms that show how the equipment and the look of the Guard changed along with its mission.
* Promotional and souvenir materials from the wide variety of non-military activities that have been housed in armories, ranging from poultry shows to midget car races.
5.
On all Fronts: New York National Guard Units in WWII
In the Second World War, the U.S. Army relied heavily on the National Guard to provide much on the manpower they needed to fight the war, especially in its first years.
New York's National Guard units, including infantry, artillery armor, medical, engineers, and other support units were one of the largest state contingents to be taken into federal service.
Furthermore, the 27th Infantry Division, made up entirely of New York National Guard units was the first division to leave the mainland and go overseas after Pearl Harbor.
The 27th went on to take part in some of the hardest fighting in the Pacific, such as the battle of Saipan.
Other New York units went all across the globe, serving everywhere from Alaska to North Africa and Europe.
The exhibit includes:
* Mannequins fully dressed in original uniforms and a sample of almost every major type of infantry weapon used in the war, from rifles and pistols to anti-tank artillery.
* A wide array of the gear that Americans industrial base provided for our soldiers ranging from field desks to tool chests, typewriters to range finders, and sporting goods to mine detectors.
* Blowups of images taken by army photographers during the 27th Divisions service in the Pacific.
6.
Art and Photographs from the Collections of DMNA
A striking part of the décor in NYS Armories and other DMNA buildings is the use of paintings, prints and photographs to inspire a sense of tradition and pride.
The public usually did not have the opportunity to view this art, but a sampling of some of the best pieces will be on exhibit at the new museum.
The works will be organized along the lines of several themes: Symbols of Authority; On Parade; Images of Battle; and the Art of Communication.
Among the featured pieces are: * Portrait paintings by some well-known 20th century artists.
* Original artwork chronicling colorful NYNG dress uniforms from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
* Oversize photographic images recording the spectacle of Grant's funeral procession and troops moving through the streets of Saratoga Springs over a century ago.
* Civil War recruiting posters.
* Recent donations of original military art by Ardis Hughes and Anthony Battilo.
### [thinbar.gif]
Return to the Press Releases Return to the Office of the Governor
