Bringing All Students to High Standards: Report on National Education Goals Panel Field Hearings By Robert Rothman December, 2000 N ATIONAL E DUCATION G OALS PANEL GOVERNORS Tommy Thompson, Wisconsin, Chairman 2000 John Engler, Michigan Jim Geringer, Wyoming James B. Hunt, Jr., North Carolina Frank Keating, Oklahoma Frank O'Bannon, Indiana Paul E. Patton, Kentucky Cecil H. Underwood, West Virginia
MEMBERS OF THE ADMINISTRATION Michael Cohen, Assistant Secretary for Elem.
&
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS U.S. Senator Jeff Bingaman, New Mexico U.S. Senator Jim Jeffords, Vermont U.S. Representative William F. Goodling, Pennsylvania U.S. Representative Matthew G. Martinez, California
STATE LEGISLATORS Representative G. Spencer Coggs, Wisconsin Representative Mary Lou Cowlishaw, Illinois Representative Douglas R. Jones, Idaho Senator Stephen M. Stoll, Missouri
Bringing All Students to High Standards: Report on National Education Goals Panel Field Hearings
By Robert Rothman December, 2000
About the Author Robert Rothman prepared this report for the National Education Goals Panel.
Mr. Rothman, a graduate of Yale University, is currently a Senior Project Associate at Achieve, Inc., in Washington, DC.
Previously, he had worked for eight years as a reporter and editor at Education Week, and as a visiting researcher at the National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards and Student Testing (CRESST) in the Graduate School of Education at UCLA.
From 1997 to 2000, Mr. Rothman was a project director at the National Research Council of the National Academies of Sciences, where he directed the Committee on Title 1 Testing and Assessment.
Bringing All Students to High Standards: Report on National Education Goals Panel Field Hearings Executive Summary What are the conditions that will help ensure school success? In 2000, the National Education Goals Panel set out to learn.
The Panel conducted a series of four field hearings in different regions of the country to find evidence of success and to understand why places were succeeding.
As an organization of state and federal policy makers, the Goals Panel was particularly interested in the role that state and district policies play in helping schools succeed.
Noted the panel's chairman, Governor Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin: "Our goal is to make every school a school of excellence and every child a successful learner."
Participants at the hearings included students, teachers, parents, principals, superintendents, university presidents, business leaders, school board members, and academic researchers.
Among other things, they demonstrated that, despite the drumbeat of negative news about education, there are positive signs across the country that educators and the public are creating successful schools and school systems.
They also showed that achieving success does not just happen.
It takes concerted effort, over time, by a lot of people.
They showed that, in the characteristic American fashion, reformers took quite different paths, even when they pursued common strategies.
Nevertheless, some common themes emerged that together could define conditions needed for all students to learn.
The themes included: · High expectations for all students.
Schools that succeeded expected all students to achieve at high levels, especially those who traditionally have not been expected to perform well.
Consistency over time.
Successful policies have remained in place for years, enabling schools to make needed changes and produce results.
Clear accountability.
Schools that succeeded had to produce results and knew that there were consequences for failure.
Using data to drive improvement.
Schools use performance information to determine where they were succeeding and where they needed to direct their efforts for improvement.
· · ·
i
·
Improving teacher quality.
Schools and school systems placed a great emphasis on enhancing the skills and knowledge of teachers, particularly those already in the classroom.
Expanding the school day and year.
Schools provided additional instructional time for students who were struggling to meet high standards.
Supporting children and families.
Schools made services available to children and their families so that health and social problems would not be an impediment to learning.
Support from business community.
Schools and school systems formed alliances with businesses to promote the common agenda of improving schools and drew on the resources businesses could provide.
· ·
·
The discussions at the hearings suggest a number of policy implications, which could help improve policies and practices in states and school districts throughout the country.
These include: · · · · · · · Overhauling leadership development; Investing in high-quality professional development; Creating P-16 councils to link schools and institutions of higher education; Providing high-quality instruction after school and in summers for students who need additional help; Providing additional support for children and families; Considering new management arrangements; and Maintaining stable policies.
ii
Introduction When asked to choose a theme for a stamp that would commemorate the decade of the 1990s, the United States Postal Service chose "improving education."
This choice was a natural one.
The 1990s was an extraordinary time in American education.
All of the states, with support and leadership at the national level, embarked on a concerted and sustained effort to improve education at all levels.
They did so with the recognition that the task would not be easy, and that solutions would not be simple.
But they did so knowing that the task was imperative: nothing less than the future of the country was at stake.
These efforts have begun to pay off, in some ways spectacularly.
As the National Education Goals Panel has reported, many states have made significant progress toward the National Education Goals that were set at the outset of the decade.
And, perhaps more significantly, states have made substantial progress in laying the foundation for future success.
Nearly every state has made standards the cornerstone of their reform efforts, and they are developing policies and practices to help all students reach high standards.
In recent months, some parents and commentators have raised questions about the standards strategy and wondered about the effects of state policies on school practices and student performance.
Others have begun to think about the conditions that need to be in place for the standards efforts to achieve their goal of raising performance for all students and reducing the achievement gaps that have persisted throughout the last two decades of education reform.
One way to determine whether strategies are having their desired effect, and to understand the conditions that will help ensure school success, is to examine schools, districts, and states up close.
By studying places that have shown evidence of progress-- particularly those that have succeeded against strong odds--we can try to understand the common factors that enabled them to succeed.
In that way, states and districts can learn from others' experiences.
Several organizations have attempted to do this recently.
For example, the Charles A. Dana Center at the University of Texas at Austin studied nine urban schools with predominantly low-income student bodies that have produced high levels of student performance (Dana Center, 1999).
Similarly, the Education Trust identified 366 highpoverty schools that exceeded expectations (Education Trust, 1999).
In 2000, the National Education Goals Panel set out on a similar study.
The Panel conducted a series of four field hearings in different regions of the country to find evidence of success and to understand why places were succeeding.
As an organization of state and federal policy makers, the Goals Panel was particularly interested in the role that state and district policies play in helping schools succeed.
The policy role is crucial.
First, policies help ensure that effective school practices are part of the system and not just the result of the efforts of a charismatic leader, as many successful schools tend to be.
1
Second, policies help ensure that all children reach high levels of performance, not just a few.
This is a new goal for American education, but it is the target reformers now are trying to achieve.
Noted the panel's chairman, Governor Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin: "Our goal is to make every school a school of excellence and every child a successful learner."
The Field Hearings The four field hearings, and the national teleconference that kicked off the series, were aimed at bringing together educators, policy makers, and business leaders from different areas of the country.
Although each focused on a specific aspect of educational improvement, all of the hearings addressed on a single theme: bringing all students to high standards.
The hearings were: · · · · · Teleconference, April 13, 2000, Washington, DC.
On applying the Baldrige criteria to education.
Hearing, May 22, 2000, Alhambra, CA.
On achieving high standards with minority and urban students.
Hearing, June 1, 2000, Burlington, VT.
On empowering educators to bring all students to high standards.
Hearing, September 19, 2000, Atlanta, GA.
On new school structures.
Hearing, October 2, 2000, Chicago, IL.
On using data to help all students achieve high standards.
Participants at the hearings included students, teachers, parents, principals, superintendents, university presidents, business leaders, school board members, and academic researchers.
Among other things, they demonstrated that, despite the drumbeat of negative news about education, there are positive signs across the country that educators and the public are creating successful schools and school systems.
They showed that achieving success does not just happen.
It takes concerted effort, over time, by a lot of people.
They also showed that, in the characteristic American fashion, reformers took quite different paths, even when they pursued common strategies.
Nevertheless, the participants expressed some common themes that together could define the elements of success.
The themes included: · · High expectations for all students.
Consistency over time.
2
· · · · · ·
Clear accountability.
Using data to drive improvement.
Improving teacher quality.
Expanding the school day and year.
Supporting children and families.
Support from business community.
High expectations for all students
Few would deny that the achievement gap that separates white and affluent students from their minority and low-income peers is one of the most vexing problems facing educators and policy makers today.
Results from the National Assessment of Educational Progress show the persistence of the problem.
In 1998, white students outperformed black and Hispanic students at every grade level in reading, both nationally and in every state.
The gaps were substantial: white 8th graders performed at about the same level as black and Hispanic high school seniors.
The gaps between poor and non-poor students were similarly large.
Eighth graders not eligible for free and reduced-price lunches performed at about the same level in reading as 12th graders eligible for the lunch subsidies.
The same story is true in mathematics as well.
In 1996, at every grade level, about 70 percent of students not eligible for free and reduced price lunches performed at the basic level or above.
By contrast, only about 40 percent of students who were eligible for the subsidies performed at the basic level or above in mathematics.
Some educators refuse to believe that such achievement gaps are inexorable.
And they have succeeded in raising performance by starting with the premise that all students will reach high levels of performance, regardless of their background.
One educator who started with that belief and has impressive results to show for it is Mona Parras, the principal of Mission Junior High School in Mission, TX.
For Parras, the motto is: "Never underestimate the power of expectation."
The 900 students in her school, of whom 99 percent are Hispanic and more than 90 percent are economically disadvantaged, were not expected to achieve much when she arrived in the early 1990s.
But she turned those expectations around.
Her school eliminated remedial classes and instead set about to enroll all students in solid academic coursework.
Now, there are three sections of students taking algebra in 7th grade; all the rest are taking pre-algebra.
And she created pre-Advanced Placement classes in both 7th and 8th grade, to prepare students
3
to take the rigorous courses when they get to high school.
She also started SAT training, to begin to prepare students for the college-entrance examination.
The results? Mission has eliminated the performance gap; all groups have better than a 90 percent pass rate on state tests in all areas.
Typically, Parras attributes the school's success to the faculty and staff, who believe in the students and act on it every day.
"A quality school is the result of quality teachers going above and beyond the call of duty," she said.
Setting high expectations for all students requires a different way of educating than in the past.
Above all, it means refusing to accept excuses for failure.
According to Gerald Anderson, the superintendent of schools in Brazosport, TX, accepting no excuses is a new idea in education, but it is one that many other institutions routinely adopt.
"We went to business and asked them to share their perceptions of the schools," Anderson said at the Goals Panel teleconference.
"They told us loud and clear: if we made excuses in our business that you make in yours, we'd be out of business."
Setting high expectations also means changing some deep-seated attitudes.
Some people, accustomed to the idea that only some children will perform at high levels, have a hard time accepting the challenge of raising performance for all children.
Sheila Smith, the coordinator of gifted-and-talented programs for the Los Angeles Unified School District, said at the hearing in Alhambra that the district encountered resistance from an unlikely source when it decided to bring Advanced Placement courses to all the city's high schools.
Parents, she said, initially fought the idea, because they wondered why their children had to work so hard.
To help parents understand the change and gain their support, the district started workshops to show parents the kind of work their children would be doing and what the outcomes are.
As a result, more and more students enrolled in the challenging courses and began to do well.
In 1986, the district's students took 5,500 Advanced Placement examinations.
Last year, students in L.A. Unified took 22,587--a fourfold increase.
And while average scores dropped over that period, as might be expected, since not just the best-prepared students were taking the exams, the coursework has proved beneficial to all students, according to Smith.
Sometimes, setting high expectations means simply making clear what the expectations are.
How can students attain challenging goals if they do not know what they have to do to reach them? The University of Georgia system has gone about making expectations clear by bringing eighth through twelfth graders onto campuses and informing them about what they have to do to earn admission and to earn a HOPE scholarship, a state program that rewards high achieving students.
The university also gives them T-shirts with the standards for admission and scholarships on the back.
"We don't tell students exactly what they need to know and be able to do to enter the workforce, a technical or community college, or a college or university," Steven Portch, the chancellor of the University of Georgia system,
4
said at the Atlanta hearing.
"Then we act surprised after they enter the workforce and need to be retrained, or enter college and need remediation.
This is not rocket science."
The state's P-16 council, which has involved educators at all levels in raising standards for students graduating from high school and entering the university system, has set a goal of bringing every student to a campus at least once a year; students at risk of failing in school are invited to spend weekends on campuses, and a small subset spend time there during the summer.
Portch said the council set a clear deadline for when the new, higher standards would go into effect.
The deadline give students and parents ample warning and enabled them to prepare, yet at the same time it did not push the effective date so far into the future that students, schools, and universities did nothing to improve.
"People argue you can't raise standards until K-12 is `fixed,'" Portch said.
"We'll never `fix' it until we raise standards and help students prepare."
Consistency Over Time In addition to setting high expectations for all students, states, districts, and schools that have shown success also maintained their expectations over a long period of time.
Keeping the expectations consistent serves a number of purposes.
First, it provides students, parents, and teachers with a stable target.
If they do not make it right away, they know what the target is, and they can make adjustments to meet it the next year or the year after that.
Second, consistency helps win over people who might resist reforms.
Because of education's history of steadily shifting reform winds, educators often believe that if they just wait long enough, the current fad will pass and they can go on doing what they had been doing until the next wind comes through.
A reform that stays the course, however, convinces people that it will not pass, and they realize they must change their practices.
Third, consistency enables states and districts to make adjustments that improve systems.
Rather than declare reforms a failure and move onto something else, states and districts faced with poor results build in additional supports and structures to turn the results around.
The contrast between a stable system that has shown impressive results and a system that has seen reform winds shift dramatically--and that has shown much less success--was evident at the Alhambra hearing.
There, John Stevens of the Texas Business and Education Coalition described the history and results of the reform effort in Texas, and Joan L. Herman of the Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing at the University of California, Los Angeles, described the story of California's reforms.
According to Stevens, the reform effort in Texas began in the mid-1980s and went into effect fully in the early 1990s.
Perhaps as significant as the policies themselves was the fact that they have remained in place throughout the decade, even through a change of
5
political leadership.
Stevens attributes the staying power of the reform to the support of the business community and the creation of an infrastructure for improvement, including Stevens's coalition.
He also noted that educators, who had resisted the reforms at first, became their strongest supporters after they saw the results.
And as a report commissioned by the Goals Panel found, the results are particularly for minority and economically disadvantaged students.
As Texas, along with North Carolina, showed the greatest progress toward Education Goals during the 1990s, and narrowed the achievement gaps dramatic, the report notes, the National in the process.
Stevens noted that some reasons often given for school success--reductions in class size, increases in the number of teachers with advanced degrees, or increases in spending--did not explain Texas's improvement, since these factors did not change much over the 1990s.
Rather, state policies--an aligned system of standards, assessment, and accountability; decentralizing decision making; and shifting resources to schools serving disadvantaged populations--appeared to make the difference.
In contrast to Texas, the story in California has been one of shifting signals, not stability, and the state has much less success to show for its efforts.
According to Herman, the state has had three testing systems over the past 10 years--not one common measure, as in Texas.
And, she said, the current test is not aligned with standards.
Nevertheless, schools have their feet held to the fire for results on the test.
California's results present a different picture than those in Texas.
The state began its current reform effort in 1993, when the National Assessment of Educational Progress placed the state near the bottom of all states in reading and mathematics achievement, and the state has made little headway since then.
On the statewide test, the Stanford Achievement Test-9th edition, the state has shown slight gains over two years, but Herman noted that this pattern is typical as teachers and students become familiar with a new test.
Looking deeper at the results, Herman noted some disturbing trends.
Within schools, as the proportion of poor children in a school increases, the performance of both poor and non-poor children decreases.
That is, poverty appears to depress performance schoolwide, not just for those who suffer from it.
Conversely, poor children perform better in schools where there are fewer poor children, although the performance gaps between poor and non-poor children are higher in such schools.
Similarly, all children in schools with high proportions of language-minority children perform less well than in schools with fewer such children.
Herman noted that the state has adopted a number of new initiatives, including incentives for teachers and a high school exit test, that have not had time to show up in results.
But she argued that, in the future, the state should adopt reasonable expectations, and not hope that schools can make dramatic gains in a short amount of time.
And she argued for the use of multiple measures of achievement, to avoid an undue emphasis on preparation for a single test, which measures only a small sample of a child's learning.
Above all,
6
Herman said, it takes more than standards and assessments to move kids forward, especially economically disadvantaged children, although standards and assessments are crucial elements in any reform strategy.
Clear Accountability While high expectations and stability over time are essential, schools, districts, and states have found that they improved when they are accountable for meeting the expectations.
Accountability creates incentives for educators to make the changes they need to attain their goals.
Accountability also enables policymakers to understand where to direct resources to help schools improve.
Nearly every state and many school districts in the past few years have established systems for holding schools accountable for student performance.
These systems differ in many ways.
Yet participants at the field hearings agreed that responsibility for student performance was an important factor in school success.
In Texas, the state holds schools accountable for the performance of all groups of students, not just for overall performance.
Not only must the school as a whole attain a certain level of passing scores on the state test in order to gain recognition, but all groups of students within the school--white, black, Hispanic, and economically disadvantaged students--must reach standards as well.
That provision encourages schools to focus their improvement efforts on the whole school, not just on high-performing students, according to John Stevens.
In Chicago, the district holds both schools and individuals accountable for performance.
Schools that show consistently poor performance are subject to sanctions.
The district has placed 100 schools on probation, and more than 70 percent of these have shown improvement, Paul Vallas, the district's chief executive officer, said at the Chicago hearing.
Schools that fail to improve can be "re-engineered," Vallas said.
In that situation, the district "declares martial law" and institutes whatever changes are necessary, including peer evaluations of faculty members.
Thirteen schools have been in that status.
In the most extreme cases of failing performance, schools can be reconstituted.
In that case, the entire faculty and staff are removed and replaced.
In four years, the district has reconstituted seven schools, and another four have been closed and converted.
In addition, teachers' and principals' jobs depend on their performance.
Some 250 teachers have been fired or resigned for academic reasons, Vallas said, and principals can be transferred or dismissed if they are ineffective.
At the same time, the district has rewarded successful teachers by naming them to standards and curriculum committees, and has rewarded principals by assigning them as "probation managers," where they can earn extra money by assisting troubled schools.
7
Students also are accountable for their performance in Chicago.
Students must meet standards in order to be promoted at certain grade levels, and high school students can repeat the core curriculum if they do not succeed.
These accountability measures have helped Chicago raise performance substantially, Vallas said.
Between 35 percent and 40 percent of the district's students are reading at the national average; while that means more than half below the national average, it is a significant increase from 1995 levels.
In addition, the proportion of students at the lowest quartile has been cut in half, from 52 percent to 26 percent, and the exodus of topperforming students from the system has dropped.
And, despite fears that higher standards would increase the number of students who dropout of school, the dropout rates have actually declined three years in a row.
Accountability is also a driving force in schools of choice.
These schools must show results or parents will take their children elsewhere.
The Community Magnet School, a 360-pupil K-5 school in Los Angeles, was created by parents in 1970 to preserve racial diversity, and it remains a school of choice.
Parents have been involved in selecting the faculty, and have helped lead the school on its improvement efforts.
"The community's accountability for the school set high expectations for everyone," says Pamela Marton, the principal.
Likewise, charter schools not only old themselves accountable to parents who choose to attend, they also are accountable for their existence.
If they do not perform adequately, their charter may not be renewed.
That responsibility is the flip side of the flexibility they enjoy to pursue whatever programs they feel will benefit students.
Yvonne Chan, the principal of the Vaughn Learning Center in Los Angeles, accepted that bargain as a way of turning around the attitudes in her school.
Originally built in 1950, the 1,200-pupil pre-K-5 school was in dire straits when she took over in the early 1990s.
But in 1993, the school elected to become the first big-city school to convert to charter status.
That meant that "the handcuffs were off, and the accountability was on," Chan said at the Alhambra hearing.
But in addition to its accountability to the chartering authority and the community, the most significant accountability was internal, Chan says.
That meant that the entire faculty had to take ownership in the school and have a stake in the school's success.
Using Data to Drive Improvement While accountability creates incentive for improvement, the data that schools collect and publish to hold themselves accountable for performance can also contribute to improvement.
Successful schools, districts, and states use data wisely to determine where they are successful, where they need to direct their improvement efforts, and how to allocate resources appropriately.
One important source of data is information about how other countries perform.
The First in the World Consortium, a group of districts in the Chicago area, used international
8
data to compare their own practices with those of the highest performing nations in the world.
Although the districts in the consortium were considered high performing, officials there knew that they could perform even better, especially when compared with other countries, according to Paul Kimmelman, the superintendent of the West Northfield (IL) School District No. 31, a member of the consortium.
"The fact is that the students we are educating today will be working in a global marketplace," he said at the Chicago hearing.
"The standards are set on an international basis."
The data the consortium used drew from the Third International Mathematics and Science Study, the most extensive cross-national examination of achievement ever undertaken.
As part of the study, researchers examined the curriculum in some 50 countries and developed what they termed General Topic Tracing Maps, which enabled them to see which topics in mathematics and science were taught in each country, and at which grade level.
Using the maps, the First in the World officials examined their own curricula and compared them to those of the five highest-performing nations.
They also analyzed the curricula to determine the breadth of topics covered, the length of time they remained in the curricula, and the coherence from year to year.
"The breadth, flow, and duration influence rigor," Kimmelman said, noting that in general, the U.S. curriculum is not rigorous enough because it contains too many topics that are repeated from year to year.
In addition to looking at the curriculum comparatively, the consortium officials also studied their own performance data to see how well students performed in mathematics.
This information helped them determine that some topics were not taught in an appropriate grade, since students did not do well.
As a result of the two analyses, the officials adjusted the curriculum, and moved topics to grades where students could profitably learn from it.
"All of this started with large-scale assessment data," Kimmelman said.
The state of Minnesota also looked at international data in an effort to improve its own performance.
The state administered TIMSS to a sample of its own students to see how Minnesota fourth and eighth graders compared with students from other nations in mathematics and science.
William H. Schmidt, the U.S. national research director for TIMSS, called Minnesota's decision a bold move, since the state has traditionally performed relatively well compared to other states on the National Assessment of Educational Progress.
"Minnesota could have rested on its laurels," Schmidt said.
"They too risks and looked internationally."
The results showed an interesting pattern that enabled researchers to discover clues that might help the state improve its practices.
Like those nationwide, the study found, Minnesota fourth graders performed relatively well; in science, Minnesota was outperformed by only one nation.
At eighth grade, though, the story was different.
In mathematics, the results were similar to those of the United States as a whole; Minnesota performed at about the international average.
But in science, Minnesota's eighth graders performed very well.
They vastly outperformed the United States average and performed second only to Singapore.
9
The differential performance at eighth grade helped pinpoint a possible reason: since the same students took both the mathematics and science tests, the results must have had something to do with the way the two subjects were taught.
Examining state practices more closely, the researchers found a significant difference.
In science, they found, the state had "de facto" standards that as many as 97 percent of schools adhered to.
These standards, moreover, were coherent.
The curriculum was focused on a small number of topics, taught in depth, and the teaching went beyond rote learning.
"This combination appears to be associated with high performance," Schmidt said.
In contrast, in mathematics, there were no de facto standards.
The curriculum was overstuffed with topics, as was the case in the United States as a whole, and many of them were relatively basic topics that other countries expected their students to master in elementary school.
Thus the international data helped Minnesota determine its strengths and weaknesses and what it might do to improve performance.
Other schools looked closer to home, but also found data valuable in driving improvement.
For the Brazosport, TX, Independent School District, a diverse 13,500pupil district located 50 miles from Houston on the Texas Gulf Coast, achievement data was both the spur for its improvement effort and the means by which the district went about improving.
According to Gerald Anderson, Brazosport's superintendent of schools, the district's reform effort began in 1991, after data from the state testing program revealed large gaps in performance among different racial and ethnic groups.
Parents started asking some difficult questions about the gaps, and the school board directed him to find answers.
At the urging of the board and the invitation of the Dow Chemical Company, which operates its largest plant in the district, Anderson attended a workshop led by W. Edwards Deming, who had written and spoken extensively about quality in business.
With the help of representatives from Dow, Anderson began quality management for administrators and faculty in 1993, and then instituted a version for schools, known as the Eight Step Instructional Process, in the district's poorest campus.
After that school showed remarkable success, the process was instituted district-wide.
Under the system, a school begins by analyzing data, and uses that data to set priorities and develop an instructional focus.
The school then assesses progress and determines whether students have mastered the material, in which case they receive enrichment, or have not, in which case they receive intensive tutorials.
The school then develops a plan to maintain the system year after year.
The results of the process are impressive.
At the outset of the district's quality journey, in 1991, the district's overall performance on statewide tests was relatively low, and there were wide gaps in performance among racial and economic groups.
By 1998-99, more than 90 percent of all students passed state tests in reading, writing, and mathematics, and the gaps had narrowed substantially.
10
These results have won the district recognition statewide and nationally.
Brazosport won the Texas Quality Award from the Texas Quality Foundation in 1998, the first school district to win that state-level award.
The district has also earned an exemplary rating from the Texas Education Agency in 1997-98 and 1998-99, and is the largest district in the state to earn that designation.
Brazosport was also one of the first education organizations to apply for the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, a program that honors organizations that have attained the highest standard of performance, and the district was a finalist in 1999.
The use of data is a way of life for schools and school systems that have adopted the Baldrige criteria as a reform strategy.
At Azalea Elementary School in St. Petersburg, Florida, everyone--students, teachers, and parents--knows what their goals are, what the data show about their progress toward the goals, and where they need to improve.
For teachers, the system has improved the way they teach, according to Delores Shippelo, a teacher at Azalea.
Before using the Baldrige criteria, she said at the teleconference, she would follow the teachers' manual, "if the children needed instruction in compound words or not."
Now, she said, she sets goals and analyzes data against the goals, and adjusts her teaching depending on where the students are strong or weak.
Students at the school use the their goals.
The students take As one fifth grader noted, the my grades were," the student data themselves to see how they are progressing against three tests a year, and chart their scores on the data board.
information is helpful.
"A while back, I didn't know what said at the teleconference."
Such self-analysis gives students more responsibility over their own learning.
Joe Grady, a social studies teacher at Bonnie Eagle High School in the Bonnie Eagle School District in Maine, said that formerly he told students how to do things and when to do them.
Now he "sits back and lets them happen."
Bonnie Eagle adopted the Baldrige criteria as a comprehensive school reform model under the federal Comprehensive School Reform Demonstration program.
Sheila Jepsen, the school's principal, said at the teleconference that the system enables the school to organize and focus the many programs and activities it operates.
Most of these activities are worthwhile, she noted, but in the past they had become "random acts," rather than an aligned system moving the school toward its goals.
Jepsen noted that some teachers have been reluctant to embrace the new system, but said that leadership--and results--will bring everyone aboard.
"We're not asking anyone to do anything differently, just think about it differently," she said.
"The data will convince people to come along.
We're beginning to think we have results.
When we share them, people will be convinced."
While the Baldrige criteria have helped schools, in Indiana, the state department of public instruction and school districts have used the process to improve their administrative operations as well.
Indiana is one of six states that are part of the Baldrige in Education
11
Initiative (BIE-IN) that aim to incorporate the Baldrige criteria into state planning.
During the April teleconference, Governor Frank O'Bannon called Baldrige a "commonsense approach" that helps ensure that the state's policies are all aligned to meet the state's goals.
In Indiana, the process began with an informal roundtable of 25 stakeholders, including political leaders, parents, educators, teacher organization leaders, community leaders, business leaders, and high education officials.
The officials avoided turf battles because they agreed on the goal of improving outcomes for all students, Governor O'Bannon said.
Using the process has helped administrators improve the way they manage school systems.
Suellen Reed, the state's superintendent of public instruction, has implemented the Baldrige criteria into the management of the state department.
That helps her convince local districts to implement the process as well.
"Do as I do, not as I say," she tells them.
Another state that is using data to help local schools improve their management and performance is Illinois.
There, the state department of education is expanding its web site to include performance and financial data for every school.
This will enable schools to compare their performance with the state and with comparable schools across the state, according to State Superintendent of Public Instruction Glenn "Max" McGee.
In addition, he said at the Chicago hearing, the web site will include a feature similar to "Turbo-Tax" software that will enable schools to use performance data in developing improvement plans.
Improving Teacher Quality Researchers are now moving toward a consensus that the most important factor in improving student achievement is the quality of teachers.
The importance of enhancing teacher quality is especially acute now; because of rising student enrollments and impending retirements, the nation is expected to hire more than 2 million new teachers over the next decade, and many policy makers and educators are growing concerned over whether they will be able to find enough qualified applicants.
In addition, by many measures the current teaching force is ill equipped to meet the demands that educating all students to high standards place on them.
For example, as the National Education Goals Panel found, the proportion of secondary school teachers with an undergraduate or graduate degree in their main teaching assignment declined between 1991 and 1994, to 63 percent.
At the Burlington hearing, Richard Askey, the John Bascom professor of mathematics at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, said the mathematical knowledge of prospective elementary school teachers is far below of that expected in high-performing Asian nations.
For example, he has studied the entrance examinations for Japanese universities, and called attention to five questions asked for admission to the education division of Shiga University (Shiga Prefecture is the sister state to Wisconsin).
Askey reported that,
12
of the prospective elementary teachers he has taught, "I have never had a student who could have done more than one of these five problems, and almost all would not have known how to start any of them."
He noted that the problems were not elementarymathematics problems, but rather the kind of mathematics all elementary teachers should know.
Askey said he has also administered to prospective teachers questions included in the eighth grade test of the Third International Mathematics and Science Study.
The college students' results were "a bit better than the international average for eighth grade students, but not much better."
Joan Herman of UCLA succinctly summarized the issue in her presentation at the Alhambra hearing.
When asked what else, in addition to standards and assessments, is needed to improve student performance, particularly for low-income and minority children, Herman replied: "Teacher quality, teacher quality, teacher quality, teacher quality."
What are states and districts doing to address the problem? One step is to recruit more able teachers.
The Chicago Public Schools aggressively recruits teachers from elsewhere in the country and around the world, Paul Vallas said at the Chicago hearing.
The district also has the authority to place such teachers in schools, he said, which helps ensure that the most troubled schools--those where teachers are reluctant to teach--are staffed by the most qualified teachers.
Other states are taking steps to set higher standards for teachers and improve their preparation prior to entering the classroom.
Connecticut offers one example.
Fourth graders in the Nutmeg State in 1998 had the highest scores in the nation on the National Assessment of Educational Progress reading test, and the state had shown the greatest improvement in reading from 1992 to 1998.
In an effort to understand the factors that contributed to these results, the National Education Goals Panel asked Joan Boykoff Baron, an education consultant, to study the results and the state's efforts.
Baron found that the gains on NAEP were consistent with those on Connecticut's statewide tests, suggesting that they represented real improvements in achievement.
she found that the state's wealth and high level of parental education, traditional explanations for the state's high educational performance, did not explain the gains 1990s.
Although Connecticut had the highest per capita income at the beginning of decade, its wealth actually declined in absolute terms and in comparison with other even as its reading performance increased.
And in the the states,
In interviews with officials at the state and district levels, Baron found that state education policies and local practices contributed to improved performance in reading.
Chief among these policies was the state test, which officials said provided them with a clear sense of the standards they were expected to help students reach and with detailed and useful data on student performance.
The state's efforts to direct resources to lowperforming schools and districts also were associated with higher performance.
13
Also high among the factors associated with improved performance were state policies regarding teaching.
In 1986, Connecticut passed a landmark Educational Enhancement Act, which raised teacher salaries considerably--they are now among the highest in the nation--and set high standards for entry into the profession and continued professional development.
A significant aspect of the system is a program that provides mentorship and support to beginning teachers, to help them prepare for an assessment they need to pass in order to earn a full license.
In addition to the benefits this program provides to the new teachers, the program, known as Beginning Educator Support and Training (BEST), also helps the experienced teachers who serve as mentors and assessors.
According to Baron, districts reported that the experienced teachers learned as much about such areas as reading and technology from the novice teachers as the beginning teachers learned from them.
Yet despite this improvement, Connecticut still has a long way to go to raise reading performance.
Although its NAEP results placed them at the top of the states, fewer than half of Connecticut's fourth graders attained the proficient level on the exam.
And the state must do more to improve the knowledge and skills of prospective teachers, Baron said.
"Do teachers have the knowledge required to effectively teach students to read? No."
Another strategy to improve the quality of teaching is to focus on professional development for teachers already in the classroom.
One district that has earned wide acclaim for its efforts to improve instructional quality is Community District 2 in New York City.
According to Bea Johnstone, the district's deputy superintendent, the effort began a decade ago with a vision that student learning depended on high-quality instruction, and that high-quality instruction required continuous learning by everyone in the system--administrators as well as teachers.
To build such learning, District 2 has dedicated 8 percent of its budget to professional development ($11 million in fiscal 1999), and has created a number of structures to help teachers and administrators improve their knowledge and skills.
These include schoolbased staff development; a professional development laboratory, which provides intensive three-week programs; coaching by Distinguished Teachers; a special 10-week course in early literacy; and other efforts.
But as Professor Richard Elmore of Harvard University, who has studied District 2's efforts, has pointed out, professional development is not an add-on to the system; it is part and parcel of the work of all teachers and administrators.
The district has built an unusual accountability system in which principals develop detailed professional development plans based on needs (as determined by extensive data from a variety of assessments), and the district holds the principals accountable for meeting their goals.
As Deputy Superintendent, Johnstone said, she is in schools four days a week meeting with principals to monitor their progress; principals are expected to conduct similar "walkthroughs" with teachers.
14
The results of these efforts have been dramatic improvements in student performance.
The district ranks second among New York's 32 community districts in reading and mathematics; in 1988, before it launched its reform effort, District 2 ranked 10th in reading and fifth in mathematics.
And on the state's fourth grade reading test, the proportion of District 2 students who performed at or above standards was nearly twice as high as the citywide average (61.8 percent, compared with 32.8 percent).
But others at the Burlington hearing noted that districts and states face major challenges in providing the kind of professional development teachers require.
David S. Wolk, Vermont's commissioner of education, said one of the major challenges in improving teacher quality is time.
The 178 instructional days and 8 professional development days are insufficient to enable teachers to learn all they need.
"We've got to view the work of educators as a year-round activity, and compensate them accordingly," Wolk said.
Vartan Gregorian, the president of the Carnegie Corporation of New York, said that the salaries teachers receive make it difficult to recruit well-qualified individuals into the profession and to retain them.
He said at the Burlington hearing that the compensation teachers receive, and the position they hold in society, places teaching in second-class status.
"We pay more to the mechanics who repair our cars, the plumbers who fix our sinks, and the accountants who do our taxes" than we pay teachers, he noted.
Yet teachers are the ones to whom "we entrust the most precious possessions we have: our children."
Some schools and districts are experimenting with new pay structures that boost salaries for better-performing teachers.
Such structures may make teaching more attractive for well-qualified individuals, who might have been discouraged by the single salary scale available in most districts, and they encourage teachers to improve their performance.
The Vaughn Learning Center in Los Angeles, for example, has given teachers a financial stake in the success of the school.
Adopting an unusual salary structure, the school offers teachers a choice over how they want to be paid: strictly by seniority, or with a base salary and a $13,000 bonus based on performance.
In addition, the school pays everyone on staff a bonus of $1,500 if the school's average score on the statewide test increases by 3 percentage points.
The school also offers teachers stock options, and 59 teachers have opted into the plan.
Allan Odden, a professor of education at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, has worked with other states and districts to redesign the way in which teachers are paid.
By paying teachers based on their ability to teach, states and districts can improve schooling by encouraging teachers to improve their skills.
Currently, in most states and school districts, all teachers are paid at about the same level.
They can earn raises through seniority and through additional coursework.
These increases reflect the belief that teachers who know more about teaching should be paid more than other teachers.
More experienced teachers and those who have taken additional coursework presumably have higher levels of knowledge and skills than
15
novice teachers and those with less professional development.
However this is just a presumption.
States and districts do not know whether more experienced teachers and those who have accumulated coursework actually know more than others, and they do not know whether their additional knowledge is at all related to an improved ability to teach.
Odden's plan would tie teachers' pay directly to the knowledge and skills they need to be effective teachers.
The more expertise they have, the better they are paid.
To create the new salary structure, states must start with standards for teachers that outline what teachers need to know and be able to do in order to teach the standards states have set for students.
These standards should be developed in levels, from novice to expert, that show the paths teachers can climb as they accumulate knowledge and skills.
States then must create performance assessments that measure whether teachers have the required abilities.
The first district to adopt such a system was Cincinnati, where the teachers' union approved the plan in September 2000.
Odden said similar proposals are under consideration in Iowa and Nebraska.
In all places, he said, unions support the plans as long as they are accompanied by increases in salary.
The second part of Odden's proposal would provide rewards to schools for improved performance.
This kind of system is more common than revamped salary structures; some version of it is in place in about 20 states.
Odden said the programs work if the targets are seen as reachable and the rewards are significant--about $2,000 per teacher.
"This is not cheap," Odden said.
"But they do focus teachers at the ground level on the most important goals of the school system."
While these efforts to recruit more able teachers to the profession, improve their preparation and professional development, and pay them more for improved performance have shown success, many participants at the hearings acknowledged that the nation has more to do to improve teacher quality.
As Senator James Jeffords of Vermont, a Goals Panel member, said at the Burlington hearing: "Supporting teachers must be the foundation of education reform.
But we have not done enough to help them be at the top of their game."
One area where participants agreed that more must be done is in the preparation of teachers.
Some universities, such as the University of Georgia system, have strengthened their programs for preparing teachers to ensure that they are qualified to enter the profession.
Significantly, the teacher education reforms involve both schools of education and colleges of arts and sciences.
"Teacher preparation is an entire university's responsibility," Chancellor Portch said.
Under the new requirements, the university requires prospective secondary teachers to major in the subject they plan to teach, and prospective elementary teachers to have an academic minor in mathematics or English.
The university also offers a "guarantee" to school districts: if districts are not satisfied with the teachers who graduate from the university, the university will provide a remedy at no cost to districts or students.
16
Portch also noted that the university has reached out to businesses to find individuals interested in starting a second career as a teacher.
They have also helped school bus drivers and lunchroom workers earn teaching credentials.
These programs provide intensive training in classroom management for people with strong subject-matter backgrounds.
"You don't dump somebody with an engineering degree in a classroom without backup," he said.
But as Vartan Gregorian noted, efforts such as the University of Georgia's are rare.
In most institutions, teacher education has "second class status," and most place responsibility, inappropriately, on schools of education.
Although teachers receive coursework in pedagogy from education schools, he noted, they receive instruction in content areas from the schools of arts and sciences.
Gregorian said universities should be held accountable for ensuring that teachers are prepared to enter classrooms.
"It does no good to blame teachers for being ill-prepared," said Gregorian, the former president of Brown University.
"They came to us in good conscience, went to accredited colleges, received scholarships, and received a diploma.
It is time to hold institutions [of higher education] liable and accountable for the education of teachers."
Expanding the School Day and Year Educators increasingly recognize that the traditional education system focused more on the time students spent in class than what they learned.
All students attended the same six-hour day and 180-day year.
Some learned a great deal and performed well, and others did less well.
Regardless of performance, they all generally went on to the next grade, and the next, until they finished 12th grade and graduated.
The standards movement was intended to change all that.
It set out expectations that all students were expected to learn.
That implied that the traditional equation, in which time was constant and learning varied, would have to change as well.
Now, since the level of learning would be fixed, by the standards, the amount of time students took to learn what they needed to learn would have to vary.
Not all schools and school systems have made the adjustment.
In some, the implementation of standards preceded the changes in school structures.
"We've got twenty-first century standards and a nineteenth century school system," said William Henderson, the principal of O'Hearn Elementary School in Boston.
The experience of a few successful schools and school systems can point the way.
These schools and systems have developed creative strategies for extending the school day and year and providing students with the instructional support they need to reach challenging standards.
Mona Parras, the principal of Mission Junior High School in Mission, TX, recognized that students could not reach the high expectations the school set without additional time.
17
So the school added a 10th period, to provide an extended day for students who needed extra assistance.
But to make that work, she had to convince parents to let the children stay another 45 minutes.
After bringing the parents in and explaining the need, the program now has a 100 percent participation rate.
Other schools added time, and enlisted parents to help, by offering learning activities outside of school.
Both O'Hearn Elementary School in Boston and the Community Magnet School in Los Angeles provide reading programs in which parents help students read in evenings and weekends.
O'Hearn encourages students to read at home at least four times a week for 20 to 30 minutes each.
By rewarding students who meet the goals and visiting students at home who do not, the school has increased the proportion of students who read at home regularly from 50 percent to 95 percent.
Similarly, the Community Magnet School created a Saturday "Reading Club" for African American students, in which teachers and parents meet with students to discuss highquality books of interest to them.
Parents buy the books and lead the discussions.
Community members also serve as mentors for about a third of Community Magnet's students, meeting with them one-on-one for an hour a week.
According to Pamela Marton, the school's principal, the students involved in the mentoring program have improved their academic performance and are less likely to be referred to the principal for disciplinary problems.
The Coca-Cola Valued Youth Program is a way of providing extended time and assistance for two groups of students: older youths who are at risk of dropping out of school and younger pupils who need instructional help.
The program was created in 1984 with the idea that youths are more likely to stay in school if they themselves are valued.
And they can be valued by serving as tutors to younger children.
"The participating tutors are used to receiving help.
They are never asked to provide help," said Maria Robledo Montecel, the executive director of the Intercultural Development Research Association, the San Antonio-based organization that directs the program.
Under the program, youths work with about three children for an hour a day, four days a week.
They are paid a stipend equivalent to the minimum wage.
They also take classes to develop tutoring skills.
Since its inception, some 9,000 youths have gone through the program.
Evaluations have shown that the tutors have improved their grades, they show up in school more often, and show up in the principal's office less often, according to Montecel.
And most significantly, they remain in school.
Although the program is targeted at potential dropouts, only 2 percent of the participants have left school before earning a diploma.
In addition to extending the school day, schools and districts have also added time to the school year to provide intensive instructional support for students who need it.
One of the most extensive summer programs is in Chicago, which created summer-school instruction for some 210,000 students who have not met standards for promotion at
18
designated grades.
The program uses a specially designed curriculum and specially trained teachers, and has produced average gains in student achievement of 8 months to one year--all in a six-week course.
As the Chicago experience demonstrates, how schools use the time is more important than the amount of time students attend classes.
William H. Schmidt, the TIMSS research director, pointed out at the Chicago hearing that the United States spends more time in mathematics instruction than does Japan, even though Japan's school year is considerably longer.
Yet as the study showed, the instructional practices in the two countries are considerably different and the achievement results are significantly different as well.
Support for Children and Families While providing instructional support is essential, successful schools and school systems have also found that they need to provide health and social services to children and their families to help students reach high standards.
Particularly in areas with large numbers of low-income students, many children come to school without the health, nutrition, and learning support that other children have and that make them ready to learn.
Schools are providing these services so that all students are prepared to reach the high expectations they have set.
For example, Chicago purchased eyeglasses for thousands of students.
"We found that many kids who fail the eighth grade test fail their eye exams too," said Paul Vallas.
Other schools, such as Mission Junior High School and Vaughn Learning Center, agreed to provide breakfast to all students, not just those who qualified under the federal program, to ensure that all students began the day with the proper nutritional start.
Other places created institutional structures to provide health and social services to children and families.
As part of its landmark Education Reform Act, Kentucky addressed the needs of families by creating Family Resource Centers and Youth Services Centers in schools.
These centers connect families to a wide array of services-- providing clothes, health services, support for victims of abuse, and more.
Any school with at least 20 percent of its students eligible for free and reduced-price lunches is eligible for a center.
Next year, according to Robert Goodlett, who directs the program for the state Cabinet of Families and Children, the centers for the first time will be fully funded; currently there are 702 serving 1,084 of the state's 1,400 schools.
Goodlett said at the Atlanta hearing that the centers help improve students' academic performance by removing some the out-of-school barriers that impede their achievement.
But in addition, the centers also reinforce teachers' belief in students' abilities by convincing teachers that children's out-of-school problems need not stop them from performing at high levels.
"I realized that not a high percentage of teachers bought into the idea that all students will learn, most at high levels," Goodlett said.
"The centers
19
helped turn that belief around.
They help every child come to school ready to learn, every day."
Another effort to help families and support children's learning also started in Kentucky.
The Lexington-based National Center for Family Literacy, which coordinates some 6,000 family-literacy efforts around the nation, was started with the idea that children will only learn at high levels if their parents are literate as well.
The centers provide instruction for parents, efforts to help parents feel good about schools (this is important, since many had bad experiences in school), and helping parents help their children learn.
The programs have been a "resounding success," according to Sharon Darling, the director of the National Center for Family Literacy.
More than 7,500 families have participated, and their children rank high on many indicators of academic success, she noted.
In addition, many of the participating parents have gone on to earn General Educational Development certificates, and many have gone on to higher education.
Yet even with such success, the programs reach only about 5 percent--"on a good day," Darling said at the Atlanta hearing--of the parents who can benefit from them.
Other schools have started similar efforts to assist parents.
The Vaughn Learning Center, for example, provides support to parents by creating a "career ladder" for them, giving them opportunities to volunteer in various capacities and gain experience that could help them land a job.
The school also provides preparation for parents studying to earn a General Educational Development certificate; 69 percent of parents in the community lack a high school diploma.
Vermont has started a program to link schools with children and parents long before the children enroll.
Under that program, known as "Success by Six," school officials meet with parents even before the child is born, and maintain contact during the early years.
Among other efforts, Alice W. Angney, superintendent of schools of the Lemoille South Supervisory Union, said at the Burlington hearing, the school officials encourage adult and child literacy, and forge links with service providers.
Linking Schools and Businesses Efforts to link schools and businesses are a recurring motif in reform efforts.
Businesses have an obvious interest in ensuring that schools are as good as they can be, and they bring resources to assist schools in their reform efforts that might not be available from other sources.
Successful schools and schools systems have been able to forge important partnerships with businesses to take advantage of their resources and expertise.
In Dade County, Florida, the school district and businesses decided to connect physically.
The school district has located four schools on business sites.
The idea began with a partnership between the district and an insurance company, said Susan Lehrman, the principal of Miami Springs Elementary School, which supports a
20
school located at Miami International Airport.
The business agreed to provide a facility, maintenance, and security, and the state provides them with a tax incentive.
The school district agreed to provide teachers and curriculum materials.
The idea has now spread to three other sites.
Businesses believed that having a school on site would help them recruit and retain employees.
Schools believed the partnership would increase parent involvement in the schools.
And, according to Lehrman, both predictions came true.
Businesses are seeing a sharp drop in absenteeism (down 30 percent at the insurance company), and schools are seeing a huge increase in parent involvement.
Parents are so supportive that they petitioned the district to expand the airport-based school beyond its original grades, K-2, to include grades 3-5 as well.
"Parents are always there," Horace Sinclair, whose two children attended Miami Springs Elementary, said at the Atlanta hearing.
Businesses also provide important political support to help bolster reform efforts in states and districts that face challenges.
John Stevens of Texas noted at the Alhambra hearing that the support of businesses was crucial in helping that state stay on its reform course.
Businesses helped form an infrastructure, including the creation of the coalition he heads, that provided continued support for the reform effort and helped legislators fend off critics.
Another important resource businesses provide is expertise about what they know best-- managing complex organizations.
While businesses recognize that teachers and principals are experts in curriculum and instruction, they often need help in areas like personnel and finance, where businesses have a lot of expertise to offer.
Businesses are eager to share their knowledge with schools, yet they often find resistance, said Larry Goolsby of the University of South Florida, who has worked with the Pinellas County schools in implementing the Baldrige criteria.
"I wish I had a nickel every time someone said, `That won't work in education,'" Goolsby said at the teleconference.
"We're not telling people what to teach.
It's how to manage a business.
And a school is a big business."
Policy Implications The many schools, districts, and states represented at the national teleconference and the field hearings offer a wide range of approaches to improving learning for all students.
Yet these approaches shared many common themes.
And they demonstrate that state policies can make a difference in bringing all students to high standards.
Above all, the schools and school districts that are showing signs of success suggest that the strategies states began to undertake in the past decade to set high standards for student performance are contributing to improved performance.
The stories told at the field hearings present a strong argument for staying the reform course, while making some appropriate corrections, rather than abandoning it in the face of opposition from vocal critics.
21
However, the hearings also make it clear that simply expecting students to reach challenging goals is not enough.
Successful schools and school systems also have in place policies and practices to support schools, teachers, students, and families to ensure that students attain the high expectations set for them.
Although states do not provide all the support needed, they can serve as a catalyst to help schools obtain the resources that will support their efforts to improve learning for all students.
The discussions at the teleconference and hearings suggest the following implications for state policy: Overhaul leadership development.
An unstated, but prevalent, message at all of the field hearings was the vital importance of strong leadership.
All of the schools and school systems represented at the hearings had at the helm a leader with the vision to imagine schools where all students reach challenging expectations for performance, and the creativity and resourcefulness to move toward realizing the vision.
American education has always had such leaders; the challenge now is to make them the norm, not the exception.
Qualified leaders can accomplish many of the successful practices identified at the hearings: using data to improve performance, planning and evaluating professional development, taking advantage of extended learning time, and enlisting support from businesses.
Yet the preparation of leaders may not equip candidates to perform these tasks.
States have understandably focused on addressing the supply of well-qualified teachers, because of the well-publicized need for new teachers in the next decade, but few states have tackled the problem of school leadership.
The solutions should be similar.
First, states should define the qualities of effective leadership and revamp professional training programs to emphasize such qualities.
As the testimony at the hearings revealed, leaders are expected to use data to improve their programs, evaluate the quality of instruction, and tap a wide range of resources to support improvements, among other skills.
Yet the preparation of principals and other administrators does not always develop these abilities.
Improving the preparation of leaders starts with standards, just like improving student performance.
As a second step, states should create incentives for capable individuals to become administrators and to remain on the job.
In part, changing the job description can help.
One reason well-qualified teachers are reluctant to enter administration is their fear that they would be leaving behind the instructional responsibilities they like and excel at.
By focusing administrators' jobs on instructional leadership, states can help encourage great teachers to become school leaders.
But states can do more as well.
Just as states are looking outside of traditional routes to find teacher candidates, they can also try to recruit school leaders from non-traditional positions, such as business and the military.
And states can consider new salary
22
structures, such as ones Allan Odden is developing for teachers, to encourage accomplished leaders to stay in the profession.
Invest in high-quality professional development.
High standards pose a challenge for teachers, most of whom are not prepared to teach all students to high levels.
Teachers need support to be able to meet those demands.
And all teachers benefit from continually upgrading their knowledge and skills.
The experience of places like Connecticut and Community District 2 in New York City, which have placed improving the teaching force at the heart of their reform efforts, shows that such efforts pay off in improved student learning.
But they also show that such improvements do not come easily or cheaply.
Connecticut spends substantial sums to pay its teachers high salaries and has built an elaborate system of support for new teachers, and District 2 commits millions of dollars to professional development and offers a wide range of programs to enhance teacher learning.
But both regard these expenditures as investments, and they have seen many benefits.
In addition to improved student performance, both Connecticut and District 2 report that experienced teachers also benefit from the learning opportunities they provide.
And neither faces a teacher shortage, unlike many other states and urban districts.
Teachers want to teach in those places.
Therefore, states need to dedicate a substantial portion quality professional development and provide time for opportunities.
High quality professional development content teachers are expected to teach, and it is linked expected to meet.
of their education budgets on high teachers to participate in such is sustained, it is focused on the to the standards students are
States can also invest in teacher learning, as Connecticut does, by setting high standards for teachers entering the profession, providing support for new teachers, and requiring teachers to upgrade their knowledge and skills in order to keep their teaching certificates.
States can also, like District 2, offer teachers an array of professional development options that provide them with opportunities to learn to teach to standards.
States should place the highest professional development priority on low-performing schools.
Create P-16 councils to link elementary and secondary schools with higher education.
In many states, higher education has been a missing partner in standards-based reform.
In part, higher education's absence reflects the institutional structures that in most states separate K-12 and postsecondary education.
Whatever the cause, the result is what Stephen Portch of the University of Georgia said is a system of blame, in which college and university professors lament the quality of entering students without taking any responsibility for improving their quality.
This situation can change if states create links between elementary and secondary schools and the university system.
Although the projects they undertake jointly can vary, such P16 councils can produce numerous benefits.
As Portch noted, they can result in the development of common expectations for high school graduation and university entrance
23
that will help ensure that students who enter the university system will possess the knowledge and skills they need, thus eliminating the need for remediation.
The links also can help inform students of the expectations they will have to meet, and help universities retool their teacher preparation programs to help ensure that teachers are qualified to teach to the standards.
And, as Portch noted, teacher education is the responsibility of the university--schools of arts and sciences and schools of education.
Portch also noted that the P-16 councils have also provided some unexpected benefits as well.
University students who have served as mentors for middle and high school students visiting the campuses have changed their career aspirations and now plan to be teachers, he said.
And the conversations among high school teachers and university professors about standards for student performance have been extraordinarily enriching for both groups.
"These are some of the most productive and greatest conversations I have heard," he said.
"I don't care what they talk about.
It is imperative that faculty are talking to one another.
Until they do that, you don't have an aligned system."
Provide high-quality instruction after school and in summers for students who need additional help.
Despite some exceptions, the traditional clock and calendar reign in many school systems, and students who need instructional support to meet challenging standards cannot get help.
If states are serious about improving learning for all students, though, this must change.
States must extend the school day and year to support all students' learning at high levels.
The first step in providing appropriate instructional support is identifying students who are falling behind.
Chicago uses scores on its gateway tests; other districts and states use "early warning" assessments to see which students need additional help.
States then must provide the resources for instructional support, after school, on weekends, or during the summer.
Because the students who need support are those who have struggled in regular classrooms, the quality of instruction in the after-school and summer programs is critical.
States should provide incentives for capable teachers to teach in those programs, and should consider the use of specially designed curricula, as Chicago does.
Provide additional support for children and families.
Many of the schools and school systems that participated at the hearings recognized that many students face barriers outside of school that impede their readiness to learn.
They took it upon themselves to provide students and their families with nutritional, health, and social services.
Many of these services already exist.
What the schools have done is coordinate them and make sure they are available to students and families.
States should consider programs like Kentucky's, which establishes services centers in schools to coordinate services for children, youth, and families.
24
Schools also have created new services.
One that has proved beneficial is literacy instruction for parents.
Providing such instruction might require additional resources, but doing so fits within the mission of the schools.
And it helps student learning by enabling parents to help their children learn.
States should consider ways that schools can provide literacy services to parents.
Consider new management arrangements.
Schools and school systems are complex organizations.
They employ large numbers of people, provide food, transportation, and health services, in addition to educating young people, and they operate within political environments in which elected officials play a large role in setting policy and overseeing operations.
Managing such organizations is a complex task.
And if school leaders are to place a greater emphasis on instructional matters, as proposed above, the job of management might require a different arrangement.
A number of urban systems are attempting to split the management and educational functions of leadership by naming a chief executive officer to control the finances and administration, and a chief educational officer to oversee the teaching and learning.
States should consider waivers and other policies that might allow districts to continue on this path.
Short of creating a new position to oversee management functions, school systems should consider seeking help from businesses.
As Larry Goolsby of the University of South Florida pointed out, this is an area where business has expertise that schools need, and businesses are willing to lend it.
Stay the course.
State policies that are successful are stable and provide assurances to educators and the public that the rules of the game will not shift constantly.
Such policies provide a steady target toward which schools can aim, and send a signal to recalcitrant reformers that the system is not going to go away.
In such states, policy makers build on existing policies and address gaps or problems that arise.
They do not go off in a new direction every time someone has a good idea.
States policy makers should resist the temptation to try a new direction if the reform has not shown results fast enough.
The effects of stable policies can be seen in states like Texas and Connecticut.
In those states, the state early on established standards and assessments and has maintained the system for a decade or more.
These states have impressive results to show for such policies.
By contrast, California has seen reform winds shift frequently, and has less impressive results.
As the Texas experience shows, business can be a powerful ally in helping stay the reform course.
There, a privately sponsored coalition has continued to advocate for the state reforms and provided support in the legislature to help block attempts at changing course.
25
26
Field Hearing Presenters April 13, 2000 Teleconference on Total Quality Management in Education G. Thomas Houlihan (President and CEO) NC Partnership for Excellence, 221 Main Street, Suite 201, Smithfield, NC 27565 Governor Frank O'Bannon State of Indiana, 206 State House, Indianapolis, IN 46204, Phone: (317) 232-1972 Suellen Reed IN Superintendent of Public Instruction State House,Room 229, 200 West Washington Street, Indianapolis, IN 46204-2798 Honorable Earline Rogers Indiana State Senate, 3636 W. 15th Street, Gary, IN 46404 Honorable Sue Scholer Indiana House of Representatives, 807 Essex Street, West Lafayette, IN 47906 Mark Chestnut Chair, Community Education Coalition, 9567 West Kelly Court, Columbus, IN 47201 Mike Copper (Superintendent) and Robert Williams (President, Board of Trustees) Bartholomew Consolidated School Corporation, 2650 Home Ave., Columbus, IN 47201 Mike Shanesy ISTA Insurance Trust, 150 W. Market St., Suite 830, Indianapolis, IN 46204 Grace Ward (Superintendent) Bonny Eagle School District, P.O. Box 38, Bar Mills, ME 04004 Brenda Clark (Principal) Azalea Elementary School, 1680 74th St., North, St. Petersburg, FL 33710 Gerald Anderson (Superintendent) Brazosport Independent School District, 301 Brazoswood Dr., Freeport, TX 77531 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------For more information on the Baldrige criteria in education, contact: Peggy Siegel, Director, Education Reform, National Alliance of Business, 1201 New York Ave., NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20005-6143.
Phone: (202) 289-2906, Fax: (202) 289-2908.
Email: siegelp@nab.com, or www.nab.com
27
Los Angeles Field Hearing, May 22, 2000 Gail Calhoun (Director, APPLES Program) Valleydale Elementary School, 700 South Lark Ellen Avenue, Azusa, CA 91702 Yvonne Chan (Principal) Vaughn Learning Center, 13330 Vaughn Street, San Fernando, CA 91340 Linda Guthrie (Teacher) Virgil Middle School, 152 North Vermont Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90004 Joan Herman UCLA, 300 Charles E. Young Drive North, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1522 Pamela Marton (Principal) Community Magnet School, 5954 Airdrome Street, Los Angeles, CA 90035 Mona Parras 416 North 4th Street, McAllen, TX 78501 Shiela Smith (Program Director, Gifted 
Information on their programs is available on the U.S. Department of Education web site: www.ed.gov/offices/OERI/BlueRibbonSchools.
For Vaughn, consult the 1996-97 winners.
For the Community Magnet School, consult the 1998-99 winners.
28
Burlington, Vermont Field Hearing, June 1, 2000 Alice Angney (Superintendent) Rutland City School District, 6 Church Street, Rutland, VT 05701 Richard Askey (Professor of Mathematics) University of Wisconsin at Madison, 2105 Regent Street, Madison, WI 53705 Joan Baron (Consultant) 18 Thomas Drive, Storrs, CT 06268 Vartan Gregorian (President) Carnegie Corporation of New York, 437 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10022 William Henderson (Principal) Patrick O'Hearn School, 1669 Dorchester Avenue, Boston, MA 01222 Bea Johnstone (Deputy Superintendent) New York City Schools, 82 Birch Road, Staten Island, NY 10303 David Wolk (VT Commissioner of Education) Vermont Department of Education, 120 State Street, Montpelier, VT 06520 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------More information about the presentations is available for a limited time on the National Education Goals Panel website at: http://www.connective.com/events/goalspanel/june2000.html.
The High Performing Learning Communities project, based at the Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh, has conducted an in-depth study of the policies and practices of Community District #2 in New York City and has produced a number of publications and videotapes about the district.
For more information, contact: High Performance Learning Communities Project, Learning Research and Development Center, University of Pittsburgh, 3939 O'Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260; (412) 6247452; www.lrdc.pitt.edu/hplc/hplc.html.
29
Atlanta Field Hearing, September 19, 2000 Allan Odden (Professor, CPRE) University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1025 W. Johnson St., Madison, WI 53706 Sharon Darling (President, National Center for Family Literacy) 325 W. Main St., Suite 200, Louisville, KY 40202-4251 Robert Goodlett (Director) Family Resource and Youth Services Centers, 275 E. Main St., Frankfort, KY 40621 Susan Lehrman (Principal) Miami Springs Elementary School, 51 Park St., Miami Springs, FL 33166 Mildred Smith (Lead Teacher, Miami International Airport Satellite Learning Center) 1000 Quayside Terrace, Tower Suite #7, Miami, Florida 33138 Horace Sinclair (President and CEO, Petrolink Energy Company) 5600 N.W. 36 St., P.O. Box 524010, Miami, FL 33152-4010 Stephen R. Portch (Chancellor) University of Georgia System, 270 Washington St., S.W., Atlanta, GA 30334 Maria Robledo Montecel (Executive Director, IDRA) 5835 Callaghan Road, Suite 350, San Antonio, TX 78228-1190 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------More information about the National Center for Family Literacy, which Sharon Darling presented, is available from their website: www.famlit.org and the following publications, all published by the center: The Power of Family Literacy Generation to Generation Even Start: An effective literacy program helps families grow toward independence Outcomes and Measures in Family Literacy Programs More information about the Coca Cola Valued Youth Program, which Maria Montecel presented, is available from the Intercultural Development Research Association, www.idra.org.
30
Chicago Field Hearing, October 2, 2000 Paul Kimmelman 1306 Hidden Lake Drive, Buffalo Grove, IL 60089 David Kroeze (Superintendent of Schools, Northbrook School District 27) 1250 Sanders Rd., Northbrook, IL 60062 William H. Schmidt (Executive Director, U.S. National Research Center, TIMSS) Michigan State University, 463 Erickson Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824-1034 John Gardner Milwaukee Board of School Directors, 3135 W. Juneau Ave., Milwaukee, WI 53208 Paul G. Vallas (Chief Executive Officer) 
31
Resources: For Further Reading The following section includes publications that could provide additional information about the topics discussed at the field hearings.
While it is not a comprehensive bibliography, it may point state policymakers to resources that can help in their education efforts.
Total Quality Management in Education National Alliance of Business.
Using Quality to Achieve Standards: How Educators and Business Can Take Action Together.
1201 New York Avenue, NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20005; (800) 787-2848; www.nab.com.
National Education Goals Panel (2000).
Strategies for Meeting High Standards: Quality Management and the Baldrige Criteria in Education.
National Education Goals Panel, 1255 22nd Street, NW, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20037; (202) 724-0015; www.negp.gov.
Siegel, Peggy (1999).
Ramping Up Reform in North Carolina: Aligning Education Rhetoric, Resolve, and Results.
Southeastern Regional Vision for Education (SERVE), Post Office Box 5367, Greensboro, NC 27435; (800) 755-3277; www.serve.org.
Achieving High Standards with Low-Income Students Charles A. Dana Center (1999).
Hope for Urban Education: A Study of Nine HighPerforming, High-Poverty Urban Elementary Schools.
U.S. Department of Education, Planning and Evaluation Service, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20202; (800) USA-LEARN; www.ed.gov.
Education Trust (1999).
Dispelling the Myth: High-Poverty Schools Exceeding Expectations.
Education Trust, 1725 K Street, N.W., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20006; (202) 293-1217; www.edtrust.org.
Elmore, Richard F. and Robert Rothman, eds. (1999).
Testing, Teaching, and Learning: A Guide for States and School Districts.
National Research Council Committee on Title I Testing and Assessment.
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council, 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20418; www.nationalacademies.org.
Ragland, Mary A., Rose Asera, and Joseph F. Johnson, Jr. (1999).
Urgency, Responsibility, and Efficacy: Preliminary Findings of a Study of High-Performing Texas School Districts.
Charles A. Dana Center, University of Texas at Austin, 2901 North IH35, Suite 2.200, Austin, TX 78722-2348; (512) 471-6190; www.starcenter.org.
32
U.S. Education Department (1998).
Turning Around Low-Performing Schools: A Guide for State and Local Leaders.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education.
May 1998.
Teacher Quality Education Trust (1998).
"Good Teaching Matters--How Well-Qualified Teachers Can Close the Gap."
Thinking K-16 Vol. 3, Issue 2.
Education Trust, 1725 K Street, N.W., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20006; (202) 293-1217; www.edtrust.org.
National Commission on Teaching and America's Future (1996).
What Matters Most: Teaching for America's Future.
National Commission on Teaching and America's Future, Teachers College, Columbia University, Box 117, 525 West 120th Street, New York, NY 10027; (888) 492-1241; www.tc.columbia.edu/~teachcom.
New School Structures Center for the Study of Social Policy (1994).
Services and Supports to Improve Outcomes for Children and Families.
Washington, DC: Center for the Study of Social Policy.
1250 Eye Street N.W. Suite 503, Washington D.C. 20005, (202) 371-1565; www.cssp.org.
Consortium for Policy Research in Education (2000).
Bridging the K-12/Postsecondary Divide with a Coherent K-16 System.
CPRE Policy Brief RB-31.
June 2000.
Consortium for Policy Research in Education Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3440 Market Street, Suite 560, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (215) 573-0700; www.upenn.edu/gse/cpre.
Education Trust (1999).
Ticket to Nowhere: The Gap Between Leaving High School and Entering College and High-Performance Jobs.
Thinking K-16.
Vol. 3, Issue 2.
Fall 1999.
Education Trust, 1725 K Street, N.W., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20006; (202) 2931217; www.edtrust.org.
Kelley, Carolyn (1995).
School-Linked Services for At-Risk Youth.
CPRE Occasional Paper OP-02, October 1995.
Consortium for Policy Research in Education Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3440 Market Street, Suite 560, Philadelphia, PA 19104; (215) 573-0700; www.wcer.wisc.edu/cpre.
Using Data Dietel, Ronald (1998), "Beyond Test Scores: How Can Parents Judge the Quality of their Schools?" Our Children, Magazine of the National PTA.
October 1998.
www.cse.ucla.edu/ptaron.htm
33
Jaeger, Richard M. and Charlene G. Tucker (1997).
Analyzing, Disaggreggating, Reporting, and Interpreting Students' Achievement Test Results: A Guide to Practice for Title I and Beyond.
Washington, DC; Council of Chief State School Officers, One Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001; (202) 408-5505; (202) 408-8072 (fax); www.ccsso.org.
Wilson.
Linda D. and Rolf K. Blank (1999).
Improving Mathematics Education Using Results from NAEP and TIMSS.
Council of Chief State School Officers, One Massachusetts Avenue, NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20001; (202) 408-5505; (202) 408-8072 (fax); www.ccsso.org.
Reports Presented at Field Hearings Askey, Richard (1999).
"Knowing and Teaching Elementary Mathematics."
American Educator.
Vol. 23, Number 3, Fall 1999.
American Federation of Teachers, 555 New Jersey Ave., NW, Washington, DC 20001; (202) 879-4400; www.aft.org.
Baron, Joan Boykoff (1999).
Exploring High and Improving Reading Achievement in Connecticut.
National Education Goals Panel, 1255 22nd Street, NW, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20037; (202) 724-0015; www.negp.gov.
Elmore, Richard F. with Deanna Burney (1997).
Investing in Teacher Learning: Staff Development and Instructional Improvement in Community District #2, New York City.
National Commission on Teaching and America's Future, Teachers College, Columbia University, Box 117, 525 West 120th Street, New York, NY 10027; (888) 492-1241; www.tc.columbia.edu/~teachcom.
Elmore, Richard F. and Deanna Burney (1997).
The Challenge of School Variability: Improving Instruction in New York City's Community District #2.
Consortium for Policy Research in Education, Graduate School of Education, University of Pennsylvania, 3440 Market Street, Suite 560, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3325; (215) 5730700; www.gse.upenn.edu/cpre.
Grissmer, David and Ann Flanagan (1998).
Exploring Rapid Achievement Gains in North Carolina and Texas.
National Education Goals Panel, 1255 22nd Street, NW, Suite 502, Washington, DC 20037; (202) 724-0015; www.negp.gov.
Hawkes, M., Kimmelman, P. 
Becoming 'First in the World' in Math and Science.
Phi Delta Kappan.
Herman, Joan L., Richard S. Brown and Eva L. Baker (2000).
Student Assessment and Student Achievement in the California Public School System.
CSE Technical Report 519.
National Center for Research on Evaluation, Standards, and Student Testing, Graduate School of Education and Information Studies, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1522; (310) 206-1532; cresst96.cse.ucla.edu.
34
Odden, Allan R. and Kelley, Carolyn.
Paying Teachers for What They Know and Do: New and Smarter Compensation Strategies to Improve Schools.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press, 1997.
National Education Goals Panel.
Minnesota 
Washington, DC: National Education Goals Panel.
Autumn 2000.
35
National Education Goals Panel 1255 22nd Street, NW, Suite 502 Washington, DC 20037 Phone: 202-724-0015 Fax: 202-632-0957 www.negp.gov negp@ed.gov 36
37
