Biennial Report Fiscal Years 2001-2002 July 2000 - June 2002 1 COMMONWEALTH OF KENTUCKY OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR KENTUCKY COMMISSION ON WOMEN 312 West Main, Frankfort, KY 40601 Telephone Number : (502) 564-6643 Fax Number: (502) 564-2315 KCW@mail.sta te. ky.us http://women.state. ky.us Paul E. Patton Governor Betsy Nowland-Cur r y Executive Director
September 30, 2002 The Honorable Paul E. Patton Governor of Kentucky State Capitol Building Frankfort, Kentucky 40601 Dear Governor Patton, I am pleased to present the Biennial Report of the Kentucky Commission on Women (KCW) for fiscal year 2001-2002, detailing the activities, programs and projects that the Kentucky Commission on Women has taken part in over the past two years.
The Kentucky Commission on Women Board of Directors and staff are proud of our accomplishments during this period, and with your help, we have launched four major new initiatives, Women in Kentucky: Our Legacy Our Future, Taking Your Voice to Frankfort: Town Meetings, the Governor's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women and the Kentuckywomen List.
Through these projects, combined with our ongoing programs and associations, KCW now touches the lives of more Kentucky women than at any other time in our 38-year history.
Kentucky women represent the majority (51%) of Kentucky's population and yet the Institute for Women's Policy Research in Washington, D.C. ranks Kentucky as the sixth worst state to be a woman in the United States.
Therefore, KCW's primary goal continues to be "to strengthen Kentucky by strengthening Kentucky women."
The board and staff of KCW join me in thanking you and First Lady Judy Patton for your constant support of the Commission on Women and our programs.
KCW is grateful for your ongoing commitment to improve the lives of Kentucky women and families throughout your administration.
We look forward to working with you over the next year as we strive to improve the status of Kentucky women.
Sincerely,
Betsy Nowland-Curry Executive Director
2
JULY 2000 - JUNE 2002 MISSION
Strengthening Kentucky by Strengthening Kentucky's Women The Kentucky Commission on Women (KCW) works to improve the status of the women of Kentucky, educates the public about issues and challenges pertaining to women and acts as an informational clearinghouse for women around the Commonwealth.
OVERVIEW AND UPDATE In December 1961, President John F. Kennedy established a Commission on the Status of Women and encouraged all states to create similar commissions at the executive level.
In April 1964, Governor Edward T. Breathitt established by executive order a Kentucky counterpart to this federal commission.
The Kentucky Commission on the Status of Women was mandated to conduct research on the status of Kentucky women and submit a written report to the governor within a year.
The findings demonstrated a pronounced need for a permanent agency to promote the improvement of women's status, and in November 1968 Governor Louie Nunn signed the executive order establishing the Kentucky Commission on Women (KCW).
The Commission became an official state agency through legislative action in 1970.
Since 1984, KCW has been under the Cabinet for General Government as an administrative body attached to the Governor's Office.
Kentucky Revised Statute 344.520, one of the statutes pertaining to KCW, states that the duties and functions of the commission shall be to: (1) Promote, encourage, and provide advisory assistance in the establishment of local volunteer community improvement programs for, and of interest to, women; (2) Conduct programs, studies, seminars, and conferences, and encourage state and local women's business, professional, and civic organizations to do likewise, to educate the public to the problems of women; (3) Consult with and advise the Governor and the agencies, departments, boards, and commissions of the state and local and municipal governments on matters pertaining to women; (4) Cooperate with the federal government and with the governments of other states in programs relating to women.
The Kentucky Commission on Women relocated twice in the last biennium.
KCW moved in November of 2001 from its offices of over 20 years on Shelby Street to share a newly renovated space on Ann Street in downtown Frankfort with the Governor's Office of Agricultural Policy.
Less than a year later KCW's co-tenants, the Governor 's Office of Agricultural Policy, needed to expand their staff and take occupancy of the entire building.
In September of 2001, KCW relocated to its present location of 312 West Main Street.
This location offers visibility in downtown Frankfort that KCW has not had since its first office location on St. Clair Street in the early 1970s.
3
For the first time in our known history, KCW staff completed a comprehensive inventory of property owned by the Commission.
Several partial inventories completed over the years were merged together and purged of items no longer owned by the Commission while all items--new and old--were entered into the state computer system.
BOARD MEMBERS JULY 2000-JUNE 2002 KCW has a board membership comprised of the Lieutenant Governor and not more than an additional 25 members including the chair.
First Lady Judi Patton was added to the Board as an ex-officio member by Executive Order in 1998.
Board members are appointed by the governor and serve four-year terms but have no limit on the number of terms each can serve.
The Chair is appointed for an unlimited amount of time.
Left: Board members Rick Starks, Sara Sidebottom, Daisy Bryant James, and Cindy Kruempelman relax at a KCW board retreat.
Right: Board members watched Governor Patton sign the 2002 Women's History Month Proclamation.
Board Member Date Appointed Date Expires County First Lady Judi Patton ex-officio Lieutenant Governor Steve Henry ex-officio Hannah Baird, Chair 9/97 Susan Coblin Abney 8/99 Nancy Ashley proxy for lt. governor Mary Edna Blackmon 9/98 Sarah Blanken 9/97 Dr. Elizabeth (Betsy) Brinson 8/99-7/02 Daisy Bryant James 9/97-1/02 Cynthia Blevins Doll 9/98 Earnestine Christian 6/96 Mary Ann Darraugh 9/98 Judith Gambill 9/97 Linda Gayheart 9/97-1/00, 2/01 Paul Gold 11/93-1/02 Christine Harris 6/96-1/01 Dot Heeg 6/96-1/01 Allison Jennings 2/01 Judi Jennings 11/93-6/01 Lois Kellogg 8/99 Gerri Kinder 8/99 Nick King 2/01 Cindy Kruempelman 9/98 Faye Liebermann 9/98 Regina Middleton 2/02 Carla Bass Miller 6/96 Judy Miller 8/99 Donna Peden 2/01 Kathy Riley 2/02 Sara Sidebottom 6/95 Rick Starks 9/98 Barbara Thomas 2/01 Carolyn Whitaker-Tandy 2/02 Lela Williams 7/81-6/85; 11/88-1/02
1/06 1/03 1/04 1/03 1/03 1/03 1/05 1/05
1/05 1/04 1/04 8/02 1/03 1/03 1/06 1/04 1/04 1/05 1/06 1/04 8/02 2/05 1/06
Franklin Franklin Boone Fayette Jefferson Bell Boone Fayette Daviess Jefferson Henderson Nelson Boyd Knott Jefferson Fayette Jefferson Jefferson Jefferson Greenup Pike Jefferson Boone Fayette McCracken Jefferson Jessamine Jessamine Fayette Kenton Warren Perry Jefferson Hardin
4
STAFF Betsy Nowland-Curry Ann Ferrell Lori Kidwell Donna Lewis Executive Director Project Manager Communications and Legislation Manager Business Manager STUDENT INTERNS Over the last two years, KCW staff has made a concerted effort to reach all area colleges and universities to recruit interns.
The efforts have been very successful and KCW has benefited greatly from the work of these dedicated students.
KCW interns have worked on a variety of projects including: · · · · · · Governor's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women and it's Issue Committees; biennial update of the KCW Boards and Commissions Directory; Kentucky Women Remembered; creation of a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization for KCW; legislative issues; and research on incarcerated women in Kentucky.
Campbellsville University (Fall 2000) University of Kentucky (Spring 2001 
Megan Tuck Sara Sahni Christina Bailey Chastity Beyl Jamie Meece Yvonne Konner Tiffany Donald Larry Zelke Molly Techau Elizabeth Ross Kaelan Hollon Caroline Harralson
5
I. PROMOTE, WOMEN
ENCOURAGE, AND PROVIDE ADVISORY ASSISTANCE IN THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
LOCAL VOLUNTEER COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS FOR , AND OF INTEREST TO,
TOWN MEETINGS: TAKING YOUR VOICE TO FRANKFORT The Kentucky Commission on Women hosted eight public town meetings throughout the spring of 2001.
This project was entitled Town Meetings: Taking Your Voice to Frankfort.
Town Meetings were held in Hazard, Somerset, Bowling Green, Madisonville, Florence, Lexington, Louisville, and Ashland.
In order to promote the Town Meetings and to ensure a high level of participation, KCW staff sent press releases, contacted local women's groups, and interviewed with local media outlets.
KCW Board members also helped plan and coordinate the Town Meetings in their areas.
Over 200 women and men representing 35 counties attended the Town Meetings and women who were unable to attend sent Thank you for visiting our written comments.
community and listening to our concerns.
I am not a native Kentuckian.
However, I have been in Breathitt County for 11 years.
I consider this my adopted home.
As an African American woman, I am often asked why I came to Eastern Kentucky and why I stayed....After Monday's town meeting, I can now better articulate what attracted me to the region as well as the challenges that have motivated me to stay...Thank you again, for helping improve the lives of women.
--Hazard Town meeting participant
Women in Madisonville talked about resources available to women in the Western region of Kentucky.
The purpose of the Town Meetings was to listen to the women of Kentucky so that KCW could better advise all branches of Kentucky government and the private sector about how their decisions impact the lives of Kentucky women.
KCW received the added benefit of increased visibility across the Commonwealth and strengthened relationships with women in all regions of the state.
As a result of the content and participation levels, the Town Meetings have also aided the Commission in its efforts to serve as an advocate in Frankfort for all Kentucky women.
The Town Meetings gave women an avenue to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of their communities in regard to the quality of life for Kentucky women.
Participants met in work groups and listed challenges and resources in their communities and then the full group prioritized the lists and brainstormed solutions to the top challenges.
The information gathered from the meetings was compiled into a report by KCW staff, Town Meetings 2001: Taking Your Voice to Frankfort.
This report was released on November 16, 2001 during a press conference at which Governor Paul E. Patton appointed the Governor's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women.
The purpose of this report was two-fold: to report on the issues of greatest importance to the attendees of the Town Meetings and to provide the basis from which the Governor 's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women could begin.
Due to budgetary constraints, KCW made the decision to both limit the number of pages in the document and limit the number of copies sent via direct mail.
The report is also available on the KCW Web site in PDF format in order to increase constituent access.
At left, participants in the Ashand Town Meeting discuss the regional impact of the Town Meetings project.
6
These Town Meetings could not have been possible without the valuable support of the following individuals, businesses and organizations: Hazard: Vernon C. Cooper, Jr.; WYMT; Pikeville College Somerset: American Association of University Women, Steve Obermann, Edward.
D. Jones, Hall Land 
Bowling Green: Bowling Green Woman's Club, Bowling Green Junior Woman's Club, Delta Sigma Theta Sorority (Bowling Green and Ft. Knox Alumnae chapters), Wilson 
Madisonville: Mayor Karen Cunningham's Office, The Country Cupboard, Madisonville Chamber of Commerce Florence: The Point Restaurant Lexington: Cross Keys YWCA; League of Women Voters; Lexington Bluegrass Business and Professional Women's Club; Communications Workers of America Local #3372; Center for Women, Children and Families Louisville: Kroger, Girl Scouts Ashland: American Electric Power, Ashland Alliance KENTUCKY WOMEN ON THE WEB The Commission maintains an active and informative Web site at http://women.state.ky.us.
The KCW Web site underwent a comprehensive facelift and redesign in the fall of 2000 which included major additions and expansions to the content and resources on the site.
The site currently houses a calendar of events of interest to women, a legislative update, links to state and national resources, information on KCW projects, and information ranging from local events to international issues.
Organizations and individuals are encouraged to submit information and links for the KCW Web site and calendar of events.
The KCW Web site is great and has clear, concise information.
I love it! --state government employee
"KENTUCKYWOMEN LIST" LISTSERV The Kentucky Commission on Women launched the Kentuckywomen List in January of 2001 and has promoted the listserv via the KCW Web site, newsletter, word of mouth, and at events attended by KCW staff.
Subscribers quickly grew to the current level of over 530 men, women, and organizations from all regions of the Commonwealth--and outside the state's borders--with new subscribers joining every day.
The Commission developed the Kentuckywomen List listserv to better fulfill its mission as an information clearinghouse for Kentucky women.
The listserv allows women from across the Commonwealth to receive and share information free of charge about community events, organizations, state government, and issues of interest.
KCW staff moderates the listserv but all messages of an informational and non-partisan nature are passed on to listserv members.
KCW has received numerous messages in praise of Kentuckywomen List and the channel of communication it provides.
KCW staff is aware of three Kentucky women who have found jobs through the listserv.
One woman said that, upon recommendation of a list member, she joined the listserv before moving to Kentucky and through it met friends, learned about events, and became familiar with state issues--which helped greatly with her move and transition as a new resident of the Commonwealth.
Numerous women have reported that through the listserv they have made valuable contacts and found the resources that allowed them to replicate programs for women and girls that exist in other areas.
on the [Kentuckywomen List] and LOVE it.
I joined up even before I off icially moved here, and have made some of my best local friends and contacts because of it, quirky, neat connections.
It's great.
--KCW listser v subscriber
I'm
The Kentuckywomen List has also become an integral tool for educating and sharing information regarding proposed state and national legislation affecting Kentucky women and their families.
It serves as a catalyst for action by encouraging individual women and representatives of organizations to communicate with their elected officials regarding specific legislation during sessions of the General Assembly as well as U.S. Congressional sessions.
In an environment of rising printing and mailing costs combined with a state budget in crisis, the Kentuckywomen List provides KCW with an inexpensive yet extremely effective and efficient means to expand its ability to reach Kentucky women and women's organizations from all parts of the state.
Kentuckywomen List provides a unique avenue for women around the state to connect with each other about the issues and activities that concern them most.
7
KENTUCKY WOMEN'S HEALTH CONFERENCE Each year, the University of Kentucky the Kentucky Commission on Women.
inception in 1998.
Additionally, KCW KCW also provided monetary support Women's Health Center hosts a women's health conference, sponsored in part by KCW staff have served on the Statewide Executive Planning Committee since its has supported the conference by attending and moderating conference sessions.
in both 2000 and 2001.
KENTUCKY CIVIL RIGHTS ORAL HISTORY PROJECT January of 2002 marked the debut of Living the Story: The Civil Rights Movement in Kentucky, a documentary based on over 175 interviews with Kentucky activists.
As part of the Kentucky Civil Rights Oral History Project, participating historians set out to document--through oral history interviews--the struggle to end legal segregation in Kentucky between 1930 and 1975.
KCW was a financial sponsor of the documentary and attended the debut screening and discussion at the Kentucky Educational Television studio in Lexington.
KENTUCKY WOMEN IN AGRICULTURE KCW was a founding member of the Kentucky Women in Agriculture organization in 1999.
Kentucky Women in Agriculture seeks in part to help women be better advocates for the family farm, educate the public and policymakers on farming issues, and strengthen relationships between member organizations to increase awareness of agriculture to the general public.
KCW staff serve on the Executive Committee, attended Women in Agriculture conferences in 2000 and 2001, and KCW continues to act as a sponsoring organization to the group.
KENTUCKY WOMEN CALLED TO ACTION KCW is a founding member of Kentucky Women Called to Action, a consortium of grassroots organizations dedicated to improving the status of women through education, networking, and taking action on issues including voter participation, economic opportunities, and access to health care and educational opportunities.
In 2001 and 2002, Kentucky Women Called to Action sponsored A Gathering of Women , a skill-building conference to improve women's leadership skills.
KCW also participated as an exhibitor at each conference, providing KCW materials and resources to all who attended.
Staff also presented workshops each year that provided attendees with the networking skills that are necessary to professional and personal growth.
WOMEN IN SCIENCE, MATH, ENGINEERING, AND TECHNOLOGY In January 2001, KCW and representatives of public and private universities around the state met for the first time to begin talking about the lack of encouragement for girls--and support for women--in the fields of science, math, engineering, and technology.
From this meeting, a coalition group was launched that thrives today as Kentucky Women in Science, Math, Engineering, and Technology (KYWISMET).
The recent efforts of this group have focused on the Issue Committee on Education and Leadership of the Governor's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women.
As a result, a great deal of research has been compiled to address this important issue, at a time when Kentucky must make strides to become a full participant in the New Economy.
8
ORGANIZING TO PROTECT ESSENTIAL HEALTH NEEDS Organizing to Protect Essential Health Needs (OPEHN) is a grassroots organization established in February of 2001.
Northern Kentucky residents sought to form a citizens' coalition in response to Northern Kentucky Independent Health District (NKIHD) Board initiatives targeting access to reproductive health care information and services.
KCW provided advice on organizing and effective coalition-building in order to reach the organization's goals.
The Commission continues to consult with OPEHN and collaborate on issues of mutual interest.
PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT KCW staff attend a variety of meetings and serve on numerous boards and committees to share knowledge and resources.
The staff and board strongly promote women's involvement in public service and staff try to attend and participate in as many events as possible and are relevant to the Commission's mission and goals..
February-April 2001 Speaker/Presenter Grote Symposium for the Advancement of Women Zonta Club, Area 2 Launching Women Lobbyists A Gathering of Women Women's Enterprise Institute NAWBO Louisville, KY Chapter Bluegrass Army Depot Wilderness Road Girl Scout Council Campbellsville College Convocation New Opportunity School for Women Lexington Kiwanis Club Bluegrass Women's Political Caucus Sponsor/Exhibitor Vagina Monologues Equal Pay Day press conference and proclamation signing Launching Women Lobbyists A Gathering of Women Violence Against Women: A Public Health Concern Alliance for Girls Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium planning committee EKU First Annual Mary Roarke Women's Expo Central Kentucky Council for Peace and Justice Member United Nations Association, Kentucky Division Governor 's Council on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault KYWISMET Violence Against Women: A Public Health Concern Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium planning committee Health Data Advisory Board Kentucky Women Involved in Agriculture Affirmative Action Advisory Board Participant Child Support Guidelines Review Commission Alliance for Girls Status of Women at UK Report release luncheon American Association of University Women Co-Opting Conscience Meetings/Reproductive Freedom Group EEOC press conference NAACP--Know Your Community program for A Gathering of Women Metropolitan Women's Political Caucus 9
May-July 2001 Speaker/Presenter Town Meetings (8) East Kentucky Women in Leadership Kentucky Studies Workshop for Social Studies Teachers, Kentucky Department of Education Kentucky Women's Leadership Network New Opportunity School for Women Sponsor/Exhibitor Take Our Daughters to Work Day press conference Town Meetings (8) Stennis American Association of University Women State Meeting Member United Nations Association, Kentucky Division Kentucky Women in Science, Math, Engineering, and Technology Kentucky Self-Sufficiency Standard Advisory Committee Kentucky Arts Council Diversity Committee Governor 's Council on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Women in Politics and Government Symposium planning committee National Association of Commissions for Women Kentucky Department of Education Title IX Conference planning committee Health Data Advisory Board Governor's Conference on Aging planning committee Kentucky Women Called to Action Kentucky Breast Cancer Advisory Board Kentucky Women Involved in Agriculture A Gathering of Women Conference planning committee Kentucky Women's Leadership Network Board Meeting Participant Institute for Women's Policy Research Conference LRC Program Review and Investigations Committee Bill and Regulation Drafting for Non-Legislative Drafters Child Support Guidelines Review Commission Conference for Southern Women in Public Service Kentucky Women's Leadership Network National Association of Commissions for Women Conference August-October 2001 Speaker/Presenter Women and Money Committee/Personal Savings Commission Women's Bar Association Governor's Local Issues Conference Women's Business and Leadership Conference New Radiance Conference Women in Politics Forum, Campbellsville College Governor's Council on Early Childhood Development Sponsor/Exhibitor American Association of University Women State Meeting Kentucky Women in Science, Math, Engineering and Technology Women's Business and Leadership Conference Member Kentucky Women Called to Action Conference Planning Meeting Affirmative Action Advisory Committee Kentucky Women's Leadership Network Board Meeting A Gathering of Women Planning Meeting Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium planning committee Kentucky Women in Agriculture Committee Meeting
10
AAUW Program Planning and Business Meeting Kentucky Coalition for Women's Substance Abuse Services Governor's Conference on Aging planning committee meeting Kentucky Women in Science, Math, Engineering and Technology Women and Money Committee/Personal Savings Commission Social Security Committee Meeting East Kentucky Women in Leadership Meeting Women Leading Kentucky Board Meeting Participant Kentucky Association of Government Communicators Award Luncheon Kentucky FESS Advisory Committee meeting Shaped by Water meeting Child Support Guidelines Public Hearing Governor's Local Issues Conference Sexual Harassment in the Workplace Press Conference November 2001-April 2002 Speaker/Presenter Frankfort Business and Professional Women Bluegrass Women's Political Caucus Governor's EEO Conference Covington Art League Professional Women's Forum OPEHN of Northern Kentucky Hardin County Women's Club Louisville Women's Political Caucus Kentucky Federated Women's Club National Association of Women Business Owners, Louisville Chapter Annual Meeting Sponsor/Exhibitor Opening Reception for The Fight for Suffrage: A Selection from the Elizabeth Cady Stanton Trust Central Kentucky Council for Peace and Justice Dinner Women of the 15th State The Alliance for Girls Member KYWISMET Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium planning committee University of Kentucky Advisory Council for Undergraduate Education Women and Money Advisory Committee Habitat for Humanity International Women's Build Governor 's Council on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault Wilderness Road Girl Scout Council Women Leading Kentucky Personal Savings Commission Participant State Data Center Conference Kentucky Welfare Reform Assessment Project Kentucky Fiscal Future Conference Healthy Babies Kick-off Women's Roundtable Luncheon Martin Luther King Celebration Civil Rights in Kentucky Reception ACLU Reproductive Freedom Meeting Child Support Guidelines Commission Center for Women, Families and Children Annual Meeting
11
May-July 2002 Speaker/Presenter Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium A Gathering of Women: Kentucky Women Called to Action Conference Northern Kentucky Independent Health District Public Hearing Owensboro Women's Coalition Kentucky Business and Professional Women's Club State Convention Florence Women's Club Center for Policy Alternatives Reproductive Health Issues Luncheon East Kentucky Labor Conference First Lady's Roundtable NAWBO Lexington Chapter Leadership Development Workshop Western Kentucky Federally Employed Women Ketnucky Women's Political Caucus Young Women in Science Sponsor/Exhibitor Kentucky Women in Politics and Government Symposium A Gathering of Women: Kentucky Women Called to Action Conference Women's Health Month Press Conference Talking about Freedom of Choice: NARAL Workshop Member Habitat for Humanity International Women's Build Steering Committee Kentucky Arts Council Project Grants Panel Breast Cancer Task Force Kentucky Women's Leadership Network Kentucky Association of Government Communicators Poverty Summit Planning Committee Women Executives in State Government Board Kentucky Women Called to Action Executive Committee Kentucky Child Advocacy Center Board Participant Arts, Entrepeneurship, and Sustainable Development in Appalachia Conference Automated Sex Offender Notification System Press Conference Poverty Summit Planning Committee Women's Health Month Press Conference Habitat for Humanity International Women's Build Northern Kentucky Independent Health District Public Hearing Stennis Center Conference for Southern Women in Public Service Celebration of Hope Breast Cancer Survivors Tea NAWBO Louisville Chapter Awards Luncheon Public Information Officers meetings Center for Policy Alternatives National Grassroots Leadership Conference Women Executives in State Government Conference Women Leading Kentucky Martha Layne Collins Video Taping Success Strategies for Women--Lessons in Leadership Western Kentucky Federally Employed Women Women Leading Kentucky Roundtable Luncheon Talking about Freedom of Choice: NARAL Workshop
12
II.
C
ONDUCT PROGRAMS, STUDIES, SEMINARS, AND CONFERENCES, AND ENCOURAGE STATE
AND LOCAL WOMEN'S BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL, AND CIVIC ORGANIZATIONS TO DO LIKEWISE, TO EDUCATE THE PUBLIC TO THE PROBLEMS OF WOMEN
VOTES FOR WOMEN: CELEBRATING 80 YEARS SUFFRAGE SYMPOSIUM KCW celebrated the 80th anniversary of the passage of the 19th Amendment as a major sponsor for Votes for Women: Celebrating 80 Years, a suffrage symposium held at the University of Louisville.
KCW staff was actively involved in the symposium planning process and program.
Over 100 women and men attended the symposium.
Other co-sponsors included the University of Louisville, Kentucky Foundation for Women, and various other women's groups.
Speakers discussed Kentucky women in the suffrage movement and as lawyers, politicians, and human rights activists.
Dr. Rosalyn Terborg-Penn, noted historian of African American women's history, served as the keynote speaker.
Two exhibits--a private suffrage memorabilia collection and photographic collection--rounded out the celebration.
WOMEN IN KENTUCKY: OUR LEGACY, OUR FUTURE The Women in Kentucky: Our Legacy, Our Future project was a joint effort between KCW, the Kentucky Department of Education, and Kentucky Educational Television.
The project consists of four parts: · · · · a poster, Our Legacy, Our Future, which features brief biographical information on nearly 200 women from around the state; a film about Kentucky women and public service, Women of Kentucky: Our Legacy, Our Future; the Web site www.womeninkentucky.com which provides information and resources about Kentucky women; and a teachers guide, created by a group of Kentucky teachers and designed to help teachers utilize the full packet.
Through interviews with women leaders, primary documents, and brief biographical sketches, the film encourages young people to become more committed to Kentucky's political process.
This film inspires interest in Kentucky history, and documents the progress of women in positions of community leadership and elected office.
The Web site complements the video and poster by providing information and resources for Kentucky students, teachers, and citizens.
The site includes photos, primary documents, sound and video clips, and bibliographies of print and media information.
The final piece of this 4-part project, a teacher 's resource guide, was designed to help teachers incorporate Kentucky women's history into the classroom year-round by providing lesson plans centered around the video, poster, and Web site for appropriate grade levels.
The Kentucky Department of Education Division of Curriculum Development and a group of Kentucky teachers developed this guide.
packets sent to all Kentucky public schools.
This 4-part educational project is the first of its kind in Kentucky, and fills a widely acknowledged need for curriculum materials related to Kentucky women's history, as well as specific requests from Kentucky teachers for materials of this kind.
In addition, it seeks to encourage girls to consider public service, in its many forms, as a viable career option.
Robin Chandler with KDE helps stuff the
13
With the support of Governor Paul Patton and First Lady Judi Patton, KCW sent this 4-part packet to every public school and public library in the Commonwealth in October of 2000.
Due to the overwhelmingly positive response to this project, KCW has made this packet available for purchase at cost to interested individuals and groups, and organizations including the Girl Scouts, Homemakers Extension clubs, and youth groups.
The Kentucky Association of Government Communicators awarded KCW with a 2001 Award of Excellence for the Web site, www.womeninkentucky.com .
These awards recognize outstanding communications materials created by government employees in Kentucky.
LAUNCHING WOMEN LOBBYISTS The Kentucky Commission on Women presented Launching Women Lobbyists in February 2001 in Frankfort, during the General Assembly session.
The free half-day program--open to the public--educated Kentucky women on the legislative process in both chambers of the General Assembly and provided them with the skills they need to be more active and effective participants and citizen volunteers.
Over 100 women attended Launching Women Lobbyists, and discussed issues of significance to Kentucky women during the 2001session of the Kentucky General Assembly.
Legislators, A panel of professional and citizen lobbyists professional lobbyists, political activists, representatives of the told the program participants about their Governor's Office, and KCW staff spoke of the need for participaprofession and how to get involved in the tion by women in the political process and encouraged women to poltical process.
get involved with issues of concern to them.
The participants also had the opportunity to hear from legislators about their experiences during the sessions, and learned the most effective means of communicating with elected officials.
The morning concluded with the participants receiving gallery passes to view firsthand the House and Senate in process.
MAKING A DIFFERENCE: KENTUCKY WOMEN IN POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT SYMPOSIUM On April 26-27, 2002 the Kentucky Commission on Women and Kentucky Historical Society presented a two-day symposium Making a Difference: Kentucky Women in Politics and Government.
The symposium brought together female political leaders and women activists from across Kentucky to discuss the past, present, and future involvement of Kentucky women in all levels of government.
The schedule included five panel discussions and two keynote addresses.
The panel speakers represented a cross section of Kentucky women at all levels of government.
Former elected officials, mayors, three sitting state representatives, and two women who have served in the federal executive branch shared their experiences and offered advice.
This symposium also addressed educating Kentucky women about groups they can join, how to get involved in campaigns, and other avenues through which women can become part of the process.
Women learned from other women who have made significant contributions to politics and government in Kentucky.
Crit Luallen, Secretary of the Governor's Executive Cabinet, spoke to the Sumposium audience about the importance of women in public service.
Despite the fact that Kentucky women have been at the forefront of every major social and political movement, the Institute for Women's Policy Research reports that Kentucky continues to rank 50th in the nation on the Composite Political Participation Index (based on number of women elected officials, voter turnout, voter registration, and institutional resources).
The Symposium provided information about the multiple ways that Kentucky women can directly impact the future of the Commonwealth through public service.
14
KENTUCKY WOMEN REMEMBERED Kentucky Women Remembered, a watercolor exhibit housed in the west wing of the Kentucky State Capitol, began in 1978 as a traveling exhibit showcasing prominent women in Kentucky history.
Through the tireless efforts of First Lady Judi Patton, a member of the KCW Board, the exhibit became a permanent fixture in the Capitol in 1996.
Kentucky citizens nominate the women to be honored and the Kentucky Women Remembered committee selects up to three women from those nominations to be added to the exhibit.
Each year on the first Friday in March, First Lady Judi Patton and KCW host a luncheon at the Governor 's Mansion to recognize the newest Kentucky Women Remembered honorees.
Over 80 legislators, cabinet secretaries, family members, and other prominent women leaders attended each luncheon.
The portraits are officially unveiled in a Capitol Rotunda ceremony by Governor and Mrs. Patton at which time the Governor also signs a proclamation declaring March as Women's History Month in Kentucky.
Senator Georgia Davis Powers' portrait by original Kentucky Women Remembered artist Paula Jull.
KCW received generous financial support for the Kentucky Women Remembered program to offset the cost of the program including statewide promotion, the artist's stipend, and the framing of the portraits.
For 2001 and 2002, supporters have been · American Electric Power, · Kentucky Education Association, · Kentucky Foundation for Women and · Tennessee Valley Authority.
The 2001 Kentucky Women Remembered Honorees were: Anne Braden (Jefferson County), in the tradition of the greatest freedom fighters, has spent the last fifty years helping to lead a generation of activists from the labor and civil rights movements.
Dr. Allie Corbin Hixson (Adair County) has become one of the most prominent feminist leaders in Kentucky and an important leader in the National Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) Movement.
Senator Georgia Davis Powers (Jefferson County) became the first African American, man or woman, to hold a seat in the Kentucky State Senate in 1968; during her twenty-one years in office, she sponsored civil rights legislation prohibiting sex, job, and age discrimination.
The 2002 Kentucky Women Remembered Honorees were: Dolores Delahanty (Jefferson County) is an advocate for women's and children's rights with a 40-year history of public service in Kentucky She was instrumental in the passage of Kentucky's Fair Credit Law and was a founding member of the National Women's Political Caucus.
Lucille Caudill Little (Fayette County) has contributed much to the performing arts and various institutions throughout Kentucky, giving more than $21 million to area arts and education causes.
Judge Judy Moberly West (Kenton County) was the first woman appointed to the Kentucky Court of Appeals and was involved in many charitable causes until her passing.
Dr. Allyson Handley, former president of Midway College, with Governor and Mrs. Patton as they unveil the portrait of Lucille Caudill Little.
15
For the first time in the history of the program, a new Kentucky artist was selected to paint the 2002 Kentucky Women Remembered portraits.
The original artist, Paula Jull, made an outstanding contribution to the Commonwealth when she created the first portraits of this exhibit in 1978, and continued to paint the portraits that were added to it through 2001.
The KCW board made the decision to seek a new artist for the portraits in order to give exposure and recognition to Kentucky women artists.
A "call to artists" brochure was widely circulated and the Kentucky Women Remembered committee reviewed submissions and chose Allison Lyne of Adairville as the new Kentucky Women Remembered portrait artist.
She will hold this position for up to three years.
COMMISSION CONNECTION Historically, KCW has published a quarterly newsletter now entitled Commission Connection, known from 1998 until 2002 as Faces 
Given the current budget constraints for fiscal years 2003-2004 and the expansion of the KCW listserv and Web site, KCW has moved to a biannual newsletter with an expanded format and layout.
However, KCW remains dedicated to providing the newsletter in paper form, recognizing that the digital divide remains strong in Kentucky.
Circulation numbers over 5000 individuals around the state and hundreds of professional and civic organizations inside and outside the Commonwealth.
Commission Connection is also available on the KCW Web site so that women not on the mailing list can access the newsletter.
KCW staff solicits outside articles and encourages the submission of additional materials and information for the newsletter from individuals and organizations.
The Upcoming Events calendar, a standard component of the KCW newsletter, has grown exponentially due to this effort.
TAKE OUR DAUGHTERS TO WORK DAY Governor Paul E. Patton has held a press conference each year of his tenure as governor in the Capitol Rotunda and signed proclamations declaring Kentucky Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
In both 2001 and 2002, KCW coordinated a statewide effort for state employees to participate in Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
Launched by the Ms. Foundation in 1993, Take Our Daughters to Work® Day was created in response to research that indicated adolescent girls frequently start out confident in their pre-teen years and become less so as they grow into teenagers.
Take Our Daughters to Work Day was intended to help girls remain strong and confident throughout adolescence.
In 2002, KCW decided to choose a day that would not conflict with the Kentucky standardized testing schedule.
Governor Patton declared Kentucky Take Our Daughters to Work Day on May 9, 2002 and over 50 girls attended the morning press conference and proclamation signing in the Capitol Rotunda.
Girls then had the opportunity to participate in a program provided by the Governor 's Press Office and/ Governor and Mrs. Patton welcomed the daughters of state employees to the Rotunda for or spend the day with their parents or parents-for-a-day in many the Kentucky Take Our Daughters to Work cabinets and agencies of state government.
celebration on May 9, 2002.
EQUAL PAY DAY In April of 2001 and 2002, Governor Paul E. Patton signed proclamations declaring Pay Equity Day across the Commonwealth.
This date symbolically represents the date on which the average American woman's salary catches up to that of her male counterpart's--from the pervious year.
In 2002, KCW participated in a press conference in Louisville City Hall, co-sponsored by the Kentucky Human Rights Commission, members of the Louisville Board of Aldermen, and the River City Chapter of Business and Professional Women.
KCW Executive Director Betsy Nowland-Curry also was a featured participant in the press conference and roundtable luncheon on pay equity issues which followed.
16
RELATED ITEMS Also represented in this section are the following programs and activities, previously described in Section I. · · · Town Meetings: Taking Your Voice to Frankfort Kentuckywomen List listserv Kentucky Women on the Web (Web site)
17
III.
C
ONSULT WITH AND ADVISE THE
GOVERNOR
AND THE AGENCIES, DEPARTMENTS
,
BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS OF THE STATE AND LOCAL AND MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENTS ON MATTERS PERTAINING TO WOMEN
GOVERNOR'S TASK FORCE ON THE ECONOMIC STATUS OF KENTUCKY'S WOMEN Raising all Kentuckians to a standard of living at or above the national average in 20 years is the primary goal of Governor Paul E. Patton's two terms in office.
Given that women comprise over half of the state's population, it is imperative that women's ability to attain economic success be addressed.
In a major step toward achieving his goal, Governor Patton appointed the Governor 's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women on November 16, 2001.
First Lady Judi Patton and former Governor Martha Layne Collins serve as Honorary Co-chairs with 49 other individuals named to the Task Force The KCW Town Meetings laid the groundwork for the Task Force.
In those meetings, participants identified challenges and resources in their communities that pertain to the economic progress of women.
The report, Taking Your Voice to Frankfort, was officially released at the November 16 press conference.
The purpose of the Task Force is to examine the issues that create obstacles to the economic progress of Kentucky women, identify solutions, and develop a plan of action.
Members were appointed for a 12­month term, to end in November of 2002.
Key to the success of the Task Force are five Issue Committees, currently collecting available data appropriate to their working topic; exploring existing resources and determining "best practice" models; and compiling and drafting reports for presentation to the Task Force.
The Committees began meeting in December 2001 and focused on the following obstacle areas: · Education and Leadership, · Economic Development and Employment, · Social and Cultural Barriers, · Women in Positions of Power, and · State Government Employees.
I want to thank you again for allowing me the oppor tunity to ser ve on the committee for women state employees.
You have been given a dif ficult charge and from what I saw at the f irst meeting...you have met the challenge with determination and drive.
--committee member
Over 450 women and men, representing over 55 Kentucky counties and all walks of life, volunteered to serve as members of the Issue Committees.
More than half of that number remained committed to driving to Frankfort each month for a three-hour meeting as well as conducing countless hours of research on their own time in their home communities.
Some members have stayed involved electronically through the committee listservs.
After the first round of committee meetings, each issue committee divided into subcommittees in order to concentrate on specific challenges facing Kentucky women.
Committee members spent January through April gathering and analyzing available research and data specific to their topics.
In May they began to investigate existing resources and model practices and began to write their reports this summer.
Throughout the process, the Issue Committees have received input from Task Force members about existing resources and sources of data.
The Issue Committees presented their final reports to the Task Force on September 27, 2002 and the Task Force will determine the findings and recommendations based on these reports.
The Task Force project includes several planned outcomes:
Committee on Women in Positions of Power members get to know each other at the first meeting in December 2001.
18
· · ·
To publish a comprehensive report of the findings and the plan of action that will serve as a guide for decisionmakers throughout the Commonwealth; To propose remedial legislation for passage by the Kentucky General Assembly; As a result of the work of the Task Force, KCW will convene a statewide summit on the economic status of Kentucky women, where business, government, and civic leaders will be challenged to champion the plan of action.
The Task Force will hold its last meeting on November 15, 2002, at which time they will complete their plan of action.
The Task Force and the Kentucky Commission on Women will hold a press conference in early December 2002 to formally present Governor Patton with the executive summary of findings of the Governor 's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women.
The full report will not be released until June 20-21, 2003 at the first Summit on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women at the KCW Staff Member Ann Ferrell joins a Social and Farnham-Dudgeon Civic Center in Frankfort.
The Summit will be Cultural Barriers Issue Committee work group at a time to not only celebrate the work of so many dedicated the Committee's May meeting.
Kentuckians, but a time to strategize about the next steps needed to put the plan of action of the Task Force into motion.
The Kentucky Commission on Women intends for this Summit to become a regular event, so that participants can reconvene to measure the changes that are affected and determine additional measures that need to be taken.
19
MEMBERS OF THE GOVERNOR'S TASK FORCE ON THE ECONOMIC STATUS OF KENTUCKY'S WOMEN Ms. Judi Patton, Honorary Co-Chair First Lady, Commonwealth of Kentucky Frankfort Martha Layne Collins, Honorary Co-Chair Former Governor, Commonwealth of Kentucky Executive Scholar in Residence, Georgetown College Georgetown Donna Peden, Vice Chair KCW Board Member Nicholasville Ms. Doris Deuth Warden, Kentucky Correctional Institution for Women Pewee Valley Mr. Andy Downs Senior VP of Strategic Planning, Kentucky Chamber of Commerce Frankfort The Honorable Jon Draud State Representative, Kentucky General Assembly Crestview Hills
Members of the Governor's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women gather at the press conference announcing their appointments on November 16, 2001.
Dr. Bill Brundage Commissioner, Kentucky Innovations Commission Frankfort Singer Buchanan Deputy Secretary, Kentucky Personnel Cabinet Frankfort Mr. Kevin Canifax Fidelity Investments Covington Ms. Judith Clabes President and CEO, Scripps-Howard Foundation Ft. Mitchell Ms. Beverly Martin Daly Assistant Director, Kentucky State Data Center Louisville Ms. Dawn Davis Director of Product Development, Xodiac Internet Data Centers Louisville Ms. Virginia Fox Executive Director and CEO, Kentucky Educational Television Lexington Mr. Mike Hammons President, Forward Quest Covington Ms. Audrey Haynes YMCA Chicago Dr. Marlene Helm Secretary, Kentucky Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet Frankfort Ms. Mary Hemmer Paul Hemmer Companies Edgewood The Honorable Margaret R. Huddleston Judge, Warren County Family Court Bowling Green
20
Ms. Carol Jordan Executive Director, Governor's Office of Child Abuse and Domestic Violence Services Frankfort Ms. Eleanor Jordan Ombudsman, Kentucky Cabinet for Families and Children Frankfort The Honorable David Karem State Senator, Kentucky General Assembly Louisville Ms. Crit Luallen Secretary, Governor 's Executive Cabinet Frankfort The Honorable Mary Lou Marzian State Representative, Kentucky General Assembly Louisville Ms. Gwen Mayes Executive Director, Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health Frankfort Ms. Marion McAleer EEO Manager, US Army 
Erlanger Mr. Joe Norsworthy Secretary, Kentucky Labor Cabinet Frankfort The Honorable Ruth Ann Palumbo State Representative, Kentucky General Assembly Lexington
Ms. Nicki Patton Governor's Office of Early Childhood Development Frankfort Mr. Jim Purgerson President, Ashland Alliance Ashland Mr. Allen Rose Secretary, Kentucky Cabinet for Workforce Development Frankfort Mr. Chris Sanders Secretary-Treasurer, Kentucky AFL-CIO Frankfort Ms. Amy Scarborough Reg.
Manager, Regulatory 
21
LEGISLATIVE INVOLVEMENT The Kentucky Commission on Women was added to the Governor 's Legislative Advisory Team starting with the 2001 session of the General Assembly.
During the legislative session, staff attends bi-weekly meetings and reviews legislation to make recommendations to the Governor on pending bills.
During the 2001 and 2002 sessions of the General Assembly, KCW staff attended many House and Senate committee meetings and testified on bills pertaining to a variety of issues related to or affecting Kentucky women.
KCW strongly believes that all issues are women's issues but have specifically followed and monitored legislation addressing women's health, child support guidelines, health insurance, reproductive freedom, domestic violence, sexual assault, sexual harassment, gender equity in the workplace, small business development, retirement, and financial planning.
LEGISLATIVE UPDATE During the legislative sessions of the Kentucky General Assembly, KCW creates and revises a Legislative Update that is distributed through the Kentucky Women list and available on the KCW web site.
The Legislative Update provides information about the status of bills monitored by KCW--those of most concern to Kentucky women.
The Web version of the Legislative Update provides links to the Kentucky Legislative Research Commission in order to provide citizens with the full text of bills under consideration by the legislature.
Because KCW encourages all women to be involved in the political process, the Update contains the necessary information for contacting legislators and keeping up to date about each day's agenda and pending legislation.
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS KCW continues its commitment to helping Governor Paul E. Patton attain his goal of gender equity on state boards and commissions and advises women on how to gain these appointed positions.
After a bill requiring gender equity on all administrative boards and commissions of the Commonwealth failed in the 2001 General Assembly, KCW worked with Governor Patton to create an Executive Order to achieve this goal.
The Executive Order received strong support from key legislators and was signed by Governor Patton during a press conference on September 28, 2000 in Covington, Kentucky.
To aid in reaching the goal of gender equity, every two years KCW compiles, updates, and distributes a Boards and Commissions Directory providing a detailed listing of all boards and commissions appointed by the Governor.
This directory is sent to all citizens who request it.
The new directory includes an informative section entitled "How to Get Appointed to Boards and Commissions."
KCW also sends notices of board vacancies to women's groups and encourages them to apply for board and commission positions.
RELATED ITEMS Also represented in this section is the following program, previously described in Section II.
· Launching Women Lobbyists
22
IV.
C
OOPERATE WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND WITH THE GOVERN
-
MENTS OF OTHER STATES IN PROGRAMS RELATING TO WOMEN WHITE HOUSE OFFICE OF WOMEN'S INITIATIVES AND OUTREACH Until its closure in early 2001, KCW worked regularly with the White House Office of Women's Initiatives and Outreach on issues affecting Kentucky women at the federal level.
This office acted as a liaison between organizations such as KCW, and the president, keeping the president informed about issues of concern to women and keeping organizations informed of federal legislation and policies affecting women in the states.
Since its closure, KCW has lost an important source of information and advocacy with the federal government.
WOMEN EXECUTIVES IN STATE GOVERNMENT Women Executives in State Government (WESG) is a national non-profit organization that promotes excellence among women leaders at the highest elected and appointed positions in state government.
Women from all 50 states participate in WESG activities and programs.
KCW Executive Director Betsy Nowland-Curry sits on the WESG Board of Directors, along with several other women executives in Kentucky state government.
As an active participant in WESG programs, KCW nominated Governor Paul E. Patton for the WESG Excellence in Leadership Award in March 2002.
Each year, WESG gives Excellence in Leadership awards in four categories--woman in the public sector, woman in the private sector, woman in state government, and governor.
Governor Patton was awarded the Excellence in Leadership Award at the WESG annual conference in June of 2002.
Presenting him with the award was Secretary Crit Luallen, a WESG Excellence in Leadership Award winner in 2001.
KCW strongly supported her nomination in the "woman in state government" category.
Crit Luallen, 2001 WESG Excellence in Government award winner, presented Governor Patton with his award in 2002.
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF COMMISSIONS FOR WOMEN The National Association of Commissions for Women consists of over 270 commissions for women at the state, county, and municipal levels.
The NACW mission is to serve as a national voice for all women's commissions; to develop and promote research and training; and to provide technical assistance and support to affect public policy.
KCW has long been a member of the National Association of Commissions for Women and sent a representative to the national conference in the summers of 2000 and 2001.
STENNIS CENTER CONFERENCE--SOUTHERN WOMEN IN PUBLIC SERVICE The Stennis Center for Public Service is a federal legislative agency dedicated to promoting and strengthening public service leadership.
Each year, the Stennis Center hosts Southern Women in Public Ser vice: Coming Together to Make a Difference, a bipartisan conference for women leaders at the local, state and federal levels.
The conference provides leadership development opportunities to women political leaders and encourages more women to seek leadership positions in public service.
Each year, the Stennis Center selects Pacesetters from each of the 13 Southern states and honors them at the conference.
Pacesetters are proven leaders and examples to others who aspire to public service careers.
KCW Executive Director Betsy Nowland-Curry was named a Pacesetter for the 2001 and 2002 Southern Women in Public Ser vice conferences.
23
CENTER FOR POLICY ALTERNATIVES The Center for Policy Alternatives (CFPA) began in 1976 and is a nonpartisan, non-profit progressive public policy and leadership development center for state legislators, state policy organizations, and state grassroots leaders.
CFPA works closely with other organizations to develop policy briefs, talking points and legislative models that offer solutions to difficult challenges.
KCW Executive Director Betsy Nowland-Curry was selected as one of 50 women from around the nation to participate in the Grassroots Women's Leadership Retreat, held in June 2002 in Lake Tahoe, Nevada.
Later that month, Ms. NowlandCurry served as the keynote speaker at a CFPA-organized luncheon with 25 national advocacy and interested organizations and spoke on reproductive issues specific to Kentucky.
INSTITUTE FOR WOMEN'S POLICY RESEARCH The Institute for Women's Policy Research (IWPR) focuses its research on areas important to women and their families.
In June of 2001 KCW staff and board member Donna Peden attended the IWPR biennial conference, The Status of Women: Facing the Facts, Forging the Future in Washington, DC.
IWPR has been an important source of data and information to KCW in recent years through the Status of the States reports, including the Status of Women in Kentucky (1998), and subsequent updates.
KCW board and staff members had the opportunity to connect with and learn from representatives of women's organizations around the nation as KCW began planning for the Governor 's Task Force on the Economic Status of Kentucky's Women.
24
