Mailing Date: Oct. 28, 1998
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE FOR PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE, BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT
: : :
Citation No. 98-0765
v.
: : :
Incident No. W4-153956 LID - 26446
VIRGINIA MARTHA DILLON CAMPBELL STREET BOX 473 AVELLA PA 15312-0473 WASHINGTON COUNTY LICENSE NO. R-6013
: : : : : : : :
BEFORE : JUDGE FRISK
APPEARANCES:
For Bureau of Enforcement
For Licensee
Richard Parker, Esquire
Virginia Martha Dillon,
Pro Se
ADJUDICATION
BACKGROUND:
This proceeding arises out of a citation that was issued on April 30, 1998, by the Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement of the Pennsylvania State Police (hereinafter Bureau) against Virginia Martha Dillon, License Number R-6013 (hereinafter Licensee).
The citation contains two counts.
The first count charges Licensee with violation of Section 5.52 of the Liquor Control Board Regulations [40 Pa.
Code §5.52], in that on March 18, 1998, Licensee, by her servants, agents or employes, failed to maintain coil cleaning records.
The second count charges Licensee with violation of Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] and Section 5513 of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.
C.S. §5513], in that on March 18, 1998, Licensee, by her servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries, poolselling and/or bookmaking on her licensed premises.
An administrative hearing was conducted on September 17, 1998, at Two Parkway Center, 875 Greentree Road, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The Bureau was represented by Richard Parker, Esquire.
Licensee Virginia Martha Dillon appeared on her own behalf.
After hearing the testimony presented, and upon review of the evidence submitted, the following Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are entered:
FINDINGS OF FACT :
1.
The Bureau commenced its investigation of Licensee's premises on November 19, 1996, and completed its investigation on March 30, 1998.
(Exhibit C-1)
2.
The Bureau notified Licensee of the nature of the violation(s) disclosed by its investigation by letter dated April 1, 1998, which was sent by certified mail and received by Licensee on April 7, 1998.
(Exhibit C-2)
3.
The citation was issued on April 30, 1998, and was sent by certified mail and received by Licensee on May 2, 1998.
(Exhibits C-3, C-4)
COUNTS 1 AND 2
4.
On March 18, 1998 at 2:35 p.m., a detail consisting of four Liquor Control Enforcement officers entered Licensee's premises, at which time Enforcement Officer Daniel J. West identified himself to bartender Beth Anne Bertovich who was in charge of the premises and rendering service to two patrons.
(N.T. 10-11)
5.
Officer West advised Ms. Bertovich that the officers were present to conduct an open inspection.
Upon entering, Officer West noted that there were three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines located in an adjoining room.
(N.T. 11)
6.
During the course of this inspection, Officer West proceeded behind the bar and noted that Licensee maintained a beer tap system for draft beer.
At this time, Officer West requested that Ms. Bertovich provide him with Licensee's tap and coil cleaning records.
(N.T. 12-13)
7.
Ms. Bertovich advised Officer West that she did not know where the tap and coil cleaning records were located, and was unable to provide them to Officer West for his review.
(N.T. 13)
COUNT 2
8.
During the course of this open inspection, Enforcement Officer Joseph M. Cozzoli examined each of the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines located on the premises.
(N.T. 23)
9.
Officer Cozzoli placed one dollar into each of the video slot machines, causing 20 credits to appear on the screen of each machine.
Officer Cozzoli played each machine, which required a minimum bet of eight credits.
Play was activated by pressing a button and watching a simulation of various symbols rolling on the screen.
These symbols stopped at random and required no skill to play.
Finally, Officer Cozzoli noted that each of the three video slot machines contained a button located on the rear panel of the machine, which caused the credits displayed to be cleared upon activation of this button.
(N.T. 23-25)
10.
Officer Cozzoli then seized the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines, after determining that each machine was operational and contained a method of clearing accrued credits.
These machines were then transported and stored in the Bureau's District 4 warehouse.
(N.T. 25)
11.
On March 28, 1998, Officer West, pursuant to a Search Warrant, examined the internal components of the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines seized from Licensee's premises during the open inspection of March 18, 1998.
Officer West also found that each machine contained internal metering components.
In the opinion of Officer West, play on each of these machines was based solely on chance and required no skill.
(N.T. 14-18)
DISCUSSION:
At the administrative hearing, the Bureau presented the testimony of Liquor Control Enforcement Officers West and Cozzoli who participated in an open inspection of Licensee's premises held at 2:35 p.m. on March 18, 1998.
Upon entering, Officer West identified himself to bartender Beth Anne Bertovich who was in charge of the premises and rendering service to patrons.
At the outset, Officer West proceeded behind the bar while Officer Cozzoli commenced an inspection of the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines.
COUNT 1
While behind the bar, Officer West noted that Licensee maintained a tap system to dispense draft beer, at which time he requested Licensee's coil cleaning records.
Ms. Bertovich was unable to furnish Officer West with these records, indicating that she was not familiar with the place where Licensee kept these records.
At the hearing, Licensee Virginia Martha Dillon represented that she would be able to produce her receipts for the cleaning of the draft beer tap system in a very short period of time.
Consequently, this court kept the record open for a period of one week in order that Ms. Dillon could furnish these records to this court and Bureau's counsel.
On September 28, 1998, Ms. Dillon furnished this court and Bureau's counsel with a letter from Harlan Wright, generally indicating that coil cleaning services had been performed at Licensee's premises on a weekly basis since October 4, 1990.
Section 5.52 of the Liquor Control Board states:
Certificate or record required.
(a) Coils, tap rods and connections may be cleaned for the licensee by a person, other than another licensee, thoroughly equipped to do so by a method enumerated in Sec. 5.51 (relating to cleaning of coils, tap rods and connections).
The licensee should obtain from the cleaner a certificate showing the date cleaned, the name of the person by whom cleaned and the method utilized.
The certificate shall be kept on file at all times for inspection by the Board.
(b) Coils, tap rods and connections may be cleaned by the licensee himself by a method enumerated in Section 5.51.
The licensee shall maintain and keep a record of the date of each cleaning and the method utilized.
This record shall also be kept on file at all times for inspection by the Board.
Therefore, this court concludes that the letter from Harlan Wright submitted by Licensee does not fulfill the regulatory requirements that actual records be maintained on the premises.
COUNT 2
As the result of this inspection, Officer Cozzoli determined that the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines maintained on Licensee's premises were operational.
Officer Cozzoli placed one dollar into each machine causing 20 credits to appear on each screen.
Officer Cozzoli then placed a minimum bet of eight credits on each machine, then cleared the remaining 12 credits by pressing a button located in the rear panel of each machine.
In the opinion of Officer Cozzoli, these machines required no skill to play.
These machines were then seized and transported for storage in the Bureau's District 4 warehouse.
On March 28, 1998, pursuant to a Search Warrant, Officer West examined the internal components of the three "Dyna Cherry Master" video slot machines seized from Licensee's premises on March 18, 1998.
This examination revealed that in addition to the "knock-off" feature, each machine also contained video accounting capabilities which maintained a running total of currency inserted into the machine, and "coins in," as well as those credits which had been cleared or "knocked off."
In Two Electronic Poker Game Machines, 465 A.2d 973 (Pa. 1983), our Supreme Court held:
Historically, we have held a machine is a gambling device per se if it can be used for no purpose other than gambling.
This broad standard must be interpreted to provide a meaningful test for judging a given machine.
If it is to be useful, it cannot mean that the machine could not possibly be used for any activity other than gambling, because almost any machine including the Electro-Sport, can be used for non-gambling (e.g. pure amusement) purposes.
Instead, the inquiry must be whether the machine is "so intrinsically connected with gambling" as to constitute a gambling device per se .
Such a determination will turn on the characteristics of the machine when read against the three elements necessary to gambling: consideration, a result determined by chance rather than skill, and a reward.
If the machine displays all three qualities, it will then be "so intrinsically connected with gambling" as to be a gambling devices per se.
(Emphasis added)
Based on the foregoing, this court is of the opinion that the Bureau has established the violations as charged in counts one and two of this citation by a clear preponderance of the evidence.
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board v. Leggens, 542 A.2d 653 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1988); Omicron Enterprises, 449 A.2d 857 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1982).
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW :
1.
The notice provisions as prescribed by Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] have been satisfied.
2.
On March 18, 1998, Licensee, by her servants, agents or employes, failed to maintain coil cleaning records, in violation of Section 5.52 of the Liquor Control Board Regulations.
3.
On March 18, 1998, Licensee, by her servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries on her licensed premises, in violation of Section 5513 of the Crimes Code, which constitutes "sufficient cause," as that term is used in Section 471 of the Liquor Code, thereby subjecting Licensee to the penalties provided by that Section.
PRIOR RECORD :
Licensee has been licensed since October 4, 1990, and has had one prior violation, to wit: Citation No. 93-1455.
Fine $250.00.
Waiver of hearing.
1.
Illegal gambling (sign-up book).
On 25 dates between January 14 and June 23, 1993.
PENALTY :
Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] prescribes a penalty of license suspension or revocation or a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 or both for violations of the types found in this case.
Relative to count two, this court is of the opinion that Licensee's possession and operation of electronic poker machines, slot machines, or similar devices used for gambling purposes on its licensed premises constitutes a relatively severe gambling offense warranting more than a minimal penalty.
For the foregoing reasons, the following penalties shall be imposed:
Count one - $50.00.
Count two - $500.00.
ORDER:
THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that Virginia Martha Dillon, License Number R-6013, pay a fine of $550.00 within 20 days of the mailing date of this Order.
In the event the aforementioned fine is not paid within 20 days from the mailing date of this Order, Licensee's license shall be suspended or revoked and the bond forfeited.
The fine must be paid by Treasurer's Check, Cashier's Check, Certified Check or Money Order.
Personal checks, which include business-use personal checks, are not acceptable.
Please make your guaranteed check payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and mail to:
PLCB-Office of Administrative Law Judge
Brandywine Plaza
2221 Paxton Church Road
Harrisburg PA 17110-9661
Dated this day of ____________________, 1998.
Roderick Frisk, J.
bas
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
