The United States Diplomatic Mission to Nigeria U.S. Mission, Nigeria 
Vol. 10, No. 4
Go to Table of Contents
June 2003
Send your comments to the Editor
Some of the traditional dancers that Borgatti photographed when she was first in Nigeria in the 1970s.
Some of the traditional dancers that Borgatti photographed when she was first in Nigeria in the 1970s
Mother, Daugther Win Prestigeous Grants for Research in Nigeria and Hungary
By Jacqueline Reis With contributions from Borgatti and Morrison ©2002 Telegram 
Opening the door to the Morrison/Borgatti home in the U.S. is a bit like crawling through a wormhole to other parts of the globe.
A large wooden chicken from the Philippines stands outside the kitchen, books about musical instruments from Hungary lie on the coffee table, and tapes of a foreign language play in another room.
For Jean Borgatti, 57, and her daughter Cecily Morrison, 21, the house is a launching pad.
Both have distinguished academic backgrounds, and both have received Fulbright grants to study abroad this year.
Borgatti, an associate professor of art history at Clark University, received a teaching and research grant and came to Nigeria to work with two universities and to reinterview people she first talked to in the 1970s when she was researching her doctoral dissertation.
Morrison recently graduated summa cum laude (Phi Beta Kappa) from Barnard College in New York and left last summer for Hungary, where she is studying how bagpipes have fit into Hungarian culture in three different time periods.
Shes just starting, and Im kind of winding things up, Borgatti said.
The Fulbright Program is named after Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas, who introduced legislation to create the program in 1946.
It selects scholars and professionals for their leadership potential and sends them abroad for further international study.
The State Department awards about 4500 Fulbright grants annually.
No one interviewed for this article could say whether Borgatti and Morrison are the first mother and daughter to receive grants in the same year.
For Morrison, the trip preparation involved working hard on her Hungarian and packing up her violins and bagpipes.
She has played the bagpipes since she was 8 years old, and also learned to play the Scottish small pipes, which she describes as an indoor version.
She arrived in Hungary earlier than the other Fulbright scholars so that she could learn more of the language, visit music camps outside Budapest and try to track down the oldest bagpipe player, who was turning 104.
Musicians there tend to play until theyre really old, she said.
Borgatti left for Nigeria at the end of August, after she had gathered the 120 pounds of books and teaching materials she was allowed to ship.
The universities, and resources they have, have suffered.
There just arent the kinds of resources that you would get at an American university, she said.
Morrison will stay in Budapest for at least 10 months, while her mother will be in Nigeria for about nine months.
Morrison said she is not sure where shell next turn her attention, although musics effect on the brain is one area of interest.
Borgatti has more definite goals: publishing books with her new research and the research she started before Ms. Morrison was born.
I cant say Ive got 20 more years to do it, like I could 20 years ago.
Its time, she said, to give birth to this baby.
Excerpts from Morrisons journal: Recently, I went to a lecture by a Hungarian bagpiper living in Americaand I met all the prominent people who play bagpipes in Hungary.
I am now teaching the wife of Hungarys first revivalist bagpiper! This past weekend I headed to Romania to go hiking with my former roommate from Glasgow, Nicoleta.
Yes, we went Romanian stylewalking through the foliage singing full volume, clambering up rocks with big packs full of glass jars and no ropes.
But, oh how beautiful the view.
The leaves are turning and all we could see for miles was red and yellow rolling hills, against a crystal clear blue sky.
I am heading to Germany on Thursday for my winter break, to look at bagpipes and attend some concerts, but until then I have a lot of work to do.
Excerpts from Borgattis journal: Its hot, Im uncomfortable, my car is unreliable; my classroom not always available, the electricity unpredictable -- but Im very glad to be back and happier than I deserve to be away from my American family and friends.
Accomplished: a homepage for the Department of Fine Arts linked to the Uniben website; a column on international opportunities for artists and scholars in the Uniben news; contact between Widernet.org and the Uniben computer people; a weekly program of African art history videos open to all students on the Ekenwan Campus one night a week; and, a paper presented on the life history of a traditional African artist from Edo North.
Im looking forward to my winter break, and some real winter, joining my daughter in Budapest and meeting up there with my husband and son for a family reunion.
¤
<
CrossRoads Archive | Electronic Journals | White House News and Policy Secretary of State Recent Statements | Washington File - Africa
This site was created by the U.S. Embassy Public Affairs Sections.
Please, send your comments on Web-related issues to the Webmaster Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
