Press Release Dividing Line Biography Constituent Services En Espanol News Legislative Information Press Area Speeches and Articles Rhode Island Visit Washington For Students Back one page Seal of the state of Rhode Island Home Reed Tells Senate to Protect Investors and Punish Corporate Crime Thursday, July 11, 2002 WASHINGTON - In a speech on the floor of the United States Senate today, U.S. Senator Jack Reed (D-RI) called upon his colleagues to approve legislation that would require greater regulation of the accounting industry, impose tighter restrictions on corporate auditors and create stronger criminal penalties for individuals who defraud investors.
Reed, a member of the Senate Banking Committee which drafted the bill, stated, "Our country currently faces a very difficult period in its economic life, and the legislation before us today begins to take the necessary steps to help right the nation's financial and economic ship, and regain the confidence of this country's citizens, as well as those of the rest of the world."
The Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act is intended to protect employees, pension holders and investors by creating oversight, accountability, and increased funding for enforcement.
Senator Paul Sarbanes (D-MD) introduced the "Investor's Bill of Rights" in reaction to the recent revelations of illegal business practices and abuses by multi-million and multi-billion dollar corporations such as Enron and Global Crossing.
Reed stated, "This carefully crafted legislation achieves what Republicans in the House and the President are falling woefully short of doing.
And that is quite simply, restoring confidence in our markets, protecting innocent individual investors, and of course ensuring that bad actors will be dealt with accordingly."
The bill creates a strong oversight board to establish and enforce new standards for auditing public companies; adopts restrictions on non-audit services, such as consulting, that accounting firms can provide to public company audit clients; increases the budget of the Securities and Exchange Commission to $776 million to enhance its investigation and enforcement capabilities; implements new corporate responsibility standards; requires quick and accurate disclosure of financial information; and prohibits conflicts of interest that could compromise stock analysts' independence.
An amendment by Senator Patrick Leahy (D-VT), which Reed supported and was approved by Senate yesterday, would add important provisions to the criminal code to help deter and punish securities fraud.
The amendment creates two new felonies to the criminal code.
One for defrauding shareholders of publicly traded companies, and one for destruction of evidence or the creation of evidence with the intent to obstruct a federal agency or criminal investigation.
It also provides whistle-blower protections to employees of publicly traded companies for reporting fraud.
This is meant to encourage more employees to lawfully disclose fraudulent activities within their own company.
The amendment also increases the ability of defrauded investors to recover their losses by lengthening the statute of limitations for securities fraud.
The Leahy amendment extends the statute of limitations to 5 years after the fraud, or 2 years after the fraud was discovered.
-end-
