House Committee on Small Business "The Offshoring of High Skilled Jobs" October 20, 2003 Prepared Remarks of Dr. Harris N. Miller, President, Information Technology Association of America (ITAA)
Introduction
Good morning Mr. Chairman and members of the House Small Business Committee.
I am Harris N. Miller, President of the Information Technology Association of America (ITAA).
I am delighted to participate in this important and timely discussion of offshore outsourcing and its impact on white-collar employment in this country.
I commend the Committee, under your leadership, Mr. Chairman, for bringing some facts and rational analysis to what is often a very emotional issue.
No economic story is more important or more perplexing than the nexus of jobs, competition, and value creation for the customer.
Throw into this mix the introduction of productivity enhancing technology, new business models, free trade principles, as well as the assortment of often entrenched interests represented in the commercial marketplace, and I believe you have set the stage for a discussion of major significance to the nation's future.
Offshore outsourcing is an issue that has caught the attention of the media, elected officials, IT customers, and ITAA members in a big way.
These are the companies that have built the information technology industry in the United States.
ITAA member firms provide computer software, services, e-commerce, hardware, communications and systems integration to meet today's business demand for efficiency, productivity, quality and customer service.
Many of these firms often generate 50 percent or more of their sales in overseas markets.
If we look more closely at the ITAA membership, we find that the overwhelming majority of these firms are small businesses, many with annual revenues of $50 million or less.
Their customers could be located around the world, but most are likely to be found around the corner, over on Main Street, in the local industrial park, or in a nearby town.
Beyond a passion for using information technology to solve customer problems, what these small companies share in common is the dream of becoming even bigger companies.
Times have changed, however.
Competitors in India, China, Israel, Ireland, Canada, Mexico, Russia, Argentina, the Philippines, and other countries have become well aware of the American appetite for IT solutions.
The ones that have been successful among these new global competitors have built a tech-savvy base of workers.
They have invested in infrastructure.
They have made a commitment to quality.
And they have paid their dues by performing well on low-level tasks for clients in the US, Japan, Western Europe, Australia, and other highly industrialized economies.
Now they want to share in the dream.
The multinational members of my organization have an intuitive understanding of global competition.
They know that fair competition opens incredible growth opportunities, many of them in developing economies.
They also know what it means to have their way barred by unfair trade restrictions in foreign markets.
And they realize that the only way to have barriers come down overseas is to keep our own domestic marketplace open to competitors from abroad.
To small IT companies, however, the meaning of global competition is not so obvious to business success and it may instead be quite alarming.
That is why ITAA has been an "early and often" advocate for a better understanding of the offshore outsourcing phenomenon.
I gave my first talk on offshore competition soon after I came to ITAA more than eight years ago, but few paid attention, because in an era of incredibly rapid growth in the US IT industry, foreign competitors were a mere blip.
Also, there was, frankly, a certain arrogance among US IT companies and government about our ability to continue our strong dominance in the global services and software markets.
As part of our educational efforts, this fall, we have conducted a series of press and analyst outreach meetings around the country on this topic, including at each senior officials from the U.S. Department of Commerce, providing a forum for candid discussion and exchange of views.
This summer, we published a statement of principles about this important issue, which I have submitted along with this testimony.
I have participated in numerous speaking events and media interviews on the subject.
And we are conducting other projects in this area that will help educate our members and the larger business and customer community.
Before proceeding to a more detailed analysis, I would like to make two general points: while the times have changed, the fundamental business rationale for outsourcing is as old as the IT business itself.
The roots of ITAA's more than four-decade history are firmly planted in a tradition of data center outsourcing, remote processing and timesharing.
Today, "timesharing" means buying two-weeks at a condo in Naples, Florida.
In the earlier days of the computer industry, however, timesharing was a common way for government agencies and commercial customers to contract out and thereby gain access to the latest in computer, networking and software technology.
In doing so, customers got their data processed and also controlled costs, gained the benefits of competitive pricing, and stayed focused on core business processes.
The business fundamentals of outsourcing really have not changed.
Outsourcing--rather than trying to build and retain a substantial in-house capability-- remains the most effective strategy for conducting a wide variety of IT operations.
Secondly, I would like to draw your attention to the distinction between "outsourcing" and "offshoring."
Offshore development and maintenance is a subset of outsourcing.
The outsourcing provider may perform services on shore, offshore, or in some combination of the two.
The decision is based on a variety of factors, not the least of which is customer preference.
Another phrase being used more widely is "near shore," which normally means work down outside the US in our neighbors to the immediate north or south, Canada or Mexico.
Because this issue is so important to us, we were especially gratified to see Intel Board Chairman Andrew S. Grove address it at a recent industry meeting in Washington, D.C.
As one of the IT industry's leading thinkers, innovators and business executives, his words resonate across national borders, government branches and market sectors.
Grove warned that without real vision and decisive action, the U.S. software and services industry could go the way of the steel industry.
As a native of Western Pennsylvania who worked his way through college, in part, by working in a steel mill, I have seen what economic obsolescence can do to companies, a community and, ultimately, to the working lives of average people.
We agree with Andy Grove that globalization is creating a new competitive reality for employers, employees, government agencies and academia.
"Globalization" has also become the phenomenon that draws together numerous public policy threads: trade, business immigration, education and training, protectionism, global tax policy, and employment.
As a growing number of countries create the resources to compete for global IT business, particularly the business located in this country, the U.S. information technology industry finds itself in the difficult position of responding to pricing pressure from abroad while assuring that the domestic talent pool--from which it has built a world class presence over 50 years--does not shrink to levels dangerous for its own technical and economic viability over the long term.
ITAA believes that the U.S. cannot legislate or regulate its way out of this perplexing situation.
At the same time, however, to do nothing--as Bobby McFerrin sang, "Don't Worry, Be Happy"--is to risk an ever-increasing number of knowledge worker jobs disappearing overseas.
We also understand such a position is not acceptable to this Committee and others in Congress who are hearing from constituents concerns about he the future of the US IT industry.
To retain preeminence in global markets, ITAA advocates a New Competitive Reality Program for the US IT industry that involves all key stakeholders--IT companies, customers, government officials, the education community, and workers.
Such a Program requires 1) detailed analysis of the situation, 2) examination of various policy and programmatic approach to address identified challenges, and 3) a plan of action to implement critical policies and programs.
Such a Program, rather than knee jerk legislative or regulatory solutions, is the way to preserve global competitiveness.
Lets talk about what this new competitive reality entails and how, as a nation, we must adjust our public policy agenda to remain at the forefront.
Offshore Outsourcing in Perspective
First, understand that, in statistical terms, the trend towards offshore outsourcing is a cloud on the horizon, not a hurricane sweeping everything in its midst.
We should keep our eye on how the weather pattern is changing over time, but we should not start boarding up our windows and stashing the patio furniture.
The US IT industry is facing new challenges, but it is not disappearing.
I say this because over 10 million Americans earn their living in the IT workforce.
Nine out of ten these workers are employed by businesses outside of the IT industry--banks, law firms, factories, stores, and the like.
Eight out of ten of these jobs are found in small businesses--the firms arguably least likely to seek a global solution or to attract a global solution provider.
Even the most doom and gloom analysts predict that fewer than 500,000 computer-specific jobs will move offshore in the next ten years.
If we have seen any storm at all, it has been the three year "perfect storm" of trends converging to depress the short-term demand for US IT workers: the dot.com bust, the telecom collapse, the recession and jobless recovery, and slow customer spending, domestically and globally, for new IT products and services.
A depression in the need for IT workers has increased attention paid to the offshore outsourcing issue.
Only a few years ago, we had virtually full employment in the IT industry.
If the economy improves and demand increases, we will see the super-charged emotional environment surrounding this issue begin to dissipate, too.
I am pleased to report that there are several data points put out by the US government and private sector analysts indicating that IT spending is increasing this year by several percentage points after two years of substantial declines.
I do not mean to diminish or downplay the very real impacts of offshore competition to American IT workers or their families.
Thousands of IT professionals have played by the rules: studied hard in school, worked long hours, made a sweat equity investment in the future of their companies.... only to find themselves now unemployed or underemployed.
A more vibrant economy and greater capital spending by the private sector will greatly help these particular individuals.
Not all of the current concerns, however, can be attributed to the economy, and we need to better understand this new competitive reality, using logic--not emotion--as our filter.
The New Competitive Reality
The first hard truth is that many large corporate customers in this country are demanding that offshore IT services be included in a competitive outsourcing bid.
These customers have been attracted by offshore firms offering substantial price savings for IT services like software code writing and testing, as well as for business processes supported by information technology, like claims processing or customer support.
Even companies that are keeping their IT work internal are moving some of it offshore.
As an example, a scripted call center worker in Mumbai might earn $1.50 per hour, compared to $10 per hour in Kansas City.
An insurance claims adjuster in this country might earn $1,500 per month, compared to $300 per month in India.
And the $75,000 annual take home pay for a certified public accountant in the U.S. might be only $15,000 in India.
Whether cost savings continues to be a significant driver remains to be seen.
As one travels up the "value chain," the need for personal interaction with the customer increases, training increases, complexity increases, the potential for lost productivity increases, and so the total cost spread between the American and Indian worker decreases.
From this perspective, the savings might be as little as 20 cents on the dollar.
The second hard truth is that some offshore service providers are delivering quality services at what many customers perceive to be a fraction of the cost.
In the U.S., the Department of Defense has set the Capability Maturity Model (CMM) as the quality standard for assessing its system and software development contractors.
U.S. firms not seeking DoD business have largely ignored the model.
Many firms in India, although not seeking DoD business, have pursued and received CMM level five certification--the highest such rating level--as a means of objectively demonstrating to customers the rigor of their software processes.
Candidly, they have made a commitment that many software companies in this country are unwilling or unable to make.
The third hard truth is that offshore companies will compete for increasingly more sophisticated and complex IT work.
I believe that the Year 2000 software conversion allowed many offshore firms to gain a foothold in the U.S. marketplace that had previously been denied them.
In that particular case, the sheer volume and time pressure involved in performing date remediation forced U.S. customers to consider offshore alternatives.
Having proven themselves well able to find and correct Y2K date references, these international firms began seeking business opportunities in areas such as system design, application development and maintenance.
In many cases, such firms will establish a U.S. presence to provide customer interaction-intensive IT services like business process consulting, functional requirements definition, requirements specification and high-level design.
Once ambiguity about how a system or business process must work is resolved, the system or software development project can be sent overseas for actual programming and testing.
I know personally many of the CEO's of these IT services companies based outside the US, and I can tell from many personal discussions that they envision themselves as global players up and down the IT complexity chain, not constrained to low-end IT work.
The fourth hard truth is that while it may be emotionally satisfying to try to protect jobs by throwing up barriers, free trade and global markets spark investment, trade and job creation.
For Americans caught in the riptide of a transitioning job market, economic abstractions like positive trade balances and expanding free markets may be the source of cold comfort.
I reject, however, the notion that offshore development is a zero sum game or that every job shipped offshore is a job permanently lost to an American worker.
On the contrary, evidence abounds that the working capital U.S. companies save by moving jobs and operations offshore results in new investment, innovation and job creation in this country.
A fifth hard truth is that in certain circumstances the productivity-enhancing technology innovations, products and services developed by American companies and workers are now being used by foreign firms to compete for American jobs.
High-speed broadband communications, for instance, is eliminating the bandwidth limitations that heretofore made the sharing of large data files or collaborating on real-time development projects onerous or impossible.
Advances in areas like Voice Over the Internet Protocol may erase the idea of distance as a cost barrier to communications.
The irony is that bridge building is always a two-way proposition.
The Competitive Reality and Public Policy Choices
If the truth is hard, this new competitive reality may mandate a public policy logic that is harder still.
A vibrant U.S.
IT industry based is critical to the nation's future for many reasons:
o Near term product and service innovation
o Next generation technology breakthroughs
o Research and development, within the IT industry as well as other industries
o Immersion of IT knowledge and expertise in other domains and industry sectors
o Domestic economic and productivity growth
o Trade expansion
o National security
Part of this new competitive reality is free market capitalism.
To remain pre-eminent in global markets, U.S.
IT companies must be the most globally competitive companies.
This may require an adjustment to pricing models.
The biggest part demands an overhaul of the basic value equation.
U.S.
IT companies must meet the challenge of cost, quality and innovation.
This means companies must have the flexibility to align their operations as necessary to meet customer demands, whether this means an onshore, near shore or offshore, or some combination of the three.
The customer wants value (which is more than simple price), and US companies must offer it to compete successfully.
Part of the new competitive reality is education, training and retooling.
The prominence of the U.S.
IT industry in world markets is a testament to the technical prowess of U.S.
IT workers.
IT workers must have the skills and skill refreshment strategies necessary to generate value and compete successfully with global counterparts.
Historically, less attention has been paid to the employability of U.S.
IT workers: high demand, double-digit industry growth rates, and little foreign competition for services jobs would have heretofore rendered such considerations beside the point.
With overseas competition building, productivity rising and demand slackening, a new emphasis is needed to assure worker--and therefore U.S.
IT industry--competitiveness.
Now, after steady gains since 1997, there is some evidence to suggest that undergraduate interest in computer science degrees may be abating somewhat--though is being offset by growth in for profit post-secondary educational institutions and community colleges.
We must recognize that true workforce competitiveness requires a lifelong commitment, beginning with math and science education in K-12 that gives children the motivation and the foundation necessary to select future technical careers--rather than act as a screen and barrier that forecloses options.
More American students must seek advanced degrees in information technology, rather than cede these seats to foreign students, and companies must do their part by providing internships, mentorships and other mechanisms for purposeful transition from school to work.
Technologies like broadband can also play an important role, breaking down the barriers of time and space so that distance learning becomes every bit as viable to education as spending four years on a college campus.
Whether the current situation with respect to offshoring is structural or cyclical, ITAA believes the time has come for industry, government, and academia to take steps to sustain a high caliber IT workforce in this country.
One such initiative might be the creation of a National Center for IT Workforce Competitiveness.
Such a Center would develop and implement technology trend-spotting, skills analysis and communications programs:
o Serving as an interface between academia and the IT industry in helping to assure the appropriateness, salience and durability of IT education within undergraduate and graduate degree programs;
o Gathering, analyzing and articulating industry requirements for IT workers five years into the future;
o Tracking the penetration of IT skills into other fields of endeavor;
o Communicating IT skill trends and directions to current and future IT workers.
Part of the new competitive reality must be a commitment to free trade, open markets and liberalized trade in services.
The fastest growing IT markets are not in the U.S. or Western Europe, but in the developing world.
One of the few bright spots in the U.S. balance of trade is trade in IT services--currently a $7.9 billion surplus.
To put it simply, we create many more jobs by selling abroad than we lose by buying from foreign markets.
IT is a big winner for the US in the global marketplace.
Any model of globalization that allows emerging countries to target the U.S.
IT marketplace while keeping their own closed to competition is simply unacceptable.
But we also do not want to start a global trade war in one of the few areas in which the US maintains a major global trading surplus.
Barriers to trade in services include governments which fail to solicit competitive bids on major procurements or bar participation of foreign providers; place discriminatory or cost prohibitive controls on in-country telecommunications networks or services; impose unfair tax rates or red tape tax collection regimes on the services of foreign firms; refuse to apply national treatment to trading partners; look the other way on intellectual property protection, piracy and copyright infringement; and create national laws in areas like domestic content or native culture preservation that are simply out of step with international norms.
International trading partners must be encouraged to make in-country IT infrastructure investments and to establish the legal, social and economic conditions that encourage foreign investment.
Part of the new competitive reality will be a commitment to research and development.
The role of innovation in building our economy cannot be overstated.
Successive waves of innovation produced the microelectronics, personal computer and Internet revolutions.
Global spending for information and communications technology (ICT) has risen over $1 trillion in the last ten years, and this figure does not include the value of goods and services customers produced using these ICT resources.
While it is difficult to say precisely how much of this spending is the result of innovation and research, one can say that the economic footprint of basic research on the IT industry has been enormous.
Microelectronics, for example, developed largely through government research and development expenditures, now accounts for 10 percent of the U.S. economy.
The question is how the national commitment to R
Since 1980, industry has steadily replaced the federal government as the predominant source of R
Of the total $264.6 billion spent for R
Industry cannot go it alone, and, indeed, many companies have cut into R
The federal government can help address this situation and assure that R
By creating a permanent R
Information technology in particular is a research-intensive industry.
Products can move from concepts to markets in 18 months or less.
Given this rapid pace of change--and the technology breakthroughs made possible by ever increasing processor power--competitive advantage is defined by a company's ability to predict market directions and to innovate to meet those market demands.
Research determines the extent to which IT companies will be innovators or imitators.
The R
A more aggressive approach to research generally yields more bountiful returns to company investors, customers, employees and the U.S. economy as a whole.
Studies show that every one-dollar reduction in the after-tax cost of R
We also need an increased spending by the Federal government on IT R
One area of immediate attention is funding for cybersecurity research.
Congress authorized a major increase in cybersecurity R
Part of the new competitive reality is to lead by example in global markets.
Several legislative attempts at the federal or state level have attempted to create procurement requirements for domestically produced content or place limitations on the location of unclassified government work.
These are counterproductive.
The Buy American provision of the Defense Authorization Bill, for instance, would create domestic content thresholds that few information technology products could meet.
Not only would this measure place the U.S. defense establishment at an extreme disadvantage, it would quickly become a standard non-tariff trade barrier adopted by countries around the world.
Such approaches shrink global market opportunities and depress job creation at home.
Part of the new competitive reality is a corporate tax policy that brings capital back to the United States.
At 35 percent, U.S. tax rates at present create an incentive for American companies with international business operations not to repatriate their profits.
This is an unfortunate situation because it deprives companies the opportunity to invest that capital in this country.
Such investment could grow companies, create new products and services, and new jobs for American workers.
The Homeland Investment Act would address this situation, providing a one-time drop in rates to attract these multi billions of dollars home.
Everyone agrees that the U.S. international tax system needs to be fixed, but that is a longer term legislative challenge.
In the mean time, this particular tax rate cut would level the global playing field, and even just a one-time cut will be good for both business and workers.
Conclusion: Stay the Course
The displacement of workers is never easy, nor is the confusion created when companies adjust to changing consumer demand, price pressure and evolving technology.
The human reaction to such perturbations is to act out rather than stay the course.
In concluding my testimony, I would suggest that several trends and circumstances suggest the steadfast approach is the wisest approach in these troubled times.
One need only look to the demographic census of the U.S. to understand that any current excess in availability of IT workers will quickly dissipate as baby boomers begin to retire.
The U.S. workforce grew 54 percent between 1980 and 2000; during the next 20 years, growth in workers between the ages of 25 and 54 will be just 3 percent.
The likelihood that developing world countries will cultivate sufficient talent to do more than backfill unavoidable U.S.
IT shortages seems remote.
Whether or not this is indeed the case needs exploration.
Too much of the public discourse on this topic is driven by personal anecdote and newspaper headline.
Government, industry and academia must work together to build the solid econometric models needed to understand this trend firmly and fully.
Business case analysis is likewise needed to flesh out the details on the offshore value equation.
For many customers and applications, proximity may be the unavoidable cost of doing serious business--the need for constant and comfortable interaction may be the ultimate barrier to widespread offshoring.
We discussed earlier how the technology itself might be facilitating the movement of work overseas.
We may also see technology herald changes that obviate the need to go offshore.
Advances in edge of the network technology, for instance, put more intelligence on the net and closer to the fingertips of actual users.
Standards that allow the easy interconnection of many different types of devices and applications may change the way companies develop and use information technology itself.
Other factors may be beyond the control of information technology practice or business logic.
A major new terrorist attack could change business thinking about offshoring, particularly if incidents escalate and governments appear unable to mount an effective response.
This element is completely unpredictable and will be largely determined by events.
U.S. companies appear to be already sensitive about the type of applications they are willing to outsource overseas.
Companies always engage in risk management in their global operations, and even large companies sending substantial work offshore have indicated to me they have informal internal percentage limits beyond which they will not go in order to mitigate risk.
Information security and the protection of important systems and data also is also a concern, although I see little evidence of companies refusing to go the offshore route for this reason alone.
Other concerns may be more prosaic but still influence the offshore decision.
Such issues include weak intellectual property protections, questionable systems of jurisprudence and missing environmental laws.
Improvements in the U.S. economy will play a major role.
I am confident that the current jobless recovery will relent as displacement and adjustment abate, capital spending increases and new investment opportunities appear.
Absent the irrational exuberance of the Dot.com days, we may not see employers giving away BMWs as signing bonuses or paying six figure incomes to technical people with little or no actual on the job experience.
Instead, in the short to mid-term, downward pressure on salaries will produce more jobs for American workers and, for those simply looking to cut costs, a more competitive payroll picture may undercut their need to move jobs offshore.
We will also catch a new, market redefining technology wave.
I cannot tell you whether it will involve nanotechnology or grid networking, light waves or power lines.
I can tell you that waves of innovation have changed conventional thinking and the market prominence of juggernaut industry players several times in the last 50 years.
I am confident this will happen again and America will once again be the beneficiary.
Voices of doom say the offshore phenomenon spells the end of white collar IT employment, as we know it.
The adherents of Adam Smith say, "Don't worry, be happy."
The answers lie somewhere in between.
We must work together to find them.
_________________________________________________________________
Return to Hearing Summary
Return to Home Page of House Small Business Committee
The United States House of Representatives
Committee on Small Business
2361 Rayburn House Office Building
Washington, DC 20515
Phone: (202) 225-5821 Fax: (202) 225-3587
Email: smbiz@mail.house.gov _________________________________________________________________
