Statement of Doreen Brown President of Consumers for World Trade Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Trade of the House Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on U.S. Efforts to Reduce Barriers to Trade in Agriculture
February 12, 1998
Mister Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, I am Doreen Brown, President of Consumers for World Trade.
As a point of reference, I have served on the National Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations.
I have also been a delegate to the annual U.S.-E.C. Agricultural Conference.
I am accompanied by John Schnittker, Senior Economist, Public Voice for Food and Health Policy, and Dale McNiel, trade attorney with McLeod, Watkinson 
Consumers for World Trade (CWT) is a national, non-profit, non-partisan organization, established in 1978, and dedicated to promoting the consumer interest in international trade policy through advocacy of trade liberalization and through educational programs.
I am delighted that this subcommittee has chosen to conduct hearings on U.S. efforts to reduce barriers to trade in agriculture.
There is no subject that is more timely, and more critical to the continued prosperity of the American agricultural and agribusiness sector and the welfare of the American consumer than the continued expansion of trade in agricultural products.
Although my statement today will focus entirely on the U.S. sugar program, I should like to add that Consumers for World Trade believes strongly in the need for renewal of fast-track negotiating authority and urges Congress to enact clean fast-track legislation as expeditiously as possible.
Without fast-track authority, the 1999 WTO agriculture negotiations round may not be very productive for the United States.
Because agricultural production is an area where the United States enjoys a substantial competitive advantage, it is in our interest to continue to expand agricultural trade by reducing barriers to our exports.
In fact, if one looks at the history of U.S. agriculture, it is clear that agriculture is a sector of the economy that has traditionally been in the position of surplus production in need of access to foreign markets.
It is these surpluses and the resulting depressed prices in the 20th century that have given rise to all manner of government price support and supply management programs.
However, Congress in 1996 took a historic step to remove agriculture's government shackles and encourage it to compete in the world market.
This was done with the passage of the Federal Agricultural Improvement and Reform Act of 1996, known as the "Freedom to Farm" Act.
Unfortunately, there were some notable exceptions in this legislation to provide freedom to farm.
Perhaps the most notable was the sugar price support program, which escaped any meaningful reform.
The domestic loan program for sugar was continued at the same loan rate for raw sugar that had been in effect since 1985.
Thus, the sugar price support program did not contribute to the freedom to farm transition process.
This special treatment for sugar follows a long-term pattern of special treatment for the sugar industry.
During the Uruguay round of trade negotiations, the U.S. sugar program was practically exempted.
There was no real impact on the sugar program, despite significant reductions of tariffs and export subsidies for virtually all other agricultural commodities and products such as wheat, rice, and cotton.
The former U.S. absolute quota on imports of sugar, which had been severely restrictive since May 1982, was held to be inconsistent with the GATT by a dispute settlement panel in 1988.
It was converted to a tariff-rate quota in September 1990.
This tariff-quota had an over-quota duty rate of 16 cents per pound.
During the Uruguay Round, the United States "re-tariffied" the original absolute quota that had been in effect during the base period for market access, despite the GATT ruling against it.
The new tariff-rate quotas had higher over-quota tariff rates of 18.075 per pound for raw sugar and 19.074 per pound for refined sugar.
The tariff-rates were agreed to be reduced only at the minimum of 15%, which for raw sugar will yield a final rate of 15.36 per pound rather than 13.6 per pound, if the existing rate had been used.
In effect, the real rate of reduction of the over-quota tariff will be only 4 percent, from 16 , which existed prior to 1995, to 15.36 over the six-year transition period.
This is the most favorable treatment that was provided for any agricultural crop or product produced in the United States.
Sugar was singled out for a 4% tariff reduction while every other commodity took cuts of at least 15% and most crops had cuts of much more, some as high as 50%.
A 4% reduction is very unlikely to lead to any increased imports of sugar even at the end of the transition period.
This means there was no market access liberalization for sugar.
Likewise, the provisions of the WTO Agreement on Agriculture for internal support reductions had absolutely no impact on the sugar program.
The reductions of internal support were based on an aggregate measure of support (AMS) which encompasses all support for agricultural commodities.
The United States had a large "credit" for reductions of support for virtually all other farm crops in the 1985 and 1990 farm bills and did not need to make further reductions to reach the reduction requirements.
Sugar made no contribution to this credit; the sugar price support loan rates were not reduced by either the Food Security Act of 1985 or the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990.
This preferential treatment for sugar in trade agreements and farm policy is detrimental to American interests for several reasons.
As President of Consumers for World Trade, I object to the fact that consumers ultimately pay the bill for the nearly $1.2 billion annual cost of the sugar program that benefits less than 1% of America's farmers.
As a consumer, I can assure you that this hidden billion dollar "consumer tax" is unfair and could even be added to Congress' tax relief agenda.
From an economic standpoint, I believe that it is highly injurious to the economy of the United States in several respects.
The highly competitive U.S. food industry has to compete with foreign products made with world market sugar that is approximately half the price of our domestic price.
This creates a powerful incentive to move plants and job opportunities to other countries.
From a trade standpoint, I object to the maintenance of a special interest program such as sugar which benefits only a privileged few because it is very detrimental to the long-term best interest of the U.S. economy in general as well as the U.S. agricultural sector.
Clearly, the United States economy has the most to gain from continued liberalization of world trade in American agriculture.
In fact, many agricultural leaders have pointed out that increased trade opportunities are not only desirable, but absolutely necessary to prevent another sharp decline in farm prices and the temptation to return to the discredited supply management policies of the past.
However, the United States negotiators are ill-equipped to push for expanded market access to other countries as long as we maintain a very restrictive special interest program such as the sugar program.
We cannot effectively push for global free trade in agricultural policies if we do not come to the negotiating table with clean hands.
The anomaly of the sugar program has already been pointed out by one of our trading partners.
The NAFTA panel that decided the dairy, poultry and egg case against Canada pointed to the U.S. sugar tariff rate quota as helping to justify its decision in favor of Canada's protectionist policies.
The defenders of the current U.S. sugar program claim that they are in fact advocates of free trade.
They say that they are willing to give up their special privileges if other countries such as the nations of the European Union will give up their sugar subsidies.
This is a red herring for two reasons.
First, U.S. antidumping and counterveiling duty laws protect domestic industries from dumping by foreign businesses and export subsidies by foreign countries.
The United States currently has a countervailing duty of 10.45 per pound on imports of EU sugar, and as a result, there are no such imports.
Therefore, there is no danger of European subsidized sugar being dumped on the U.S. market.
A second and equally important point is that the United States has not waited on the Europeans or any other nation to eliminate their subsidies on other commodities such as corn and wheat before we have eliminated our subsidies on the same commodities.
In fact, in those commodities, we have consciously chosen to pursue free market policies and to seek to open up world markets, despite the fact that the nations of the EU have substantial subsidies for those commodities.
We have pursued free trade in other agricultural commodities because it is in our national interest.
It is in our national interest to also seek to compete in the world sugar market.
We can no longer operate on a two-track system, seeking to have a global market that is free of trade barriers on commodities in which we have determined to be competitive, while continuing to maintain a high protectionist wall for a few special interest commodities like sugar and peanuts.
In addition to the impact that the sugar program has on our own competitive stature, it has disadvantages for the economies of other nations which we seek to help.
The U.S. sugar program harms the economies of the developing countries where there are natural advantages in growing sugar cane.
The Commerce Department once reported that the reductions of the imports of raw sugar during the last half of the 1980s had virtually offset all of the benefits of the first 5 years of the Caribbean Basin Initiative.
A USDA study in 1990 concluded that with the liberalization of market access for sugar, world prices would have been 10% to 30% higher than during the period from 1975-1989, and sugar production in developing countries would have been dramatically higher.
Thus, the incomes of developing countries would be significantly enhanced if the United States liberalized its trade policies for sugar.
The tariff-rate quotas for imports of raw and refined sugars are provided for in additional U.S. note 5 to chapter 15 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
The HTS specifies minimum quota quantities but authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to set the quotas higher in order to achieve adequate supplies at reasonable prices.
For the past two years, the Secretary of Agriculture has established a tariff-rate quota for raw sugar that is automatically increased or reduced at various times during the year depending upon the sugar stocks-to-use ratio announced in the World Agricultural Supply and Demand Estimates (WASDE).
The trigger level that has been used, 15.5 percent, has kept raw sugar prices far above the market price needed to avoid having sugarcane or sugar beet processors forfeit sugar under the loan program.
In fact, Congress imposed a 1 cent per pound forfeiture penalty in the last farm bill which effectively lowered the risk of forfeiture by 1 cent, but the administration has not acted to lower market prices in response.
In summary, the U.S. sugar policy is a very damaging policy that hurts American consumers, American business, American workers, American agriculture, and even our friends in developing countries.
It is a policy that needs to be changed.
The U.S. sugar quota system should be phased out to establish a free and open market for sugar.
_________________________________________________________________
