OPEN SKIES OP-ED FOR TRANSPORT MAGAZINE Rep. James L. Oberstar Ranking Democratic Member Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure U.S. House of Representatives December 23, 1999
For more than 50 years, the United States and United Kingdom have been grappling with the question of whether airline service between our two countries should be provided in an open, free market, or in a market limited by government regulation.
My governments support of free trade goes back to November 21, 1944, when President Franklin Roosevelt sent a telegram to Prime Minister Winston Churchill during the Chicago conference on air commerce in the post-war world.
It read, in part, "a limitation on the number of planes between points [would] place a dead hand on the use of great air trade routes."
At that time, aviation was a small industry, and how it was regulated was not a critical issue for either countrys economy.
Now aviation is a $600 billion sector of the U.S. national economy, and has become the cornerstone upon which all other sectors rely to make economic progress.
The need, both in the U.S. and abroad, to travel by air for business has fostered tremendous growth in aircraft manufacturing, avionics, communications as well as tourism: a $1.6 trillion sector worldwide.
Passenger travel forecasts indicate strong growth over the next five years, with U.S. passenger travel likely exceeding 650 million in 1999 alone.
Leaders at every level of government and the private sector are emphatic that the pivotal factor in attracting or expanding business and generating economic growth is the adequacy of air service and the aviation infrastructure.
The air cargo market is growing faster than any other sector of the aviation industry.
Twenty-one percent of the total value of global trade is shipped by air, and that is forecast to increase to 27 percent by 2008, an average air freight growth of 6.6 percent a year.
To accommodate that growth, Boeing estimates that the worlds jet freighter fleet will have to double by 2017.
That means adding 1,000 more aircraft.
President Roosevelts initial efforts to secure free trade in aviation were not successful.
Our governments efforts to achieve free trade ("open skies") began again after deregulation of domestic aviation in 1978.
Although a much more difficult task than originally anticipated, the Clinton Administration, with my support and that of other Members of Congress, has achieved substantial breakthroughsmore than 70 new bilaterals, including 38 open skies agreements.
Our experience has been that open skies agreements have been pivotal in securing tremendous growth in the world aviation market.
When a protectionist regime is replaced by open skies, market growth increases dramatically, and airlines of both countries share in the growth.
For example, when air service between the U.S. and Canada was limited by a restrictive agreement, the yearly growth was 1.4 percent; after the 1995 open skies agreement, the yearly growth increased to 11 percent.
During the first three years of open skies, 17 U.S.-Canada markets experienced growth of more than 100,000 annual passengers.
In recent months, there has been considerable discussion of whether a true open skies trade regime means allowing greater foreign participation in domestic U.S. air traffic.
Although I have specifically opposed these proposals in the past, I believe that, as we evolve to a full multilateral regime of open skies, we may be able to find ways to increase opportunities for foreign investors and airlines to participate in our market.
The United States and the United Kingdom are currently engaged in talks to determine the future of air commerce between our great nations.
U.S.-U.K. service accounts for half of the $20 billion U.S.-Europe aviation trade.
The current agreement governing air service is the most restrictive agreement we have with a developed aviation partner.
It restricts Londons preferred airport, Heathrow, to two U.S. airlines.
The agreement limits the U.S. cities eligible for non-stop service to London, and caps entry in most markets at one airline from each country.
If we cannot achieve open skies, it is vital that our governments at least reach a balanced bilateral agreement, one that is fair to carriers under both flags, and provides value-for-value access to both markets.
This process, unfortunately, has stagnated.
Both the U.S. and U.K. need to understand the extraordinary benefits available to each country through broadening our bilateral trade and moving to an open skies agreement.
Certainly, there are thorny points on both sides of this issue: the availability of slots at major U.S. airports and London Heathrow, terminal space at Heathrow, the impact of noise on airport neighbors, and access to internal markets.
Issues such as these have been confronted and overcome in bilateral negotiations with other countries.
They can and must be overcome in the U.S.-U.K. negotiations if we are to take full benefit of the extraordinarily valuable North Atlantic aviation trade.
