Press Banner DELAIRE USA INCORPORATED, OF MANASQUAN RECEIVES $34,400 NEW JERSEY DEPARTMENT OF LABOR GRANT FOR TRAINING TO UPGRADE WORKER SKILLS TRENTON, October 25, 2002 - Commissioner Albert G. Kroll of the New Jersey Department of Labor announced that Delaire USA, Inc., of Manasquan, has been awarded a $34,400 Customized Training grant to upgrade the skills of the company's 23 employees.
Delaire USA is investing $29,326 in matching funds to provide the training.
"The Department of Labor's Customized Training Grant Program enables companies such as Delaire USA to compete in today's global economy," said Governor James E. McGreevey.
"The funds support investment in training for new technologies, to increase employees' marketability and earning power, and improve productivity."
New Jersey Labor Commissioner Albert G. Kroll said today, "The future productivity of New Jersey businesses and their ability to compete in this global economy rests on the skills of the workers.
This is the kind of investment that will help keep Delaire USA competitive in this modern economy."
Lorraine Hallock, Delaire USA President said, "We are very pleased to have this kind of partnership with the State of New Jersey in this effort to train our valued employees.
Training provided in manufacturing strategies, performing quality process and product audits, TQM employee awareness, soldering and wire tinning and team building and problem solving will keep Delaire among the leaders in its field.
We hope this training will allow us to grow our business and hire more employees."
Deputy Labor Commissioner, Kevin P. McCabe, presented the company with the training grant on behalf of Governor McGreevey and Commissioner Kroll.
Deputy Commissioner McCabe said, "The leadership at Delaire USA understands the importance of investing for the future.
This company not only is investing in the tools and technology to expand into the fiber-optics market - Delaire USA is investing, with the Labor Department, in the skills of the working men and women of the company."
Customized Training grants are matching grants awarded to New Jersey businesses to provide training to the company's workforce in skills specifically needed to increase productivity and to increase marketability.
The grants, awarded through the New Jersey Department of Labor, are funded through the Workforce Development Partnership Program.
In the past 12 months, 120 companies have been awarded over $16 million in Customized Training grants to upgrade the skills of almost 24,000 employees.
The companies receiving these grants have matched New Jersey's investment with over $25 million of their own resources.
Albert G. Kroll also stated, "We look forward to working with other New Jersey companies who want to educate their employees in the latest technologies and process improvements.
They can learn more about our Customized Training Program by calling 609-292-2239.
Another great source of what's happening in the New Jersey Department of Labor is our website, www.nj.gov/labor."
