U.S. Department of State
Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs June 2003
People History Government Political Conditions Economy Foreign Relations U.S. Relations Travel/Business Background Notes A-Z Background Note: Cambodia
PROFILE
OFFICIAL NAME: Kingdom of Cambodia
Geography Area: 181,040 sq. km. (69,900 sq. mi.); about the size of Missouri.
Cities: Capital--Phnom Penh (pop.
1.2 million), Battambang, Siem Reap, Kompong Cham, Kompong Speu, Kompong Thom.
Terrain: Central plain drained by the Tonle Sap (Great Lake) and Mekong and Bassac Rivers.
Heavy forests away from the rivers and the lake, mountains in the southwest (Cardamom Mountains) and north (Dangrek Mountains) along the border with Thailand.
Climate: Tropical monsoon with rainy season June-Oct. and dry season Nov.-May.
People Nationality: Noun and adjective--Cambodian(s), Khmer.
Population (2003 est.): 12,313,486.
Avg. annual growth rate 2.5%.
Health: Infant mortality rate--95 /1,000.
Life expectancy--54 years male; 58 years female.
Ethnic groups: Cambodian 90%; Chinese and Vietnamese 5% each; small numbers of hill tribes, Chams, and Burmese.
Religions: Theravada Buddhism 95%; Islam; animism; Christian.
Languages: Khmer (official) spoken by more than 95% of the population, including minorities; some French still spoken; English increasingly popular as a second language.
Education: Years compulsory--none.
Enrollment--primary school, 93%; grades 7 to 9, 20%; grades 10 to 12, 7%; and post-secondary, 1.2%.
Literacy (total population over 15 that can read and write, 1998)--67.3% (male 79.5%; female 57.0%).
Government Type: The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC), a constitutional monarchy formed on the basis of elections internationally recognized as free and fair, was established on September 24, 1993.
Independence: November 9, 1953.
Constitution: September 24, 1993.
Branches: Executive--King (head of state), appointed prime minister, two deputy prime ministers, and 25 ministers.
Legislative--National Assembly, consisting of 123 elected members.
Judicial--Supreme Court and lower courts.
Administrative subdivisions: 20 provinces and 4 cities.
Political parties and leaders: RGC Coalition--Cambodian People's Party (CPP), led by Prime Minister Hun Sen; National United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia (FUNCINPEC), led by National Assembly President Prince Norodom Ranariddh.
Outside the RGC: Sam Rainsy Party (SRP), led by Sam Rainsy (main opposition party); several minor parties.
Flag: Two horizontal blue bands, divided by a wider red band on which is centered a white stylized representation of Angkor Wat.
Economy GDP (2002): $3.6 billion.
Per capita GDP (2002): $275.
Annual growth rate (2002): 4.5%.
Inflation (2002): 3.0%.
Natural resources: Timber, gemstones, some iron ore, manganese and phosphate, hydroelectric potential from the Mekong River.
Agriculture (37% of GDP, 2001): About 4,848,000 hectares (12 million acres) are unforested land; all are arable with irrigation, but 2.5 million hectares are cultivated.
Products--rice, rubber, corn, meat, vegetables, dairy products, sugar, flour.
Industry (22% of GDP): Types--garment and shoe manufacturing, rice milling, tobacco, fisheries and fishing, wood and wood products, textiles, cement, some rubber production, paper and food processing.
Services (41% of GDP): Tourism, telecommunications, transportation, and construction.
Central government budget (2002): Revenues--$438 million; expenditure--$630 million; foreign financing--$268 million.
Trade: Exports ($1.451 billion 2001)--garments, shoes, cigarettes, natural rubber, rice, pepper, wood, fish.
Major partners--United States, EU, Singapore, Japan, Thailand, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Indonesia.
Imports ($1.806 billion 2001)--fuels, cigarettes, vehicles, consumer goods, machinery.
Major partners--United States, Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand, EU, Malaysia, Indonesia.
Economic aid received: Pledges of $610 million in grants and concessional loans (2001), with disbursement rate of 77%.
Major donors--Asian Development Bank (ADB), UN Development Program (UNDP), World Bank, International Monetary Fund, Australia, Canada, Denmark, the EU, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Thailand, U.K., U.S. Principle foreign commercial investors: Malaysia, Taiwan, U.S., China, Korea, Hong Kong, Singapore and Thailand.
Exchange rate (2002): 3,950 per U.S.$.
GEOGRAPHY Cambodia is located on mainland Southeast Asia between Thailand to the west and north and Vietnam to the east.
It shares a land border with Laos in the northeast.
Cambodia has a sea coast on the Gulf of Thailand.
The Dangrek Mountain range in the north and Cardamom Mountains in the southwest form natural boundaries.
Principal physical features include the Tonle Sap lake and the Mekong and Bassac Rivers.
Cambodia remains one of the most heavily forested countries in the region, although deforestation continues at an alarming rate.
MODERN HISTORY Although Cambodia had a rich and powerful past under the Hindu state of Funan and the Kingdom of Angkor, by the mid-19th century the country was on the verge of dissolution.
After repeated requests for French assistance, a protectorate was established in 1863.
By 1884, Cambodia was a virtual colony; soon after it was made part of the Indochina Union with Annam, Tonkin, Cochin-China, and Laos.
France continued to control the country even after the start of World War II through its Vichy government.
In 1945, the Japanese dissolved the colonial administration, and King Norodom Sihanouk declared an independent, anti-colonial government under Prime Minister Son Ngoc Thanh in March 1945.
The Allies deposed this government in October.
In January 1953, Sihanouk named his father as regent and went into self-imposed exile, refusing to return until Cambodia gained genuine independence.
Full Independence Sihanouk's actions hastened the French Government's July 4, 1953 announcement of its readiness to grant independence, which came on November 9, 1953.
The situation remained uncertain until a 1954 conference was held in Geneva to settle the French-Indochina war.
All participants, except the United States and the State of Vietnam, associated themselves (by voice) with the final declaration.
The Cambodian delegation agreed to the neutrality of the three Indochinese states but insisted on a provision in the cease-fire agreement that left the Cambodian Government free to call for outside military assistance should the Viet Minh or others threaten its territory.
Neutral Cambodia Neutrality was the central element of Cambodian foreign policy during the 1950s and 1960s.
By the mid-1960s, parts of Cambodia's eastern provinces were serving as bases for North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong (NVA/VC) forces operating against South Vietnam, and the port of Sihanoukville was being used to supply them.
As NVA/VC activity grew, the United States and South Vietnam became concerned, and in 1969, the United States began a series of air raids against NVA/VC base areas inside Cambodia.
Throughout the 1960s, domestic politics polarized.
Opposition grew within the middle class and among leftists, including Paris-educated leaders such as Son Sen, Ieng Sary, and Saloth Sar (later known as Pol Pot), who led an insurgency under the clandestine Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK).
The Khmer Republic and the War In March 1970, Gen. Lon Nol deposed Prince Sihanouk and assumed power.
On October 9, the Cambodian monarchy was abolished, and the country was renamed the Khmer Republic.
Hanoi rejected the new republic's request for the withdrawal of NVA/VC troops and began to reinfiltrate some of the 2,000-4,000 Cambodians who had gone to North Vietnam in 1954.
They became a cadre in the insurgency.
The United States moved to provide material assistance to the new government's armed forces, which were engaged against both the Khmer Rouge insurgents and NVA/VC forces.
In April 1970, U.S. and South Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in a campaign aimed at destroying NVA/VC base areas.
Although a considerable quantity of equipment was seized or destroyed, NVA/VC forces proved elusive and moved deeper into Cambodia.
NVA/VC units overran many Cambodian Army positions while the Khmer Rouge expanded their smallscale attacks on lines of communication.
The Khmer Republic's leadership was plagued by disunity among its leadership, the problems of transforming a 30,000-man army into a national combat force of more than 200,000 men, and spreading corruption.
The insurgency continued to grow, with supplies and military support provided by North Vietnam.
But inside Cambodia, Pol Pot and Ieng Sary asserted their dominance over the Vietnamese-trained communists, many of whom were purged.
At the same time, the Khmer Rouge forces became stronger and more independent of their Vietnamese patrons.
By 1974, Lon Nol's control was reduced to small enclaves around the cities and main transportation routes.
More than 2 million refugees from the war lived in Phnom Penh and other cities.
On New Year's Day 1975, communist troops launched an offensive that, in 117 days of the hardest fighting of the war, destroyed the Khmer Republic.
Simultaneous attacks around the perimeter of Phnom Penh pinned down Republican forces, while other Khmer Rouge units overran fire bases controlling the vital lower Mekong resupply route.
A U.S.-funded airlift of ammunition and rice ended when Congress refused additional aid for Cambodia.
Phnom Penh surrendered on April 17--5 days after the U.S. mission evacuated Cambodia.
Democratic Kampuchea Many Cambodians welcomed the arrival of peace, but the Khmer Rouge soon turned Cambodia--which it called Democratic Kampuchea (DK)--into a land of horror.
Immediately after its victory, the new regime ordered the evacuation of all cities and towns, sending the entire urban population out into the countryside to till the land.
Thousands starved or died of disease during the evacuation.
Many of those forced to evacuate the cities were resettled in new villages, which lacked food, agricultural implements, and medical care.
Many starved before the first harvest, and hunger and malnutrition--bordering on starvation--were constant during those years.
Those who resisted or who questioned orders were immediately executed, as were most military and civilian leaders of the former regime who failed to disguise their pasts.
Within the CPK, the Paris-educated leadership--Pol Pot, Ieng Sary, Nuon Chea, and Son Sen--was in control, and Pol Pot was made prime minister.
Prince Sihanouk was put under virtual house arrest.
The new government sought to restructure Cambodian society completely.
Remnants of the old society were abolished, and Buddhism suppressed.
Agriculture was collectivized, and the surviving part of the industrial base was abandoned or placed under state control.
Cambodia had neither a currency nor a banking system.
The regime controlled every aspect of life and reduced everyone to the level of abject obedience through terror.
Torture centers were established, and detailed records were kept of the thousands murdered there.
Public executions of those considered unreliable or with links to the previous government were common.
Few succeeded in escaping the military patrols and fleeing the country.
Solid estimates of the numbers who died between 1975 and 1979 are not available, but it is likely that hundreds of thousands were brutally executed by the regime.
Hundreds of thousands more died of starvation and disease (both under the Khmer Rouge and during the Vietnamese invasion in 1978).
Estimates of the dead range from 1.7 to 3 million, out of a 1975 population estimated at 7.3 million.
Democratic Kampuchea's relations with Vietnam and Thailand worsened rapidly as a result of border clashes and ideological differences.
While communist, the CPK was fiercely anti-Vietnamese, and most of its members who had lived in Vietnam were purged.
Democratic Kampuchea established close ties with China, and the Cambodian-Vietnamese conflict became part of the Sino-Soviet rivalry, with Moscow backing Vietnam.
Border clashes worsened when Democratic Kampuchea's military attacked villages in Vietnam.
In mid-1978, Vietnamese forces invaded Cambodia, advancing about 30 miles before the arrival of the rainy season.
In December 1978, Vietnam announced formation of the Kampuchean United Front for National Salvation (KUFNS) under Heng Samrin, a former DK division commander.
It was composed of Khmer communists who had remained in Vietnam after 1975 and officials from the eastern sector--like Heng Samrin and Hun Sen--who had fled to Vietnam from Cambodia in 1978.
In late December 1978, Vietnamese forces launched a full invasion of Cambodia, capturing Phnom Penh on January 7 and driving the remnants of Democratic Kampuchea's Army westward toward Thailand.
The Vietnamese Occupation On January 10, 1979, the Vietnamese installed Heng Samrin as head of state in the new People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK).
The Vietnamese Army continued its pursuit of Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge forces.
At least 600,000 Cambodians displaced during the Pol Pot era and the Vietnamese invasion began streaming to the Thai border in search of refuge.
The international community responded with a massive relief effort coordinated by the United States through UNICEF and the World Food Program.
More than $400 million was provided between 1979 and 1982, of which the United States contributed nearly $100 million.
At one point, more than 500,000 Cambodians were living along the Thai-Cambodian border and more than 100,000 in holding centers inside Thailand.
Vietnam's occupation army of as many as 200,000 troops controlled the major population centers and most of the countryside from 1979 to September 1989.
The Heng Samrin regime's 30,000 troops were plagued by poor morale and widespread desertion.
Resistance to Vietnam's occupation continued.
A large portion of the Khmer Rouge's military forces eluded Vietnamese troops and established themselves in remote regions.
The non-communist resistance, consisting of a number of groups which had been fighting the Khmer Rouge after 1975--including Lon Nol-era soldiers--coalesced in 1979-80 to form the Khmer People's National Liberation Armed Forces (KPNLAF), which pledged loyalty to former Prime Minister Son Sann, and Moulinaka (Movement pour la Liberation Nationale de Kampuchea), loyal to Prince Sihanouk.
In 1979, Son Sann formed the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF) to lead the political struggle for Cambodia's independence.
Prince Sihanouk formed his own organization, FUNCINPEC, and its military arm, the Armee Nationale Sihanoukienne (ANS) in 1981.
Within Cambodia, Vietnam had only limited success in establishing its client Heng Samrin regime, which was dependent on Vietnamese advisers at all levels.
Security in some rural areas was tenuous, and major transportation routes were subject to interdiction by resistance forces.
The presence of Vietnamese throughout the country and their intrusion into nearly all aspects of Cambodian life alienated much of the populace.
The settlement of Vietnamese nationals, both former residents and new immigrants, further exacerbated anti-Vietnamese sentiment.
Reports of the numbers involved vary widely with some estimates as high as 1 million.
By the end of this decade, Khmer nationalism began to reassert itself against the traditional Vietnamese enemy.
In 1986, Hanoi claimed to have begun withdrawing part of its occupation forces.
At the same time, Vietnam continued efforts to strengthen its client regime, the PRK, and its military arm, the Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Armed Forces (KPRAF).
These withdrawals continued over the next 2 years, and the last Vietnamese troops left Cambodia in September 1989.
Peace Efforts From July 30 to August 30, 1989, representatives of 18 countries, the four Cambodian parties, and the UN Secretary General met in Paris in an effort to negotiate a comprehensive settlement.
They hoped to achieve those objectives seen as crucial to the future of post-occupation Cambodia--a verified withdrawal of the remaining Vietnamese occupation troops, the prevention of the return to power of the Khmer Rouge, and genuine self-determination for the Cambodian people.
A comprehensive settlement was agreed upon on August 28, 1990.
Cambodia's Renewal On October 23, 1991, the Paris Conference reconvened to sign a comprehensive settlement giving the UN full authority to supervise a cease-fire, repatriate the displaced Khmer along the border with Thailand, disarm and demobilize the factional armies, and to prepare the country for free and fair elections.
Prince Sihanouk, President of the Supreme National Council of Cambodia (SNC), and other members of the SNC returned to Phnom Penh in November 1991, to begin the resettlement process in Cambodia.
The UN Advance Mission for Cambodia (UNAMIC) was deployed at the same time to maintain liaison among the factions and begin demining operations to expedite the repatriation of approximately 370,000 Cambodians from Thailand.
On March 16, 1992, the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia (UNTAC) arrived in Cambodia to begin implementation of the UN Settlement Plan.
The UN High Commissioner for Refugees began fullscale repatriation in March 1992.
UNTAC grew into a 22,000-strong civilian and military peacekeeping force to conduct free and fair elections for a constituent assembly.
Over four million Cambodians (about 90% of eligible voters) participated in the May 1993 elections, although the Khmer Rouge or Party of Democratic Kampuchea (PDK), whose forces were never actually disarmed or demobilized, barred some people from participating.
Prince Ranariddh's FUNCINPEC Party was the top vote recipient with a 45.5% vote followed by Hun Sen's Cambodian People's Party and the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party, respectively.
FUNCINPEC then entered into a coalition with the other parties that had participated in the election.
The parties represented in the 120-member Assembly proceeded to draft and approve a new Constitution, which was promulgated September 24.
It established a multiparty liberal democracy in the framework of a constitutional monarchy, with the former Prince Sihanouk elevated to King.
Prince Ranariddh and Hun Sen became First and Second Prime Ministers, respectively, in the Royal Cambodian Government (RGC).
The Constitution provides for a wide range of internationally recognized human rights.
Compared to its recent past, the 1993-2003 period has been one of relative stability for Cambodia.
However, political violence continues to be a problem in there.
In 1997, factional fighting between supporters of Prince Norodom Ranariddh and Hun Sen broke out, resulting in more than 100 FUNCINPEC deaths and a few CPP casualties.
Some FUNCINPEC leaders were forced to flee the country, and Hun Sen took over as Prime Minister.
FUNCINPEC leaders returned to Cambodia shortly before the 1998 National Assembly elections.
In those elections, the CPP received 41% of the vote, FUNCINPEC 32%, and the Sam Rainsy Party (SRP) 13%.
Due to political violence, intimidation, and lack of media access, many international observers judged the elections to have been seriously flawed.
The CPP and FUNCINPEC formed another coalition government, with CPP the senior partner.
Cambodia's first commune elections were held in February 2002.
These elections to select chiefs and members of 1,621 commune (municipality) councils also were marred by political violence and fell short of being free and fair by international standards.
The election results were largely acceptable to the major parties, though procedures for the new local councils have not been fully implemented.
A riot occurred in January 2003 in which the Embassy of Thailand and several Thai businesses were damaged.
Following the incident, Prime Minister Hun Sen expressed the RGC's regret to the Thai Government and promised compensation.
Media While limitations still exist, freedom of press has improved markedly in Cambodia since the adoption of the 1993 Constitution that grants a certain degree of freedom to the media.
The written press is by and large free and independent of political parties.
Cambodia has an estimated 20 Khmer-language newspapers that are published regularly.
Of these, eight are published daily.
There are two major English-language newspapers, one of which is produced daily.
Broadcast media, in contrast to print, is more closely controlled.
It tends to be politically affiliated, and access for opposition parties is extremely limited.
GOVERNMENT
Principal Government Officials King and Head of State--Norodom Sihanouk Prime Minister and Head of Government--Hun Sen President of the Senate--Chea Sim President of National Assembly--Prince Norodom Ranariddh.
The Embassy of Cambodia in the United States is located at 4530 - 16th Street NW, Washington DC 20011.
Tel: (202) 726-7742 or FAX: (202) 726-8381.
ECONOMY In spite of recent progress, the Cambodian economy continues to suffer from the legacy of decades of war and internal strife.
Per capita income and education levels are low compared with most neighboring countries.
Infrastructure remains inadequate.
Most rural households depend on agriculture and its related subsectors.
Manufacturing output is concentrated in the garment-manufacturing sector.
This sector started to expand rapidly in the mid-1990s and now employs more than 200,000 workers but faces an uncertain future with the end of textile quotas at the end of 2004.
The other main foreign currency earner is tourism.
After several years of rapid growth, the tourism sector has slowed in 2002-03, mainly due to SARS-related fears.
The service sector is heavily concentrated in trading activities and catering-related services.
Cambodia's real GDP grew at 6.3% in 2001 and 4.5% in 2002, with almost all of the growth coming from the garment sector.
Inflation was less than 3%, and the national currency, the riel, is relatively stable.
The economy is heavily dollarized; the dollar and riel can be used interchangeably.
Cambodia remains heavily reliant on foreign assistance --in 2001, 58% of the central government budget depended on donor assistance.
Cambodia has had trouble attracting foreign direct investment, due in part to the unreliable legal environment.
New FDI levels fell steadily from 1999-2001.
In 2002, FDI was a mere $135 million.
The economy also has a poor track record in creating jobs in the formal sector, and the challenge will only become more daunting in the future since 40% of the population is under 15 years of age and large numbers will begin to enter the work force over the next 10 years.
ANGKOR WAT Over a period of 300 years, between 900 and 1200 AD, the Khmer Kingdom of Angkor produced some of the world's most magnificent architectural masterpieces on the northern shore of the Tonle Sap, near the present town of Siem Reap.
The Angkor area stretches 15 miles east to west and 5 miles north to south.
Some 72 major temples or other buildings dot the area.
Suryavarman II built the principal temple, Angkor Wat, between 1112 and 1150.
With walls nearly one-half mile on each side, Angkor Wat portrays the Hindu cosmology with the central towers representing Mount Meru, home of the gods; the outer walls, the mountains enclosing the world; and the moat, the oceans beyond.
Angkor Thom, the capital city built after the Cham sack of 1177, is surrounded by a 300-foot wide moat.
Construction of Angkor Thom coincided with a change from Hinduism to Buddhism.
Temples were altered to display images of the Buddha, and Angkor Wat became a major Buddhist shrine.
During the 15th century, nearly all of Angkor was abandoned after Siamese attacks, except Angkor Wat, which remained a shrine for Buddhist pilgrims.
The great city and temples remained largely cloaked by the forest until the late 19th century when French archaeologists began a long restoration process.
France established the Angkor Conservancy in 1908 to direct restoration of the Angkor complex.
For the next 64 years, the conservancy worked to clear away the forest, repair foundations, and install drains to protect the buildings from their most insidious enemy: water.
After 1953, the conservancy became a joint project of the French and Cambodian Governments.
Some temples were carefully taken apart stone by stone and reassembled on concrete foundations.
Angkor Wat has attracted international tourism to Cambodia, which is growing at a rapid pace.
It is now the second-largest foreign currency earner in the economy.
FOREIGN RELATIONS The Royal Government of Cambodia has established diplomatic relations with most countries, including the United States.
The RGC is a member of most major international organizations, including the UN and its specialized agencies.
The RGC became a member of ASEAN in 1998.
The RGC is a member of most major international organizations, including the UN and its specialized agencies such as the World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
The RGC is an Asian Development Bank (ADB) member, a member of ASEAN, and is in the process of securing membership in the WTO.
U.S.-CAMBODIAN RELATIONS Between 1955 and 1963, the United States provided $409.6 million in economic grant aid and $83.7 million in military assistance.
This aid was used primarily to repair damage caused by the first Indochina war, to support internal security forces, and for the construction of an all-weather road to the seaport of Sihanoukville, which gave Cambodia its first direct access to the sea and access to the southwestern hinterlands.
Relations deteriorated in the early 1960s.
Diplomatic relations were broken by Cambodia in May 1965, but were reestablished on July 2, 1969.
U.S. relations continued after the establishment of the Khmer Republic until the U.S. mission was evacuated on April 12, 1975.
During the 1970-75 war, the United States provided $1.18 billion in military assistance and $503 million in economic assistance.
The United States condemned the brutal character of the Khmer Rouge regime between 1975 and 1979.
The United States opposed the subsequent military occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam, and supported ASEAN's efforts in the 1980s to achieve a comprehensive political settlement of the problem.
This was accomplished on October 23, 1991, when the Paris Conference reconvened to sign a comprehensive settlement.
The U.S. Mission in Phnom Penh opened on November 11, 1991, headed by Charles H. Twining, Jr., who was designated U.S. Special Representative to the SNC.
On January 3, 1992, the U.S. embargo was lifted, thus normalizing economic relations with Cambodia.
The United States also ended blanket opposition to lending to Cambodia by international financial institutions.
When the freely elected Royal Government of Cambodia was formed on September 24, 1993, the United States and the Kingdom of Cambodia immediately established full diplomatic relations.
The U.S. Mission was upgraded to the U.S. Embassy, and in May 1994 Mr. Twining became the U.S. Ambassador.
After the factional fighting in 1997 and Hun Sen's legal machinations to depose First Prime Minister Ranariddh, the United States suspended bilateral assistance to the Cambodian Government.
At the same time, many U.S. citizens and other expatriates were evacuated from Cambodia and, in the subsequent weeks and months, more than 40,000 Cambodian refugees fled to Thailand.
The 1997 events also left a long list of uninvestigated human rights abuses, including dozens of extrajudicial killings.
Since 1997, U.S. assistance to the Cambodian people has been provided mainly through non-governmental organizations, which flourish in Cambodia.
The United States supports efforts in Cambodia to build democratic institutions, promote human rights, foster economic development, eliminate corruption, achieve the fullest possible accounting for Americans missing from Indochina conflict, and to bring to justice those most responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law committed under the Khmer Rouge regime.
Principal U.S. Officials Ambassador--Charles A. Ray Deputy Chief of Mission--Alexander A. Arvizu Political Officer--Donald B. Coleman Economic/Commercial Officer--Michael R. Keller Consular Officer--Kenneth J. Lyons Administrative Officer--Jennifer A. McIntyre Public Affairs Officer--Heide M. Bronke Regional Security Officer--Charles E. Diamond Defense Attache--Col. Steven L. Rundle
The U.S. Embassy in Phnom Penh is located at 27 EO Street 240.
Tel: (855) 23-216-436, fax: (855) 23-216-811.
TRAVEL AND BUSINESS INFORMATION The U.S. Department of State's Consular Information Program provides Consular Information Sheets, Travel Warnings, and Public Announcements.
Consular Information Sheets exist for all countries and include information on entry requirements, currency regulations, health conditions, areas of instability, crime and security, political disturbances, and the addresses of the U.S. posts in the country.
Travel Warnings are issued when the State Department recommends that Americans avoid travel to a certain country.
Public Announcements are issued as a means to disseminate information quickly about terrorist threats and other relatively short-term conditions overseas which pose significant risks to the security of American travelers.
Free copies of this information are available by calling the Bureau of Consular Affairs at 202-647-5225 or via the fax-on-demand system: 202-647-3000.
Consular Information Sheets and Travel Warnings also are available on the Consular Affairs Internet home page: http://travel.state.gov.
Consular Affairs Tips for Travelers publication series, which contain information on obtaining passports and planning a safe trip abroad are on the internet and hard copies can be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, telephone: 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.
Emergency information concerning Americans traveling abroad may be obtained from the Office of Overseas Citizens Services at (202) 647-5225.
For after-hours emergencies, Sundays and holidays, call 202-647-4000.
The National Passport Information Center (NPIC) is the U.S. Department of State's single, centralized public contact center for U.S. passport information.
Telephone: 1-877-4USA-PPT (1-877-487-2778).
Customer service representatives and operators for TDD/TTY are available Monday-Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Eastern Time, excluding federal holidays.
Travelers can check the latest health information with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia.
A hotline at 877-FYI-TRIP (877-394-8747) and a web site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel/index.htm give the most recent health advisories, immunization recommendations or requirements, and advice on food and drinking water safety for regions and countries.
A booklet entitled Health Information for International Travel (HHS publication number CDC-95-8280) is available from the U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, tel. (202) 512-1800.
Information on travel conditions, visa requirements, currency and customs regulations, legal holidays, and other items of interest to travelers also may be obtained before your departure from a country's embassy and/or consulates in the U.S. (for this country, see "Principal Government Officials" listing in this publication).
U.S. citizens who are long-term visitors or traveling in dangerous areas are encouraged to register at the Consular section of the U.S. embassy upon arrival in a country by filling out a short form and sending in a copy of their passports.
This may help family members contact you in case of an emergency.
Further Electronic Information Department of State Web Site.
Available on the Internet at http://state.gov, the Department of State web site provides timely, global access to official U.S. foreign policy information, including Background Notes; daily press briefings; Country Commercial Guides; directories of key officers of Foreign Service posts and more.
National Trade Data Bank (NTDB) .
Operated by the U.S. Department of Commerce, the NTDB contains a wealth of trade-related information.
It is available on the Internet (www.stat-usa.gov) and on CD-ROM.
Call the NTDB Help-Line at (202) 482-1986 for more information.
