NOAA Research skip navigation Atmosphere Climate Oceans Organization Education Newsroom Search Home NAPAP logo National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program What is NAPAP? precipitaion graphic The National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP) is an interagency scientific research, monitoring and assessment program on the effects of sulfur and nitrogen oxides on the environment and human health.
NAPAP acts as a coordinating office between six Federal agencies, which also fosters cooperation among its members, other governments, States, universities, and the private sector.
The participating agencies are the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Department of Energy (DOE), the Department of the Interior (DOI), the Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA).
NAPAP is a mature program that, through coordination, capitalizes on the different strengths of the participating agencies.
What Do We Know About Acid Rain?
In 1980, Congress established NAPAP to conduct a comprehensive ten-year research, monitoring and assessment program on the causes, effects and controls of acid rain.
During the 1980's, the NAPAP greatly improved our technical understanding of acid rain and produced a wealth of information that is embodied in NAPAP's 27 State of Science and Technology Reports and the 1990 Integrated Assessment Report.
In 1996, NAPAP conducted an integrated assessment of costs benefits and effectiveness of acid rain controls specified in Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments and implemented by the US Environmental Protection Agency.
The results of the assessment were published in the NAPAP Biennial Report to Congress: An Integrated Assessment.
The significant findings of the assessment are listed in the Executive Summary of that report.
Encapsulated findings are: * We have seen reductions in SO[2] emissions since 1980 and especially in 1995, the first year of Title IV.
* The acidity of and sulfate concentrations in precipitation have decreased in the Midwest, Mid-Atlantic, and the Northeast United States.
* Since 1980, lakes and streams throughout many areas of the United States have experienced decreases in sulfate concentrations.
Although there is evidence of recovery from acidification in New England lakes, additional reductions in sulfur and nitrogen deposition would be required to fully recover sensitive Adirondack lakes.
* Sulfur and nitrogen deposition have caused adverse impacts on certain highly sensitive forest ecosystems in the united States, especially high-elevation spruce-fir forests in the eastern United States.
Most forest ecosystems are not currently known to be adversely impacted by acid deposition.
However, if deposition levels are not reduced in areas where they are presently high, adverse effects may develop in more forests due to chronic, multiple-decade exposure.
* Reduced SO[2] emissions are expected to reduce sulfate concentrations and, in turn, their contribution to haze.
* Decreased emissions are expected to reduce fine-particulate sulfate and nitrate concentrations in air, possibly leading to reductions in adverse health effects.
* Quantifiable economic benefits could be relatively large in the areas of human health and visibility and exceed the costs of reducing emissions.
* The market-based approach to reducing emissions of SO[2] has reduced compliance costs for utilities below those of a traditional command-and-control approach.
Specific information can be obtained by contacting the NAPAP program office.
How Is the United States Controlling Acid Rain?
In 1990, Congress passed the landmark Acidic Deposition Control Program as Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments (Public Law 101-549).
This innovative control program, administered by EPA's Clean Air Market Programs, is aimed at reducing the adverse effects of acid rain.
NAPAP was reauthorized under Section 901, j, of Title IX of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments as an open ended program.
The legislation's mandates for NAPAP relate to the sources, effects and control of sulfur and nitrogen oxides, which are the main anthropogenic emissions that create acid rain.
The Acid Deposition Control Program mandates by 2010 a 40% annual reduction in the emissions of sulfur dioxide (SO[2]) from a 1980 base and imposes a national cap of about 15 million tons.
In addition, annual emissions of nitrogen oxides (NOx) from stationary sources were to be cut by about 10% by the year 2000.
However, there is no national cap on the emissions of nitrogen oxides.
Highlights of the control program are 1) an innovative, market-based trading and banking system of emission allowances, and 2) flexibility in the choice of technologies to reduce emissions.
NAPAP was reauthorized in 1990 to continue coordination of federal acid deposition research and monitoring of emissions, acidic depositions, and its effects.
NAPAP reports to Congress on these activities as well as assess the costs, benefits, and effectiveness of the Acidic Deposition Control Program in a form that is useful to policymakers.
The policy-relevant assessment approach examines rigorously all the links in the causal chain and emphasizes research to sort out alternative hypotheses and peer review to ensure credibility of the results.
For additional information please contact:
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program NOAA, MailCode R/SAB 1315 East-West Highway Silver Spring, MD 20910 Telephone: (301) 713-0460 x202 Fax: (301) 713-3515 E-mail: napap@noaa.gov
orangeline atmosphere | climate | oceans organization | education | newsroom | search | home
Last Modified 21 June 2002
