Welcome to California California Home Welcome to California - images of Golden Gate Bridge, ocean sunset, waterfall, flowers, and city skyline California Home Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing Division Continuing Care Advisory Committee Community Care Licensing Offices Resident Information Provider Information Provider Statutes Comments or Questions? CDSS Department Seal Picture of CCRC Continuing Care Welcome to California's Continuing Care Retirement Community Website __________ search (_) My CA Image of Governor Gray Davis and Link to his Home Page Overview Today's seniors are faced with many attractive options for retirement living.
CCRCs offer a long-term continuing care contract that provides for housing, residential services, and nursing care, usually in one location, and usually for a resident's lifetime.
All providers offering continuing care contracts must first obtain a certificate of authority and a residential care facility for the elderly (RCFE) license.
In addition, CCRCs that offer skilled nursing services must hold a Skilled Nursing Facility License issued by the Department of Health Services.
The California Department of Social Services (the Department) is responsible for the oversight of continuing care providers.
This includes approving facilities, monitoring financial condition and regulating the providers.
The Department's Community Care Licensing Division monitors CCRCs to ensure that the providers comply with Community Care licensing laws and regulations regarding buildings and grounds, accommodations, care and supervision, and quality of service.
The Department's Continuing Care Contracts Branch has the responsibility for overseeing continuing care contract providers.
It reviews and approves applications to operate a CCRC and monitors the ongoing financial condition of all CCRC providers and their ability to fulfill the long-term contractual obligations to residents.
The Department also receives advice from the Continuing Care Advisory Committee, whose members are appointed by the Governor and Legislature.
Individual sections contained in this website provide information about continuing care contracts, about the Continuing Care Advisory Committee, and about current licensing requirements.
Whether you are a prospective resident, current resident or care provider, we are sure you will find useful information on our home page.
It is the Department's goal to provide the best possible community care licensing service for the people of the State of California.
Back to Top of Page 2003 State of California.
Conditions of Use Privacy Policy The content found herein may not necessarily represent the views and opinions of the Schwarzenegger Administration
