Skip Links U.S. Department of State
Home Contact Us Email this Page FOIA Privacy Notice Archive
Search __________ Go
U.S. Department of State [i_spcr08.gif] About the State Dept.
Press and Public Affairs Travel and Living Abroad Countries and Regions International Issues History, Education and Culture Business Center Other Services Employment
[Print Friendly Version]
Bureau of European and Eurasian Affairs November 2003
People History Government Political Conditions Economy Foreign Relations U.S. Relations Travel/Business Background Notes A-Z Background Note: Ireland
PROFILE
OFFICIAL NAME: Republic of Ireland
Government Area: 70,282 sq. km. (27,136 sq. mi.); slightly larger than West Virginia.
Cities: Capital--County Dublin (pop.
1,122,821) of which City of Dublin (pop.495,101).
Other cities--Cork (123,338), Galway (65,774), Limerick (54,058), Waterford, (44,564).
Terrain: Arable 10%, meadows and pastures 77%, rough grazing in use 11%, inland water 2%.
Climate: Temperate maritime.
People Nationality: Noun--Irishman, Irishwoman.
Adjective--Irish.
Population: 3,917,203.
Population growth rate: .93%.
Ethnic groups: Irish, with English minority.
Religions: Roman Catholic 88.4%; Church of Ireland 3.0%; other 8.7%.
Languages: English, Irish (Gaelic).
Education: Compulsory up to age 16.
Enrollment rates--5-14 year olds--100%; 15 year olds, 97%; 16 year olds, 91%.
Literacy--98%-99%.
Health: Infant mortality rate--5.3/1,000.
Life expectancy at birth--male 73.0 yrs., female 77.5 yrs.
Work force: Services--56%; industry--29%; agriculture--10%; government--5%.
Government Type: Parliamentary republic.
Independence: December 6, 1921.
Constitution: December 29, 1937.
Branches: Executive--president, chief of state; prime minister (Taoiseach--pronounced "TEE-shock"), head of government.
Legislative--bicameral National Parliament (Oireachtas--pronounced "o-ROCK-tas"): House of Representatives (Dail--pronounced "DOIL") and Senate (Seanad--pronounced "SHAN-ad").
Judicial--Supreme Court.
Administrative subdivisions: 26 counties, 34 local authorities.
Major political parties: Fianna Fail, Fine Gael, Labor, Progressive Democrats, Green Party, Sinn Fein.
Suffrage: Universal over 18.
Flag: flag of ireland
Economy GDP at market prices (2003.): $148 billion.
Annual growth rate (2003 est.): 1.5%.
Per capita income (2003 est.): $38,172.
Natural resources: Zinc, lead, natural gas, barite, copper, gypsum, limestone, dolomite, peat.
Agriculture (4% of GDP): Products--cattle, meat, and dairy products; potatoes; barley; sugarbeets; hay; silage; wheat.
Industry (38% of GDP): Types--food processing, beverages, engineering, computer equipment, textiles and clothing, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, construction.
Trade (2002): Exports--$93.7 billion (excluding services): computer equipment, chemicals, meat, dairy products, machinery.
Imports--$55.3 billion (excluding services): grains, petroleum products, machinery, transport equipment, chemicals, textile yarns.
Major suppliers--EU 56%, U.K. 55%, Germany 13%, France 7%, U.S. 15%, Japan 5%, China 4%.
PEOPLE AND HISTORY The Irish people are mainly of Celtic origin, with the country's only significant sized minority having descended from the Anglo-Normans.
English is the common language, but Irish (Gaelic) also is an official language and is taught in the schools.
Anglo-Irish writers, including Swift, Sheridan, Goldsmith, Burke, Wilde, Joyce, Yeats, Shaw, and Beckett, have made a major contribution to world literature over the past 300 years.
The earliest inhabitants--people of a mid-Stone Age culture--arrived about 6000 BC.
About 4,000 years later, tribes from southern Europe arrived and established a high Neolithic culture, leaving behind gold ornaments and huge stone monuments.
The Bronze Age people, who arrived during the next 1,000 years, produced elaborate gold and bronze ornaments and weapons.
The Iron Age arrived abruptly in the fourth century BC with the invasion of the Celts, a tall, energetic people who had spread across Europe and Great Britain in the preceding centuries.
The Celts, or Gaels, and their more numerous predecessors divided into five kingdoms in which, despite constant strife, a rich culture flourished.
The coming of Christianity from across the Irish Sea brought major changes and civilizing influences.
Tradition maintains that in 432 AD, St. Patrick arrived on the island and, in the years that followed, worked to convert the Irish to Christianity.
The pagan druid tradition collapsed in the spread of the new faith, and Irish scholars excelled in the study of Latin learning and Christian theology in the monasteries that flourished.
Missionaries from Ireland to England and the continent spread news of the flowering of learning, and scholars from other nations came to Irish monasteries.
The excellence and isolation of these monasteries helped preserve Latin learning during the Dark Ages.
The arts of manuscript illumination, metalworking, and sculpture flourished and produced such treasures as the Book of Kells, ornate jewelry, and the many carved stone crosses that dot the island.
Two hundred years of Viking invasion and settlement was later followed by a Norman Conquest in the twelfth century.
The Norman conquest resulted in the assimilation of the Norman settlers into Irish society.
The early 17th century saw the arrival of Scottish and English Protestants, sent as colonists to the north of Ireland and the Pale around Dublin.
From 1800 to 1921, Ireland was an integral part of the United Kingdom.
Religious freedom was restored in 1829.
But this victory for the Irish Catholic majority was overshadowed by severe economic depression and mass famine from 1846-48 when the potato crop failed.
The famine spawned the first mass wave of Irish emigration to the United States.
A decade later, in 1858, the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB--also known as the Fenians) was founded as a secret society dedicated to armed rebellion against the British.
An above-ground political counterpart, the Home Rule Movement, was created in 1874, advocating constitutional change for independence.
Galvanized by the leadership of Charles Stewart Parnell, the party was able to force British governments after 1885 to introduce several home rule bills.
The turn of the century witnessed a surge of interest in Irish nationalism, including the founding of Sinn Fein ("Ourselves Alone") as an open political movement.
Nationalism was and is a potent populist force in Irish politics.
While Home Rule was granted in 1914, its enactment was to be suspended until war in Europe ended.
Believing the mantra: "England's problem is Ireland opportunity" and tapping into a mood of Gaelic revivalism, Padraic Pearse and James Connolly led the unsuccessful Easter Rising of 1916.
Pearse and the 1916 leaders declared an independent Irish republic, only to be driven out of their Headquarters in the General Post Office and formally surrendering less than a week later.
The decision by the British-imposed court structure to execute the leaders of the rebellion, coupled with the British Government's threat of conscription, alienated public opinion and produced massive support for Sinn Fein in the 1918 general election.
Under the leadership of Eamon de Valera, the elected Sinn Fein deputies constituted themselves as the first Dail.
Tensions only increased: British attempts to smash Sinn Fein ignited the Anglo-Irish War of 1919-21.
The end of the war brought the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921, which established the Irish Free State of 26 counties within the British Commonwealth and recognized the partition of the island into Ireland and Northern Ireland, though supposedly as a temporary measure.
The six predominantly Protestant counties of northeast Ulster--Northern Ireland--remained a part of the United Kingdom with limited self-government.
A significant Irish minority repudiated the treaty settlement because of the continuance of subordinate ties to the British monarch and the partition of the island.
This opposition led to further hostilities--a civil war (1922-23), which was won by the pro-treaty forces.
In 1932, Eamon de Valera, the political leader of the forces initially opposed to the treaty, became prime minister, and a new Irish constitution was enacted in 1937.
The last British military bases were soon withdrawn, and the ports were returned to Irish control.
Ireland was neutral in World War II.
The government formally declared Ireland a republic in 1948; however, it does not normally use the term "Republic of Ireland," which tacitly acknowledges the partition but refers to the country simply as "Ireland."
GOVERNMENT AND POLITICAL CONDITIONS Ireland is a sovereign, independent, democratic state with a parliamentary system of government.
The president, who serves as chief of state in a largely ceremonial role, is elected for a 7-year term and can be re-elected only once.
In carrying out certain constitutional powers and functions, the president is aided by the Council of State, an advisory body.
On the Taoiseach's (prime minister's) advice, the president also dissolves the Oireachtas (Parliament).
The prime minister is elected by the Dail (lower house of Parliament) as the leader of the political party, or coalition of parties, which wins the most seats in the national elections, held approximately every five years (unless called earlier).
Executive power is vested in a cabinet whose ministers are nominated by the Taoiseach and approved by the Dail.
The bicameral Oireachtas (Parliament) consists of the Seanad Eireann (senate) and the Dail Eireann (house of representatives).
The Seanad is composed of 60 members--11 nominated by the prime minister, 6 elected by the national universities, and 43 elected from panels of candidates established on a vocational basis.
The Senate has the power to delay legislative proposals and is allowed 90 days to consider and amend bills sent to it by the Dail, which wields greater power in parliament.
The Dail has 166 members popularly elected to a maximum term of 5 years under a complex system of proportional representation.
Judges are appointed by the president on nomination by the government and can be removed from office only for misbehaviour or incapacity and then only by resolution of both houses of parliament.
The ultimate court of appeal is the Supreme Court, consisting of the Chief Justice and five other justices.
The Supreme Court also can decide upon the constitutionality of legislative acts if the president asks for an opinion.
Local government is by elected county councils and--in the cities of Dublin, Cork, Limerick, and Waterford--by county borough corporations.
In practice, however, authority remains with the central government.
Irish politics remain dominated by the two political parties that grew out of Ireland's bitter 1922-23 civil war.
Fianna Fail was formed by those who opposed the 1921 treaty that partitioned the island.
Although treaty opponents lost the civil war, Fianna Fail soon became Ireland's largest political party.
Fine Gael, representative of the pro-treaty forces, remains the country's second-largest party.
This party system, however, is evolving.
Fine Gael's core vote collapsed in the May 2002 general election, perhaps signalling an end to the civil war divide.
A feature of recent general elections has been the emergence of "Independent" TDs as a political force.
In the 2002 general election, 14 "Independent" TDs were elected to the Dail.
The May 2002 national elections returned Fianna Fail and its coalition partner, the Progressive Democrats, to power.
Fianna Fail increased its seats in the Dail to 81 while the Progressive Democrats doubled their representation to 8 seats.
Fine Gael lost a total of 23 seats, primarily to a number of smaller parties and independents.
Sinn Fein increased its representation in the Dail from 1 to 5 seats in the May 17 election.
Prime Minister Ahern was re-elected Taoiseach on June 6, and organized the government with very few changes in the ministerial appointments; Mary Harney was reappointed as Tanaiste (Deputy Prime Minister).
Ireland enjoyed more than 6 years of impressive economic growth from 1996-2002--the fastest growing in economy in the OECD during the period.
With large budget surpluses during these boom years, it also expanded public spending, at rates approaching 20% per year in 2000-01.
Beginning in 2002, however, the worldwide economic downturn brought new challenges to the Government as the surpluses evaporated and tough government cut-backs are now necessary.
Northern Ireland Consolidating the peace process in Northern Ireland and encouraging the full implementation of the 1998 Good Friday Agreement (GFA) remain priority U.S. goals in Ireland.
The conflict in Northern Ireland stems from a history of British rule and the various armed and political attempts to gain independence.
"Nationalist" and "republican" communities seek a united Ireland, while "unionists" want Northern Ireland to remain part of the U.K.
After decades of violence by republican paramilitaries, most notably the Irish Republican Army (IRA), the British and Irish governments negotiated an IRA cease-fire in 1997, which was followed by the U.S.-brokered Good Friday Agreement (GFA) in 1998.
The landmark GFA established a power-sharing legislative assembly to serve as the autonomous local government of Northern Ireland.
The 108-member Northern Ireland Assembly is led by a First Minister and Deputy First Minister, one from each of the two communities, and a 10-Minister Executive.
The GFA also provided for changes in both the British and Irish Constitutions.
Ireland ceded territorial claim to Northern Ireland, and the U.K. agreed that Northern Ireland could become part of Ireland if a majority (north and south) so voted in the future.
Finally, the GFA provides the blueprint for "normalization," to include the eventual removal of British forces, devolution of police and justice functions, and guarantees of human rights and equal opportunity for all individuals.
The Agreement was approved in a referendum by 71% of Northern Ireland voters and 95% of Irish voters.
The major political parties in Northern Ireland are the Ulster Unionist Party (UUP), the Social Democratic and Labor Party (SDLP), the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), and Sinn Fein.
From the time the Assembly was created in 1998, up until October 2002, the governing parties were the pro-Agreement UUP and the nationalist party SDLP.
In October 2002, the British Government suspended (for the fourth time) the Assembly, following a breakdown in trust between unionists and republican party Sinn Fein.
The British and Irish government began discussions with the parties to try to resolve longstanding unresolved differences between the communities, and to secure a commitment from Sinn Fein that republicans would divest themselves of all paramilitary activities and capabilities.
Efforts to restore the political process in time to stage new elections to the Assembly in May 2003 broke down when the two governments concluded they did not have sufficient assurances from republicans.
However, the governments proceeded to publish a Joint Declaration, mapping out the timetable to full implementation of the GFA.
The governments also announced, in September 2003, the creation of an International Monitoring Commission that will serve as a forum to hear complaints of alleged breaches of GFA commitments by the political parties and/or by British authorities.
The four-member Commission includes a representative from the United States.
As of October 2003, negotiations had been renewed to try to secure a commitment from republicans to sever all paramilitary ties, and to pave the way for Assembly elections in the fall, which are scheduled to take place November 26, 2003.
The United States supports the efforts of the British and Irish Governments to restore the democratic process in Northern Ireland and to fully implement the GFA, which the United States believe is the only viable blueprint for a lasting peace.
The United States remains engaged in dialogue with all parties, in coordination with its embassies in Dublin and London, its consulate in Belfast, and the office of the President's Special Envoy for Northern Ireland.
U.S. goals are a demonstrated commitment by republicans to a peaceful and political solution, and an equally clear commitment by unionists to a full and equal partnership with nationalists.
As the United States urges an end to paramilitary activities, it seeks to strengthen the democratic rule of law, to include a reformed Police Service of Northern Ireland with representation by both communities.
The United States also continues to provide funding ($25 million annually) for projects administered under the International Fund for Ireland, created in 1986 to generate economic opportunity and cross-community engagement in the border areas, both north and south.
Principal Government Officials President--Mary McAleese Taoiseach (Prime Minister)--Bertie Ahern Tanaiste (Deputy Prime Minister) and Minister for Enterprise, Trade and Employment--Mary Harney Ambassador to the United States--Noel Fahey
The Irish Embassy in the United States is at 2234 Massachusetts Ave.
NW, Washington, DC 20008 (tel. 202-462-3939/40/41/42).
Irish Consulates are located in New York, Chicago, Boston, and San Francisco.
ECONOMY In the first 6 months of 2003, trade between Ireland and the United States was worth approximately $12.0 billion, a 10% decrease compared to the same period in 2002.
In 2002 U.S. exports to Ireland were valued at $8.5 billion, less than half the value of Irish exports to the U.S. ($16.5 billion).
The range of U.S. products includes electrical components, computers and peripherals, drugs and pharmaceuticals, electrical equipment, and livestock feed.
Irish exports to the United States represents approximately15%-20% of all Irish exports.
The U.S. is Ireland's second largest export destination - second only to the U.K. Exports to the United States include alcoholic beverages, chemicals and related products, electronic data processing equipment, electrical machinery, textiles and clothing, and glassware.
The United States currently contributes $25 million annually to the International Fund for Ireland, a program that supports cross-border initiatives and economic development.
U.S. investment has been particularly important to the growth and modernization of Irish industry over the past 25 years, providing new technology, export capabilities, and employment opportunities.
The stock of U.S. investment in Ireland was valued at $35.7 billion in 2002.
Currently, there are more than 507 U.S. subsidiaries, employing approximately 90,000 people and spanning activities from manufacturing of high-tech electronics, computer products, medical supplies, and pharmaceuticals to retailing, banking and finance, and other services.
Many U.S. businesses find Ireland an attractive location to manufacture for the EU market, since it is inside the EU customs area.
Government policies are generally formulated to facilitate trade and inward direct investment.
The availability of an educated, well-trained, English-speaking work force and relatively moderate wage costs have been important factors.
Ireland offers good long-term growth prospects for U.S. companies under an innovative financial incentive program, including capital grants and favorable tax treatment, such as a low corporation income tax rate for manufacturing firms and certain financial services firms.
U.S.-IRISH RELATIONS U.S. relations with Ireland have long been based on common ancestral ties and on similar values and political views.
These relations, however, have now broadened and matured, given the substantial U.S. corporate involvement in the Irish economy.
The United States seeks to maintain and strengthen the traditionally cordial relations between the people of the United States and Ireland.
Economic and trade relations are an important element of the bilateral relationship.
U.S. investment has been a major factor in the growth of the Irish economy, and Irish membership in the European Union (EU) means that discussion of EU trade and economic policies, as well as other aspects of EU policy, are a key element in exchanges between the two countries.
Emigration, long a vital element in the U.S.-Irish relationship, has declined significantly with Ireland's economic boom in the 1990s.
For the first time in its modern history, immigration to Ireland, especially of non-Europeans, is a growing phenomenon with political, economic, and social consequences.
However, Irish citizens do continue the common practice of taking temporary residence overseas for work or study, mainly in the U.S., U.K., and elsewhere in Europe, before returning to establish careers in Ireland.
Principal U.S. Officials Ambassador--James Kenny Deputy Chief of Mission--Jane Fort Administrative Officer--Lewis Lukens Commercial Attaché--Dale Tarsharski Consular Officer--Jill Johnson Defense Attaché--Col. John O'Sullivan, USA Economic Officer--John Fennerty Political Officer--Eva Weigold Public Affairs Officer--Morgan Kulla
The U.S. Embassy in Ireland is located at 42 Elgin Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4 (tel. 668-7122; fax 668-9946).
TRAVEL AND BUSINESS INFORMATION The U.S. Department of State's Consular Information Program provides Consular Information Sheets, Travel Warnings, and Public Announcements.
Consular Information Sheets exist for all countries and include information on entry requirements, currency regulations, health conditions, areas of instability, crime and security, political disturbances, and the addresses of the U.S. posts in the country.
Travel Warnings are issued when the State Department recommends that Americans avoid travel to a certain country.
Public Announcements are issued as a means to disseminate information quickly about terrorist threats and other relatively short-term conditions overseas which pose significant risks to the security of American travelers.
Free copies of this information are available by calling the Bureau of Consular Affairs at 202-647-5225 or via the fax-on-demand system: 202-647-3000.
Consular Information Sheets and Travel Warnings also are available on the Consular Affairs Internet home page: http://travel.state.gov.
Consular Affairs Tips for Travelers publication series, which contain information on obtaining passports and planning a safe trip abroad are on the internet and hard copies can be purchased from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, telephone: 202-512-1800; fax 202-512-2250.
Emergency information concerning Americans traveling abroad may be obtained from the Office of Overseas Citizens Services at (202) 647-5225.
For after-hours emergencies, Sundays and holidays, call 202-647-4000.
The National Passport Information Center (NPIC) is the U.S. Department of State's single, centralized public contact center for U.S. passport information.
Telephone: 1-877-4USA-PPT (1-877-487-2778).
Customer service representatives and operators for TDD/TTY are available Monday-Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Eastern Time, excluding federal holidays.
Travelers can check the latest health information with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta, Georgia.
A hotline at 877-FYI-TRIP (877-394-8747) and a web site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel/index.htm give the most recent health advisories, immunization recommendations or requirements, and advice on food and drinking water safety for regions and countries.
A booklet entitled Health Information for International Travel (HHS publication number CDC-95-8280) is available from the U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, tel. (202) 512-1800.
Information on travel conditions, visa requirements, currency and customs regulations, legal holidays, and other items of interest to travelers also may be obtained before your departure from a country's embassy and/or consulates in the U.S. (for this country, see "Principal Government Officials" listing in this publication).
U.S. citizens who are long-term visitors or traveling in dangerous areas are encouraged to register at the Consular section of the U.S. embassy upon arrival in a country by filling out a short form and sending in a copy of their passports.
This may help family members contact you in case of an emergency.
Further Electronic Information Department of State Web Site.
Available on the Internet at http://state.gov, the Department of State web site provides timely, global access to official U.S. foreign policy information, including Background Notes; daily press briefings; Country Commercial Guides; directories of key officers of Foreign Service posts and more.
National Trade Data Bank (NTDB) .
Operated by the U.S. Department of Commerce, the NTDB contains a wealth of trade-related information.
It is available on the Internet (www.stat-usa.gov) and on CD-ROM.
Call the NTDB Help-Line at (202) 482-1986 for more information.
This site is managed by the Bureau of Public Affairs, U.S. Department of State.
External links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
