State Department seal U.S. Department of State Bureau of Consular Affairs Washington, DC 20520
Consular Information Sheet Consular seal __________________________________________________________________
This information is current as of today,
Iceland
August 14, 2003
COUNTRY DESCRIPTION: Iceland is a highly developed, stable democracy with a modern economy.
The national language is Icelandic, but English is widely spoken, especially in the capital city of Reykjavik.
ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: A passport is required.
U.S. citizens do not need visas for tourist or business stays of up to three months within any six-month period.
Because Iceland is a signatory to the Schengen Agreement, the three-month period begins when entering any of the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain and Sweden.
Icelandic law requires that foreigners obtain visas if they plan to stay in the country longer than three months or study or work in Iceland.
The Embassy of Denmark in Washington, D.C., and the Danish consulates general in Los Angeles and New York process applications for Icelandic visas.
The Embassy of Iceland in Washington, D.C., and the Consulate General of Iceland in New York do not process visa applications.
For further information concerning entry requirements for Iceland, please contact the Royal Danish Embassy at 3200 Whitehaven St. N.W., Washington, D.C. 20008, tel. (202) 234-4300, via the Internet at http://denmarkemb.org, or the Danish consulates general in Los Angeles or New York.
In an effort to prevent international child abduction, many governments have initiated procedures at entry/exit points.
These often include requiring documentary evidence of relationship and permission for the child's travel from the parent(s) or legal guardian if not present.
Having such documentation on hand, even if not required, may facilitate entry/departure.
SAFETY AND SECURITY: There have been no incidents of terrorism directed toward American interests in Iceland.
Icelanders most commonly voice political dissent in the form of peaceful protests.
Anti-American demonstrations target specific U.S. Government policies rather than U.S. citizens, and usually occur near the U.S. Embassy or main Reykjavik government buildings.
Americans traveling abroad should review the Worldwide Caution Public Announcement, Travel Warnings and Public Announcements found on the Bureau of Consular Affair's web site at http://travel.state.gov.
For general inquires on safety and security overseas, contact the Overseas Citizens Services call center at 1-888-407-4747.
The call center is open from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday through Friday (except for U.S. federal holidays).
Callers unable to use toll-free numbers, such as those calling from overseas, may obtain information and assistance by dialing 1-317-472-2328.
DUAL NATIONALITY: In addition to being subject to all Icelandic laws affecting U.S. citizens, dual nationals may also be subject to other laws that impose special obligations on Icelandic citizens.
For additional information, please consult Iceland's Directorate of Immigration and see the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov for our Dual Nationality flyer.
CRIME: Iceland has a relatively low crime rate, but minor assaults, automobile break-ins and other street crimes have become more common, especially in the capital city of Reykjavik.
Tourists should be aware that downtown Reykjavik can become especially disorderly on weekend evenings.
To minimize risk, visitors should avoid being out past 3 or 4 a.m.
Violent crime is rare, but it does occur, and appears to be increasing.
The loss or theft abroad of a U.S. passport should be reported immediately to the local police and the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate.
If you are the victim of a crime while overseas, in addition to reporting to local police, please contact the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate for assistance.
The Embassy/Consulate staff can, for example, assist you to find appropriate medical care, to contact family members or friends and explain how funds could be transferred.
Although the investigation and prosecution of the crime is solely the responsibility of local authorities, consular officers can help you to understand the local criminal justice process and to find an attorney if needed.
U.S. citizens may refer to the Department of State's pamphlet, A Safe Trip Abroad, for ways to promote a trouble-free journey.
The pamphlet is available by mail from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402, via the Internet at http://www.gpoaccess.gov, or via the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov.
MEDICAL FACILITIES: Excellent medical facilities are available in Iceland.
To obtain emergency medical assistance anywhere in the country, please dial 112.
To obtain non-emergency medical assistance in the Reykjavik metropolitan area outside of normal business hours, please dial 1770.
The nurse who answers will offer advice on how to handle the problem, suggest that the patient come to an after-hours clinic, or send a physician to make a house call.
For information on after-hours dental care, please call 575-0505.
MEDICAL INSURANCE: The Department of State strongly urges Americans to consult with their medical insurance company prior to traveling abroad to confirm whether their policy applies overseas and if it will cover emergency expenses such as a medical evacuation.
U.S. medical insurance plans seldom cover health costs incurred outside the United States unless supplemental coverage is purchased.
Further, U.S. Medicare and Medicaid programs do not provide payment for medical services outside the United States.
However, many travel agents and private companies offer insurance plans that will cover health care expenses incurred overseas including emergency services such as medical evacuations.
When making a decision regarding health insurance, Americans should consider that many foreign doctors and hospitals require payment in cash prior to providing service and that a medical evacuation to the U.S. may cost well in excess of $50,000.
Uninsured travelers who require medical care overseas often face extreme difficulties.
When consulting with your insurer prior to your trip, ascertain whether payment will be made to the overseas healthcare provider or if you will be reimbursed later for expenses you incur.
Some insurance policies also include coverage for psychiatric treatment and for disposition of remains in the event of death.
Useful information on medical emergencies abroad, including overseas insurance programs, is provided in the Bureau of Consular Affairs brochure, Medical Information for Americans Traveling Abroad, available via the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov/medical.html.
OTHER HEALTH INFORMATION: Information on vaccinations and other health precautions, such as safe food and water precautions and insect bite protection, may be obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's hotline for international travelers at 1-877-FYI-TRIP (1-877-394-8747); fax 1-888-CDC-FAXX (1-888-232-3299), or via the CDC's Internet site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel.
For information about outbreaks of infectious diseases abroad consult the World Health Organization's website at http://www.who.int/en.
Further health information for travelers is available at http://www.who.int/ith.
TRAFFIC SAFETY AND ROAD CONDITIONS: While in a foreign country, U.S. citizens may encounter road conditions that differ significantly from those in the United States.
The information below concerning Iceland is provided for general reference only, and may not be totally accurate in a particular location or circumstance:
Safety of Public Transportation: Excellent Urban Road Conditions/Maintenance: Excellent Rural Road Conditions/Maintenance: Fair Availability of Roadside Assistance: Good
Less than a third of the country's total road network is paved (2,262 miles of paved road vs. 5,774 miles of gravel or dirt road).
Most of the 900-mile ring road (Highway 1) that encircles the country is paved, but many other roads outside the capital, especially those that run through the center of the country, are dirt or gravel tracks.
Even those roads that are paved tend to be narrow and lack a shoulder or margin.
Most bridges are only one lane wide, requiring drivers to be cognizant of oncoming traffic.
Extreme care should be taken when driving in rural areas during the winter (October through March), when daylight hours are limited and the weather and road conditions can change rapidly.
Many routes in the interior of the country are impassable until July due to muddy conditions caused by snowmelt.
When driving in the interior, consider traveling with a second vehicle and always inform someone of your travel plans.
For information on current road conditions throughout the country, please call the Public Roads Administration (Vegagerdin) at 1777 or consult its web site at http://www.vegag.is.
For recorded weather information in English, please call the Icelandic Weather Office (Vedurstofa Islands) at 902-0600, ext. 44.
Talking on cell phones while driving is prohibited except when using a hands-free system.
The law requires drivers to keep headlights on at all times.
Unless otherwise posted, the speed limit in urban areas is 50 km/h.
In rural areas, the speed limit depends on the type of road.
On dirt and gravel roads, the speed limit is 80 km/h.
On paved highways, the speed limit is 90 km/h.
It is illegal to turn right on a red light.
At four-way stops the right of way goes to the driver on the right; in traffic circles to drivers in the inside lane.
Many intersections in the capital have automatic cameras to catch traffic violators.
The use of seatbelts is mandatory in both the front and rear seats, and children under the age of six must be secured in a special car seat designed for their size and weight.
Drivers are held responsible for any passenger under the age of 15 who is not wearing a seatbelt.
No one who is less than 140 centimeters tall or weighs less than 40 kilograms is allowed to ride in a front seat equipped with an airbag.
Driving under the influence of alcohol is considered a serious offense in Iceland.
The threshold blood alcohol test (BAT) level is very low.
Drivers can be charged with DWI with a BAT as low as .05%.
Drivers stopped under suspicion for DWI are usually given a ``balloon'' or Breathalyzer test.
If the test is positive, a blood test is routinely administered.
Under Icelandic law, a blood test cannot be refused and will be administered by force if necessary.
The minimum punishment for a first offense is a fine of 50,000 Icelandic kronur and the loss of driving privileges for two months.
For additional general information about road safety, including links to foreign government sites, see the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov/road_safety.html.
U.S. citizens spending less than 90 days in Iceland may drive using their U.S. licenses.
For specific information concerning Icelandic driver's permits, vehicle inspection, road tax and mandatory insurance, please contact the Iceland National Tourist Organization offices in New York via the Internet at http://www.iceland.org/oeku.htm.
AVIATION SAFETY OVERSIGHT: The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has assessed the Government of Iceland's civil aviation authority as Category 1 -- in compliance with international aviation safety standards for oversight of Iceland's air carrier operations.
For further information, travelers may contact the U.S. Department of Transportation within the United States by telephone at 1-800-322-7873, or visit the FAA's Internet web site at http://www.faa.gov/avr/iasa.
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) separately assesses some foreign air carriers for suitability as official providers of air services.
For information regarding the DOD policy on specific carriers, travelers may contact the DOD by telephone at (618) 229-4801.
CUSTOMS REGULATIONS: Icelandic customs authorities encourage the use of an ATA (Admission Tmporaire/Temporary Admission) Carnet for the temporary admission of professional equipment, commercial samples, and/or goods for exhibitions and fair purposes.
ATA Carnet Headquarters, located at the U.S. Council for International Business, 1212 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10036, issues and guarantees the ATA Carnet in the United States.
For additional information, please call (212) 354-4480, or send an email to atacarnet@uscib.org, or visit http://www.uscib.org for details.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES: While in a foreign country, a U.S. citizen is subject to that country's laws and regulations, which sometimes differ significantly from those in the United States and may not afford the protections available to the individual under U.S. law.
Penalties for breaking the law can be more severe than in the United States for similar offenses.
Persons violating Icelandic laws, even unknowingly, may be expelled, arrested or imprisoned.
Penalties for possession, use or trafficking in illegal drugs in Iceland are strict, and convicted offenders can expect jail sentences and heavy fines.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES: Extreme care should be exercised when touring Iceland's numerous nature attractions, which include glaciers, volcanic craters, lava fields, ice caves, hot springs, boiling mud pots, geysers, waterfalls and glacial rivers.
There are few warning signs or barriers to alert travelers to potential hazards.
Several tourists are scalded each year because they get too close to an erupting geyser, or because they fall or step into a hot spring or boiling mud pot.
High winds and icy conditions can exacerbate the dangers of visiting these nature areas.
Hikers and backpackers are well advised to stay on marked trails, travel with someone, let someone else know their travel plans, and check weather reports.
DISASTER PREPAREDNESS: Iceland is subject to natural disasters in the form of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, avalanches and violent storms.
Travelers should learn how to prepare for and react to such events by consulting the web site of Iceland's National Civil Defense Agency at http://www.avrik.is.
General information about natural disaster preparedness is available via the Internet from the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) at http://www.fema.gov.
CHILDREN'S ISSUES: For information on international adoption of children and international parental child abduction, please refer to our Internet web site at http://travel.state.gov/children's_issues.html or telephone the Overseas Citizens Services (OCS) call center at 1-888-407-4747.
The OCS call center can answer general inquiries regarding international adoptions and will forward calls to the appropriate country officer in the Bureau of Consular Affairs.
This number is available from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Eastern time Monday through Friday (except U.S. federal holidays).
Callers who are unable to use toll-free numbers, such as those calling from overseas, may obtain information and assistance during these hours by dialing 1-317-472-2328.
REGISTRATION/EMBASSY AND CONSULATE LOCATIONS: Americans living in or visiting Iceland are encouraged to register at the Consular Section of the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavik and obtain updated information on travel and security within Iceland.
The U.S. Embassy is located at Laufasvegur 21, tel. +354-562-9100; fax +354-562-9110.
Information about consular services can be found in the Consular Section of the Embassy home page at http://www.usa.is.
* * *
This replaces the Consular Information Sheet dated August 19, 2002, to update sections on Entry Requirements, Dual Nationality, Crime, Medical Facilities, and Traffic Safety and Road Conditions, and to add a section on Safety and Security.
Return to Consular Information Sheets and Travel Warnings Page
