DOJ Seal Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) _______________________________________________________________ VI. Charging and Other Strategy Considerations for Infringement Cases
A. Whether to Prosecute an Intellectual Property Crime A.1.
The federal interest in intellectual property crimes A.1.a.
Federal law enforcement priorities A.1.b.
The nature and seriousness of the offense A.1.c.
The deterrent effect of prosecution A.1.d.
The individual's culpability in connection with the offense A.1.e.
The individual's history with respect to criminal activity A.1.f.
The individual's willingness to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of others A.2.
Whether the person is subject to prosecution in another jurisdiction A.3.
The adequacy of a non-criminal alternative in an intellectual property case A.4.
Special considerations in deciding whether to charge corporations B.
Other Federal Offenses to Consider in Relation to Intellectual Property Infringement Cases B.1.
Mail fraud and wire fraud: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343 B.1.a.
Possible advantages of charging wire or mail fraud B.1.b.
Possible disadvantages of charging wire or mail fraud B.2.
RICO: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961-1968 B.3.
Money laundering: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957 C. How To Charge a Copyright or Trademark Crime C.1.
Units of prosecution C.2.
Multiple intellectual property crimes committed by the same act D.
The Victim's Role in an Intellectual Property Case __________________________________________________________________
This chapter provides guidance on strategic considerations when evaluating intellectual property infringement cases.
First it discusses whether to charge an infringement case at all, including an extended discussion on whether to charge a corporation.
It then provides analysis of other charges to consider, such as wire and mail fraud, RICO, and money laundering.
Finally, it provides practical advice on how to charge an infringement case, and the role of a victim in putting such a case together.
___________________________________________________________________________
VI.A.
Whether to Prosecute an Intellectual Property Crime
Generally, federal prosecutors should take into account the same considerations in determining whether to charge an intellectual property crime as they would with respect to all federal crimes.
See, e.g., U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.220.
Thus, the prosecutors should evaluate all the considerations normally associated with the sound exercise of prosecutorial discretion: the sufficiency of the evidence, the likelihood of success at trial, the probable deterrent effect, rehabilitative potential, and other consequence of conviction, in addition to the adequacy of non-criminal approaches.
In exercising this discretion, U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.220 notes three situations in which the prosecutor may properly decline to take action despite having admissible evidence sufficient to obtain and sustain a conviction for a federal crime: when no substantial federal interest would be served by prosecution; when the person is subject to effective prosecution in another jurisdiction; or when there exists an adequate non-criminal alternative to prosecution.
While individual U.S. Attorney's Offices may evaluate these factors with different standards, each of these grounds is discussed below with particular attention paid to intellectual property crimes.
VI.A.1.
The federal interest in intellectual property crimes
In determining the substantiality of the federal interest that would be served by a prosecution, the attorney for the government should weigh all relevant considerations, including: (1) current federal law enforcement priorities; (2) the nature and seriousness of the offense; (3) the deterrent effect of prosecution; (4) the person's culpability in connection with the offense; (5) the person's history with respect to criminal activity; (6) the person's willingness to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of others; and (7) the probable sentence or other consequences if the person is convicted.
See U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.230.
The last factor (the consequences of a conviction for an intellectual property crime, including the probable sentence) is addressed at length elsewhere in this manual.
See infra Chapter VII discussing consequences of conviction for intellectual property crimes).
The other factors will be discussed below with specific attention to intellectual property crimes.
In recent years, Congress has taken an especially strong interest in intellectual property crimes as well as intellectual property law generally.
As discussed elsewhere in this manual, Congress has enacted stiffer penalties for intellectual property crimes, and has made many intellectual property crimes a predicate offense under the money laundering and RICO statutes.
Moreover, Congress took the unprecedented step of singling out intellectual property crime s for detailed accounting in the Attorney General's Annual Accountability Report.
In enacting the Anticounterfeiting Consumer Protection Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-153, 110 Stat. 1386, Congress required the Attorney General to include in th e annual report, on a district-by-district basis, the following four criteria: (1) the number of open investigations; (2) the number of cases referred by the Unite d States Customs Service; (3) the number of cases referred by other agencies or sources; and (4) the number and outcome, including settlements, sentences, recoveries, and penalties, of all prosecutions brought under sections 2318, 2319 , 2319A, and 2320 of Title 18.
The federal interest in intellectual property is no recent or transitory development.
It has been recognized since the ratification of the Constitution.
See U.S. Const. art.
I, § 8, cl. 8.
Longtime Congressional interest in providing a sound federal basis for intellectual property law is further demonstrated by two comprehensive bodies of statutes: the Copyright Act of 1976 (codified as amended at Title 17); and the Lanham Act (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051-1127).
In fact, the Copyright Act in 1976 established federal preemption over state law because of the importance of a uniform federal copyright law.
See 17 U.S.C. § 301.
VI.A.1.a.
Federal law enforcement priorities
The importance of intellectual property to the national economy, and the scale of intellectual property theft, led the Department of Justice to designate intellectual property crime as a "priority" for federal law enforcement.
As the U.S. Attorneys' Manual recognizes, "from time to time the Department establishes national investigative and prosecutorial priorities.
These prioritie s are designed to focus Federal law enforcement efforts on those matters within th e Federal jurisdiction that are most deserving of Federal attention and are most likely to be handled effectively at the Federal level."
U.S. Attorneys' Manual 9-27.230(B)(1) (comment).
Intellectual property crimes were formally designated a "priority" by Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder on July 23, 1999.
Deputy Attorney General Eric Holder, Remarks at Press Conference Announcing the Intellectual Property Rights Initiative (Jul. 23, 1999) (http://www.cybercrime.gov/dagipini.html).
In announcing the Intellectual Property Rights Initiative, Deputy Attorney General Holder stated that the Department of Justice, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the United States Customs Service had concluded that they must make investigating and prosecuting intellectual property crime "a major law enforcement priority."
In making the announcement, he noted that
[a]s the world moves from the Industrial Age to the Information Age, the United States' economy is increasingly dependent on the production and distribution of intellectual property.
Currently, the U.S. leads the world in the creation and export of intellectual property and IP-related products.
Deputy Attorney General Holder also observed that "[a]t the same time that our information economy is soaring, so is intellectual property theft."
Since intellectual property theft undermines the federally established copyright and trademark systems, it is especially appropriate that investigation and prosecution of these crimes be a federal law enforcement priority.
VI.A.1.b.
The nature and seriousness of the offense
Intellectual property crimes, like other crimes, vary in their nature and seriousness; it is therefore essential to consider each case on its own facts.
Limited federal resources should not be diverted to prosecute inconsequential cases or cases in which the violation is only technical.
Prosecutors may conside r any number of factors to determine the seriousness of an intellectual property crime, including:
1.
Whether the counterfeit goods or services present potential health or safety issues (e.g., counterfeit medications or airplane parts);
2.
The scope of the infringing or counterfeiting activities (e.g., whether the subject infringes or traffics in multiple items or the infringes upo n multiple industries or victims), as well as the volume of infringing items manufactured or distributed;
3.
The scale of the infringing or counterfeiting activities (e.g., the amount of illegitimate revenue and any identifiable illegitimate profit arising from th e infringing or counterfeiting activities based upon the retail value of the infringed item);
4.
The number of participants and the involvement of any organized criminal group;
5.
The scale of the victim's loss or potential loss, including the value of the infringed item, the size of the market for the infringed intellectual property that is being undermined (e.g., a best-selling software package or a famous trademark), and the impact of the infringement on that market;
6.
Whether the victim or victims took reasonable measures that could have been taken to protect against the crime; and
7.
Whether the purchasers of the infringing items were victims of a fraudulent scheme, or whether there is a reasonable likelihood of consumer mistake as a result of the subject's actions.
VI.A.1.c.
The deterrent effect of prosecution
Deterrence of criminal conduct is one of the primary goals of the criminal law.
Experience demonstrates that many infringers will not be deterred by civil liability, which can be treated as a cost of doing business.
For example, even when a permanent injunction or consent decree is in force, they do not necessarily deter some defendants.
Some defendants may respond to such civil remedies by changing the item upon which they are infringing, such as counterfeiting shirts bearing marks of Major League Baseball teams after being the subject of an injunction obtained by the National Football League.
Others close shop only to quickly reopen under a different corporate identity.
Criminal prosecution can better deter a violator from repeating his or her crime.
Criminal prosecution of intellectual property crimes is also important for general deterrence.
Many individuals may commit intellectual property crimes not only because they can be relatively easy to commit (such as copying music) but also because the subjects believe they will not be prosecuted.
Criminal prosecution plays an important role in establishing public expectations of right and wrong.
Even relatively small scale violations, if permitted to take place openly and notoriously, can lead other people to believe that such conduct is tolerated in American society.
While some cases of counterfeiting or piracy may not result in provable direct loss to the holder of the intellectual property right, the widespread commission of intellectual property crimes with impunity can be devastating to the value of such rights.
The importance of general deterrence is easily understood with regard to counterfeiting of United States currency: even though some counterfeit bills can be "passed" without any harm to the monetary system of the United States, widespread commission of counterfeitin g would be devastating to the value of the dollar.
Today's brands have currency only to the extent that anticounterfeiting laws are enforced.
Vigorous prosecutions can change the counterfeiter's calculus.
If individuals believe that counterfeiters will be investigated and prosecuted, the y will be deterred.
Industry groups representing victims of intellectual property crimes are acutely aware of their need for law enforcement protection for intellectual property.
These victims will vigorously publicize successful prosecutions.
The resulting public awareness of effective prosecutions can have a substantial deterrence effect.
VI.A.1.d.
The individual's culpability in connection with the offense
Intellectual property crimes are often committed by multiple individuals working in concert, such as a company that traffics in counterfeit goods or pirated software.
See infra Section VI.A.4 (discussing special considerations for cases involving corporations).
The individuals in suc h an organization are not necessarily equally culpable.
For example, a prosecutor may reasonably conclude that some course other than prosecution would be appropriate for a relatively minor participant.
In considering the relative culpability of specific individuals within a group of people who commit intellectual property crimes in concert, a number of non-exclusive factors have proven helpful, including: (1) whether the person had oversight responsibility for others; (2) whether the person specifically directed others to commit the offense; (3) whether the person profited from the offense, as with an owner of a company or as with a salesperson receiving commissions; (4) whether the person was specifically aware of the wrongful nature of the activity, as evidenced by the receipt of a warning such as a "cease and desist" letter or by a statement to collaborators admitting wrongfulness, but nonetheless continued to engage in the activity; and (5) whether the person took affirmative steps, such as creatin g misleading records, to deter investigation, and thereby facilitate commission of the offense.
Other factors may also be relevant in particular cases.
VI.A.1.e.
The individual's history with respect to criminal activity
The subject's history with respect to criminal activity will of course be extremely fact dependent.
Experience with intellectual property crime cases teaches that defendants often have a history of engaging in a pattern of fraudulent conduct not necessarily limited to intellectual property crimes.
It should not be assumed that commission of an intellectual property crime is an exception to an otherwise law-abiding life.
Therefore, it is appropriate to consider whether there is a reasonable basis to believe that the person has engaged in previous intellectual property violations.
A prosecutor, an investigator or a victim may be aware of any permanent injunction or consent decree in any civil case against the defendant.
VI.A.1.f.
The individual's willingness to cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of others
A defendant's willingness to cooperate will depend on the individual.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognize that in intellectual property cases, defendants often have a substantial capacity for cooperation, if they are in fac t willing.
Since intellectual property crimes often require special materials, equipment, or information, and can involve multiple participants, defendants often can provide substantial assistance.
This cooperation can take at least three forms.
Most commonly, a defendant might cooperate in the investigation or prosecution of others directly involved in the same criminal scheme.
Second, a defendant might also provide valuable cooperation concerning the source or destination of counterfeit goods or pirated works.
For example, if a defendant is investigated for selling counterfeit watches on a retail basis, he could provide information as to the wholesaler of those counterfeit watches; the wholesaler in turn could provide information regarding the manufacturer, or abou t other retailers.
Third, a defendant might also provide information concerning the trafficking of counterfeit packaging materials in which counterfeit goods may be sold.
This information is easy to overlook since the price of the packaging may be relatively low in comparison to the price of the goods, particularly for high - technology items.
However, such information can be invaluable.
For example, a defendant accused of trafficking 2,000 counterfeit computer chips for $200 each for a total of $400,000 may also have sold 10,000 counterfeit boxes for that sam e kind of chip at three dollars each for a total of $30,000.
Though the $30,000 in box sales may seem like a small part of a $400,000 case, it can provide an important lead concerning the purchaser of the counterfeit boxes.
Since the boxe s serve no other purpose than to facilitate the trafficking in counterfeit goods, a reasonable inference is that the box purchaser may also be trafficking in the counterfeit chips.
Therefore, what was a simple $30,000 worth of boxes could lea d to $2 million worth of counterfeit chips.
VI.A.2.
Whether the person is subject to prosecution in another jurisdiction
The second situation noted by the U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.220 in which the prosecutor may properly decline to take action despite having sufficient admissible evidence is when the person is subject to effective prosecution in another jurisdiction.
In intellectual property cases, as in other cases, "[a]lthough there may be instances in which a Federal prosecutor may wish to consider deferring to prosecution in another Federal district, in most instances the choice will probably be between Federal prosecution and prosecution by state or local authorities."
U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.240 (comment).
In determining whether prosecution should be declined because the person is subject to effective prosecution in another jurisdiction, prosecutors should weigh all relevant considerations, including: (1) the strength of the other jurisdiction's interest in prosecution; (2) the other jurisdiction's ability and willingness to prosecute effectively; and (3) the probable sentence or other consequences if the person is convicted in the other jurisdiction.
U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-27.240.
See United States v. Coffee, 113 F. Supp.2d 751 (E.D. Pa. 2000) (granting defendants' motion to transfer venue on the basis of the convenience of the parties and witnesses and the interests of justice where the impecunious defendants' home and the alleged criminal operations and were in Dayton, Ohio an d only five of 57 proposed government witnesses were in Philadelphia, where an undercover operation had purchased counterfeit airplane parts).
Intellectual property cases represent a rare species where a prosecutor arguably may not be able to defer to a prosecution in the location of the primar y victim.
For example, a individual in one state may traffic in counterfeit sports wear bearing the counterfeited mark of a sports team located in a second state, and he might do so without ever physically entering that second state.
Because of the defendant's constitutional and statutory right to be tried in the state and district in which their crime was "committed," U.S. Const. art.
III § 2 cl. 3; U.S. Const. amend.
6; 18 U.S.C. § 3237, a prosecutor based in that second state -- the home state of the victim -- arguably may not have proper venue over the counterfeiter unless it can show that the "locus delecti" of the counterfeiting took place in the second state, a determination that must be made "from the nature of the crime alleged and the location of the act or acts constituting it."
United States v. Rodriguez-Moreno, 526 U.S. 275, 280 (1999).
Although this subject has not been vigorously litigated in the criminal infringement context, ordinarily that analysis turns on the locations of the actions of the defendant, rather than the district where the harm is felt.
For example, in United States v. DeFreitas, 92 F. Supp.2d 272, 276-77 (S.D.N.Y. 2000), the district court found New York venue proper in a case under 18 U.S.C. § 2320 where the counterfeit Beanie Babies were shipped from China to Canada, trucked to New York and then to New Jersey because "the very nature of the offense of 'trafficking' contemplates a continuing offense, one which begins with obtaining control over the counterfeit goods, continues with the transport, and ends with the transfer or disposal of such goods."
Cf. United States v. Muench, 153 F.3d 1298, 1303 (1998) (finding venue for failure to pay child support to be proper in Florida, where victim child lived, even though Texas was where the defendant lived and where his child support checks were due); United States v. Reed, 773 F.2d 477, 483 (2d Cir. 1985) (considering factors such as the site of the criminal acts, the elements and nature of the crime, the locus of its effects, and the suitability of the variou s districts for accurate factfinding and concluding that perjury in one district in a proceeding ancillary to a proceeding in another district may be prosecuted in either).
See generally Donna A. Balaguer, Venue, 30 Am.
Crim.
L. Rev. 1259 (1993).
Thus, in intellectual property cases, it is common that the federal prosecutor will be called upon to vindicate the rights of a victim intellectual property holder based in another district, another state, or even another country.
Prosecutors should therefore be cognizant that the defendant may not be subject to prosecution in the victim's district, state or nation.
Federal prosecutors should also recognize that local or state authorities may not have a great interest in punishing violations of the rights of out-of-state victim intellectual property holders.
By contrast, ensuring uniform and reliable national enforcement of the intellectual property laws is an important goal of federal law enforcement.
This goal takes on added significance for federal prosecutors when the victim is based in a foreign country because of the importance of intellectual property in modern international trade.
With consistent enforcement of intellectual property rights, America will continue to set an example of vigorou s intellectual property rights enforcement and continue to be perceived as hospitable to foreign firms that would register their intellectual property and engage in business here.
Even if the local or state authorities express a strong interest in prosecution, they may not have an ability or a willingness to prosecute the case effectively.
Intellectual property cases may not be a priority for some state or local authorities.
They may have limited resources to devote to intellectual property cases.
For example, a particular office may not have space to store the large inventory seized from the warehouse of a counterfeiter.
Local and state authorities may also believe that since many intellectual property rights are conferred by the federal government, they do not have the ability to prosecute any intellectual property crimes.
In most cases, this belie f is erroneous.
There is no general federal preemption of intellectual property crimes.
In fact, the vast majority of states have criminal intellectual property rights statutes.
The one provision for federal intellectual property preemption is for copyright infringement, 17 U.S.C. § 301, and even this preemption permits prosecution for other kinds of crime.
For example, over half of the states have enacted criminal trademark infringement statutes, which are unfair trade or "passing off" statutes.
A listing of these statutes is provided in Appendix D. These crimes are not preempted by federal law.
Courts have recognized that the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051-1127, which regulates federal trademark law, "does not preempt states' ability to recognize and protect trademark rights."
Keebler Co. v. Rovira Biscuit Corp., 624 F.2d 366, 372 n.3 (1st Cir. 1980) (holding that defendant was not liable in civil trademark infringement case involving sod a biscuits).
The Act sets a "protective floor only and does not interfere with state laws which provide additional trademark protection."
Storer Cable Communications v. City of Montgomery, 806 F. Supp. 1518, 1540 (M.D. Ala. 1992) (holding that Lanham Act did not preempt ordinance prohibiting certain anticompetitive practices in cable television case).
The Lanham Act would preempt only those rare state laws that directly conflict with its provisions or purposes by permitting an erosion of trademark rights.
Mariniello v. Shell Oil Co., 511 F.2d 853, 858 (3d Cir. 1975) (holding that the Lanham Act did not preempt state law protecting franchisee's gasoline dealer franchise case).
See State v. Frampton, 737 P.2d 183 (Utah 1987) (holding that Lanham Act does not preempt criminal simulation statute; the purpose of the statute was to protect consumers); Barnett v. Maryland State Bd. of Dental Exam'rs, 444 A.2d 1013 (Md. App.1982) (holding that dentist's registration of term "polydontics" as service mark did not preemp t State Board of Dental Examiners from acting to ban his use of advertisements containing "polydontics" on the basis that the advertisements were misleading or deceptive).
See also Warner Bros. v. American Broad.
Cos., 720 F.2d 231, 247 (2d Cir. 1983) (holding plaintiff's reliance on state unfair competitio n law to allege a tort of "passing off" not an assertion of rights equivalent to those protected by copyright in civil infringement case involving superhero parody).
A vast majority of states (over 40) have also have enacted "truth in labeling" laws or "true name and address" statutes.
In states that have enacted these laws, it is illegal to manufacture, sell, distribute, or possess a variety of items and commodities, with intent to sell, re-sell, distribute, or rent, tha t do not bear the name and address of the manufacturer.
These statutes cover a range of items -- from sound recordings and audiovisual works to petroleum products and foodstuffs.
See Appendix D.
In many states, these laws are misdemeanors for first-time offenders.
These state laws are listed by state in Appendix D.
Courts generally have determined that these "true name and address" statutes are not preempted by federal copyright law.
See, e.g., Anderson v. Nidorf, 26 F.3d 100, 102 (9th Cir. 1994) (holding California's anti-piracy statute not preempted by federal copyright laws in illegal sound recording case); State v. Awawdeh, 864 P.2d 965, 968 (Wash.
App. 1994) (holding Washington's statute not preempted by federal copyright law in illegal sound recording case); People v. Borriello, 588 N.Y.S.2d 991, 996 (App. Div. 1992) (holding that New York's statute not preempted by Copyright Revision Act in illegal video recording case).
Federal copyright law does provide that as of 1978, "all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any of the exclusive rights within the general scope of copyright . . . and come within the subject matter of copyright . . . are governed exclusively by [Title 17].
Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right or equivalent right in any such work under the common law or the statutes of any state."
17 U.S.C. § 301(a).
See, e.g., Kodadek v. MTV Networks, Inc., 152 F.3d 1209, 1212-13 (9th Cir. 1998) (holding state law unfair competition claim for releasing cartoon and merchandise derived from drawings without authorization to be preempted where complaint expressly based unfair competition claim on rights granted by the Copyright Act); Kregos v. Associated Press, 3 F.3d 656, 666 (2d Cir. 1993) (holding state law unfair competition and misappropriation claims preempted when based solely on the copying of protected expression in forms).
A substantial majority of states have enacted state piracy or unauthorized duplication statutes.
Over 45 such statutes are listed in Appendix F. Nevertheless, courts have regularly determined that state law claims relying on misappropriation claims are preempted.
See, e.g., State v. Perry, 697 N.E.2d 624 (Ohio 1998) (holding that federal copyright law preempted prosecution in case involving defendant's use of computer software on his bulletin board); Del Madera Properties v. Rhodes 
Legislative history suggests a Congressional intent that "misappropriation" is not necessarily synonymous with copyright infringement, and that a misappropriation claim would not be preempted.
See H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N.
5659 (1976).
Courts have recognized this legislative history and have afforded it some limited weight.
See, e.g., National Basketball Assoc. v. Motorola, Inc., 105 F.3d 841, 850 (2d Cir. 1997) (discussing the legislative history at length and holding that a narrow "hot-news" misappropriation claim would survive preemption for actions concernin g material within the realm of copyright).
Despite preemption, many states have other statutes that may be used to address cases involving violations of intellectual property rights.
Courts revie w arguments that actions are preempted to determine whether the rights for which protection are sought may be "equivalent" to those protected by copyright law, often turning to the "extra element" test, i.e., permitting the state law claim to survive preemption if the "extra element" is "required instead of or in addition to the acts of reproduction, performance, distribution or display."
National Basketball Ass'n v. Motorola, Inc., 105 F.3d 841, 850 (2d Cir. 1997); Kregos, 3 F.3d at 666.
For example, state authorities may use fraud statutes in cases involving intellectual property because of the extra element of deception that need not be proven in copyright cases.
See, e.g., National Basketball Ass'n, 105 F.3d at 852 n.6 (observing that state law claims involving breach of fiduciary duties or trade secret claims to not generally be preempted); Allied Artists Pictures Corp. v. Rhodes, 496 F. Supp. 408, 447 (S.D. Ohio 1980), aff'd in pertinent part, 697 F.2d 656 (6th Cir. 1982) (determining in dicta that regulation of market practices, including fraudulent licensing, to be qualitatively different from copyright).
VI.A.3.
The adequacy of a non-criminal alternative in an intellectual property case
Prosecutors may consider the adequacy of non-criminal alternatives when addressing an intellectual property case.
Some civil remedies, including ex parte seizure of a defendant's infringing products and punitive damages, may be available for certain violations of copyright and trademark rights.
15 U.S.C. § 1116(d) (trademark remedies); 17 U.S.C. §§ 502-505 (copyright remedies).
Also, for importers of trademark-infringing merchandise, the Customs Service may assess civil penalties not greater than the value that the merchandise would have were it genuine, according to the manufacturer's suggested retail price for first offenders, and not greater than twice that valu e for repeat offenders.
These civil fines may be imposed in the U.S. Custom Service's discretion, in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or othe r remedy authorized by law.
19 U.S.C. § 1526(f).
The availability and adequacy of these remedies should be carefully considered when evaluating an intellectual property case.
Yet civil remedies may be futile under various circumstances.
For example, intellectual property crimes are unusual because they generally are committed without the victim's knowledge, even after the fact.
The victim usually has no direct relationship with the infringer -- before, during, or after the commissio n of the crime.
If a victim is unaware of a violation by a particular defendant, civil remedies generally will be unavailing.
Furthermore, without criminal sanction, infringers or counterfeiters might treat the rare case of the victim's civil enforcement of its rights as a cost of doing business.
Another important factor to consider when contemplating civil remedies is that infringers may be judgment-proof.
In most cases, the infringer traffics in counterfeit items worth far less than the authentic ones.
By the time law enforcement identifies the unlawful activity, the value of the infringing items that the defendant has distributed often far exceeds the funds to which the defendant has access.
This phenomenon is particularly common in software infringement cases, since an infringer can reproduce large numbers of high quality copies with only minimal investment.
In Internet and computer bulletin board cases, a relatively modest expenditure in a personal computer and a modem can result in the reproduction and distribution of hundreds or even thousands of exact duplications of copyrighted works.
In such instances, a criminal sanction may be the only meaningful deterrent.
There are a number of other circumstances where existing civil remedies may simply be an insufficient deterrent.
For example, there may be cases where there have been prior unsuccessful efforts by a victim to enforce intellectual propert y rights against the defendant or the existence of circumstances preventing such efforts.
Criminal charges may also be necessary if counterfeiting continues despite the entry of a permanent injunction or consent decree in a civil case.
As these scenarios illustrate, there are numerous situations where civil remedie s may not deter the infringement, particularly where the defendant regards civil penalties as a cost of doing business.
Another option to keep in mind in civil cases where there is a "repeat infringer" is that the existence of a civil order may provide a basis for a petition to the court for contempt.
Finally, civil remedies may not fully capture the wrongfulness of the defendant's criminal conduct.
Counterfeiting or infringement of intellectual property threatens the very integrity of the federal intellectual property system, just as counterfeiting of currency jeopardizes the currency system.
A meaningful threat of criminal prosecution is necessary to safeguard the public's confidence in intellectual property.
VI.A.4.
Special considerations in deciding whether to charge corporations
Corporations are often vehicles for the commission of intellectual property crimes.
Trafficking any items, including infringing items, requires the reliable performance of many functions, such as: purchasing, accounting, inventory management, quality control, sales and returns.
The performance of these functions on a large scale can be substantially facilitated by the organization and know-how of a business entity.
A business may be especially suited to trafficking in counterfeit items if it already participates in the market for legitimate ones.
For example, a business that sells legitimate goods may also sell counterfeit goods at a lower price.
The organizational nature of such infringing schemes may make a RICO charge worth considering.
See Section VI.B.2 (discussing the option of charging RICO in intellectual property cases).
While every case should be evaluated on its own facts, intellectual property crimes committed by or on behalf of corporations exhibit certain typica l features.
These features are worth analysis against general considerations, such as the Department's guidance on Federal Prosecution of Corporations (June 16, 1999) ("Corporate Guidance").
That guidance states that to hold the corporation liable for the illegal acts of its agents, "the government must establish that the corporate agent's actions (i) were within the scope of his duties and (ii) were intended, at least in part, to benefit the corporation."
Corporate Guidance § I.B.
The guidance also notes that "[i]n all cases involving wrongdoing by corporate agents, prosecutors should consider the corporation, as well as the responsible individuals, as potential criminal targets."
Corporate Guidance § I.B.
The guidance identifies eight factors for prosecutors to bear in mind while considering the proper treatment of a corporate target.
Corporate Guidance § II.A.
These factors should be considered in intellectual property cases as they are in other cases with a corporate target.
Some of the factors, such as timely and voluntary disclosure of wrongdoing and willingness to cooperate, as well as specific remedial actions taken by the corporation, are particularly fact dependent.
Of the other factors, a few deserve particular attention in intellectual property cases, such as: pervasiveness of wrongdoing within the corporation; the corporation's past history; restitution and remediation; collateral consequences; and non-criminal alternatives.
These are discussed individually below.
Pervasiveness of wrongdoing within the corporation.
The Department's guidance recognizes that "[c]harging a corporation for even minor misconduct may be appropriate where the wrongdoing was pervasive and was undertaken by a large number of employees, or by all the employees in a particular role within the corporation, e.g., the salesmen or procurement officers, or was condoned by upper management."
Corporate Guidance § IV.A.
In some cases where an intellectual property crime is committed by individuals through a corporation , the involvement can be pervasive throughout the corporation and condoned by management.
For example, the sales people sell some of the company's goods at a discount to the rest of the market; the quality control team ensures that the infringing item will "pass"; the inventory manager keeps the infringing item separate from legitimate ones; and the purchaser must seek out, obtain and earmark the infringing goods obtained at a discount.
It would be difficult for a "rogue" salesman to sell counterfeit items without the cooperation of the purchaser in obtaining them and the inventory manager in making their availability for sale known to him.
If the counterfeit or pirated item is create d in-house, then involvement is even greater: the purchaser must obtain raw materials but not the finished product; the warehouse people must assemble the item; the accountant must keep track of the adjustment to the company's inventory; and others may even be called upon from time to time to help in the warehouse.
All of this participation usually takes place with the awareness and at the direction of management, as would almost be required for so pervasive a scheme.
The corporation's past history.
As the Department's guidance notes, a corporation "is expected to learn from its mistakes."
Corporate Guidance § V.B.
Of course prosecution may be appropriate if the corporation has not responded appropriately to previous non-criminal guidance, warnings, sanctions, or criminal charges.
In intellectual property cases, guidance or warnings may often be in the form of a "cease and desist" letter sen t by the victim, possibly followed by initiation of civil suit.
In addition, it is often the case that an infringing corporation becomes aware of contemporaneous sanctions against a similarly situated firm, such as a supplier or a competitor.
Corporations may be expected to learn from the mistakes of others with whom they associate.
Prosecution may be appropriate if a corporation became aware of actions against associates and yet continued to engage in the conduct at the roo t of the enterprise.
On the other hand, declination may be justified if a corporation became aware of actions against associates and took remedial actions , such as implementing a corporate compliance program, improving an existing one, disciplining or terminating wrongdoers or management, paying restitution, or cooperating with relevant government agencies.
Restitution and remediation.
In prior intellectual property cases, corporate defendants have paid substantial fines and restitution.
These sanction s not only deter and punish wrongdoers, they also aid in making the victim whole.
A corporation may be more likely to be able to pay substantial amounts than an individual.
Of course, as the Department's guidance notes, "neither a corporatio n nor an individual may avoid prosecution merely by paying a sum of money."
Corporate Guidance § VIII.A.
Collateral consequences.
While the Department's guidance notes that prosecutors may consider collateral consequences of a corporate criminal conviction, it also recognizes that unknowing people, such as officers, director s shareholders and employees, might be affected by a corporate conviction.
Corporate Guidance § IX.B.
In intellectual property cases involving corporations committing infringement crimes, the illicit conduct can be pervasiv e throughout the corporate entity.
Where these entities are closely held, few unknowing innocent people would suffer substantial consequences.
The Department' s guidance also draws attention to non-penal sanctions that may arise, such as debarment from eligibility from certain government programs including government contract eligibility.
Corporate Guidance § IX.B.
For example, there have been notorious cases of the government purchasing infringing items, such as airplane parts or computer chips to control satellite or military equipment, from government contractors.
Under a "low bid" system, th e government may be particularly susceptible to purchasing infringing goods.
In cases such as these, the potential for debarment as a consequence of prosecution should be seriously considered.
Non-criminal alternatives.
As discussed, prosecutors may consider the non- criminal alternatives to prosecution when addressing an intellectual property case.
See supra Section VI.A.3 (discussing non-criminal alternatives in intellectual property cases).
This inquiry is equally important when the defendant is a corporation.
As the Department's guidance recognizes, prosecutors may consider whether non-criminal alternatives adequately deter, punish and rehabilitate a corporation that has engaged in wrongful conduct.
The Department's guidance suggests that prosecutors may also evaluate the "regulator y authority's ability and willingness to take effective enforcement action."
Corporate Guidance § X.B.
For the closely held corporations that are typically engaged in the commission of intellectual property crimes, there is no willing or able regulatory authority, such as the Securities and Exchange Commission, to provides oversight.
Therefore, the only alternative to criminal enforcement in these cases may be a civil suit brought by the victim.
This alternative is subject to many of the same concerns when dealing with a corporat e target as described above for a natural target.
See supra Section VI.A.3 (discussing non-criminal alternatives in intellectual property cases).
___________________________________________________________________________
VI.B.
Other Federal Offenses to Consider in Relation to Intellectual Property Infringement Cases
In addition to the intellectual property statutes discussed above, there are other criminal statutes prosecutors may charge in developing intellectual property cases.
Of these, prosecutors should be particularly aware of the variou s wire and mail fraud, money laundering, and RICO statutes which are discussed below.
Prosecutors may, for the usual strategic reasons, wish to bring accessory charges, such as aiding and abetting, 18 U.S.C. § 2; or conspiracy, 18 U.S.C. § 371.
See, e.g., United States v. Sachs, 801 F.2d 839 (6th Cir. 1986) (affirming conviction for aiding and abetting, and conspiring to infringe, in motion picture copyright infringement case).
Of course, a jury's inability to reach a verdict on an ancillary charge, such as an accompanying conspiracy count, does not necessarily affect a finding of guilt on the substantive count or counts.
See United States v. Steele, 785 F.2d 743, 750 (9th Cir. 1986) (affirming conviction for copyright infringement despit e dismissal of conspiracy to infringe charges).
Some crimes that are technical violations of the copyright or counterfeiting provisions may be core violations of other provisions.
For example, the computer hacker who exceeds authorization in a computer system and copies sensitive data for financial gain may be more appropriately charged under 18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2), whereas a person who copies trade secret information may be subject to punishment under the Economic Espionage Act, 18 U.S.C. §§ 1831, 1832.
For further discussion of prosecution of trade secrets, see infra Chapter VIII.
Infringing articles are often manufactured overseas and then shipped into the United States for distribution.
Commercial importation of unauthorized copie s of copyrighted works constitutes copyright infringement.
See 17 U.S.C. §§ 501(a), 602.
If significant customs duties were avoided by counterfeiting the goods, prosecutors may consider also charging the defendant with entering goods into the United States by false statements, 18 U.S.C. § 542; or with smuggling goods, 18 U.S.C. § 545.
Absent exceptional circumstances, prosecutors considering intellectual property crimes -- especially copyright crimes -- should not charge interstate transportation of stolen property, 18 U.S.C. § 2314.
In 1985, the Supreme Court reversed a conviction for the interstate transportation of copyrighted Elvis Presley records, holding that it was not Congress's intention that section 2314 function as a criminalization of copyright infringement.
See Dowling v. United States, 473 U.S. 207 (1985).
The Court reasoned that an infringer of a copyright neither assumed physical control over the copyright, no r wholly deprived the owner of its use.
The statute "seems clearly to contemplate a physical identity between the items unlawfully obtained and those eventually transported, and hence [requires] some prior physical taking of the subject goods."
Dowling, 473 U.S. at 216.
The same reasoning could apply to infringement of a trademark, which requires neither physical control nor deprivation to the owner.
Moreover, trademark, like copyright is protected by an extensive body of federal law.
Therefore, prosecutors should generally reserve charging § 2314 for theft of physical property and avoid using it for theft of intellectual property.
VI.B.1.
Mail fraud and wire fraud: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343
In many intellectual property cases, prosecutors should consider charging mail or wire fraud in addition to, or in lieu of, an intellectual property crime .
Federal prosecutors, of course, need no introduction to the wire or mail fraud statutes.
See, e.g., Peter J. Henning, Maybe it Should Just Be Called Federal Fraud: The Changing Nature of the Mail Fraud Statute, 36 B.C. L. Rev. 435 (1995); Jed S. Rakoff, The Federal Mail Fraud Statute (Part I), 18 Duq. L. Rev. 771 (1980).
Intellectual property cases are not removed from the reach of wire or mail fraud statutes merely because the property at issue is intangible.
In 1987, the Supreme Court issued two separate opinions defining the scope of mail and wire fraud statutes in cases involving the theft of intangible property.
In United States v. McNally, 483 U.S. 350 (1987), the Court rejected the view that the mail fraud statute then in effect reached schemes that denied the public the loyal services of government officials.
Relying on the legislative history of these statutes, the Court interpreted 18 U.S.C. § 1341 as "limited in scope to the protection of property rights."
Id. at 360.
(In response to the McNally decision, Congress enacted 18 U.S.C. § 1346 broadening the definition of a "scheme or artifice to defraud" to include "a scheme or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.")
Read broadly, McNally might be construed to preclude all prosecutions for schemes to defraud individuals of intangible property like copyrights.
Nevertheless, in Carpenter v. United States, 484 U.S. 19 (1987), the Court made clear that a scheme to defraud the owner of another type of intangible property -- confidential information -- was covered by the mail and wire fraud statutes.
Distinguishing McNally, the Court stated that confidential business information had "long been recognized as property."
Id. at 26.
According to the Court, this intangible interest had received greater legal recognition as property than had the right to honest and faithful services by public employees, a right which the Court characterized as "an interest too ethereal in itself to fall within the protection of the mail fraud statute."
Id.
Since intellectual property has been no less recognized as property, than as confidential business information, it should be equally protected under the wire and mail fraud statutes.
See generally Pamela Samuelson, Information as Property: Do Ruckelhaus and Carpenter Signal A Changing Direction in Intellectual Property Law?, 38 Cath.
U. L. Rev. 365 (1989).
VI.B.1.a.
Possible advantages of charging wire or mail fraud
Charging wire or mail fraud in an intellectual property case may have several strategic advantages for federal prosecutors.
Prosecutors may be more comfortable with the familiar statute.
Moreover, juries may believe that fraud is less exotic and more inherently wrongful than an intellectual property crime.
This is particularly true where the facts involve deception or defrauding of consumers by counterfeit merchandise, such as counterfeit automobile parts.
Prosecutors should also consider the sentencing advantages, if any, of charging wire or mail fraud, although many of these comparative advantages have been eliminated with the May 1, 2000 of the Sentencing Guidelines.
See infra Section VII.A.
VI.B.1.b.
Possible disadvantages of charging wire or mail fraud
Prosecutors should be wary, however, of the possible snares in charging wire or mail fraud either in addition to or in lieu of an intellectual property crime.
A wire and mail fraud charge generally requires proof of a scheme to defraud, and an intent to defraud.
An infringement charge would require neither.
Need for a scheme to defraud.
One interesting question is whether the government may even charge fraud for pure infringement in the absence of evidenc e of any misrepresentation or scheme to defraud.
In one copyright case, a charge of wire fraud was dismissed where no misrepresentation was alleged.
See United States v. LaMacchia, 871 F. Supp. 535 (D. Mass. 1994).
The judge in LaMacchia reasoned that the bundle of rights conferred by copyright is unique and carefully defined, precluding prosecution under the general wire frau d statute, at least when there is no fraudulent conduct on the part of the defendant.
Id. at 544-45.
The court in LaMacchia relied heavily on the Supreme Court's decision in Dowling v. United States, 473 U.S. 207 (1985).
In Dowling, the Court overturned the defendant's conviction for interstate transportation of stolen property under 18 U.S.C. § 2314 because it found Congress' actions to be preemptive.
See Dowling, 473 U.S. at 207.
Compare 4 Nimmer on Copyright, § 15.05[A] at 15-34 (1999) ("Dowling's lesson is that Congress has finely calibrated the reach of criminal copyright liability, and therefore, absent clear indication of Congressional intent, the criminal laws of the United States do not reach copyright-related conduct.")
with Aaron D. Hoag, Note, Defrauding The Wire Fraud Statute: United States v. LaMacchia, 9 Harv.
J.L. 
NOTE: The LaMacchia opinion may have significant limits.
The indictment in LaMacchia did not charge the defendant with making any misrepresentations whatsoever.
When there is some evidence of misrepresentation or fraud, the fact that the goods at issue were intellectual property should not bar a mail or wire fraud prosecution; Dowling does not provide contrary authority.
See Cooper v. United States, 639 F. Supp. 176, 180 (M.D. Fla. 1986) (rejecting contention that Dowling precluded any mail and wire fraud prosecutions of copyright infringers who had distributed pirated eight- track and cassette tapes and were charged with "fraudulently represent[ing] to the public and to others that certain sound recordings 'were produced by the manufacturers identified on the labels of said products' when, in fact, the products were not legitimately or lawfully reproduced"); United States v. Wang, 898 F. Supp. 758, 760-61 (D. Colo. 1995) (holding that defendant's unauthorized transmission by wire of copyrighted computer files could be prosecuted under the wire fraud statute and rejecting the claim that Dowling limits the reach of the mail and wire fraud); see also Dowling v. United States, 473 U.S. 207, 209 n.l (1985) (declining to consider sua sponte the fact that the defendant did not challenge his conviction under the mail and wire fraud statutes).
To prove mail or wire fraud in any jurisdiction the government must establish a scheme to defraud.
While the code provides no direct guidance as to what constitutes a "scheme or artifice to defraud," decisions interpreting these statutes frequently emphasize false or misleading statements made by the defendant to the victim.
See McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350, 358 (1987) ("[T]he words 'to defraud' commonly refer 'to wrongdoing one in his property rights by dishonest methods or schemes,' and 'usually signify the deprivation of something of value by trick, deceit, chicane or overreaching.'") (citation omitted); United States v. Morris, 80 F.3d 1151, 1160 (7th Cir. 1996) (noting that statute "encompasses fraudulent schemes premised on false statements or factual misrepresentations"); United States v. Brien, 617 F.2d 299, 307 (1st Cir. 1980) (describing a "plan to deceive persons as to the substantial identity of the things they are to receive in exchange") (citation omitted).
Courts have upheld fraud convictions even when the victim of the fraud had no direct contact with the perpetrator of the fraud, broadly characterizing the nature of the fraudulent conduct to fit within the language of the federal fraud statutes.
See United States v. Christopher, 142 F.3d 46, 54 (1st Cir. 1998) (holding that even though injury fell on third party, fraudulent representations to insurance regulators constituted violation of the wire fraud statute since "[n]othing in the mail and wire fraud statutes requires that the party deprived of money or property be the same party who is actually deceived") ; United States v. Manzer, 69 F.3d 222, 226 (8th Cir. 1995) (holding that sale to a third party of illegal cable television descrambling devices that permitted the unauthorized decryption of premium channel satellite broadcasts violated federal fraud statutes); United States v. Coyle, 943 F.2d 424, 427 (4th Cir. 1991) (holding a sale of cable television descramblers to be a scheme to defraud "because it wronged the cable companies in their 'property rights by dishonest methods or schemes;'" quoting McNally, 483 U.S. at 358).
Nevertheless, in the absence of strong evidence of misrepresentation, a prosecutor may prefer not to proceed with a wire or mail fraud charge if an infringement crime may be charged.
By contrast, fraud on the purchaser is not an element in any of the intellectual property crimes.
Courts have not accepted claims by defendants that the infringement offenses with which they were charged had not been completed because no purchaser was defrauded.
See, e.g., United States v. Gantos, 817 F.2d 41, 43 (8th Cir. 1987) (upholding trademark counterfeiting conviction where the defendant told the buyer that the goods were counterfeit).
Need for a specific intent to defraud.
Defendants in intellectual property cases have tried to excuse their actions by stating that they did not intend to defraud the recipients of the infringing materials.
Proof of specific intent to defraud is required for mail and wire fraud, but not for the infringement crimes .
Where the evidence to show a specific intent to defraud is not overwhelming, a prosecutor might consider charging the case as an infringement and using the limited evidence of the defendant's fraud as part of the context for the case.
Many cases recognize that mail and wire fraud prosecutions require proof of a specific intent to defraud.
United States v. Beech-Nut Nutrition Corp., 871 F.2d 1181, 1195-96 (2d Cir. 1989) (citing cases) (affirming conviction for offenses stemming from a conspiracy to sell misbranded and adulterated apple juice in interstate commerce while observing that "a finding of conscious avoidance could not alone provide the basis for finding purpose or for finding intent as a whole").
See also United States v. Gabriel, 125 F.3d 89, 98 (2d Cir. 1997).
Although some cases note that reckless disregard of the truth is sufficient to prove "specific intent" in the context of mail and wire fraud, the conduct in question manifested a clear specific intent to defraud.
See, e.g., United States v. Coyle, 63 F.3d 1239, 1243 (3d Cir. 1995) (health care fraud); United States v. Reddeck, 22 F.3d 1504, 1507 (10th Cir. 1994) (fraudulent correspondence university scheme); United States v. Gay, 967 F.2d 322, 326 (9th Cir. 1992) (fraudulent direct marketing scheme); United States v. Simon, 839 F.2d 1461, 1470 (11th Cir. 1988) (fraudulent oil and gas lease scheme).
The "good heart" excuse has not been accepted by the courts in intellectual property cases because none of the intellectual property crimes discussed above, 18 U.S.C. §§ 2318-2320, requires a specific intent to defraud.
For example, trademark counterfeiting under 18 U.S.C. § 2320 requires only general intent, i.e., that the defendant knowingly trafficked in a counterfeit mark.
One court specifically rejected a "good heart" defense that th e counterfeit marks were used so that the end user could reorder authentic parts and use authentic repair manuals.
See United States v. Brooks, 111 F.3d 365, 372 (4th Cir. 1997) (affirming conviction of defendants for fraud, trafficking in counterfeit goods, and other charges in connection with sales of electrical components to the U.S. Navy).
See also United States v. Gantos, 817 F.2d 41, 43 (8th Cir. 1987) (affirming trademark counterfeiting conviction where the defendant told the buyer that the goods were counterfeit).
Even the "willful" mens rea required to prove criminal copyright infringement does not require the government to show a specific intent to defraud.
See supra Section III.B.3 (discussing willfulness element needed for copyright infringement prosecution).
VI.B.2.
RICO: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961-1968
Prosecutors in certain intellectual property cases may consider bringing charges under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) provisions found at 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961-1968.
Counterfeit labeling, 18 U.S.C. § 2318; criminal copyright infringement, 18 U.S.C. § 2319; trafficking in recordings of live musical performances, 18 U.S.C. § 2319A; and trademark counterfeiting, 18 U.S.C. § 2320 are all predicates for a racketeering charge under 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1)(B).
Recognizing the frequency with which intellectual property crimes are committed by organizations, Congress specifically added the four above-noted intellectual property crimes as predicat e acts when enacting the Anticounterfeiting Consumer Protection Act of 1996.
Pub. L. No. 104-153 § 3, 110 Stat. 1386 (1996).
The legislative history highlights testimony from Leonard Walton, Deputy Assistant Commissioner of Investigations for the United States Customs Service, comparing the pattern of criminal activity and organizational structure associated with counterfeiting to that of drug trafficking.
He then went on to explain that the RICO provisions of the law were "essential to allow law enforcement agents to take down the entire criminal organization rather than merely react to each crime the organization commits."
H.R. Rep. No. 104-556, at 304 (1996), reprinted in 1996 U.S.C.C.A.N.
1074, 1075.
Cf. Toms v. Pizzo, 4 F. Supp.2d 178, 184 (W.D.N.Y. 1998) (noting that §§ 2318, 2319, and 2320 are predicates for RICO).
Many large-scale infringement cases involve a regular pattern of coordinated activity by a highly structured organization, such as a corporation.
See supra Section VI.A.4 (discussing charging corporations in intellectual property cases).
Thus, infringement cases may make good candidates for bringing a RICO charge.
Of course, a RICO charge can add complexity to a case, and requires prior approval from the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal Division.
U.S. Attorneys' Manual §§ 9-110.101, 9-110.320.
The U.S. Attorney's Manual provides that a RICO charge should be added only if it would serve a specific consideration for a case.
U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-110.310 (enumerating considerations).
Of the enumerated considerations, two are typicall y of special interest in infringement cases: (1) a RICO prosecution would provide the basis for an appropriate sentence in a way that prosecution only on the underlying intellectual property charges would not; and (2) use of RICO would provide a reasonable expectation of forfeiture which is proportionate to the underlying criminal conduct.
For sentencing purposes, a RICO charge provides a minimum base offense level of 19.
See U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual § 2E1.1.
This floor could provide an appropriate minimum sentence that would recognize th e wrongfulness of, and the need to deter, such large scale criminal activity even if the entire scope or scale of the infringing activity cannot be proven.
Such a floor may also help address the many difficult valuation issues that arise in sentencing infringement crimes, even with the recent amendments to the sentencin g guidelines.
See infra Section VII.A (discussing sentencing for infringement crimes).
Intellectual property crimes can take place without the victim rights holder ever becoming aware.
Therefore, it can be difficult, once the crime is discovered, and investigated, to determine precisel y how long it has been ongoing.
In most cases, the scope of the crime is determine d by the defendant's records or the defendant's admissions, which can be remarkabl y incomplete.
This concern is exacerbated by the ease with which large-scale intellectual property crimes can be committed.
For example, a Web site that offers downloads of copyrighted software can provide thousands of copies if it can provide one.
Though less dramatically, trademark crimes can be committed on a large scale constrained only by the supply of the "knockoff" goods and the difficulty of generating the counterfeit mark.
A structured organization that engages in intellectual property infringement as a profitable and repeated practice may be a highly capital- intensive business with substantial proceeds.
Such proceeds would be ripe for forfeiture, except that, as discussed separately, forfeiture provisions provided for in a pure intellectual property case are more limited than the general forfeiture provisions.
See infra Section VII.C (discussing forfeiture for infringement crimes).
Unlike intellectual property crimes, RICO has broad forfeiture provisions.
See 18 U.S.C. § 1964.
In some intellectual property cases, a RICO charge may thereby provide a reasonable expectation of forfeiture proportionate to the underlying infringing conduct.
Prosecutors with questions concerning RICO practice should contact the RICO expert in their office or the Criminal Division's Organized Crime and Racketeering Section at (202) 514-3595.
As noted above, a RICO charge can add complexity to a case, and requires prior approval from the Organized Crime and Racketeering Section of the Criminal Division.
If the charge is well-grounded an d clearly explained, this approval requirement should not be an undue burden to prosecutors.
VI.B.3.
Money laundering: 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957
Prosecutors may consider bringing additional charges under the money laundering statutes found at 18 U.S.C. §§ 1956, 1957.
The penalties for a violation of these statutes can be greater than for an intellectual property violation alone.
The sentencing guidelines for money laundering start at a base offense level of 17, 20, or 23; all of these are substantially greater than thos e for an intellectual property violation.
U.S. Sentencing Guidelines Manual §§ 2S1.1, 2S1.2.
A money laundering charge also provides a basis for criminal forfeiture of property involved in the money laundering offense, an option not ordinarily available in simple intellectual property cases.
See 18 U.S.C. § 982(a)(1).
Criminal copyright infringement, 18 U.S.C. § 2319 and trademark counterfeiting, 18 U.S.C. § 2320 (but not counterfeit labeling, 18 U.S.C. § 2318) are specified unlawful activities that may be used as predicates for money laundering charges.
See 18 U.S.C. § 1956(b)(7)(D).
For example, in one recent case, the defendant had mass-produced counterfeit audio cassette recordings of releases by performers of popular music.
Along with co-conspirators, he infringed the copyrights of the performers and used the proceeds from sales to expand operations.
He pleaded guilty to conspiracy, copyright infringement, trafficking in counterfeit labels, and money laundering.
United States v. Khalil, No.
CR. A. 95-577-01, 1999 WL 455698 (E.D. Penn.
June 30, 1999).
Defendants in intellectual property cases commonly violate the money laundering laws.
They might violate 18 U.S.C. § 1956(a)(1) by engaging in financial transactions involving proceeds of their specified unlawful activity with the intent to promote the carrying on of further specified unlawful activity.
For example, an individual who traffics in counterfeit goods may deposit the proceeds of his sales into a bank account and then use the proceeds to purchase more counterfeit goods for the purpose of trafficking.
In addition, a defendant might violate 18 U.S.C. § 1957 by knowingly engaging in a monetary transaction in property of a value greater than $10,000 derived from a criminal offense that is a specified unlawful activity, such as the sale of counterfeit goods.
Since these scenarios, which constitute technical money laundering violations, are so typical, it may be difficult to decide whether a particular case is appropriate for charging money laundering, particularly if th e defendant is also trafficking in legitimate goods.
While each case must be decided upon its own facts, certain factors have proven helpful for prosecutors in intellectual property cases considering a money laundering charge: (1) the gross amount derived from a specified unlawful activity; (2) whether the total monetary value is more than de minimis; (3) whether more than 50 percent of the funds contained in, or related to, a commingled bank account are proceeds of the specified unlawful activity and are used to promote the carrying on of further specified unlawful activities; (4) whether covert accounts, such as off- shore bank accounts, were used to conceal the activity; and (5) whether financia l records were designed to conceal the use of the proceeds, such as using two sets of financial books.
Prosecutors should be aware that in so-called "receipt-and-deposit" cases, i.e., any case in which the conduct to be charged as money laundering consists of the deposit of proceeds of specified unlawful activity into a domestic financial institution account that is clearly identifiable as belonging to the person or persons (including the business entity outwardly involved in the criminal conduct) who committed the specified unlawful activity, no indictment or complaint may be filed without prior consultation with the Asset Forfeiture and Money Laundering Section.
See U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-105.330(4).
For a detailed discussion of the elements of money laundering and for Department of Justice policy, see U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-105.000 and Money Laundering Section, U. S. Department of Justice Money Laundering Federal Prosecution Manual (June 1994).
Prosecutors wit h questions concerning money laundering practice should contact the money laundering expert in their office or the Criminal Division's Asset Forfeiture an d Money Laundering Section at (202) 514-1263.
___________________________________________________________________________
VI.C.
How To Charge a Copyright or Trademark Crime
VI.C.1.
Units of prosecution
Because a defendant often traffics in numerous labels of copyrighted works, infringes numerous copyrighted works or counterfeits numerous trademarks, it is not always easy to draft an indictment that accurately reflects a defendant's actions.
The United States Department of Justice Criminal Resource Manual advise s that "all U.S. Attorneys should charge in indictments and informations as few separate counts as are reasonably necessary to prosecute fully and successfully and to provide for a fair sentence on conviction."
U.S. Attorneys' Manual § 9-215.00 ("Criminal Resource Manual") (recommending charging no more than fifteen counts).
The charging determination is subject to the rule of reason, and generally the best approach is to organize charges around specific courses of conduct in order to keep the case as straightforward as possible for the jury.
Prosecutors may consider charging counts by the mark or copyright infringed, by the identity of the copyright holder or mark holder, or by the date upon which the infringing goods were manufactured, distributed, or seized.
Indictments charging counterfeiting and piracy schemes can be unified through a conspiracy count under 18 U.S.C. § 371.
In cases where the defendant infringed only one type of the same copyrighted work or trademark, the defendant should be charged with a single count.
This amounts to counting the number of illegal copies made or distributed by the defendant in the requisite period if any and charging them as a single count in the indictment.
Although no court has addressed this issue in the copyright context, it should not be held duplicitous to charge a single count of copyright infringement that alleges infringement by both "reproduction" and "distribution" because the offense is "infring[ing] a copyright," 17 U.S.C. § 506(a) and "reproduction" and "distribution" are alternate means of infringing a copyright because they are defined by the statutory scheme as alternative ways to violate the copyright holder's exclusive rights.
See 17 U.S.C. § 501(a) (defining infringement as violation of an exclusive right provided by 17 U.S.C. §§ 106-118); see also 17 U.S.C. § 106(1) (exclusive right of reproduction); 17 U.S.C. § 106(3) (exclusive right of distribution).
See generally, e.g., United States v. Cornillie, 92 F.3d 1108, 1109 (11th Cir. 1996) (count of indictment charging defendant with multiple means of intimidation not duplicitous because statute recited each means of committing offense).
Although charging infringemen t by reproduction and distribution under some circumstances does permit greater penalties than other means of infringement, see 17 U.S.C. § 506(a)(2); 18 U.S.C. §§ 2319(b)(1), (c)(1), and thus it may be duplicitous to charge them in the same count with other forms of infringement, it should not be held duplicitous to charge those two means of infringement togther.
See, e.g., United States v. Hixon, 987 F.2d 1261, 1265 (6th Cir. 1993); United States v. Burton, 871 F.2d 1566, 1573 (11th Cir. 1989); United States v. Uco Oil Co., 546 F.2d 833, 838 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied, 430 U.S. 966 (1977).
Indeed, the criminal statutes permit multiple copyrighted works to be charged in a single copyright infringement count or multiple trademarks to be charged in a single counterfeiting count.
For example, the criminal copyright statute does not require that all the copyrights infringed be in the same class or even be held by the same copyright owner; a defendant may still be convicted of a felony for reproducing or distributing a total of ten copies of potentially different copyrighted works, so long as they are of the required value and the copies were made within the specified time frame.
See 17 U.S.C. § 506(a)(2), 18 U.S.C. § 2319(c)(2).
As the legislative history specifically notes:
the phrase "of one or more copyrighted works" is intended to permit aggregation of different works of authorship to meet the required number of copies and retail value.
For example, a defendant's reproduction of 5 copies of a copyrighted word processing computer program having a retail value of $1,300 and the reproduction of 5 copies of a copyrighted spreadsheet computer program also having a retail value of $1,300 would satisfy the requirement of reproducing 10 copies having a retail value of $2,500, if done within a 180-day period.
H.R. Rep. No. 997, 102 Cong. 2d Sess., at 6 (1992), reprinted in 1992 U.S.C.C.A.N.
3569, 3574 (1992).
The indictment may also contain separate counts for each separate copyrighted work or each separate genuine mark.
For example, in United States v. Song, 934 F.2d 105 (7th Cir. 1991), a case involving counterfeit watches and handbags, the court upheld the defendant's conviction on five separate count s "because she was trafficking in goods bearing five different counterfeit marks."
Id. at 109.
The court based its determination on the plain language of 18 U.S.C. § 2320 which covers someone who "'intentionally traffics or attempts to traffic in goods or services and knowingly uses a counterfeit mark' on such goods or services."
Id. at 108 (emphasis in original).
When a defendant meets the felony minimum by reproducing one class of copyrighted materials (e.g., 10 copies of a copyrighted word processing program having a retail value of $2,600), and also reproduces 10 copies of another computer program copyrighted by a different author and worth more than $2,500, he or she may be charged with two felony counts.
The plain text of the trademark statute demonstrates that it is designed to provide protection for every genuine mark.
Likewise, the Copyright Act makes clear that the statute seeks to protect each individual's copyrighted work.
See 17 U.S.C.A. § 506.
Therefore, charging a defendant with separate counts for violating each of the different copyrights or trademarks can fulfill one of the important purposes of the statute.
Further, since reproducing a compilation constitutes multiple violations of the Copyright Act, and since one of the goals of the Act is to protect the individual's copyrighted work, it is proper to charge separate infringing acts against each individual victim as separate offenses.
Thus, for example, where multiple copies of separate copyrighted works are contained on a single videocassette tape or CD-ROM disk, the statute would permit multiple charges.
VI.C.2.
Multiple intellectual property crimes committed by the same act
A defendant's acts may criminally violate multiple intellectual property rights.
An awareness of the multiple intellectual property crimes that can be charged for the same act can help a prosecutor identify charges more likely to be proven in a particular case or identify additional charges that better captur e the breadth of wrongful activities by the defendant.
In cases of copyright infringement arising under 18 U.S.C. § 2319, prosecutors commonly bring counterfeit labeling or trademark counterfeiting charges in addition to, or in lieu of, the pure copyright charge.
For example, manufacturers or vendors of infringing items may illegally attempt to reproduce the labels and packaging for genuine copyrighted works.
These counterfeit labels will usually support charges under the counterfeit labeling statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2318.
The packaging usually carries counterfeit trademarks, which will usually support charges under the trademark counterfeiting statute, 18 U.S.C. § 2320.
Indeed, since the offenses of counterfeit labeling and trademark counterfeiting have simpler elements and a lower mens rea than criminal copyright infringement, it may be preferable to charge them and not charge 18 U.S.C. § 2319 at all.
Infringers often reproduce the instruction manuals offered by the legitimate manufacturer, in addition to distributing the infringing goods or works.
These instruction manuals are costly to design and produce and many leading manufacturers have a practice of copyrighting them as well.
If the instruction manual is copyrighted, reproducing its text can give rise to an another charge of copyright infringement, as well as an additional charge under 18 U.S.C. § 2320 if the infringing copy bears a registered trademark.
While the value of the infringed manual may be small compared to the value of the counterfeit items, a separate charge can make clear the defendant's wholesale disregard for, and infringement of, the victim's intellectual property rights.
Sometimes, the act of copying digitized intellectual property may automatically give rise to two separate intellectual property crimes.
One important example is with copies of music performances.
The infringement of a sound recording generally involves not one, but two separate acts of copyright infringement upon two different copyrighted works.
The first infringement is for the musical work, i.e., the notes and lyrics.
The other infringement is for the separately copyrighted public performance of the work.
Each type of infringement may be charged in a separate count.
A similar dual intellectual property crime may arise with respect to computer software, since computer software often employs a trademarked name, icon, or graphics.
For example, a defendant who posts a pirated copy of computer software on an Internet bulletin board under a trademarked name may have committed trademark counterfeiting in addition to copyright infringement.
In one litigated civil case, the court granted plaintiff's motion for summary judgment where the defendant operated a bulletin board that facilitated the distribution of plaintiff's computer games via the Internet.
When the downloaded game was played, the game began with a screen showing plaintiff's federally registered trademark.
The court rejected defendant's claim that plaintiff's trademark was being used merely "as a file identifier" and that such use does not violate the Lanham Act.
The court stated that the use of plaintiff's trademark "creates a likelihood of consumer confusion as to whether Sega endorsed or sponsored the games appearing on or downloaded from MAPHIA [defendant's BBS]."
Sega Enters.
Ltd. v. MAPHIA, 948 F. Supp. 923, 939 (N.D. Cal. 1996).
The court concluded that the defendant's "use of Sega's trademark on virtually identical Sega game programs constitutes counterfeiting."
Id.
The same logic could be applied under the criminal law.
Charging both copyright and trademark violations arising from the same act or acts does not violate the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment of th e Constitution since "each offense contains an element not contained in the other.
" United States v. Dixon, 509 U.S. 688, 696 (1993) (citing Blockburger v. United States, 284 U.S. 299, 304 (1932)).
Accordingly, inconsistent verdicts from a trial involving charges of copyright infringement and trademark counterfeiting should not jeopardize a successful conviction.
See United States v. Sheng, 26 F.3d 135, 1994 WL 198626 (9th Cir. 1994) (unpublished op.) (rejecting claim of inconsistent verdicts where defendant was acquitted on the criminal copyright infringement count and convicted for trafficking in counterfeit goods).
___________________________________________________________________________
VI.D.
The Victim's Role in an Intellectual Property Case
Congress has passed numerous statutes guaranteeing victims' rights during the investigation, prosecution and sentencing stages of all criminal prosecutions.
See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 1512 (tampering with a witness, victim or an informant).
In compliance with these statutes and Department of Justice guidelines, prosecutors must always be mindful of the rights of victims, including but not limited to notification about services and case events, active consultation with government attorneys, the return of property and restitution, and protecting victims' right to privacy without infringing on the constitutiona l rights of defendants.
See generally Attorney General Guidelines for Victim and Witness Assistance (January 31, 2000); United States Attorney's Manual § 3-7.300 to 3-7.340; Markus Dubber, The Victim in American Penal Law: A Systematic Overview, 3 Buff.
Crim.
L. Rev. 3 (1999).
Victims of intellectual property crimes are entitled to no less consideration.
Indeed, as with other white-collar crimes, victims often are intimately involved in the investigation and prosecution of intellectual propert y crimes:
It is in the public interest that victims and others expend their time, efforts, and resources to aid public prosecutors.
Many so-called white collar crimes are complicated transactions.
Knowledgeable people are needed to detect and explain them.
It would not serve the public interest to have a rule that inhibited close cooperation between prosecutors and victims.
Commonwealth v. Ellis, 708 N.E.2d 644, 651 (Mass. 1999) (holding statutorily prescribed funding scheme under which insurance companies underwrote the costs of investigations and prosecutions conducted by state insurance fraud bureau to be permissible).
Frequently, corporate victims in intellectual propert y cases independently investigate suspected infringers, and provide this information to prosecutors.
See International Bus.
Machs.
Corp. v. Brown, 857 F. Supp. 1384, 1389 (C.D. Cal. 1994) (rejecting defendant's allegation that IBM's cooperation with law enforcement was improper and observin g that "this court sees no reason why those victims who have the resources and willingness to pursue their own investigation and enforce their own rights shoul d be precluded either from doing so or from sharing the fruits of their efforts with law enforcement agencies").
Such cooperation is not only desirable but often of critical importance.
Indeed, in many intellectual property cases, the victim rights holder is a necessary witness to testify with regard to the legitimate, infringed upon item.
For example, an author might be needed to authenticate a copyrighted work as his or her creation.
Moreover, recognizing the complex issues of sentencing in copyright and trademark cases, Congress has made special provisions to invite the involvement of victimized rights holders.
In any case, a pre-sentence report must contain verified information containing an assessment of the impact on any individual against whom the offense has been committed.
Fed.
R. Crim.
P. 32(b)(4)(D).
Those injured by copyright infringement or trademark infringement, including producers and sellers of legitimate works, intellectual property holders, and their legal representatives, are guaranteed by statute the right to submit a victim impact statement identifying the extent and scope of their injury and loss prior to sentencing.
See 18 U.S.C. §§ 2319(d), 2319A(d), 2320(d).
Like Congress, prosecutors should recognize the benefits of inviting victims to participate in intellectual property cases.
Prosecutors should, however, be mindful of the risks of such intimate association.
In every case, government attorneys must make independent, discretionary decisions during all stages of a criminal case and should exercise care that victim involvement does not complicate the case or, in extreme situations, jeopardize the prosecution itself.
Obviously, a prosecutor with personal private interests in the case may run afoul of ethics laws and regulations.
See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 208 (forbidding participation in a matter in which government officer or employee has a financial interest).
In intellectual property investigations and prosecutions, government attorneys should be cognizant of possible undue victim involvement and its ramifications.
Such involvement could create an appearance of impropriety for th e law enforcement institution as well as for the individual cases.
One case of undue victim involvement in an intellectual property case resulted in a dismissa l of charges against the defendant.
In California v. Eubanks, 927 P.2d 310 (Cal. 1997), the California Supreme Court concluded that arrangements linking th e prosecutor to a private party who had a personal interest in the outcome of the case created an actual conflict of interest and found no abuse of discretion in the trial court's dismissal of all charges against the defendants.
Id. at 323.
In that case, a corporation had contributed approximately $13,000 toward th e costs of a district attorney's investigation of individuals suspected of stealin g trade secrets.
The California Supreme Court discussed at length the importance of the independence and impartiality of the local prosecuting authority at all stages of the criminal prosecution:
The importance, to the public as well as to the individuals suspected or accused of crimes, that these discretionary functions be exercised "with the highest degree of integrity and impartiality, and with the appearance thereof" cannot be easily overstated.
. . .
The nature of the impartiality required of the public prosecutor follows from the prosecutor's role as representative of the People as a body, rather than as individuals.
Id. at 315 (citation omitted).
Although private financing of intellectual property cases is unlikely in federal cases, excessive reliance on information provided by industry investigators may raise similar concerns and in some situations limit the ability of the prosecutor to objectively evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of a case.
Naturally, close victim consultation is essential when information or expertise is uniquely in the possession of the victim.
For example, law enforcement appropriately may involve the victim of an IP crime to distinguish legitimate goods from counterfeits or to identify proprietary information.
However, to minimize any appearance of impropriety, prosecutors should be wary of accepting offers of in-kind assistance of goods or services that could easily be obtained elsewhere, such as provision of simple storage facilities.
While there is greater concern when the victim offers such assistance, offers from third parties must also be evaluated carefully and be consistent with the Department policies of acceptance of gifts.
The Department of Justice has established general policy regarding gifts to the Department.
Department of Justice order 2400.2 (September 2, 1997).
This policy provides that the authority to accept gifts including gifts of services on behalf of the Department or its components has been delegated exclusively to the Assistant Attorney General for Administration and that solicitation of gifts must be approved in advance by the Attorney General or by the Deputy Attorney General.
For additional information, contact the Facilities and Administrative Services Staff of the Justice Management Division at (202) 616-2995.
The perceived taint before a court or a finder of fact, that a private party controls the prosecution can have ramifications throughout a criminal proceeding, not just for a decision on a motion to dismiss.
It may affect the jury's willingness to assign guilt and the court's sentencing.
Courts and the finders of fact can recognize when victims of intellectual property crimes may have a significant financial interest at stake in the prosecution.
For example, victims may seek civil redress soon after the conclusion of the criminal case and use the criminal conviction as res judicata.
While there is nothing untoward about the civil case succeeding the criminal case, a prosecutor should be aware, when meeting with victims and when evaluating all aspects of a case, of the potential for perceived impropriety.
Sharing evidence and close consultation can be appropriate, but steps should be taken to avoid giving the defense any avenue at trial to suggest that the case against the defendant was motivated by the desires of the victim alone.
Ultimate decisions concerning investigation strategy, evidence gathering, charging, plea negotiations, trial tactics and sentencing recommendations should all remain as free of this taint as possible.
Just as it would be ill-advised to have the victim of a street crime present when such critical decisions are made, so too should victims of copyright or trademark cases be excluded from such discussions where possible.
he jury's willingness to assign guilt and the court's sentencing.
Courts and the finders of fact can recognize when victims of intellectual property crimes may have a significant financial interest at stake in the prosecution.
For example, victims may seek civil redress soon after the conclusion of the criminal case and use the criminal conviction as res judicata.
While there is nothing untoward about the civil case succeeding the criminal case, a prosecutor should be aware, when meeting with victims and when evaluating all aspects of a case, of the potential for perceived impropriety.
Sharing evidence and close consultation can be appropriate, but steps should be taken to avoid giving the defense any avenue at trial to suggest that the case against the defendant was motivated by the desires of the victim alone.
Ultimate decisions concerning investigation strategy, evidence gathering, charging, plea negotiations, trial tactics and sentencing recommendations should all remain as free of this taint as possible.
Just as it would be ill-advised to have the victim of a street crime present when such critical decisions are made, so too should victims of copyright or trademark cases be excluded from such discussions where possible.
Go to . . .
CCIPS home page || Justice Department home page __________________________________________________________________
Updated page April 23, 2001 usdoj-crm/mis/jam __________________________________________________________________
