site index | ED.gov National Center for Education Statistics Home _________ Go [spacer.gif] [blueline.gif]
Among other things it explains how to optimally view our site, demystify PDF and Zip file formats, and provide links to some useful downloads and resources.
Appearance - Browsers Zip Format Archive Files Appearance - Resolution Useful Downloads Appearance - Start-up Page Web Tools and Resources Portable Document Format (PDF) NCES Product Disclaimer Video/Audio Playback and Flash Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) Red Bullet Appearance - Browsers
There are a number of things that you can do to optimize the look of nces.ed.gov on your computer.
We recommend browsing with either:
* Microsoft Internet Explorer 5.0 or 6.0 * Netscape 4.0 or 7.0
Of course, using versions of either of these browsers such as Netscape Communicator 4.79 and Internet Explorer 4.0 will also work.
These browsers are all free downloads.
We've designed our pages to take advantage of browser features such as Javascript.
Both Microsoft and Netscape browsers support Javascript, but sometimes in slightly different ways.
We also make sure that our pages can be viewed by older browsers.
If you're not using Netscape or Internet Explorer, you will also get a good view of nces.ed.gov by using a browser that supports tables, forms, and images.
Top of Page Red Bullet Appearance - Resolution NCES makes every effort possible to develop for our audience's varying graphics resolutions.
While we currently develop most of our pages for 800 x 600 resolution, we try to develop for both 640 x 480 and up to 1280 x 1024 resolution.
By using this as our guideline, we can be sure that everyone can enjoy horizontal-free scrolling when viewing our pages.
Of course our pages can be best viewed in 1280 x 1024 resolution.
As mentioned, although we try to accommodate all screen resolutions some of our data tables are just too large to fit on one screen in a 640 x 480 screen resolution.
When this occurs we recommend changing your screen resolution to 800 x 600 or higher.
This is easily done on your computer (PC's) by going to your "control panel" and selecting "display".
Within display select "settings" and choose the screen resolution you would like.
Top of Page
Red Bullet Appearance - Start-up Page Make nces.ed.gov your browser's start-up page to get the latest in education statistics.
If you are interested in education issues, then you would probably like to have your browser default to a site that satisfies your needs.
This three step process takes less than one minute! Choose your browser from the two options below and follow the appropriate instructions.
Internet Exp. 5.0
1.
Select "Tools" and " Internet Options" from the toolbar at the top of the screen.
2.
Click on the tab labeled "General" and select "Home Page" from the options.
3.
Paste or type http://nces.ed.gov into the "Address" box and Click "Apply" then "OK."
Netscape 4.0
1.
Select "Edit" and "Preferences" from the toolbar at the top of the screen.
2.
Select the tab labeled "Navigator" or "Communicator" and go to the section labeled "Home Page."
3.
Paste or type http://nces.ed.gov in the "Location" dialog box.
Click "OK."
It's done.
The next time that you start your browser, you'll begin with the NCES home page, your source for the latest in education statistics.
Top of Page Red Bullet Portable Document Format (PDF) PDF File Why we use PDF
Many NCES reports and graphics placed on our website are created in Portable Document Format (PDF).
They are most commonly denoted by the above icon.
PDF is used because it maintains the original look and feel of large documents, and allows us to place more publications on the web in a quick and efficient manner.
Further, PDF products are independent of platforms, applications, and distribution media.
How to obtain a PDF Reader Versions of Acrobat Reader exist for all major computer platforms, including Windows 98, Windows NT, Windows 2000, Windows ME, Macintosh, Sun, UNIX and several other operating systems.
To download the reader, you'll need a computer and a Web browser (such as Netscape Navigator or Internet Explorer) connected to the Internet.
If you are using a modem to connect to the Internet, it may take you extra time to complete the download.
Please follow the instructions on the Adobe Acrobat download page to install the Acrobat Reader.
Following are the System Requirements for Acrobat Reader 5.0:
Windows System Requirements * Intel® Pentium® processor * Microsoft® Windows® 95 OSR 2.0, Windows 98 SE, Windows Millennium, Windows NT® 4.0 with Service Pack 5, or Windows 2000 * 64 MB of RAM * 24 MB of available hard-disk space (70 MB additional for Asian fonts recommended) Macintosh System Requirements * PowerPC® processor * Mac OS software version 8.6(*), 9.0.4, 9.1, or OS X(*),(* Some features may not be available due to OS limitations) * 64 MB of RAM * 24 MB of available hard-disk space (70 MB additional for Asian fonts recommended)
Download the Adobe Acrobat Reader software now! This reader is free of charge.
Having problems with PDF Files? Should you experience PDF files appearing as a blank window within Internet Explorer after downloading and are using Adobe Acrobat Reader version 3.0 or earlier, please upgrade to a later version.
If this does not resolve the issue please follow the following steps: Use the "Save Target As" or "Save Link As" option to download the PDF file directly to your hard drive and bypass the Acrobat Reader plug-in.
1.
Using the right-side mouse button click on the file (click on the title link) you are interested in.
2.
Select the "save target as" option in Internet Explorer, or "save link as" in Netscape.
3.
Save as type should be "Adobe Acrobat Document" or "all files."
4. Make sure you name the file (or accept the name supplied).
5.
Know the location of where you are saving it.
6.
Hit save.
7. Use the Adobe Acrobat Reader to open the file after downloading.
Accessibility and PDF's Adobe Systems, Inc. is producing various products designed to make PDF documents accessible to persons using screen reading software.
Their accessibility webpages describe their efforts.
They also have a free downloadable accessibility plug-in called, MakeAccessible.
This plug-in runs under Microsoft Windows 95 OSR 2.0, Windows 98, Windows Millennium Edition, Windows NT 4.0 with SP 5 or SP 6, or Windows 2000.
Each system should have at least 64 MB (128 MB recommended) of RAM per processor, 200 MB of virtual memory, and 870 K of disk space available.
The MakeAccessible Plug-in creates a tagged Adobe PDF file from an untagged PDF file.
This allows a pdf document to be read by a screen reader for greater accessibility.
Other Acrobat Add-ons Once you've downloaded and installed the Acrobat Reader, you'll be able to view PDF files simply by clicking on the link to the PDF file in your browser.
Either the browser will handle the PDF file, or it will bring up another program for viewing the PDF file.
Either way, a special window will appear that contains buttons that work only for PDF files.
Use these buttons to navigate through the file.
If you want to print the PDF file, you must use the print button located within the Adobe Acrobat viewer (usually this is just above the document on the left side).
Use of the browser print button or the browser's "File, Print" command will not result in a correct printout.
The NCES website supports byteserving.
Byteserving, also known as page-at-a-time or byte-range downloading, enables you to view a PDF file from a Web server before the entire file is downloaded.
Note: Byteserving is not supported by the older versions of Adobe Acrobat Reader, so you may need to install a newer version.
Once you get byteserving working, if you'd like the full document to be downloaded in the background even as you browse through it, select the "Allow Background Download of Entire File" option in the General Preferences of the Acrobat Reader.
Top of Page Red Bullet Video/Audio Playback and Flash About Video and Audio Playback Media Player
NCES has adopted Advanced Streaming Format (ASF) as its standard for video deployment.
Videos will be able to be viewed immediately using Windows Media Player, or can be downloaded for easier viewing.
The downloaded version will always be better quality than the streamed or viewable copy; this is due to performance reasons.
The Windows Media Player should automatically download any needed codecs (these are needed to view certain video formats).
How to obtain Windows Media Player Click here to acquire Windows Media Player.
About Macromedia Flash Flash NCES uses Macromedia Flash in some of our applications, most notably in the NCES Student's Classroom.
Macromedia Flash Player displays web application front-ends, high-impact website user interfaces, interactive online advertising, and short-form to long-form animation.
Designers and developers use Macromedia Flash MX to develop distinctive and compelling content, revolutionary user interfaces, and rich applications for the web.
It is pre-installed in most web browsers and on most computers.
It is included in Windows 98 (including all new Windows 98 and Windows XP computers), Netscape Navigator, Apple Macintosh operating systems, America Online, and WebTV, among others.
How to obtain a Macromedia Flash Player Click here to obtain a free Macromedia Flash Player.
Top of Page Red Bullet Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) About Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG)
NCES has adopted Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) as a graphics file format.
SVG is a web development language based on XML. SVG, a W3C recommendation (web standard), enables web developers and designers to create dynamically generated, high-quality graphics from real-time data with precise structural and visual control.
Through the use of SVG, we are able to offer dynamically generated, high-quality, scalable, interactive graphics from real-time data.
Although many SVG viewers are available, NCES recommends the Adobe SVG Viewer 3.0 (or above) as a stable, well-supported viewer.
How to obtain Adobe's SVG Viewer Visit Adobe SVG Viewer Download Area to download a free viewer.
Top of Page Red Bullet ZIP Format Archive Files Zip File Why we use ZIP
A Zip format allows either extremely large files, or files created in formats no longer widely used, to be combined and compressed and thus downloaded with more speed and ease.
The user requires an "unzip" utility to extract files from an archive (all files for downloading have been compressed using zip archiving and compression).
NCES uses Zip archiving for several of its newer applications, such as video, and for many data sets.
In addition, some older reports are available only in a combination of file formats, such as Lotus .WK1 format for tables and plain ASCII for the text.
The time it takes to download a file depends on two factors: the size of the file and your connection speed.
To estimate the time required to download a file we have provided a link to a "File Download Time Calculator."
How to obtain a ZIP Extractor To acquire the decompressing utility for your computer's operating system, click on the appropriate link below:
Windows Download a trial version of Winzip Macintosh Download a zip/unzip utility for Macintosh (MacZip)
Top of Page Red Bullet Useful Downloads The links below provide some useful downloads which can greatly minimize problems users encounter when viewing our site:
Internet Explorer Download the latest version of this popular browser to access the latest features on the NCES site and the rest of the Web. Netscape Download the latest version of this popular browser to access the latest features on the NCES site and the rest of the Web.
Adobe Acrobat Reader You will need to download this popular reader in order to view the various PDF files on our site.
Adobe Acrobat Reader - Help Page This is the place to go for all your PDF problems related to printing, viewing, and downloading.
Adobe Acrobat Reader - Byteserving This article discusses byteserving, or how to deliver PDF documents page by page as you browse, thus avoiding having to wait for the entire PDF file to download before viewing it.
Adobe Acrobat Access This is a link to a special Adobe site that talks about how to make PDF documents accessible for people with visual disabilities Microsoft Word Viewer Microsoft Word Viewer 97 for Windows 16-bit Operating Systems (Word Viewer), the newest member of the Word Viewer family, is a freeware product that allows you to view and print Microsoft Word 2000 documents.
Like previous versions of Word Viewer, the latest version can also open documents created with all previous versions of Word for Windows and version 4.x and above of Microsoft Word for Macintosh®.
You cannot edit an open document in Word Viewer.
However, you can copy text to the Clipboard to paste it in other applications.
Microsoft Excel Viewer The Microsoft Excel 97 Viewer allows users to view and print Excel 97 and Excel 2000 spreadsheet files, in addition to other Excel for Windows® (versions 2.0 and greater) and Excel for the Macintosh® (versions 2.2a and greater) spreadsheet files.
This small, freely distributable viewer gives users the flexibility to view page layout, copy and control cell sizes, and access the zoom and AutoFilter features.
While this viewer is called the Microsoft Excel 97 Viewer (and is referred to by this name throughout this page), it is important to understand that you are not limited to only viewing Excel 97 spreadsheets.
Microsoft Powerpoint Viewer With this release, the Microsoft PowerPoint® Viewer 97 now also supports PowerPoint 2000 files.
This viewer allows people who use PowerPoint to share their presentations with people who do not have PowerPoint installed on their computers.
When you post presentations on the Internet, you can include the PowerPoint Viewer to expand your online audience to people who might not have PowerPoint, or to those with different versions.
You can view and print presentations, but you cannot edit them in the PowerPoint Viewer.
The PowerPoint Viewer 97 supports PowerPoint 2000 files as well as those files created with previous versions of PowerPoint.
Microsoft Windows Media Player For streaming and playing audio and video content in formats such as WMA, MP3, WAV, AVI, MPEG and more, download this viewer.
Macromedia Flash Player Installing this free download of the Macromedia Flash Player lets you experience animation and entertainment in your Web browser.
WinZip Trial Download this popular zip/unzip utility for Windows.
Macintosh Zip Utility Download a zip/unzip utility for Macintosh called MacZip.
Top of Page
Red Bullet Web Tools and Resources The resources below provide some useful tools and information which may help when viewing our site:
Download Time Calculator Visit this site to find out download times for various modem and connection speeds.
It allows you to specify any file size.
Bandwidth Speed Test Does your Internet connection appear fast or slow? Whether you are using a cable modem, digital subscriber line (DSL), integrated services digital network (ISDN) connection, or a plain old dial-up modem, the Bandwidth Speed Test will give you the answer.
HyperStat HyperStat Online is an introductory-level hypertext statistics book.
It is a good place to start if you are a statistics "newbie."
Statistic Calculations This page contains links to interactive webpages that perform statistical calculations.
Together, they comprise a powerful, conveniently-accessible, and free, multi-platform statistical software package.
Top of Page
Red Bullet NCES Product Disclaimer Reference herein to any specific commercial products, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government.
Top of Page
[spacer.gif] [blueline.gif]
