SM3A Home SM3A Mission Overview Additional Information and Timeline Daily Mission Updates Space Telescope Operations Control Center Image Gallery Cool Links Site Map SM3A Home Live Video Feeds Guestbook Discussion Board Mission Chronicles CosmicKids Shuttle Crew Information Media Information Glossary Search HST Project Science Office HST Project Science Office Christmas Greetings from December 25 Christmas Greetings from December 24 - part 1 Christmas Greetings from December 24 - part 2 Christmas Greetings from December 24 - part 3 Christmas Greetings from December 24 - part 4 Christmas Greetings from December 23 Christmas Greetings from December 22 Christmas Greetings from December 21 12/23/1999 happy holidays i hope you all are safe happy holidays! God bless you all.
Future astronaut Brian Balch.
12/23/1999 Hope Hubble's Y2K Compliant! Merry Christmas to all! 12/23/1999 I would like to wish all of you and your families Merry Christmas~ Merry Christmas 
12/23/1999 To the gallant crew of Discovery; Although you are away from your families at this special time of year, take comfort in the fact that you are laying the groundwork for a new millenium in which science, not fear or greed, shall be the guiding force in our lives.
Thanks to the example of your courage and sacrifice, I believe that the stars which we can now only see through Hubble shall one day be the home of a space-faring humanity.
Best wishes for a Christmas among the stars, and a safe return to Earth.
12/23/1999 YOU ARE SANTA THIS YEAR by fixing the Hubble! Great Job! Merry Christmas from HOUSTON; Austin Alexander 
12/23/1999 Have a very Merry Christmas and God speed STS-103.
Come home safe.
12/23/1999 happy holidays crew, i wish i could be where you are right now. i would love to go into space its all i have dreamed about since i was a little kid. i just wanted to wish yall a merry christmas and a happy new year.
but man do i wish i could be out there looking down on the earth from that perspective! it would be the highlight of my life.
well good luck and merry christmas. donald cowger 17 tampa, florida 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew, Thank you for being so courageous and going up on the shuttle after so many delays.
Best wishes for a wonderful holiday season and a wonderful new year Sincerly,' Cathy Grich 12/23/1999 To the fellow humans currently treking the outer atmosphere.
Merry Christmas, Happy New Year, thank you for your bravery as pioneers.
Jayson 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, Wish you a very very happy christmas.
When the world will be enjoying the holidays, you people will be working there, so that our scientists can see the universe better.
We are really proud of you and remember - we will be thinking of you people during x'mas.
We are watching your great achievements through internet.
So best of luck and warm wishes Dibakar Ray New Delhi India 12/23/1999 Wish you all the best 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, I heard that you are repairing the Hubble space telescope.
I really like the pictures that the telescope took.
I hope everything goes well.
Do you have a Christmas tree up there? Are you doing any other experiments? I hope you have a very MERRY CHRISTMAS!!! Good luck and God bless you.
A 5th grade admirer, Becky 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New Millennium! Ken and Barb Cade -- Chandler, Texas 12/23/1999 Hi up there! I bet you guys have got one of the best views of the world on Christmas morning.
I guess its pretty awesome! I hope that what you are experiencing today, out there, with such glorious views, of our home and of the stars, may be experienced by all of Mankind.
You and the team that supports you on your mission are the pioneers that will bring this about.
I wish you the very best in your missions, for only through your successes will Mankind finally learn humility and know true peace.
Its Christmas, and maybe for this one day the world should be as it seems from space.
Merry Christmas.
Ben Ashdown England 12/23/1999 May the Peace of this Holy Season Be with all of You.
Have a safe flight.
Best wishes to you and your families.
Ron Woelfel Family Menomonee Falls, Wi 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas.
We think you folks are doing a wonderful job and are inspired by your dedication and willingness to carry out the duties of your positions and to risk your very lives so that you may advance technology for the good of all the rest of us tethered to the big blue marble we call home.
The space program has provided us with many wonderful advances that we would never have dreamed of had there not been people such as yourselves.
Thanks for doing what you do.
The Bartons Phil, Kathie, Chris, Kyle and Sabrina 12/23/1999 Hi Everyone, I just wanted to say Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
Oh, I can only imagine how beautiful it must be up there.
I bet you have to pinch yourself to believe you are really there.
All of you be careful and I am praying everything goes perfectly.
God bless each of you.
Mrs. Phyllis Terrell 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas.
Are u ready to come home? Hope u have a great trip and a safe landing and may the force be with u! Have a happy new year from Corona, California.
12/23/1999 Merry Chrismas from the Astronomy Capital of Australia, Coonabarabran, home of the Anglo-Australian Telescope.
My name is Kevin Cooper.
I am an amateur astronomer, and a retired telescope operator and technician from the AAT. 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to all of you.
12/23/1999 To the crew of Space Shuttle Discovery, The tasks you complete today will forever change the history of our Evolution.
May your journey be safe and fruitfull.
I would like to express the merriest of Christmas's and the Happiest of New Years.
12/23/1999 Watch out for flying reindeer with bright red lights.
We understand that the chubby guy in the red suit isn't certified as an astronaut.
Have a Merry Christmas and a safe landing.
Bobbie, Sue and Nanc 12/23/1999 Hello to all of the Space Shuttle Crew We hope you have a Wonderful Christmas Day.
In the heavens of the Galaxy, I will be thinking of you all in my small home in Australia.
So have a safe journey home to Earth Merry Chirstmas 
I am also an avid Amateur Astronomer, and keenly interested in you work on the HST.
You are working on a telescope that has revolutionalized the way we look at the heavens.
I wish you all a great mission, and will look forward to seeing the results of your work on the internet in the near future.
Merry Christmas, Godspeed, and a safe and uneventful re-entry! Yours sincerely, Gary Colwell.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the Space Shuttle Crew! My name is Gary Colwell 
I am also an avid Amateur Astronomer, and keenly interested in you work on the HST.
You are working on a telescope that has revolutionalized the way we look at the heavens.
I wish you all a great mission, and will look forward to seeing the results of your work on the internet in the near future.
Merry Christmas, Godspeed, and a safe and uneventful re-entry! Yours sincerely, Gary Colwell.
12/23/1999 Dear STS-103 crew: Merry X'mas 
I came from Taiwan.
I pay attention to your news everyday.
Hope you work successfully and come back to earth with glory.
We are proud of you.
Raymond Tsai from Taiwan, ROC 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New Year....................
The astronomy class at Cameron University (Lawton, Oklahoma) wishes each shuttle astronaut and their families a special holiday greeting.
Space is awesome..............
Our first unit of study is about Edwin Hubble and galaxies! 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, I'm sorry that you'll be away from your families for the holidays, but what you're doing is very important.
Happy Solstice and I wish you a safe return.
Alex Marianyi 12/23/1999 Thanks guys for an absolutely incredible job.
You are the greatest.
From an old 1942 Marine with a few years as an Air Force civil service type who worked in Metrology at AGMC and down at the Cape.
I am most appreciative of your work to save the Hubble, a Telescope that constantly amazes us all as it allows our future to unfold.
12/23/1999 Happy Holidays! We're all very proud of you, and can't wait until your safe return! All the best, Steve, Debbie, Sean, Travis (humans), Alpo, Madison (canines), Flower, Figaro, Trax, Jet (felines), Iggy (reptile) Baumrucker 12/23/1999 Being away from family and friends this time of year is difficult, but you can be assured that our thoughts and best wishes for a Merry Space Christmas.
12/23/1999 My whole family has been tracking your fantastic work on the Hubble with NASA television.
Hope you are having a little fun up there along with your work.
Have a Merry Christmas and a safe return...
The Petersen's 12/23/1999 To: Michael Foale I'm an ex-pat Brit who has made the US my home now.
I'm really proud of you and your crewmembers for all your hard work and achievements to forward science and exploration.
Many thanks to you all 12/23/1999 Hi I hope you all have a very Merry Christmas.... wave to santa and Tell Santa hi from Lawrence, New York.....Have a safe trip....
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the Space Shuttle Crew! My name is Gary Colwell 
I am also an avid Amateur Astronomer, and keenly interested in you work on the HST.
You are working on a telescope that has revolutionalized the way we look at the heavens.
I wish you all a great mission, and will look forward to seeing the results of your work on the internet in the near future.
Merry Christmas, Godspeed, and a safe and uneventful re-entry! Yours sincerely, Gary Colwell.
12/23/1999 Folks; I don't mind telling you that you are doing a fine job Merry Christmas 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New year.
You are one of a few people who got a chance to go out side our atmosphere.
YOu got a chance to see the outside world.
Above all you will understand how complex and integrated and live in a proper manner.
Some of the stars are very very far to reach.
When I think all this I praise the LORD Jesus Chirst who did all this in His words.
Above all the universe are created by His words, but we human being are made by His hands and looks like Him.
In the event of His birthday (Dec. 25, you will understand how great our LORD is.
The amaizing thing is He so loved the world and gave is only son to die for our sin.
That is why Jesus came to this world and died for our sin on the cross.
Do you belive in Jesus? Are you born again? Do not for get He will come back.
It took for you days and spent millions dollars to reach not far distance.
But when the LORD come back from a very far light years distance He will reacht to us in Second.
Especally He is very close when we kneel down and prey.
How great is LORD.
Give him praise.
Jesus Loves you Merry Chistmas Semegne 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the Space Shuttle Crew! My name is Gary Colwell 
I am also an avid Amateur Astronomer, and keenly interested in you work on the HST.
You are working on a telescope that has revolutionalized the way we look at the heavens.
I wish you all a great mission, and will look forward to seeing the results of your work on the internet in the near future.
Merry Christmas, Godspeed, and a safe and uneventful re-entry! Yours sincerely, Gary Colwell.
12/23/1999 To Curt Brown from your friends in Bal Harbour.
Merry Christmas to you and your crew from Michelle and the Petrillos.
12/23/1999 My friends, I'm sure it has been a great year for all of us - and we have every reason to be thankful for all of the learning experience we have had - good or bad.
I am a Malaysian.
It's really a great opportunity for me to see what you guys are doing through the internet - as for most of us, the less fortunate ones, are unable to share the excitement and challenges you guys have been through.
My only wish is that one day, my people here would be able to catch a glimpse of you guys in action and get a taste of what the wonder of nature and technology have to offer.
Merry Christmas to each and every one of you.
God Bless you and your loved ones as well.
Take care.
Joyce 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, Take a moment and think about this.
God gives us the power to change the things we can.
God also gives us the power to accept the things we cannot change.
If all people would take a moment and think about that do you think everyone on Earth could see it the way you see it now? Peace on Earth,Good Will to Men.
MDL Pleasant Garden,N.C.
12/23/1999 May the Force be with you and to all a good night.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Godspeed, Discovery.
It's easy to think of shuttle missions as being almost routine, but watching your work on the Hubble Telescope via NASA Television helps those of us still earthbound maintain our sense of how special and important your work is.
Thanks for the amazing job you do to help us understand our universe a little bit better.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the whole crew.
We're all proud of you and wish you a safe and sucessful mission.
God speed and bless you over this holiday season 12/23/1999 May all of your Christmans whishes come true.
See you back on earth.
Greg Harvey 12/23/1999 You all are the true leaders of our era.
We have grown past the traditional needs of political leaders and are now looking for determined explorers of the human potential.
Please feel proud of what you are doing.
We will all see your shadow in the spectacular pictures that Hubble will bring us next Millenium.
Thank you 12/23/1999 Hello Discovery! Merry Christmas and best wishes for the new year! Hope your mission is successful and I am praying for your safe return.
GODSPEED!! 12/23/1999 hello been watching and listening on nasa tv and the internet live audio/your doing a great job hope for safe return/love to listen to the shuttle audio while on the internet it's great.
thank god for nasa tv/have a merry christmas ps wish I was there 12/23/1999 Good work on the Hubble Space Telescope.
I have been watching you on NASA TV as you work on Hubble.
I hope you have a very merry Christmas.
God bless you.
Kenneth Parker Camarillo, CA Age 16 12/23/1999 Crewmembers of ST-103: I am aouthorized to send to you a special greeting and Christmas wish to you from the embodiment of the Special Security Division.
The SSD is a Star Trek Fan organization and we follow the paths of NASA and other space agencies.
I am the Director of this organization and the entire membership of this organization sends to you the Merriest Of Holiday Wishes.
The following poem about this Christmas appears in our latest Fanzine and I'd like to share it with you.
CHRISTMAS SOLITUDE Charles P. Teator The hour is early at dark four-thirty, quiet, empty, solitary, almost lonely, a sanctified peace touches the soul of life, as Christmas Eve, Becomes Christmas Morn.
I look to the window, to a peaceful falling snow, covering the Earth in a blanket of white, to warm the heart and soul, granted by the Spiritual Oneness, for whom this day is for.
Through the sleeplessness of this night, beyond this meditation, the Spitit of Christmas, bequeaths an everlasting love, given to all and one, the shared elemental Truth for the Sanctified Peace throughout the land.
Through the frosted pane, to the gentle floating snowflakes, highlighted by the streetlamps, the Spirit of the Day awakens, with Glorious Sanctified Truth.
Merry Christmas Merry Christmas ST-103 from the membership of the Special Security Division, guardians of the future.
Charles P. Teator, Director, Special Security Division 12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL OF YOU OUR THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS ARE WITH YOU.
HAVE A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND HAPPY NEW YEAR.
MAY YOUR MISSION BE A SUCCESS AND A SAFE RETURN HOME.
THINKING OF YOU THE RACER FAMILY 12/23/1999 I wish you a merry christmas,I wish you a merry christmas,and I wish that your ship won't crash like the other two.
From, Justin Wilson 12/23/1999 Well done.
God bless all and may your and your families have a joyful holiday season.
Marc and Mamie Hechter Las Vegas, NV 12/23/1999 Has the Station orbited close enough to be visible from the Shuttle? 12/23/1999 Dear Curt, Jean-Francois, Michael, John, Scott, Claude, Steven, and Ground Crew; Great job everybody, I've been watching the mission on TV, its the best thing on TV.
I'm glad we can see live pictures and audio of the mission, it makes me think about how much goes into these projects.
Those news briefings are very informative, (that Linda Ham lady is very pretty) Merry Christmas to everyone on the mission and have a Happy New Year-Century-Millinum GOD Bless the crew that they finish everything safely and return home.
12/23/1999 We are wishing you a safe and merry Christmas and New Year from Oakville, Texas.
Our thoughts and prayers will be with you and your families during this time.
May God continue to bless you, The Webers 12/23/1999 Hey there, heroe guys!!! From PUERTO RICO.
I just want to thank you for fixing my telescope (I wish!).
I am 16 years old, but soon I'll be joining the NASA.
Guys, you are so lucky of going to space.
I bet that things look better up there.
If you see any UFOs please tell them to visit me whenever they want.
I hope that everything's all right on space, and I hope that you don't have problems with the Y2K thing.
Happy Halloween, oooops! I mean, Happy Thanksgiving day..
Oooops again!! Merry Christmas!!! You are true heroes!!! FROM CHRISTIAN DIAZ!!! (Pirulo) 12/23/1999 Just want to wish the Crew and Ground Support of the Discovery mission the best of luck and a MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR!! Great job up there! Thanks a lot! J.G. from Maryland 12/23/1999 From us earthlings down below wishing all of you a very Merry Christmas and a great Mellinium!!!! 12/23/1999 My son and I were at the reception thrown for Cmdr Brown at Gregory's in Cocoa Beach.
It was the highlight of his 8 years.
He is on a videotape wishing you a Merry Christmas.
We hope your trip goes well and wish you Happy Holidays and Godspeed.
Thank you for having us at the launch.
Sincerely, John Broom (sweeperok@aol.com) Ford Broom Oklahoma City 12/23/1999 Hey there, heroe guys!!! From PUERTO RICO.
I just want to thank you for fixing my telescope (I wish!).
I am 16 years old, but soon I'll be joining the NASA.
Guys, you are so lucky of going to space.
I bet that things look better up there.
If you see any UFOs please tell them to visit me whenever they want.
I hope that everything's all right on space, and I hope that you don't have problems with the Y2K thing.
Happy Halloween, oooops! I mean, Happy Thanksgiving day..
Oooops again!! Merry Christmas!!! You are true heroes!!! FROM CHRISTIAN DIAZ!!! (Pirulo) 12/23/1999 merry christmas to all the space travellers,my birthday is on christmas eve! i will be 11 years old.and would like to travel in space one day.i think you,re all doing a great job uptheir. so merry christmas from me and my brother,who also likes space travel matthew and chris from canada 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts.
You all be careful and get the hubble fixed and get back to earth where you can be with your families and have a very Merry Chrismas and a Happy New Year.
PLEASE BE CAREFUL One of your many admirers Steve Barnett 12/23/1999 merry x-mass n' happy new year.
you're doing a great job.
-- -- rgds/m.d.
12/23/1999 We would like to say Merry Christmas to all and a safe trip home.
From, Mel,Becky,regan,
Keep up the good work and have a safe flight home to planet Earth.
From Dan and Karen, graduate students in Electrical Engineering and Veterinary Science.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the crew of STS-103 and all the support personel who made the flight possible.
Your achievements were phenomenal and your persistence was commendable.
I hope you get to enjoy your families through the holidays after all your hard work and space walks aboard Discovery.
All of us who wish to be astronauts admire your accomplishments and can only imagine how much preparation went into the flight.
God bless you and your families and have a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year! 12/23/1999 We are so proud of our astronauts here in America.
I just wish that more media attention was directed toward the space program.
I have been a fan since the first shuttle mission in '81 and hope to see the day when any American can take a ride into space.
Happy holidays from Robert and Amy Smith - High Point, NC. 12/23/1999 Hallelujah!! You guys are doing a great job, and you have no idea how badly I'd like to be up there helping ;) A toast to you, and a safe travel through the heavens.
Merry Christmas, I can't think of finer place to spend it.
Helmar P.S.: I'll toss back a glass of egg-nog for y'all.
Or maybe two or three....or four..
12/23/1999 Hello Discovery, Happy Holidays! I was watching NASATV and i head that you are putting a 486 in. and I it was Y2K compliant! Well as long as it works! 12/23/1999 I just hope 
You have given your very best.
We are very grateful for you! Thanks a millenium! 12/23/1999 12/23/99 Hello up There, Have you seen the north pole? I am waiting for my first Christmas and wondering if you have seen SantaClause? I am 11wks old and waiting for my daddy to come honefrom Houston Control, I bet you have little boys and girls waiting at home for you too! God Bless You and Stay Safe! Baby Patrick Lanham 12/23/1999 Best wishes for a safe, productive and successful flight! Merry Christmas and Happy New Year! 12/23/1999 From Mexico City, I hope you have a succesfull mission, merry christmas.
12/23/1999 Thanks for the great Christmas present of watching you retool the hubble on the Nasa channel and keeping up with your schedule on Web TV.
It is exciting to see what you are doing.
You make it look so easy! You are brave to commit yourselves to this kind of work.
Have a great Holiday.
Thanks to all those who made it possible for all of us watching to be a part of what you are doing.
The Nasa channel is great! Mrs. Sue Fodor, Lakeland FL 12/23/1999 Take a few minutes to gaze out the window and ask yourself was this all done by random chanch or is there a "higher" power at work in the cosmos.
Is there someone looking down upon you as you gaze down upon us? There was a song sung back in the late sixty's when spaceflight was relatively new by Barry McGuire called the "Eve of Distruction".
The line reads "you may leave here for four days in space but when you return its the same old place".
The times have changed but the "place" has not.
There is still the "bad" things that still happen here on earth but maybe for just a few seconds while you're streaking along at seventeen thousand miles an hour there may be true "peace" on earth.
Cast your shadow of peace upon us o Discovery and may God cast his shadow of peace upon us all and bring us peace and joy this Christmas season now and forevermore.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas in Space, From earth to space have a very special Christmas.
I know your families and Santa will save all your presents for your return to earth.
Please wave out the window Christmas morning and i'll be looking and wave back.
Merry Christmas, Evan, Theresa and Jack Zaruba Overland Park, Kansas 12/23/1999 Happy Holiday...you have the unique opportunity to view all of the splendor and glory of God's creation.
Blessed Holiday.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New Millenium and thanks for your hard work.
Do you suppose there will ever be a need for psychologists in space? Are there any unique psychological disorders caused by being in space? Orbitting the Earth ...talk about separation anxiety... 12/23/1999 Best of luck on the success of your very important mission! Each day that the Hubble Deep Space Telescope sends pictures of our great Universe back to Earth, everyone receives a gift of knowing that the place in which we live is only a small part of our neighbourhood.
Great work and, most importantly, thank you for sacrificing your holidays so that we can learn a little more about the beauty of the space around our humble little planet.
Merry Christmas! Tracy Hartshorne, Prince George, BC, CANADA.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, Discovery! How fitting you launched with 3 "Silver Bells" ringing you into the heavens for this special mission.
Your work gives us all something a little extra to be grateful for this Holiday Season.
I worked the Hubble's initial launch and her first sevicing mission and my heart and thoughts are with you all on this flight.
Good luck and Best Wishes!!! Terri Stowe (League City, TX) 12/23/1999 Greetings: I would like to wish all of you and your families happy holidays, since you will not be down here celebrating them.
I must say, however, I would be glad to sacrifice one family get-together to be in your space-suits.
Ever since I witnessed the tradgedy of the Challenger mission when I was no more than three, I have been captivated by the exploration space.
I could think of no better excuse to miss the Christmas trees, presents and endless lines for Santa Claus in the local malls.
I hope you get that monster of a mechanical eye working so we can catch more glimpses of the universe and its innerworkings.
Perhaps, as space travel becomes more frequent and commericalized, I will be able to experience what you and the rest of the NASA astronauts have been experiencing for the last thirty-five or so years.
And why not throw an AMD Athlon or P3 Coppermine in that beast? I know, testing, besides the 486 was probably one of the most stable procesors created.
Good luck, and have a safe trip home.
Brandon Rigsby and CompUSA Store #341 Nashville, Tennesee 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, Santa Clause was wondering if he could borrow several of your space suits (he will have to adapt 10 of them to accommodate the reindeer ,including Rudolph).
He has many presents and wishes of good cheer for you, the brave astronauts -- undaunted explorers -- who are launching our civilization into the next millennium.
We salute you.
The nay-sayers and the naive will fade away, but your endeavors will never be forgotten.
Santa indicated that if you would look out your window into the starlight, you will enjoy the thoughts and spirits of those great thinkers and explorers who led the way ...
Isaac, Johannes, Albert, Galileo, Aristotle, Bart, Immanuel, and friends ... and experience the exhileration of discovery.
We wish you a Merry Christmas and a Happy Millennium.
Thank you for the gifts you are giving to our children and to our species.
12/23/1999 Just a note from a first time visitor from Canada.
good luck on the rest of your mission and all of the best of the holiday season.
May 2000 be filled with memories like those you are making right now.
12/23/1999 May God be with you on your journey in space this Christms Season.I as an american am proud of you astronsts for all that you do to explore space for the good of mankind.Your bravery does not go unnoticed.Merry Christmas to you all and thanks for a job well done.
12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew As our world exists today with many people making judgements about only the failures that NASA has, I would like to congratulate your crew on the efforts that you and the rest of the people at NASA are making to make `this a better world and universe to live in.
I know that it is exciting and that your families must all be real proud of your work.
Have a merry christmas, and I know from your vantage point the world is really a pretty awesome place.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, Merry Christmas is a song composed by John Williams Very Uplifting song for anyones spirit on christmas morning Was played by The Dallas Symphony Orchestra on Friday December 17 at 8:00 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Discovery Crew, My family and I want send our thanks and blessings to you and your families during this historic Christmas mission.
We wish you all the joy this season can bring and pray for your safe return.
God Bless and be with you all.
Dave Cotton 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and a very blessed New Year! What a special group of guys, having the privilege to see the earth from the heavens.
To view where the star of David must have shown that night 2000 yrs ago.
I pray for your families and your safe return to them.
My brother is a part of the payload you are carrying, not literally, he is in Houston, missing his new sons first Christmas.
Again God Bless and Keep you in the name of Jesus Christ.
Laura Disney Edgewater,MD 12/23/1999 Hello DIcoverey Crew, The Sagdeo family wishes you a good trip.
We are going to go to Florida on the 25th and it is too bad that we cannot watch you touchdown in time for new years eve.
We are from Cupertino California.
Parth from Sagdeo family attended space camp and was pilot and wishes happy new year to the pilot.
-From Vivek, Anjali, Parth, and Nakul Sagdeo 12/23/1999 I want to wish the crew of Discovery and Very Merry Christmas and I hope all goes well on your mission.
I hope that all of your families are healthy and eager to see you home.73s from us here in Redneckville.
12/23/1999 hello guys, keep up the good work.
Hi Scott, it's your cousin John, I'll have to talk to you when you get back.
Merry Christmas and a happy new year.
12/23/1999 I HOPE YOU SEE SANTA FROM OUTER SPACE.
GOOD LUCK.
ILLYANNA 6 YEARS OLD 12/23/1999 Don't let the telescope distract you from the Christmas spirit! While we have Chirstmas lights down here, you have the greatest light display of all when you look down towards Earth and see the city skys.
Hey, are there any jews up there? 12/23/1999 thanx for doing what u r doing, so we can all enjoy space pix. continue to follow the yellow brick road. bojo in ga 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy Holidays! The skill and courage that it takes to do what you do is far beyond me.
Thank you for the effort that you put forth in name of science and exploration.
Have a comfortable and safe journey back to Earth.
Michael Scott 12/23/1999 Nothing serious, just thought (every time I do that it gives me headaches and gets me in trouble) I'd give a bright and cheery "Bah Hubble!" Remember the immortal (or were they immoral) words of the P-3 flight crew who put down at the international airport with their gear up.
"Oh [UNPRINTABLE]! When someone finally decides they really want to find life on Mars, design a space suit for my cat.
I'll have to go along to make certain she doesn't eat it before you can say "Take me to your leader!" Take care 
Your sacrafice will not be forgotten and I wish you and yours the very best in the new year.
Quite often we forget to thank the ones that make a difference for all of us.
THANK YOU FOR TAKING THE RISK! God speed and see you back on earth.
Jim Stanlake 12/23/1999 We wish you a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
Thank you for doing your job.
We all benefit from your courage, knowledge and adventurous spirit.
12/23/1999 I AM A 53 YEAR OLD EX-MARINE WITH TWO TOURS IN VIETNAM.
I RETIRED YESTERDAY FROM MAKING JOHN DEERE TRACTORS IN WATERLOO IOWA.
I FLY ULTRA-LIGHTS AND AM FACINATED WITH YOUR SPACE TRAVEL.
I WISH THE CREW A VERY MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
I BELIEVE THAT THIS MISSION IS MONEY WELL SPENT.
JESUS LOVES YOU !!!!! 12/23/1999 We wish you all very blessed and wonderful christmas.We thank God Almighty for the safe return home.Please pray that the Lord will bless us all in this millinium.As you have seen the earth without any borders and divisions high above that we will all be one as one peaceful community.We thank you for taking such a venture to further the human capabilities.Some of you may go again to space.Please remember to pray high above for all of us.May The Lord bless you all and shine His Face on you.Thanks be to God in Jesus Christ.
paul from syracuse,ny.
12/23/1999 HI GUYS, Just thought to drop you a line and wish ya Merry Christmas.
It's kinda hard being away from the family during the holidays, but just think, somewhere down the road, you'll be able to look back and say, hay in 99" I was watching the most spectacular Christmas card ever made! Come home safe, you are remembered R.E.Robb 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, Thank you for the job you are doing and the sacrifaces you make, in order to make this a better world to live in.
The reasearch done in space will someday feed us and cure our diseases.
Thank you The Wagners, Bob Sue Whitney.
12/23/1999 Discovery Crew, Greetings and Happy Holidays from Earth! The sacrifice of being away from your families during Christmas must be great, but the work you are doing makes me very proud.
Space is the future of mankind.
I wish you a safe return and success on your mission.
God Speed.
-Louis H. Lietzen 12/23/1999 A very Merry Christmas to all of you "Up There" Where so many would love to be Just Once including me, and also to your families Thank you for continuing the work of our world each day because of the dedication of you and everyone who works with the NASA program one we will know more about ourselves and our world and maybe one day we will all be able to cruise the stars.
Thank you for giving our children a dream and continuing our dream.
Love and Peace always.
Michelle and Rose(wants to be an astronaught when she grows up) 12/23/1999 May Almighty GOD bless you and be with you every moment.
Many thanks to all of you for your important work over this special time of year.
May the hope and joy of Christmas be with you.
Best wishes and Happy New Year! GODs speed! 12/23/1999 Hi Guys! Dec 23, 1999 What better way to spend the Holidays than "working" a shift in orbit.
The spectacular assignment of getting a priceless Hubble telescope back in fully operational condition is one I envey back down here on Terra Firma.
The last inspiring Christmas I vividly remember is one a long time ago, in a Galaxy far far away (ooops, sorry), on a quiet eve when an Apollo crew circled the MOON, beamed back live images of the moon's surface (so near you could almost reach out and touch the craters), and read from a moving passage of literature.
The video of your work in space (for at least a full 8-hour "day") is again riveting.
Thank you for supporting our Merry Christmas down here on this special planet.
I wish you guys the BEST Christmas ever until you return and can celebrate again on the ground.
Well done.
My imagination is once again recharged! Bob Lasch, Shuttle missions fan! 12/23/1999 I was present to watch STS-71 launch in July, 1995.
THat was the most amazing thing that I have ever seen.
I cannot imagine what it is like to be a passenger, much less the commander or pilot when they "go for throttle up".
I hope that you have a great holiday season, even if it is in space.
12/23/1999 Do you feel the space Shuttle has a future or will we develop a new space shuttle that is more efficient and cost effective? brian foubert 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to you all.
I really admire your dedication to work.
I mean, you gave up Xmas with your families to go to work.
My dream is to be an astronaut, and you make excellent role models for me.
Enjoy your time up there.
-Chad Haefele (chaefele@hotmail.com) 12/23/1999 Seasons Greetings fellow earthlings !! WHAT AN AMAZING part of the universe you are in, I can't imagine.
I have a thousand questions, I suspect you're probably kind of busy right now.
So the best of holidays and safe journey always.
We are very proud of you 
Don't pick up any hitchikers.
Love, Kathleen Ruefli, Georgia USA Carol Slaughter, Georgia USA Hello Fellows, Hope you are getting a lot of work done and having a blast doing it! Just sending up a line to let you know we are all thinking of you.
Merry Merry 
Damit Ray from High Falls, Georgia Says Happy Holidays and God Speed! O ya John Boy 
Ramon Slaughter Georgia, USA 12/23/1999 Have a great CHRISMAS trip in space.It's very interesting to follow you by T.V. or internet.
12/23/1999 HOLIDAY GREETINGS FROM DENVER, COLORADO, PLANET EARTH! WE ARE SENDING THIS NOTE OF WELL WISHES FROM OUR FAMILY TO ALL OF YOU.
WE ARE CERTAIN OUR CHRISTMAS NIGHT SKY WILL SHINE BRIGHTER WITH ALL OF YOU LOOKING DOWN, WATCHING OVER ALL OF US HERE ON EARTH, AWAITING YOUR SAFE RETURN HOME.
GODSPEED AND MERRY CHRISTMAS!! WITH GRATITUDE FOR YOUR SERVICE TO OUR COUNTRY, THE STAMBAUGH FAMILY ~ STEPHANIE,TONY,ADAM AND NOAH 12/23/1999 GREETINGS FROM CANADA!!! I am writing to you from Red Deer, Alberta, my name is Bob Connolly and I have cerebral palsy.
You live my dream, my room is filled with space pictures and I am so proud of the American space program.
I will be visiting NASA's website often to keep updated on your journeys.
God Bless you and your families during the holidays.
I have followed the space program closely for all my 46 years and am so thrilled at the thought that you may read this message.
It would make my life dream just to know you even read this...as this will be as close to space as I will ever get.
See you in my dreams.....A message back would make my life complete.
12/23/1999 To Our Gallant Astronauts: Your work, as well as those who support you on the ground is extremely important to his country and the world.
In the past all our major advances in technology and medicine have been made as a result of wars our country has fought with others resulting in terrific costs in lives, property and funding.
Now we have NASA and the Space Program, which is costly, but not in lives and property to the extent that our advances cost us in the past.
Know that you are adding to our knowledge of our environment, our earth and our place in the universe.
God Speed and a Very Merry Christmas and a Happy, Healthy and Prosperous New Year 2000.
God Bless You All.
Royal 
12/23/1999 This is a very special message from the small country of El Salvador in Central America To the crew of the space shuttle, may you have a happy Christmas and a safe trip and return to earth, we know your work will help all future generation and to keep earth as a better place to be in.
From this country and on this 23rd of Dec.
My son and I watch the moon and wonder how it will be to be in space and to see earth on the last Christmas of a millenium.
Again have a happy holiday even, and be sure that in earth we know the sacrifice it is to be so far from your love ones in this holiday.
Regards Cucalon Family.
Carlos, Raquel, Carlos Jr. and Rebecca 12/23/1999 To the Crew of the Space Shuttle Discovery Merry Christmas to you all from Spokane Washington.
I am watching you finish up your second space walk, I realized as I am getting ready to spend time with my family at Christmas you will be away from yours.
May you and all your families be blessed this time of year and very special thank you for giving up your special holiday time for all of us on Earth.
May God's Angels be with you on a safe return home to your familes.
Happy Holidays Jon Visintainer 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Remmeber that Jesus is the Reason for the Season.
Make Him Lord of your Life today.
He is the creator of all the beauty you see in space.
Thanks for the work you are doing.
May God Bless.
12/23/1999 Your work in space is to improve the quality of life for all of our family's here on earth.
We are proud of your ability, we are proud of your work, we are proud of you! Merry Christmas in space! Now get home before midnite.
John 12/23/1999 I want to add my wish for you all to have a very Merry Christmas, and have a very Happy New Year when yoy all return.
to be with your familes.
Dick Morris, Broken Arrow, ok "dickmorrisusa@netscape.net" 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and God Speed to you all.
The work you are doing is wondrous to all that wish we could be there.
12/23/1999 Wow, do I wish I was up there with you all now.
It has always been a dream of mine to go up one day, but I don't thank that I will ever get too.
But I hope that you all are having a great time and may I wish you a happy HOLIDAYS.
Thanks for all that you do.
Jared 12/23/1999 Hello Astronauts! I hope your mission is going very well and safe.
You probably aren't very much interested in this, but I am 13 and very much would like to be an astronaut like you all.
Please feel free to contact me, if you wish.
I admire you very much and wish you good luck on your mission.
I also thank you for repairing the telescope.
Have a very Merry Christmas and a Happy Holiday season.
Happy New Years.
God bless you always and forever.
God speed, K Worth 12/23/1999 Greetings from Nebraska.
We hope you have a Merry Christmas so high above the earth.
Keep an eye out for Santa Claus.
Hope you can have turkey with your family when you get back.
Merry Christmas from the Kinders.
12/23/1999 MY NAME IS GLEN SHICK FROM SCHUYLER FALLS NEW YORK.
MERRY CHRISTMAS I HAVE TWO QUESTIONS DO YOU THINK NASA HAS SPACE SUITS FOR 8 REINDEER AND ONE JOLLY FAT MAN.
SECOND HOW DID NASA FIT A FIRE PLACE ON THE SHUTTLE 12/23/1999 There are so very many of us here in East Tennessee who folow your every move, and instill the awe and wonderous happiness of the technology it takes to be in your shoes into our children, and our children's children !! My grandsons will both grow up to love and appreciate the hard work and many personal sacrifices you all make to let us enjoy the benefits!! Thank you so very much, and believe you me...I would love to be in your shoes!! 12/23/1999 Greetings from the Copeland Family.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and best wishes to the crew of STS-103 from Penetanguishene, Ontario, Canada.
Dale Forget 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew, Merry Christmas!!! When ever the flights are broadcast on t.v.
I always watch them.
Have a safe journey.
From Angelina in Tucson Arizona 12/23/1999 Dear Flight Crew, Best Wishes for a happy holiday and a wonderful new year.
Thanks for all you do.
Lisa 12/23/1999 To the crew of STS-103.
We would like to thank you for giving rebirth to the hubble and hope that your christmas is as wonderful as the gift that you are giving the rest of the world.
Joe 
The sacrafices all of you are making by missing part of your holiday season in the name of science truely make you heros to all.
I am an astronomy and physics student at the University of Maryland.
I am seriously considering the possibitity of one day becoming an astronaut.
So please know, there are many individuals like myself who admire and look up to individuals like yourselves in the space program.
Also, please remember that the hearts of myself and my family will be with you on Christmas Day.
Have a safe trip home and may God bless you all.
Happy Holidays Ross M. Henry 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, STS-103 Crew, I wish you a very special Chistmas.
You're on the top of the World !!!! Our imagination is flying in space, with you ! Good luck! 12/23/1999 From Peru, I want to wish Merry Crhistmas and happy New Year to the members of the Shuttle crew and their families.
Have a nice trip.
Bye. Juan P. Villavicencio 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery astronauts, Congratulations on your extraordinarily successful repair mission in space.
And thank you all so much for making so many dreams to come true here on Earth.
You have been inspiring us all with your phenomenal courage, determination and professionalism.
What a sacrifice you are making and risks you are taking for the sake of humanity and science! Merry Christmas and have a safe flight back home.
Sema Emiroglu Soper - John Soper 12/23/1999 Hey guys! Good work!! I've been watching spaceflight since ther Mercury missions.
It's neat what ya'll are doing.
God speed!!! 12/23/1999 To the crew of the good ship Discovery, God bless all the brave souls on this ship as you strive forward at a time when many Americans question the financial and logical reasonings of space exporation.
All of you have accepted an intense challange and came through with the success that NASA and all the tax paying citizens need.
For the sake of this country's future; its children and for the thrilling and challenging tasks involved with space exploration.... job well done, God's speed.
12/23/1999 merry christmas make sure you get some time to look for santa 12/23/1999 Dear all, Just a short message (I know you have received many) to say have a very Merry Christmas up there, and a Happy New Year when you arrive safely back down here in a couple of days.
Wishing you all the very best, Stephen (England, U.K.) 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery astronauts, Congratulations on your extraordinarily successful repair mission in space.
And thank you all so much for making so many dreams to come true here on Earth.
You have been inspiring us all with your phenomenal courage, determination and professionalism.
What a sacrifice you are making and risks you are taking for the sake of humanity and science! Merry Christmas and have a safe flight back home.
Sema Emiroglu Soper - John Soper 12/23/1999 HAPPY HOLIDAYS AND GOOD LUCK ON YOUR MISSION .
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Cleveland.
Beep your horn as you pass by.
12/23/1999 May God speed and as you soar through space please be assured of our prayers,good wishes and sincere gratitude for all of your sacrifices and hard work and teamwork which has placed you on the new frontier.
Happy and Holy Christmas.
John G. Ingram Captain USNR ( Ret.) 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew: Just a word to say how much I, for one, appreciate the sacrifice you're currently making.
I saw, on Discovery News, how hard you've trained for this mission and the importance of this delicate operation.
Having the whole world hold its breathe and watch over your shoulder has to really make a very difficult job all the more difficult.
Merry Christmas, God speed in your endeavor and safe return!! Barbara Davis Poughkeepsie, NY 12/23/1999 Hello Mr. Brown Mr. Kelly Mr. Smith Mr. Foale Mr. Grunsfel Mr. Nicollier Mr. Clervoy How have you been? My name is Juan Almeida, and I'm a student from Venezuela.
First of all, I would like to wish you a very, very, very Happy New Year and a Merry X-mas.
I also want to tell you that you had done an excellent job, and I want to congratulate you for that.
Good bye and take care.
LAnd safely Juan Almeida Caracas, Venezuela 12/23/1999 As a recently retired Phila.Pickett middle school science/math teacher and a long time NASA subscriber[thank you for all those lesson plans]from my heart to all your hearts Merry Christmas and may the new year continue to bring all the NASA FAMILY health and success.
Bill and JoAnne MacKenzie 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, My grandaughter and I would like to wish you all the healthiest and happiest holiday in space with great success in your present, most important Hubble repair mission to say not the least your efforts at space station provisioning A safe return to the Mother Planet to you Great American Heroes.
Sincerely, Mark and Emily Peel 12/23/1999 To the crew of STS-103.
On Christmas Day, we celebrate Jesus's birth.
Just think that on Christmas all of you will be the closest people to God this holiday season.
I guess no white Christmas for any of you? :-) But then again all of you get to celebrate the holidays in a place where only a select few people have been before.(Compared to Earth's population) Have a wonderful Christmas and a very Happy New Year/Millenium.
Enjoy being close to the heavens while it lasts.
Dave 12/23/1999 Congrats for the great job you are doing in space.
Have a Merry Christmas, Bravo Laurent Coque 12/23/1999 Best Wishes for a safe journey.
Wave at the moon and wink at the stars for me.
Happy Holidays! 12/23/1999 Thank you for showing us courage.
As Jesus Christ risked his life for us.
You risked your life for us also.
As both are not understood by all the fact is they will some day understand both the courage and the benifits of both.
I consider all prayers by many for you as being answered and you have a huge family of love a couple hundred miles deep in our space faring Planet Ship called EARTH.
GOD LOVE YOU ALL AND BRING YOU HOME TO BOTH FAMILYS AND LOVED ONES. 12/23/1999 I have always had a love of anything to do with space so the work that you are performing on the Hubble telescope I think is vital and that to people like me the pictures it takes are amazing.
So for you to work on this over christmas is a testament to your dedication for your own love of space and our's.I hope that all go's well and perfect for you and that you know we are thinking of you now and until you arrive home.
This message I hope will reach you as I have never done something like this before but I feel as if you deserve a message no matter how simple and badly written it might be but the sentement of pride to not just the Brit on board but everyone there.
Best of Wishes and Merry Xmas Neil Anthony Armstrong {seriously it is my name} 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Astronauts, Thanks for the examples of courage, determination, and inspiration that you have provided to us all during your mission.
Happy Holidays and Best Wishes to you and your families.
The Pasco Family Sacramento, CA 12/23/1999 To the Nasa Astronauts: Even as small child I remember watching astronauts floating around up in space and was always awe struck.
As I watch your progress this week fixing the Hubble Space Telescope, I still have the same feelings that I had as a child.
I wanted to personally thank you for giving your own personal time over the holiday season to further our understanding of the universe.
Happy Holidays to all of you, and may your hard work take space exploration well beyond the new millenium! ~Alex Cerruti 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to our heroes.
We could not exist without people willing to sacrifice their own lives for the good of all of us.
You will be remembered and revered throughout our history for your bravery.
Rebecca Wheeler 12/23/1999 To all the crew: I teach 8th grade Earth Science and constantly use the NASA site in my classes.
I want to thank you for the learning experiences your work enables me to use in the classroom.
Thank you for repairing Hubble for all of us down here who depend on you.
God bless you and your families and keep you safe on your voyage at this very special time of the year.
Imagine, Christmas orbiting the Earth! Linda McMahan 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, When you get your wake-up call Christmas morning, it will be a very special sunrise.
Although you are away from your families you will have the best seat in the universe.
From all of us down here who can only dream about a glorious view like you have--God Bless You Charles D. Fales 
Have a safe return! Sincerely, Chelsea Leitch, Alpharetta, Georgia, USA 12/23/1999 Merry, Merry Christmas to all of you! We know that you will be away from your families on this holiday, but rest assured that the love of our family,even down to our 3 dogs is with you and with them.
We pray for your safe return.
We also thank you from the bottom of our hearts for giving up your Christmas to fix the Hubble telescope.
Enjoy your wonderful adventure and may God Bless you.
Always, Jim 
Wish we were there with you And if you see Santa, point him to those who need it most! 12/23/1999 Hello Discovery and all the ships in space Seasons greetings from Brampton, Ontario, Canada.
I'm glad to see that the CANADAarm is performing in it's usual exceptional way (hey, we've got to blow our own horn once in a while, after all we've got to have something else to to be proud of other than cold weather and Wayne Gretsky).
Anyway, as a space "nut" from a way back I can only say "WISH I WAS THERE".
Take care and safe journey.
John Moffatt 12/23/1999 HAPPY HOLIDAYS!!!! We are very proud of you all for your hard work and perseverance through the mission.
I greatly admire your efforts and hope some day I will be an astronaut too.
Anyway, I want to wish you all a merry Christmas, a happy New Year, and a safe return home!!! 12/23/1999 WE HOPE YOU HAVE A VERY MERRY CHRISTMAS!!!! HAVE A SAFE RETURN!!!! FROM NATASHA MASHBURN, 6 YEARS OLD.
AND BROTHER KYLE 4 YEARS OLD. 12/23/1999 Good luck on your mission, Have a Merry Christmas,from all the good people here on the good Earth.
MERRY CHRISTMAS.
12/23/1999 To all the STS-103 crew members Happy Holidays to you and your family and congratulation for an exceptional job on this mission.
PS.
I've been following your journey in space through the shuttle location software.(Fantastic piece of Java Software!!!) Normand from VanKleek Hill Ontario, Canada 12/23/1999 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to all aboard.
You folks have the best job in the world.
I should say in the galaxy.
I will raise a glass for you Rgds, Rob 12/23/1999 Linda and I wish you a very successful, Healthy, Merry Christmas.
We also wish you a very uneventful, Safe, and Healthy return back to earth.
Our Prayers are with you.
Gus 
I am on the NASA webpage just about everyday looking at pictures and I love the ones from the Hubble.
So I think that what u are doing is GREAT! I think u all our very determinded to stay with this project after all the delays.
I hope u all have a Merry Christmas and come back safely to earth.
Godspeed.
Christy from Iowa 12/23/1999 Hi! i am from Venezuela.
I wish you a very big Merry Christmas.
I had been following all you travel! Congratulations.
Bye! My best wishes for you and yours families! 12/23/1999 Dears astronauts, I hope that you will excuse me for my uncorrect english, but I'm an Italian lover of astronomy.
Please, keep all of my best wishes for your Christmas around the Earth.
My prayer to Jesus for your good work up on HST.
Thank you for your work from all Italian deep space lovers.
Roberto (past french student...) 12/23/1999 Hello Up there .
We down here have a great admiration for what you fellows are doing up there.
I am a former Nasa Edwards emoloyee and would like to thank you for doing a great job.
My wife and I both want to wish you all a very Merry Christmas and a safe trip home.
John and Becky Tanner .
12/23/1999 Dear friends, The snow is falling on the cold ground in Chicago and our presents are wrapped under the tree.
Our best gift that any one of us will find this Christmas is not under the tree of sparkling lights, but watching the brilliant stars.
The Hubble telescope doesn't service a group of researchers, it brings light to the future.
Thank you and God bless.
Love, the Kelly Family 12/23/1999 have a great christmas!!!!!!!!!I wish I was up their with you guys.happy new years.
12/23/1999 hi guys! merry christmas (etc) from sunny perth, western australia. i hope everything goes well for you, and eveyone in Perth wishes you all the best in your servicing mission.
have a wonderful time up there, from everyone living in "The City of Lights"! 12/23/1999 bruno marchal montreal canada radio amateur ve2mmc joyeux noel et bonne annee a tous l'equipage du sts103, felicitation pour votre travail,je vous regarde sur le net et je vous ecoute sur onde courtes grace au club radio amateur de la nasa wa3nan,attention a vous et bon retour sur terre revener vite le bog de l'an 2000 arrive hi hi hi encore joyeux noel a vous tous et a vos familles. merci a mr jean francois clervoy pour la traduction a l'equipage. bon retour discovery 12/23/1999 Greetings from Dartmouth, Nova Scotia, Canada.
Our thoughts and good wishes are with you and your families during this holiday season.
Looking forward to the successful completion of your mission and safe return home.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
Sincerely, Blair 
From Neville 
Canada 12/23/1999 Dear Mr Foale, M. Nicollier, Mr Kelly, Cdr Brown, M. Clervoy, Mr Grunsfeld, and Mr Smith, Sorry that you're all without your families for the holidays (I suppose they haven't been fully trained yet), but there is a houseful of Brits and Americans watching you in awe from New York, if that's any conosolation.
You've made our holidays incredible, and my personal drive to become an astronaut even stronger.
Merry and Happy Christmas! Some thing highly witty and profound, Olivia Billett, Dan Mckerrell and families 12/23/1999 Best Wishes to all the crew up in Space- Hope to see you back home soon with a save jorney home-Maybe you can make it back in time for the New Year Celebration of the millennium to help keep things in a prosperous order..have a save and fun journey back..
12/23/1999 thanks for a job well done.
watch out for the moon being its so close.
From a fellow pilot 12/23/1999 Hi, You all made my Holiday Season with your liftoff.
I've been kind of down this year.
But living in South Florida, I was able to see you streak across the sky and it was truly inspiring! Thank you so much! Wishing you the best of success, a great Holiday and a happy New Year! Bill Grable Coral Springs, FL 12/23/1999 Hi Im nathan and I love space merry christmas 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew, My name is Dana Quinlan.I'm 9 years old.I live in Xenia,Ohio.My zip code is 45385.I wanted to ask how your trip was?What dose it look like out there?What dose it feel like to wear a space suit?Have a Merry Christmas and a happy New Year! 12/23/1999 i hope u have the best holidays ever.
im 9 years and i want 2 to be an astronaut when i grow up.:) i live in the space city houston. i am really proud of you all.keep up the good work.love nida 12/23/1999 As we celebrate this Christmas and look to the new millennium, giving new eyes into the heart of the universe gives the world a chance to look into our very souls.
Your efforts and hard work are much appreciated.
Merry Christmas and have a Happy New Year on Terra Firma.
John Gisondi NYC 12/23/1999 As we celebrate this Christmas and look to the new millennium, giving new eyes into the heart of the universe gives the world a chance to look into our very souls.
Your efforts and hard work are much appreciated.
Merry Christmas and have a Happy New Year on Terra Firma.
John Gisondi NYC 12/23/1999 from Brazil by Carlos Roberto: Good Job, Merry Christmas for all of you.
Don't be care.
You'll be back in peace! 12/23/1999 I have just been looking at the NASA page with my father-in-law, Oscar Foran.
We are fasinated by all the information we found about the thousands of satellites that are circling the earth.
We hope your mission is a success.
Also, wish you a very Merry Christmas.
You have the best view for the holidays.
12/23/1999 have a great christmas!!!!!!!!!I wish I was up their with you guys.happy new years.
12/23/1999 I just wanted to wish all of NASA a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
Especially the the crew of the Discovery.
Take special care of yourselves everyone on Earth especially your families would like to see you return safely to your families.
hope that the Christmas Spirit will grant you a safe journy home.
If at all possible please send me a reply by mail since i am using the computer at work and do not have a personal computer.
Best Wishes, ERIC ALEX HASBUN 1711 MICHELLE ST WEST COVINA, CA 91791 (626)918-0688 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and A good New Year,..God Speed 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, my family and I would like to wish all of you a merry christmas.
We have been watching you on television down here on earth.
Your doing some very important work up there.
Take care and return home safely.
Sincerely, The Zinn family.
12/23/1999 To Michael, Claude, Scott, Curtis,Jean-Francois, John and Steven....
Merry Xmas from Adelaide, Australia ! Congratulations on your fantastic and inspiring work to date...I look forward to being able to see more of the Universe due to your repairs and improvements to the mighty Hubble! 12/23/1999 As you are so close to the face of God we should realize what a great and mighty Lord he is to have made the heavens and Earth and all that is within this universe.
May God watch over you flight from begining to end and give you the peace of mind that you need.
God bless you at Christmas being so close to God.
Randy Evans 12/23/1999 Hi Shuttle Crew, I'm Elizabeth Yetter and I'm 9 years old.
My Mom and Dad work at JPL and I think it's really cool to work in space.
Merry Christmas and good luck on your Hubble mission.
12/23/1999 What an experience it must be for you to look down on you home planet, as your fellow Christians are celebrating the birth of our Christ ! God bless your crew as we celebrate for you and with you.
12/23/1999 I have few heroes that I respect, like Steven Hawkings and Leonardo Da Vinci, and the Space Shuttle crews.
I envy you , I would love to be able to go to space.
My thoughts are always with you while you are on a mission.
Happy Holidays and a Happiest New Year to you all.
I also send my thoughts and Wishes to the Ground crew.
From Shirley aka George aka Crazy aka Squirrel.
12/23/1999 As we follow your mission with it's successess, trials, and tribulations, we marvel at the technology that's been developed to allow man to float above the earth's atmosphere and repair the Hubble telescope so that it remains a functioning and useful tool for us.
May your journey be swift and your trip a safe one as we all journey into the new millinneum - 2000.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year from the Wards in San Antonio, Texas.
12/23/1999 We live in a society much to void of morale 
You truly are AMERICAN HEROES, we need more people like you to lead our nation forward.... keep up the good work..
God Bless and Merry Christmas to all of you..
God speed and may you have a safe journey home; Rick and family from connecticut.
12/23/1999 As you toil in the heavens, remember that we on earth are praying for your safe return.
Have a blessed Christmas! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to the shuttle crew from Pete and Valerie Ebinger,Rocky Ford CO.You guys are doing a terrific job and it makes us proud!! Looking forward to your homecoming.Have a safe trip! Godspeed, Pete Ebinger 12/23/1999 God bless our astronauts this holliday season, from your friends at beautiful South Lake Tahoe California.
Can you see Santa from space? Thank you all for making the Hubble Telescope Y2K compliant (just in time!) May your families share with you Christmas,wherever you may be in orbit.
12/23/1999 Hallo aus Germany!All best and have good time in Space-and Merry Crismas Happy New 2000! Best to the Crew Faithfully Oktay from Stuttgart/ Germany; 12/23/1999 Great job on hubble.
Merry Christmas.
Please come home safely.
We're all proud of you! God Speed 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew, My name is Taylor White I'm 5 years old and I live by Wright Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio.
Can you see Santa Claus Coming? I hope you have a Merry Christmas and a safe trip home.
12/23/1999 Hello! All the crews of Shuttle Discovery, How are you?? My name is Michael Chow and live in Hong Kong.
I wish you have a wonderful Christmas time in space.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year!!! ^_^ Best Regards, Michael Chow 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays from Connecticut! You're doing a great job 
How incredible it must be to be where you are on Christmas.
How alone you must feel, even though you have all of our thoughts with you.
We wish you a successful mission and a safe journey home.
I'll be listening for the sound of the Shuttle breaking the sound barrier upon re-entry.
God Speed from the Gier's, Adams'and Brinton's.
12/23/1999 I wish you a Merry Christmas in Space and a Happy New Year on the ground.
You have made me very happy by repairing the Hubble Telescope--I am looking forward to many more of those high quality pictures on the NASA Calendar page.
Thanks.
Doug McLaughlin Oxnard, CA 12/23/1999 Hello guys! Merry Christmas and a happy new year!! How's it to celebrate Christmas from outer space? I am from Germany and I will perhaps never get a chance to see Earth from space so I think it should be a very special moment?! Am I wrong? All the best for you!! Jens S. Dahmen from Germany 12/23/1999 Deseo que todos ustedes pasen una Navidad feliz en rbita y que tanto esta misin como las futuras que realicen estn colmadas por el xito.
Saludos de un admirador desde las islas Canarias - Espaa.
12/23/1999 Wishing you a Happy Holidays and safe return home! Our best to your families! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and a safe return, From the Glaiel Family Westfield Mass. 12/23/1999 I'm a retired soldier and I have missed a few Christmases with my family over the years 99 I'm a retired soldier and I have missed a few Christmases with my family over the years so I know what it's like.
I'm sure you would like to be with your families during the holiday season.
I just want to say, the sacrifice you are making during this holiday is much appreciated by all americans no matter where they are in the world.
As Lee Greenwood said, "I'm Proud to be an American" and I'm proud of you.
Merry Christmas to the crew of the Discovery and to all of you at NASA.
God bless you all and God Bless America.
12/23/1999 Congratulations on STS-103! Your devotion to space science and the exploration of the universe is commendable.
To the francophones on the mission, Bonjour mes amis et bonne noel! Have a merry christmas and a safe journey home.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas! You may be away from your individual families for this holiday, but the hearts of your American Family are with you.
Good luck and God bless you for your wonderful work.
We await your safe return to the Good Earth! Gregg Kuehn Grafton, WIsconsin 12/23/1999 12/23/99 From up there in space it must really look like 'peace on earth'.
Happy Holidays and a safe voyage home.
The Kaufer Family in Tuxedo, New York 12/23/1999 Dear people high up over there (and also here on Earth)... thank you for your work! We can't imagine a better way of passing the holidays... except for the fact that you are separated from your families.
But you are not alone, so many people are with you, right now.
The warmest greetings and the deepest thanks to you all, leave this home in the Alps and reach you in orbit (or maybe already on the ground).
And, by the way, have a smooth slide (as we say here...) in the new year!!!! Ciao, Mirko 
I ALSO KNOW WHAT IT IS TO BE AWAY FROM YOUR LOVED ONES DURRING THE HOLIDAYS BECAUSE I DID MY TIME IN THE NAVY FOR 5 YEARS.
MY VERY FIRST CHRISTMAS IN THE NAVY I HAD FIRE WATCH AND I WAS 3,500 MILES FROM HOME(I AM SURE YOU ALL KNOW WHAT THAT IS LIKE).
I JUST WANTED YOU ALL TO KNOW THAT I THOUGHT ABOUT YOU TODAY AND I THINK THAT WE LIVE IN A GREAT TIME WHEN I CAN SIT IN MY OFFICE ON EARTH AND WRITE YOU ALL IN SPACE.
SO I SAY MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A SAFE RETURN TO YOU CURT,JEAN,C.,JOHN,SCOTT,CLAUDE AND STEVEN.
12/23/1999 HELLO SHUTTLE CREW, MY NAME IS GEORGE AND I REALLY APPRECIATE WHAT YOU ARE ALL DOING UP THERE AS I AM A SPACE TRAVEL FAN.
I ALSO KNOW WHAT IT IS TO BE AWAY FROM YOUR LOVED ONES DURRING THE HOLIDAYS BECAUSE I DID MY TIME IN THE NAVY FOR 5 YEARS.
MY VERY FIRST CHRISTMAS IN THE NAVY I HAD FIRE WATCH AND I WAS 3,500 MILES FROM HOME(I AM SURE YOU ALL KNOW WHAT THAT IS LIKE).
I JUST WANTED YOU ALL TO KNOW THAT I THOUGHT ABOUT YOU TODAY AND I THINK THAT WE LIVE IN A GREAT TIME WHEN I CAN SIT IN MY OFFICE ON EARTH AND WRITE YOU ALL IN SPACE.
SO I SAY MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A SAFE RETURN TO YOU CURT,JEAN,C.,JOHN,SCOTT,CLAUDE AND STEVEN.
12/23/1999 Good evening, courageous astronauts! My wife, Claire, and my kids Anne-Sophie and Emmanuel, are proud to tell you: Merry Christmas "directement du Qubec!" Your friend from Qubec City, Gilles Pageau N.B. Le jour de Nol, j'aurai 46 ans! 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle crew, Thank you for fixing the Hubble Space Telesope.I wish each and every one of you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
I live in Galveston near Houston,Tx .Tomorrow night my Family will try to see you and the Hubble Space Telescope.
I am 8 yrs.old.
My Father works for a company called Copart inc.
My Mother doesn't work for anybody.
This Summer we went to the open house at Johnson Space Center and had a fun day.Maybe next year you can come to JSC's open house and sign autographs I would try to be the first person in line and I woul get every one of you autographs.Well Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.By the way do you have a Christmas tree up there? Merry Christmas, Buck Carson of Galveston, Tx 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Discovery!! My name is Scooter and I am 6 years old.
I want to be an astronaut when I grow up.
I want to walk on the moon and collect moon rocks.
I hope you have a Merry Christmas and return safely to Earth! Love, Scooter Louisville, KY 12/23/1999 A warm Hello to everybody from Philippines.
I hope I could watch you pass by.
But I dont know when.I also was not able to watch you launch.
God Bless and take care.
Merry Christmas, from Val. 12/23/1999 We are all extremely proud of the work you are performing.
And you do so despite the personal risk for the wonderful research material that the Hubble provides.
Merry Christmas to you and yours (albeit a little later).
God Bless.
12/23/1999 Holiday greetings and salutations from Ft.Pierce,Fla.Our prayers are with you on this most important mission.14 month old Adam has had the privelege of witnessing 3 shuttle launches,the first when he was 3 weeks old! We hope and pray that your Holiday is Peaceful and Joyous.God Bless you all and we will be watching your return.The Hennessey Family.W 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to everyone at NASA.
Thanks for all the hard work you put in.
I know you all work long hours and struggle with a decreasing budget.
I just wanted to let you know that each and everyone of you is important and appreciated.
Thanks for the Christmas pictures from space.
Maybe it will let people know just how unique and potentially fragile our world is.
Happy Holidays and look out for that Y2K! 12/23/1999 Hello: Hi my name is Carrie I live in Ontario Canada.
I would like to say that I love nasa and watch any shows i can about it.
I would like to say Merry Christmas you are going to have the best seat in the house for Christmas day.
I hope you get a changes to look down on us some time during your busy day.
Carrie 12/23/1999 Thak you for fixing the telescope! Now we should see good pictures from space.
Keep up the good work!!!! Have a Merry Christmas and a safe trip back! 12/23/1999 me and my friends watch the nasa channel every night in support of our fellow nasa crew space men.
i think you guys are a benifical part of our society and our knowlegde for extratestical creatures i love you guys i wish i were you.
do you think you could lick your finger and write my name on the the hubble..
12/23/1999 Hello my friends from Discovery! I would like to wish you a Merry Christmas and a good return to our old and beautiful Earth.
Please don't forget to switch On the Discovery's front lights when you fly over Aracaju/Brazil.
On that moment, I will salute you with champagne! Best wishes.Yuri Carlo/Aracaju/Brazil.
12/23/1999 wishing you all, a very merry chrismas.from where yo sit on this special day,the world most look like it does, have peace and good will for all.we all will be praying for you up there, please say one for us down here, in hopes that the good thoughs and good will will, will fall on all people of the world.god bless,lew 
We are all very proud of you.
When we grou up we would like to be astronauts too! We loved watching the launch! Have a safe return.
You are in our hearts and prayers.
Tres 
I would love to be able to go up on a shuttle.
I just hope it doesn't stop now, I would really love to see us on Mars then further out.
I hope by the time I die I will be able to have my ashes sent up in a shuttle or even further out, to be set loose in space.
My biggest dream.
Hopefully another 20 some years at least.
Merry Christmas and a Great New Year.
12/23/1999 A big hello from Australia and thankyou for helping keep this important tool functioning.
I watched for you last night as you passed over us twice but the clouds showed up, oh well maybe next time your up there I'll have better luck.
From Phill.
12/23/1999 to all the crew members on this mission ,I give you all a very lot of credit for what you are doing over this christmass holiday ,by beeing up in space to fix the teliscope.this is a very important thing to further the education of our space exploration and I just want to thank all of you for what your doing, and to wish you all a very merry christmass from all of us hear on earth.
happy holidays steve ketchie 
Just a short note to thank you for being away at a special time of the year.
Yes Christmas comes once a year, but your ride comes once in many lifetimes.
We all think you are special people, the kids really enjoy tracking you on the computer.
So from the sunny but cold shores of Lake Ontario, "Merry Christmas, and keep your eyes and hearts in the stars.
The Widera family, Rochester, New York............
12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS from Montgomery Al.How are we looking from up there? Good luck on your mission and we will be waiting your safe return.If you run across Santa up there send him our way.Good luck and GOD SPEED.
Chris Pat and Beth 12/23/1999 From my family to all of yours, have a safe Christmas! You all are doing a wonderful job.
Keep up the good work, we'll keep the turkey warm for you! The Topp Family Jamestown, RI 12/23/1999 Sometimes people say that heroes only walk on the earth for such a limited amount of time.
I hate to dissapoint that marvelous philosopher, but you are breaking the laws that we have instated once again.
You are soaring above, opening gates of knowledge and helping to remove the ignorance of our civilization.
You truly are the sustainable heroes.
Your sacrifice is honourable and much appreciated.
The true heroes right now are flying overhead.
May God bless you and your family over the Christmas season.
Jared Kuehl, British Columbia, Canada.
12/23/1999 Guys , I just want to let you know that your doing a great job up there and being part of Nasa history is priceless, I know that your not with your families right now , but we all down here consider you the crew as family and we have your support because your doing a big difference for the world .
We all love you guys .
Have a happy Merry Christmas and a happy new year .
12/23/1999 Great work I am so excited watching your fine work on NASA TV.
I really know now how important space travel is to the USA.
Merry Christmas have a safe landing and continue on the important work of NASA 12/23/1999 Greetings from Earth.
I know that it will be hard to be away from loved ones on this Christmas.
I hope that all will be well for you and your loved ones.
Merry Christmas! and have a safe jurney home.
John [:-) 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to you up there from Germany.
You are doing a wonderful job up there in orbit.
Have a great time for the rest of your mission and a safe landing an return to your families.
12/23/1999 hello my name is Liam Fullam and I was wondering how long does it take to become an astronaut and where you have to go to school? I also wanted to know if you knew anything about tha S.E.T.I. institute.
The last thing I was wondering was if you knew anything about getting a job in the Huston NASA center because my class went to a space thing where we got to pretend like we were huston people doing read outs and everything.
Thanks for your time and Seasons Greetings.
Please responde via e-amil to Kingcobra3590530@aol.com Thank you again.
12/23/1999 How you doing in space? Do you feel good in space? Please tell me all about it when you get back.
I hope you have a very good Chirstmas in space.
From Connor age 5 12/23/1999 Dear astronauts.
best wishes and merry Christmas to you from Munich,GERMANY ! Hope we see you successfull back.
12/23/1999 Greetings! I run a small planetarium on the island of Guam (I wave when you guys pass over us!).
I wrote a show about the first servicing mission, and I intend to write one about this one.
If any of you guys are in the neighborhood in a couple of months, drop by, but not from orbit PLEASE! I depend on the marvelous pictures generated by Hubble to illustrate my shows.
THANK YOU for fixing it for me; you've given me the best present I could have! MERRY CHRISTMAS!! Pam 12/23/1999 I wish you all a Merry YK2 bug free Christmas orbital journey.
But be careful not getting to close of Santa in his great frenzy deliveries night... most of all safe return ...
Richard Bergeron 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle crew, Here on the planet, we do not have Peace on Earth or Good Will to All.
There are wars, there is starvation, poverty and ignorance.
You are up there helping to end ignorance with repair of the Hubble Space Telescope.
Goodspeed John F. Kohler 217 Fairlawn Avenue Daly City, CA 94015 12/23/1999 From the Heart of the people of "Mother Earth,We have a wish for the Crew Members of the Space Shuttle Discovery.you guys did a good job upthere recovering the Huble Space Telescope,so We can enjoy the beauty of our Universe let us dream That one day we will set foot on The Red Planet"MARS"Me and family Garcia And Carbajal.WIshes You a "MERRY MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR!!! TO YOU AND YOUR FAMILIES HERE ON BEAUTIFULL MOTHER EARTH!!!Thank You for giving us hope God Bless you"" 12/23/1999 Seasons Greetings!! Fellow earthlings.
I have just seen a news-story about the 3 wise men meeting in jerusalem, King Harrod being close to death, a new king to be born by a virgin teenage girl called Mary in probably bethlehem (not sure of location) and to cap it all a bright star appearing over jerusalem.
Rather spooky wouldn't you say? My question is can you shed any light on this matter? (excuse the pun) Did NASA have no knowledge of the appearance of such a star? Thank you for taking the time to read this I eagerly await your reply Yasir Manzoor 12/23/1999 God bless you and keep you safe.
Have a Merry Christmas and as Gus Grissom said "do good work".
12/23/1999 Hi Crew! Have a nice Christmas time out there and a wondeful new milenium from Colombia South America.
We are all aware downhere of your news.
My question is How long do you think could comercial space trips to moon or to anyother planet begin? Juan Manuel Alsina, Bogot- 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts in space.
We wish you could be home for christmas but since you can't, kimi, jessie, and cliff from Shelby Twp. Michigan.
Wish you all a MERRY CHRISTMAS.
12/23/1999 Thank each of you for the wonderful Christmas present by capturing and repairing the Hubble Telescope.
We are awed by your performance.
God bless all of you this Christmas, and peace and good health in the Millenium.
12/23/1999 All, continue to do the good work that you do while in space.
We have been interested since Mercury.
Maybe one day We'll be able to go into space and look back at Earth.
Have a Merry Christmas and we are thinking of you.
Frank 12/23/1999 Hey there guys! Just thought I would drop you a line while you're away up in the heavens during Christmas.
I hope everything is going great up there.
My friends and I are thinking about all of you while we're stargazing down here.
Well, to make this short, we wish you all a wonderful Christmas and a great holiday season.
There's nowhere I'd rather be than in space for Christmas, I would totally love it! Anyway, have a safe trip home! :) Take care, Nina Rupp Bellingham, WA 12/23/1999 Discovery....this is Polar command... we advise that Santa has confirmed lift off at 00:01 gmt,12/24/99...of mission "toy drop" ......
Please confirm when Spotted.........MERRY CHRISTMAS DISCOVERY!!!!!! 12/23/1999 Hi! To all.
I worked the SKYLAB 1 
I was with RCA, at a tracking station, that provided a Satilite link for the recoveries.
I may me one of the few, that grew, to where you are today.
But I remember the total task that we all had.
It takes a team to what you are doing.
I salute you and the team that you have.
From a caring member, of one of the old teams.
HAPPY HOLIDAYS and come on back, We need you for our future.
Tom.
12/23/1999 Hello and Merry Christmas and Happy New YEar to each of the Adventuers aboard the shuttle...I pray that God bless each and every thought and to return you to the Arms from whence you came.
Godspeed....
Sincerely, Sp4 Murrill L.McLean 1/246 FA 29th Inf 12/23/1999 To the crew of STS-103, I wish you all the best for a safe and productive mission and a very happy, if different, holiday!! The mission to repair the Hubble is so important, and I want to thank-you all for all your hard work and dedication to maintaining this wonderful and amazing invention.
The images from the Hubble, as well as providing valuable new information, also help to further the great sense of wonder that the universe provides us.
My own interest in space and cosmology has been very much heightened by the fascinating pictures and their stories from the space telescope.
Many thanks and happy holidays, -Rich Thomas 12/23/1999 Hey guys! Merry Christmas! It's snowing here where i am! Going to be a wonderful white christmas.
I watched your space walk yesterday.
Looks good.
Come home safely for us ok?! God Bless us everyone! Brittanie Sues 12/23/1999 What a special feeling you all must have to spend the last Christmas of this mellinium in the awe of space.
I know you will miss your families, but from the hearts of all here on earth, may God Bless you with wonderful joyous adventure to celebrate the birth of our Christ.
Come Home safely :o) Merry Christmas !! 12/23/1999 Dateci la possibilita' di rivedere il nostro passato e di sognare il nostro futuro....buon ritorno....
12/23/1999 Wishing all of the crew a safe,happy holiday.May you all be back home safely to spend time with your familys, with whom you all probably miss dearly.We the Wirick Family want to thank you for your hard work in space.
Merry Christmas from Crown Point, Indiana, Home of Jerry Ross.
The Donald Wirick Family 12/23/1999 The Thompson family from Moncks Corner, S.C. wishes a very merry Christmas to your crew.
Love, Cathy, Archie 
Beth wants me to tell you "Thank you for saving hubble, 'cuz it takes cool pictures."
Have a happy holidays and a safe trip home! Jeff, Beth 
Hubble is one of the best platforms we have and is teaching us so much.
I'll be thinking (and watching the live webcast) about you all as I sit here working, trying desperately to get all my work done on the new Radisson.com/CountryInns.com/RegentHotels.com sites.
Have a Merry Christmas up there and we'll see you back down here for a great new years! Mark Ranum - BORN Information Services BTW: Who is Billy Bob? 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Guys !!!! Here's hoping you have a safe and successful trip.
There can't be many cooler places to spend Christmas Day than in orbit - even if there ain't much room to party.
best wishes, Chris Lawson ( Stockport, England ) 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts - Happy Holidays and Merry Christmas! Thank you for spending Christmas in orbit.
We know you will miss your families but we think you are doing a great job by fixing the Hubble telescope because we've learned so much about our solar system, our galaxy and our universe by seeing the pictures from it.
We are really looking forward to seeing pictures from it for a long time to come.
Yours truly, Sam and Will Parmenter, ages 10 and 7 years old 12/23/1999 In the beginning, God created the heaven and the earth... and now mankind soars in the heavens...
God speed to all for the peace-full exploration of space....
You may have a hint, but, I can say that ALL people,everywhere, wish each and everyone a Merry Christmas..... and WE WILL EXPECT YOU BACK IN TIME TO CELEBRATE THE NEW YEAR!!!!!! 12/23/1999 We waited quietly for you to pass by tonight.The sky was clear and bright-we sat in awe.Merry Christmas and a job well done.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Discovery! We are all watching from below it must be an awesome site from where you are.
Safe Landing...God Speed.
12/23/1999 Hope you have a Merry Christmas and a safe return to earth! from Shannon in Edmonton, Alberta 12/23/1999 what an extraordinary event for your respective lives...to have the privilege to contemplate the mystery of our very uniqueness in the solar system from the vantage point of outer space! our thoughts are with you for a most successful voyage!! happy holidays!! rene' diaz and family 12/23/1999 Discovery's Crew, Being a 22 year old, 36 hour student pilot, I couldn't even imagine how much of a blast it is to be on the Space Shuttle.
Merry Christmas guys, have a safe trip coming home! Korey Klann Walled Lake, Michigan 12/23/1999 Hi my name is Janson Bailey.
I am 7 years old.
I hope you are having a good time in space.
I saw you on tv today.
Did you get the satelite fixed? What state are you flying over? Merry Christmas from Janson.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy Holidays, Thanks for your hard work so that we all can continue to enjoy and benefit from Hubble images and data starting in early 2000.
When we see farther and better we get a better perspective on humankind and our place in the Universe.
Godspeed and a safe journey home.
12/23/1999 How very special to celebrate the Holidays in space.
There are no amount of words to express the admiration Myself and my family feel for you.
As you sacrifice Christmas wit Your loved ones....please know that you are loved by all of us down below.
Happy Holidays 12/23/1999 DECK THE HALLS (HST Version) Deck the halls with atomic fireballs Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Broken gyros, astronomy stalls Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Don we now, our space apparel Fa-la-la, la-la-la, la-la-la Fix the Hubble, now in peril Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la See the HST before us Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la "Grappled the fixture," cheered the chorus Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Six new gyros, ones that measure Fa-la-la, la-la-la, la-la-la New computer, what a treasure Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Fast away 3A's year passes Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Don't you worry lads and lasses Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Shuttle landing starts a new day Fa-la-la, la-la-la, la-la-la SM3B's on the way Fa-la-la-la-la, la-la-la-la Happy Holidays from your HST Orbit Shift Flight Controllers at the Goddard Space Flight Center.
:-) 12/23/1999 I wrote to Santa Clase and told him you-all were very busy, and told him not to forget you.
Merry Christmas to you and your familys.
Great job you are doing.
John Farrell, Hurst,TX.
12/23/1999 I'm Franchini Francesco from Naples - Italy.
Now i'm sitting in my warm room while you're running on the dusty and cool roads of Space, working to open new eyes on the Universe.
Thanks to you all.
From the bottom of my heart comes to you and to your families, my very best wishes of a MERRY MERRY MERRY XMAS AND HAPPY NEW YEAR 2000.
We all are waiting for your COME BACK HOME.
F.Franchini amateur astronomer 12/23/1999 I'm proud of all of you, and all astronauts.
Thanks for your courage and dedication.
I'm sorry you will be away from your families this holiday.
I too have to work and will be away from my loved ones.
Hopefully you won't get any snow up there (ha ha).
Merry Christmas! Holly 12/23/1999 H! H! H! Merry christmas from Portugal 12/23/1999 Dear Discovery Crew: I am 5 years old and my name is Aidan Wilcox.
I live in Arlington, Massachusetts.
I hope you have a happy holiday.
If you see santa and his reindeer, please tell him Merry Christmas.
I want to be a space scientist some day.
I have a shuttle that I play with and I take all over space.
Have a Very Merry Christmas, Aidan Wilcox 12/23/1999 May you have a blessed Christmas and may the love of the Lord bless each and every one of you with a safe journey and a safe return to earth.
May you be blessed with the love and peace of the Lord.
12/23/1999 Have a blessed Holiday.
Let us know if you see Santa leaving the north pole :-) Stay safe and we will see you back on this beautiful blue planet....God speed! The Gainer Family 12/23/1999 goog like buon natale e felice anno nuovo dall'Italia ITALY Reggio Calabria a south of Italy happy new year 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to you all.
You should get double time for working the holidays.
Jay 12/23/1999 Greetings from the Goddard STOCC.
Great work with the rendezvous and RSU changeouts! The gyros powered up just like we expected and continue to operate superbly.
On behalf of the HST PCS team, thanks for relieving us from six weeks of sleep deprivation under Zero Gyro Sunpoint.
It'll be great to get back to science! Good luck with the deploy - we'll be ready to take her back Saturday.
Steve Lee.
12/23/1999 I'm so proud to be part of this great country i want to wish you guys up there in space and to your families here On Mother Earth.a "MERRY CHRISTMAS and HAPPY NEW YEAR.we Love you all and to everybody that sent their gratitude MERRY XMAS.from DJSEXYLOCO@AOL.COM and Family CARBAJAL" 12/23/1999 We on earth are proud of what all astronauts/cosmonauts have done.
I hope that you take the time.....reach out your hand ...and touch the face of God.
You do all of mankind proud.... keep it sweet.
12/23/1999 Merry X-mas to you all and have a safe trip home! My daughter, son and myself are currently watching you here on the NASA channel (GE-2 T9) C-Band!! I have just installed a new computer system here in the living room, so we can monitor things VIA the Internet as well as on NASA TV all on our 50" big screen! You have just recently completed your 60th orbit and are finishing up some work on Hubble.
We enjoy watching these space walks as this is the only time we here on Earth are able to see other things besides the Earth, the crew, etc..
We would like to know why NASA does not show us here on Earth pictures of the Moon, Planets, stars, etc..
when you are up in space.
Once again Merry X-mas and have a happy new year! The Matthew Bowers family - Rockford, Illinois 12/23/1999 To the Discovery Crew, Blessings to you all as you work to repair the Hubble.
I and the members of my 8th grade class have been watching on NASA TV from the launch on.
We hope all continues to go well and pray for your safe return to earth.
Timothy Grothaus St. John Lutheran School Rochester, MI 12/23/1999 Hello everyone!!!!!! My name is Danielle, I'm 17 years old and I'm from Rio de Janeiro/Brazil.
I wanna wish you deep from my heart a Merry Christmas and a wonderful New Year, with a lot of discoveries and good things for you all! And keep briging to us news from Space, specially from the Moon ( I love her...
it's so beautiful).
I told my mother that I really would like to go there with you... but it wouldn't be possible.
So be happy!!!!! Kisses and hugs from me.
Danielle 12/23/1999 Just remember that when it's Christmas here...it's well as there are no time zones in space I guess it's always Christmas up there!! Have a good one :) 12/23/1999 Greetings from the Goddard STOCC.
Great work with the RSU changeouts! The gyros powered up just like we expected and continue to operate superbly.
On behalf of the HST PCS team, thanks for relieving us from six weeks of sleep deprivation under Zero Gyro Sunpoint.
It'll be great to get back to science! Good luck with the deploy - we'll be ready to take her back Saturday.
Steve Lee.
12/23/1999 Greetings from the Goddard STOCC.
Great work with the RSU changeouts! The gyros powered up just like we expected and continue to operate superbly.
On behalf of the HST PCS team, thanks for relieving us from six weeks of sleep deprivation under Zero Gyro Sunpoint.
It'll be great to get back to science! Good luck with the deploy - we'll be ready to take her back Saturday.
Steve Lee.
12/23/1999 Good Christmas Merry Christmas there to space wishes Markus Vkevinen from Finland 12/23/1999 To The Crew Of STS-103 (Discovery) Congradulations on the successful work to restore the world's premier astronomical research tool, the Hubble Space Telescope! I'm sure that the late Edwin Hubble has been looking down upon each and every one of you, and the others before you who have maintained this important tool of science and discovery, to help mankind better understand our place in the vast universe.
As you look down upon Earth on Christmas Day 1999, remember our world is a fragile place in which we live.
As you orbit each ninety minutes, you pass many borders, many nations and countless billions of the human race.
May your mission be a symbol for peace, love and universal understanding among all peoples of the world, for it is you, and others to follow that will lead humankind towards the stars! 12/23/1999 Dear Crew of the STS-103, We have been trying to see you go up since October.
We went to Florida for the 12-6-99 lift-off date.
My grampy, Ken Budden, whom you all have worked with on this project has spoke highly of you and wanted us to see you all go up.
We appreciate all that you do for our country.
I know it must be hard to be away from your family for christmas.
So, "I wish you a merry christmas, I wish you a merry christmas, I wish you all a merry christmas, 
Your Space Friends, Amber (4) future engineer Patrick(1) future astronaut Heather 
The Baniak family, PUNTA GORDA, FL. 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from HUNGARY and have a safe trip back to Earth.
Nice job, guys, Keep it up! 12/23/1999 Have a great Xmas Come Home safe.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to you, the crew of STS-103.
You carry with you the world's vision of a prosperous and peaceful new millenium.
During this holiday season, you are in our thoughts and prayers.
May God grant you a safe return to your families and loved ones.
12/23/1999 Merry X-mas from the Morath Family, Steven,Laura,Stephen and Andrew wish we were there........ regards from tampa,fl 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts,I am onlly 8 years old.
I relly want to be a Astronaut when I grow up.Thanks you for your work.
MERRY CRISMAS.
12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, Hope you have a very happy (and productive)holiday! We have been watching you on TV and the internet everyday with interest.
We have a family member who is a NASA engineer working at the cape, and since she works on the shuttle, we love to keep up to date! Happy Holidays, The Webster Family 12/23/1999 Dec. 21 was my 41st birthday, and the 31st anniversary of the launch of Apollo 8.
Watching that launch in 1968 was the best present I received that year, and it was indeed a pleasure to also watch your rendevous with the Hubble telescope this year.
Congratulations and best wishes for your continued success, and may God bless you and your families this Christmas season.
Tim Lundberg Olathe, KS 12/23/1999 Merry Merry Christmas.
We are soooo proud of all of you!! Your mission is as magical as the holidays!! With love from earth Walter Portner 
Os invito a venir al Puerto de la Cruz.
Tenerife.
Islas Canarias.
Espaa 12/23/1999 Happy holidays to all at NASA, onboard and on the ground.
No luck seeing you fly overhead tonight, because of clouds, but will look up again Christmas eve and think of you.
Thanks for being there, away from your families at this time of year.
We appreciate your sacrifice.
12/23/1999 A very happy Xmas and safe return ....
from Gtersloh, Germany 12/23/1999 I am really excited about sending this to you guys up there.
I want to wish you all a Merry Christmas.
I would also like to give you luck with repairing the Hubble.
12/23/1999 I wish everyone aboard the Shuttle a very Merry, Healthy and Blessed Christmas.
It must be wonderful to look down on our planet from orbit - I envy you.
My e-mail name, Marsface1, is in honor of the monolith discovered on the Martian surface.
With luck you may one day journey to Mars! God bless all of you! 12/23/1999 i hope you have fun up there ... i like your job say hello to the aliens Jimmis from Washington DC area 12/23/1999 Dear all, We're watching you on Nasa TV on the second EVA over the Internet from Michael's home town area of Lincoln Lincolnshire, in the UK. Michael, your the hero of Central and Calender News and no doubt your in the Lincolnsire Echo Newspaper again...
Well done to you all for a fine job, good tail winds and God speed.
Merry Christmas.
Darren Round 
Our thoughts are with you and your families now and untill your safe return.
Great Britain is proud of you Micheal your spirit and courage is an example to us all.
Children will be inspired to follow in your footsteps and travel into space, of this I am sure.
I travel to Florida a few times a year and always visit KSC, I have also seen a number of shuttles blast off.
I am always amazed at the specticle.
Safe flight, come home safe.
12/23/1999 Holiday greetings!!!!!!!!!! Keep up the good work! You are giving the entire world a terrific Christmas present! Rick Johnson Connecticut 12/23/1999 I WISH TO YOU ALL THE MOST HAPPIEST HOLIDAY, 
I ADMIRE YOU ALL. 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, I am Donald Kellogg, Jr from Traverse City, MI.
I think what you guys are doing is fantastic! I know we will learn many many more things about space because of this launch.
I hope everything goes well and you return safe and sound!!! THANK YOU!!!! 12/23/1999 I envy you up there - all we have down here is the comercialisation of christmas - but up there you see the beauty of christmas for what it is really worth.
Up there you will not be nipping out for that last minute forgotten gift. instead you will be looking down at a peacefull looking world - which from down here is far from the truth of it all.
All the best on the great job that you are doing - godspeed.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from the crew at Coastal Pacific Foods Ontario, CA 12/23/1999 The earth is with us for ever.
The real Christmas is your make the right of the World Thank you, Sincerely The Umanity 12/23/1999 Keep up the magnificent work! You are an inspiration to us all! Have a very merry space 1999 Christmas! 12/23/1999 To Mr Nicollier I have just read with delight and pride that you are up there space walking for Science.
It was so nice to meet you when you gave a very gripping talk in conjunction with Bob Williams in Aspen a year ago.
Joyeux Noel et Bonne Annee For the Aspen Center for Physics Pierre Ramond 12/23/1999 Great job Discovery.
That was a long EVA on Wednesday which shows us all your dedication to the mission.
We all appreciate what your doing to further the exploration of the universe.
Everyone on Earth will get a wonderful present when your return Hubble to it's orbit to continue it's mission.
Have a wonderful Christmas and a safe return to mother Earth.
12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, What's it like up in space?We hope you all have a Merry Christmas.If you get lost up there look for the north star and Jesus will help you find your way home.
Thanks for being astronauts.
Love, Natalie 
Shwan, my son Alan 
Have been glued to the TV.
We have enjoyed the pictures of the Astronauts working on the Hubble telescope.
Thanks for the coverage.
Merry Christmas to all the crew and their families from Gettysburg, PA. John 
I am very interested in the space program.
good luck! 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, Thank you for your hard work.
I'll be thinking about you up there.
God Bless you.
Here's to a safe return.
Susan Crump 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, How are you? I hope you have a great Christmas up in space.
Also a Happy New Year and (2000)! 8) - Mita Patel Best wishes 12/23/1999 Hello Claude Nicollier I send you greeting from Switzerland.
I wish you a merry Chrismas and happy new year.
For the work in the space good luck and when you have time look down to us.
12/23/1999 Wish you all a very merry Christmas and a happy New Year.
Quite a few people will agree with me when I say space Travel is the EVENT of the century.
People for centuries To come will admire astronaut's courage like you and peope who went before you.
What an appropriate way to spend the Christmas in space as we approach the year 2000.I wish you all the very best.
From Canoga Park, California Home of the Space Shuttle Main Engine 12/23/1999 Good luck, God speed, and merry Christmas.
I hope to be up there one day.
12/23/1999 hey, hope all is well in space today.
my name is austin, i am seven years old.
just wanted to wish you all a happy holiday in space i am sure it is one you will never forget.
if you see santa flying around please take a picture as i am sure it will be worth more than any pokemon card ever made.
please have a safe flight home.
AUSTIN from earth (ohio).
12/23/1999 go for all mankind rhg ralphhg@earethlink.net 12/23/1999 To:Curtis Brown Holiday Greetings From North Carolina Curtis, I saw the shuttle status page and it showed you going 16,500 mile per hour.
If that isn't fast enough to get you qualified in any NASCAR race, I don't know what is.
I was raised in Harnett county, not too far up the road from Elizabethtown.
I have heard NASA refer to the shuttle as the equivalent of a pickup truck.
Good thing they got a good old boy to drive it.
Can we get a John Boy and Billy "A-ooh-ah-ooh-ah-ooh-ah"? Make sure that everyone gets their beer cans out of the payload bay before you land, those NASA security are tough.
Have a Merry Christmas and keep them straight up there.
JT 12/23/1999 Sorry that you can't be with your families for The Holiday.
Good luck with your pending mission.
I hop that it goes well.
I enjoy the pictures that Hubble puts out.
12/23/1999 I would just like to congradulate you all on a job well done.
The Hubble will now be able to see faster!!! Well Done! And the best wishes.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to all of you in space!!!! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Dallas, Texas-- Being the last mission in the millennium is something very special and I am sure your families are very proud of you.
I know I am.
As someone who spent a fair number of Christmas' away from his family and out in the oilfield, I can appreciate what you are going through on Christmas Day.
Come back soon....and safely.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas you guys.
Did you check out the moon? It's been awesome from down here.
Be safe and take care.
Marcus Dylan Bush 8 years old.
12/23/1999 To the crew of Discovery.
Best wishes for the festive season from Scotland.
All the best with your mission to update the Hubble Space telescope.
Have a safe journey home.
The Murphy Family 12/23/1999 dear astronauts, Hey, my name is Jason Kelley and I just wanted to say hey.
I hope that I will become an astronaut myself.
I am only 15 years old, but I have had my eye on being one since I was 7 years old.I am in an organisation called Civil Air Patrol and I am a Master Sergent and I hope this will help my future in the space program.
I hope you are having a whole lot of fun out there.
Merry christmas to everyone up there.
12/23/1999 Hello everybody, I hope you are well.
I wish you a merry Christmas.
In your spaceship you have probably no Christmas tree and no Christmas meel, but I wish you a great Christmas in space.
Pour les francophones (en particulier pour Claude Nicollier) : je vous souhaite un joyeux Nel et sachez que l'on pensera  vous depuis notre plante bleue en ce jour de fte. Encore bravo pour ce que vous fates.
Alain, prs d'Yverdon, dans le canton de Vaud en Suisse.
12/23/1999 LIKE WISH THE CREW OF THE SPACE SHUTTLE, GROUND CREW AND THE REST OF THE PEOPLE THAT PUT EVERYTHING TOGETHER AND MAKE IT WORK.
HAPPY HOLIDAYS YOURS TRUELY ALFRED J BARSOCCHI 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Astronauts, Have a Super Merry Christmas!! My name is Grant Weil and I'm in the 2nd grade at McCarty Grade School in Aurora, Illinois.
Our mascot, "Midnight", which is a mustang bean bag toy, is onboard with you!! He was packed up and shipped to NASA over the summer to go up on your mission.
I know all of you and Midnight will have a Christmas to remember! Good luck on the rest of your mission.
We're all watching the reports down here on earth.
It would be neat if you could come to our school when you get back.
Grant Weil 12/23/1999 Hi, just wanted to wish youall a very marry cristmas 1999.
from ottawa kansas and the Farrell family.
gods speed to you all, have a safe and successful mission.
and a safe trip home.
don,laura,amber,amanda,dannie,andy 12/23/1999 This message is to all the crewmembers of the STS-103 mission and especially to Claude Nicollier as I am swiss as well :) I'm a student and very interested in space science, I have been following the whole mission over the internet and have been watching NasaTV online broadcasting as we don't get NasaTV here.
You guys are all doing a great job up there, and I wish you all the best for the proceeding of the mission and merry christmas :) I'd love to be up there as well, farewell, Kyle from Switzerland PS: If anyone of you has the time to mail me back, which I would love, then please do it :) 12/23/1999 hello there my name is Carel Cramer and I live in Holland.
I always foolow your ups en downs from earth to space.
I wish you and all they love you all the best for now and the coming century many greetings and godspeed carel 12/23/1999 To see the Earth as it truly is, small and blue and beautiful in that eternal silence where it floats, is to see ourselves as riders on the earth together, brothers on that bright loveliness in the eternal cold-brothers who know now they are truly brothers...Merry Chrismas from earth 12/23/1999 Dear Crew: Girlhood dreams of being an astronaut went unfulfilled, but should this message reach you up there in the heavens, then I will have gotten half way! :) May the quiet of the cosmos give you peace and serenity at this holiday time.
Blessed tidings to you all.
From, Ali in Chicago.
12/23/1999 The pictures that the Hubble Space Telescope can get impress everybody , whether he is a fan of space exploration or not , just as the Apollo 8 mission did exactly 31 years ago.
So I hope that you can make it work for many more years , because it is one of the best representatives of space exploration.
Good luck , Merry Christmas and happy new year! Elias Roussos Athens, Greece 12/23/1999 Thanks for fixing the telescope! I watch you guys every night on NASA cable TV here in Seattle and it would drive my wife nuts(in a good sort of way) if you could email her/us a holiday email from the space shuttle.
Happy holidays from us down here on earth! Jesse 
Amicalement, PAILLEX Amael 12/23/1999 Dear Astronaut Heroes: The work you are accomplishing is awe inspiring and very dangerous.
The pictures created by the Hubble telescope in the past have been remarkable beyond words.
Your work on the Hubble will make it possible for more of those pictures beyond words.
God bless you, and God speed.
Be careful, Concerned earthling.
12/23/1999 Just wanted to wish the crew a very merry christmas and let you know that my thoughts are with you as you spend christmas in space.
I can't help but think that in a way it's appropriate that as we draw closer to the year 2000 and the beginning of a new era, your mission is taking place.
It seems clear to me that the greatest advancements of humankind to take place in the next century will be directly linked to our exploration of space.
So thank you for your efforts and once again have a merry christmas.
12/23/1999 You guys have really got some stones..
Merry Christmas 12/23/1999 Hola , felicitaciones por lo que han logrado mi nombre es Alejandro Castro, soy Chileno y tengo 21 aos, creo que el estar ahi es un sueo echo realidad, hoy en la tierra es un dia muy especial como ustedes saben, solo les quiero desear mucha suerte de parte de toda la humanidad, y si se encuentran con un extraterrestre invitenlos a esta gran fiesta!!! I wish so much lucky!!! happy 2000!!! life forever i love you!!! chao!! 12/23/1999 Feliz Natal para todos voces, e um prospero ano de 2000.
Sao os sinceros votos de um grande admirador deste conceituado e magnifico trabalho.
Um forte abrao.
Sidney e Denis.
12/23/1999 I hope you guys have a wonderful Christmas in space! I would love to be in your shoes, and you should count yoursleves very lucky.
May you return safe to your familes and loved ones.
Good luck and a Merry Christmas.
12/23/1999 Just thought I should send you guys a Christmas letter to let you know that we are thinking about you here at the "Bishop" house hold.
I hope your mission is a success, and that you all come back to your families, for a real christmas get together and not have to use a computer to communicate with youave, then a pen and paper.
Happy Holidays!!!! from the Bishop family in Minnesota.
12/23/1999 Just wanted to wish all a Merry Christmas and to say thanks for giving up your Holiday with the family to repair the Big Eye in the Sky! Hope all have a Happy New Year.
Bob Gibbons Hamlin, PA 12/23/1999 Happy new year Sal (Rome - Italy) 12/23/1999 Grettigs to all off you out in the space in Discovery.
Merry Chrismas to all of you.
Best wisheses from Morten in Oslo, Norway.
12/23/1999 Thanks and Good Job! 12/23/1999 Have any of the astronuts worked with mission specialist Joe Tanner on the previous Hubble space repair? The objective appears to be similar (repair/maintenance), is there other aspects that make this mission more unique (ie. any firsts?, never been tried before activities,etc.)? Russ Meyer friend of Joe T's rsmcem@aol.com 12/23/1999 I have been watching you guys servicing hubble, over the internet (on nasatv), and i must say that you make it all look so easy, you cannot see me but i am greener (with envy) that the xmas tree on this web page).
I come from England , so I cannot say that you make me proud to be American , but you sure make me proud to be Human.
Wishing you all a merry xmas, new year 
May your flights be always good... 12/23/1999 buon natale da roberta,stefano e dalla nostra piccola bambina di nome giulia. merry christmas from roberta,stefano and from our little baby giulia. speriamo che i vostri computers funzionino meglio del nostro. we hope that your computers run better than our. se vedete VERONA(ITALIA) dallo spazio mandatici un saluto natalizio.
if you see VERONA(ITALY)from the space send us a christmas greeting.
12/23/1999 HOW'S THE WEATHER UP THERE? WE'RE IN FLORIDA AND WE'RE GOING TO TRY SEEING YOU WITH THE NAKED EYE, LOOKING WEST.
WE TRIED, IT'S TO CLOUDY.
WE WANT TO THANK YOU FOR YOUR COURAGE, STRENGTH 
MERRY CHRISTMAS 
Joyeux Nol Toute l'quipe de www.swissgeo.ch 12/23/1999 what all NASA ASTRONAUTS say about there next mission and i quote americas' favorite action toy these days......." to infinity and beyond--!@#$%^
We hope you do well to Hubble and put everything in place again.
We certainly wish all of you a merry christmas and a safe return.
For now we know that you'll be back before the 'magic' Y2K.
Greetings from the Netherlands, Gerard et Annemique 12/23/1999 Nanu Nanu Discovery! Happy Holidays from a greatful Dallas, TX.
The nation and the world appreicate your efforts, and the sacrifice each one of you has made to spend christmas on discovery.
But, if NASA had offered I would have gladly filled in as a alternate! :) Best of Wishes! This is Dallas, TX - OUT 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, I hope you all have a Merry Christmas while you are navigating the heavens.
As a fellow scientist who peers at the microscopic world five days a week, I envy your view of the macroscopic from the shuttle.
Take care and God bless.
Sincerely, Jason Selby Materials Scientist Seagate Technology Longmont, Colorado 12/23/1999 Hi Guys.
Just a very short message from Ireland, fair play to you, have a good Christmas, get back safely.
best wishes.
Noel, Hannah, Jessica, and Sam Golden.
12/23/1999 Feliz Navidad y Prospero Ano, y milenio nuevo.
De parte de la Familia Hernandez de El Paso, Texas.
Carlos M. Hernandez II, Kathy Y.
Hernandez and children: Carlos III, Marco, and Melissa.
Thanks for your courage and positive role model.
12/23/1999 Hallo! Ich wnsche der Crew ein schnes Weihnachtsfest, auch wenn sie so weit von der Erde entfernt sind.
Ich hoffe das Eure Mission Erfolgreich ist und Ihr wieder Gesund zur Erde zurckkehrt.
Viel Glck! Moskito.MD 12/23/1999 Wish you all a merry christmas 12/23/1999 Ragazzi, come sempre siete fantastici!! Vedervi al lavoro nel vuoto  sempre un'esperienza unica.
Spero solo che i turni di lavoro non siano cos pressanti da non farvi godere il posto unico nel quale siete.
A very Merry Christmas and a Happy Happy New year from Milan, Italy.......and what about a new millennium's eve from the space? Could you invite me? I will be so glad spending my next holydays with you!! Ale 12/23/1999 I have been watching you folks with my son on the internet and I would just like to say Merry Christmas to all of you! Your work is fascinating and we are proud of you.
We wish you all the best.
Paul and Cole Wohler Madison, Wisconsin 12/23/1999 Keep up the great work.
We're all thinking of you during this holiday season.
12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew - My name is David and I'm almost 5 years old.
I live in Austin Texas and when I grow up I'm going to fly the shuttle! Have a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year!! Your best pal, David 12/23/1999 Happy Christmas for the Shuttle Crew from Switzerland !! Good Luck for all 12/23/1999 I CAN SEE YOU WITH MY COMPUTER, YOU MEN INTO THE COLD SPACE FOR OUR EMANCIPTION.
HAPPY CHRISTMAS AND HAPPY NEW MILLENNIUM.
I HOPE THAT INTO THIS NEW MILLENNIUM THERE'REN'T THE WARS.
THANK YOU FOR THIS DREAM.
I'M STEFANO ABATI CAVRIAGO (REGGIO EMILIA) ITALY (UNITED STATES OF EUROPE).
12/23/1999 I wish you a merry christmas.
I think its great to be there watching our lovely planet.
I am electrical engineer, it would be great to spend sometime out there in this time of the year.
I wish I could be in your place.
Just look at the sun once before and the pale blue dot just before you leave.
Tell them we are trying to give them less harm and wish all the world a merry christmas.
12/23/1999 How proud we all are on your accomplishments during this very important mission.
You are all bringing quite the holiday present to all those who help make this all possible and worthwhile.
God Bless.
Mark Lantzakis Shuttle Program Manager Hamilton Sundstrand Space Systems International (the Shuttle ECLSS and Space Suit folks) 12/23/1999 merry christmas From all at BURNED the home of Fun Fair ONLINE IN THE UK 12/23/1999 Dear Space Shuttle Crew, Christmas Greetings from Phoenix! Congratulations on your successful launch - you're in our thoughts and prayers at this very special time of year.
Merry Christmas and all the very best for the ride home! Faye, Peter, Sarah and Mary Flynn 12/23/1999 Christmas greetings from Dublin , Ireland.
This is my first ever session on the internet so what better way to start than a mesage to the space shuttle ! God speed and smooth sailing on your return to Earth.
Ian Sutton 12/23/1999 good luck and best wishes from Germany Wuppertal.
A small city 360.000 people.
A town with a hanging railway.
Merry Xmas and a happy New Year.
12/23/1999 helo ! do you see Space Cristmas father ? If you see him send me a space present of papa noel thank you and happy christmas and new year 2000 and good luck for the BUGS when you gone a come back! JC 
From Las Vegas NV. 12/23/1999 good luck and best wishes from Germany Wuppertal.
A small city 360.000 people.
A town with a hanging railway.
12/23/1999 Howdy out there! We - here down in Germany - wish You a peaceful Xmas! To be honesty we - at least me (Helge) - envy You! You do a great work! Return home safely! Our best wishes accompany You! Angelika 
Hope that the creator is smiling on you and your crew members as you will be missing the holidays with your families but I am sure that your wives are very understanding and patient women waiting for your return.
Although my children are young, I tell them to be proud of the brave souls who work at NASA, especially those of you brave enough to leave the planet.
I am very proud as an American to know] that the Space Programs continue and hope that our next President will find it in their heart to stop spending so much on our multi-billion dollar effort for military spending and contribute a much higher portion of our tax dollars on increasing and expanding our efforts through NASA.
Again, my heart is with you and your families during this final holiday season of the millenium and I wish you all a safe return to earth and your families.
Many blessings to you and your crew! 12/23/1999 Dear hero's I have great respect for your job, and really appreciate how you show that manned spaceflights and science goes hand in hand! I wish you a merry christmas and a safe return to earth! Jan ten Pierick 12/23/1999 Hi, this is Jeff Pai from Michigan.
Wish you guys a happy holiday.
Also, congradulations, you guys are the last group of human in space for this century.
Keep up the good work, and we will see you in Florida.
12/23/1999 You people on Discovery are great! It is a pleasure to watch you work up there.
Merry Christmas from the entire Powell Family.
Joel Powell 12/23/1999 As you go about the work of engineering, reviewing checklists, measuring and observing, I hope you can pause to reflect on the wonder that engulfs you in God's great and complex universe.
We on the earth dream through your eyes and hope you return to share the wonder and glory of the universe.
Have a wonderful holiday season.
Paul Bohn 12/23/1999 To all the crew of the sts-103, a very Merry Christmas and a Happy New Millennium.
It's fantastic to be able to see and hear you all go about your work and I continue to watch in awe and envy.
I hope one day I'll get to see the view for myself.
Keep up the good work and have a safe trip home.
Louise Whitbread, Hungerford, England 12/23/1999 joyeux noel de libourne (france). formidable ce que vous vivez.
12/23/1999 Happy Holidays crew of STS-103! I was hoping this launch would also have been a SAREX mission, I am an amateur radio operator and would love to have a conversation with an astronaut in space! Best wishes on your mission and for a safe return.
Have a merry Christmas and a happy New Year! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from all of us at Atlee Pro Music in Richmond, Virginia.
Jason, Chris(Utah), Mike, Paul,Ron, Justin and Tim.
Hope all of you get a visit from Santa up there! Love, Atlee Pro Music Staff 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to the Discovery Crew! Even though you will be away from your families for the holiday, may it still be a joyous day for you.
Thanks for the great job you are doing on the Hubble Telescope repair.
Kim Foreman 12/23/1999 To the Crew of "Discovery" Having followed your progress via the net, you should be congratulated on the fine performance against all odds.
*** WELL DONE !!! *** Working in space is not easy at the best of times, especially as this is an environment that man was not designed for.
Consider yourselves honoured that you are able to venture into God's great arena that we call space, and that you are able to return again to the stage that we call earth to tell about the wonders of what you have seen in that time.
Even though you are far from family and friends at this time, I take the opportunity to wish you a Merry Christmas up there in space, a Safe Landing 
Best Wishes and Regards from SYDNEY - AUSTRALIA ....
The Iron Paw 12/23/1999 Congradulations on your EVA! Good work; looking forward to seeing some new pictures from Hubble.
Merry Christmas from all of us on the good Earth...
Godspeed.
12/23/1999 I personally hope that you will accomplish your mission, and have a very merry christmas up in space.
Do good! 12/23/1999 Hello, I host a nationally syndicated, live, call-in computer show on the radio.
I would like to extend an invitation to all, or any of you, to appear on my show when you get back to Earth.
Continued success with your mission and good luck! Merry Christmas! Regards, Dr. Computer 12/23/1999 Ladies and Gentelmen Last year our Gramma and Granpa passed away, Granpa died last decemember and Gramma in july.
We would like very much for to wave to them since your closer than we are.Wishing you very happy holidays and sorry you have to work on Christmas.
With love Kelsey 4 Michael 7 and David 7.
(Dad helped us with this.)Thank you.
12/23/1999 Happy Holidays from Jayson in Carteret,New Jersey 12/23/1999 Buon Natale all'equipaggio del Discovery dalla Svizzera.
Claude, non andare troppo veloce e non rientrare tardi!!! Rex-Lugano (CH) 12/23/1999 Hey guys, I'm a NASA employee and I want to thank you for a job well done.
Keep up the good work and keep flying safely! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the crew of STS-103 from the little town of Wimberley, Texas.
We know that your sacrifices and work has been great.
However, by the touch of your hands you have affected each of us in how we see our world and universe.
May God bless each of you during this wonderful journey, and we look forward to your safe return.
Tim, Judy, Sean, Siobhan McGaha 12/23/1999 Happy Christmas to the only people on a remoter location than me for the festive season, I am on an oil rig in the North Sea, you will be able to see the rigs lights at night from there.
Well you are guarenteed a Nice New year, we are not, we have to work boath, not good.
Any way don't knock Santa down if he crosses your path on his slay.
All the best Ian Hudson 12/23/1999 This is a message for Jean-Franois and his friends of the discovery shuttle.
I'm a student in the "ecole polytechnique" and i'm very proud of your work with the robotic arm.
It must be very hard to manipulate it.
Good luck for the end of the mission I hope I'll be able to join you in space in a few years ! Bonne chance, joyeux Nol et bonne anne  tout l'quipage.
Thomas Voirin (X99) 12/23/1999 Great job! Your execution and hard work are going to pay off for years in ways we cannot imagine now.
Hubble is such a key part of our space exploration program.
Thank you for your dedication, professionalism, and for being great representatives of mankind in space.
God bless you and your families during the holidays.
12/23/1999 We wish you a wonderful and Merry Christmas from back home on Earth!! You guys are doing a great job!! I can't wait to see the new pic's from Hubble once you've completed your mission!!! Come home safely!!!! P.S. to John - Must be some SWEET shrimp cocktail up there to eat it that much, huh?!?!?!?!?! :-) Rob Gartley Waukegan, IL. 12/23/1999 Doing a great job.
I know you have practiced long and hard to make this mission a complete success.
Have a safe journey back to earth and a very healthy and great New Year 12/23/1999 Happy holidays and happy New Year from Wells Fargo's Trading desk... 12/23/1999 HAPPY CHRISTMAS TO EVERYBODY! WE ARE WAYTING IN EARTH.
GREATS, JARDS MACAL99.
12/23/1999 happiest of all the holiday greetings,earthlings.even though you are far from home our thoughts and prayers are with you all.may your holiday be filled with the spirit of love and life as may your lives be filled with the spiritof christmas,god bless and safe journey.
12/23/1999 Happy Holidays gentlemen.
I do hope you like the untainted view of the Earth.
God's view must be great from up there.
Enjoy.
12/23/1999 From a kid who was 10 when Neil and Buzz walked on the moon, THIS is the kind of "working in space" America was building toward even then.
What scientists learn from missions such as yours will return us to the moon and then to Mars and beyond.
Good job, Discovery! And they owe you time-and-a-half for working on a holiday.
(Me, I'd hold out for 20-cents a mile!) Charles Compton, Charlotte, NC P.S.
On Christmas Eve, could you mention Borman, Lovell and Anders, who were so far away from home 31 years ago that night? 12/23/1999 HAPPY HOLIDAYS FROM WEST VIRGINIA ...MY NAME IS JOHNATHAN I AM 6 YEARS OLD AND LOVE SPACE ....PLEASE WAVE TO ME AND WATCH OUT FOR SANTA......LOVE TO YOU ALL... 12/23/1999 Greetings from Namibia! Here's wishing you all a happy Christmas and well into the new millennium.
Many people on earth (also in Namibia) will hold you in their hearts over the festive season.
I wish you God Speed in your task and for your return home.
Gideon Opperman 12/23/1999 Merry christmas and Happy New Year (and millenium)!!! I've been following your work with interest and I must say it must be a thrilling experience to be doing what you're doing for the benefit of mankind.
God bless you all.
12/23/1999 we wish you merry christmas and have a good trip at home do and for all the people on board god bless you and salute the mir from us 12/23/1999 Dear Crew, Merry Christmas and happy holidays.
i was excited to hear about your mission.
i like astronomy and want to be an astronaut when i grow up.i hope you have a fun time up in space.
i heard it was the first mission to be held during christmas.Again happy holidays.
From Bill P. 12/23/1999 On Behalf of the Web Development Department at Conexus in Salt Lake City, Utah, we want to wish you all a very Merry Christmas!! We have been watching the live video feeds of your space walk all day today.
It has been an incredible experience to watch the mission from down here.
I wish I was up there with you.
Have a safe trip home on monday.
Again, Merry Christmas Jared Bronson and the staff of Conexus 12/23/1999 Seasons Greetings from a World War II B-24 Combat Pilot and B-29 Test Pilot.
My two Distinguished Flying Crosses and four Air Medals make me appreciate your willingness to undertake nobel things.
We will think of you many times each day and will remember you in our prayers.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Reidsville North Carolina.
May the view of the heavenly skys during this Christmas season be bright..
Many happy Holiday wishes for you guys and your families here on earth..
May your return trip be safe..
12/23/1999 Merry christmas to all and good work.
Attention at the Millennium Bug! by an italian boy 12/23/1999 Feliz Navidad, Joyeux Noel, and Merry Christmas from the Evans, Kelbers, and Hadsocks down here in Sunny Florida.
We are in awe of your mission and of the bravery and dedication of your crew.
Have a safe EVA and a safe trip home.
12/23/1999 To: STS-103 Crew and Mission Control From: Norybell Ayala; Puerto Rico Merry Christmas and God Bless all of you.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and Happy New Year, Good Luck with your mission and gook luck with your return home.
We believe in all the NASA missions.
From The Snell Family in Middleburg Florida.
12/23/1999 thank you 12/23/1999 I lived in Delray Beach during the '80s and early 90s and have seen another night launch and the Challenger attempt.
Currently I am visiting my folks in West Palm Beach, and we took time out to a visually quiet area out of town to view the magnificent launch, streaking colors in the night sky of the shuttle.
May you all have a productive trip on your mission and a safe return.
John Roman - roman@ti.com Dallas, TX 12/23/1999 Discovery Crew, I would like to wish all of you a merry chrismas.
I watched your launch from Merit Island on sunday.
Your lauch was great, it was the clearist night and lauch that I have ever seen.
As the President of the Phi Theta Kappa honor society at the University of Tampa, we all wish you a very merry chrismas and keep up the great work that makes us the world leader in space exploration.
12/23/1999 Have a nice christmas up there, and a safe return to earth.
Elisabeth (13) and Erik (11), Norway 12/23/1999 DEAR CREW, THE ACTUAL CHRISTMAS TREE IS YOUR SHUTTLE DANCING IN THE SKY.
OUR BEST WISHES EZIO E MONICA FULCHERI ITALY 12/23/1999 con nuestros mayores deseos de felicidad e imaginandonos lo maravilloso que ser contemplar la Tierra desde ahi.Felicidades 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas boys! Many greetings from Berlin.
Thanks to repairing (I hope that's the right English word) the Hubble-telescope.
We hope you're ready for Y2K.
See you on earth.
Florian and Mirco 12/23/1999 HELLO FROM CAPELLA (MY LAST NAME) HERE ON EARTH! CAN YOU SEE MY NAMESAKE? THE VERY, VERY BEST TO ALL OF YOU DURING THIS HOLIDAY! THANK-YOU FOR YOUR WORK.
JENNIFER CAPELLA 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays!! Can't think of a better place to spend the time, but in space taking in the beauty of it all.
Best wishes for your continuing task on the Hubble.
Has looked great on NASA TV so far.
12/23/1999 Forse lass nessuno di Voi conosce l'italiano, io comunque vi faccio i migliori Auguri di Buon Natale (passato lavorando in orbita !!) e felice Nuovo Millennio.
Max (Italy - Bolzano - South Tirol) 12/23/1999 Happy holidays! Thank you for your hard work, particularly since it caused you to spend the Christmas holiday away from your families.
How awesome it must feel to look down upon the beauty of the earth! Peace! Linda Cawley 12/23/1999 Freude herrscht! 12/23/1999 Your view from space shows all the countries of the world are as one, undivided by map lines.
May this be the message our planet understands from your mission, and all missions, as we enter a new millennium.
We'll be looking up for you tonight as you pass over west coast Florida.
Jeff Jensen, Treasure Island.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to all the Shuttle crew.
Thank you for all your efforts on behalf of the world.
We appreciate all your efforts with this and all missions.
Repairing the Hubbel telescope will enable us to continue our study of our universe and maybe others.
I pray that you have a safe return to your families.
May the New Year bring Peace and Happiness for all the world.
12/23/1999 dear astronauts: we hope you are having fun. thank you for fixing the telescope.
12/23/1999 Dear astronauts : Have a million of congratulations and God bless you and yours parents ....
Sinecerely , Enrique Martnez 21 yrs. old , Mechanic Engineer Student Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas , Mexico.
12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to the crew! Although you are far from your families this Christmas, please know the world is watching and thinking of you and sends holiday cheer your way.
I have been excitedly watching the live broadcasts of the spacewalk via www.space.com as I sit here at my computer and it's been truly amazing! (Don't tell my boss!) Keep up the excellent work and best wishes for a safe trip home.
Beth - Chicago, IL 12/23/1999 Hello, Astronauts! My name is Thomas and I live in Centreville, VA.
I am going to watch you on TV! hope everything is good up there! I hope you have fun and a Merry Christmas! From, Thomas 12/23/1999 Hello everybody I hope you find a time enjoing your trip, looking on our planet.
I wish you merry Christmas and all the best in the next year.
Thank you for your job.
Special greetings from Switzerland to Claude Nicollier (Hopp Schwiiz)! 12/23/1999 Wish you a very Happy Christmas! Abhijit 12/23/1999 ola eu dezejo-vos um bom voo e um, ano feliz.
E mais vosses estao com sorte de estar ai em cima.99/12/23 12/23/1999 Wow, my message is going to go up to outerspace.
I want to go too! Merry Christmas Astronauts, you have the COOLEST jobs! May the Force be with You! 12/23/1999 STS-103 Crewmembers: MERRY CHRISTMAS!!! I hope this message finds all well in space.
While we spend Christmas at home with our families, we appreciate your efforts on behalf of the United States and the ESA. Unfortunatly, we missed your launch by one day (stayed as long as we could before having to return to DFW), but have been following it closely.
My nephew has really enjoyed the experience of learning about the shuttle program and the Apollo missions.
He now wants to go to the Air Force Academy, pilot training, and flight test training so that he can one day apply to the astronaut program.
Your work not only accomplishes many great things, but almost more importantly, inspires youth to dream and accomplish more lofty goals.
Again, MERRY CHRISTMAS and thank you for everything.
Chris Broom FAA Liaison American Airlines 12/23/1999 Wanted to wish all of you a Merry Christmas.
I watched the live video feed of the new computer being put into Hubble.
Great job! Return homely quickly and safely.
12/23/1999 keep up the good work and watch out for Santa, I here he maybe in your neck of the woods!!!!!!! Thanks for the vews! Zoe 12/23/1999 Seasons greetings and Merry Christmas to the Discovery crew! You all do a great job! Regards to Claude Nicollier - we are very proud of you down here in Switzerland.
Good luck! 12/23/1999 Hallo Claude Nicollier, viele Grsse aus der Schweiz und viel Erfolg beir des Reparatur des Hubble Space Telescops. ich wnsche Ihnen eine Frohe Weihnacht und eine gute Rckkehr zur Erde.
Alles gute fr das Jahr 2000 und "Many happy landings" Stefan Engler 12/23/1999 Joyeux Nol  toute l'quipe et en particulier aux deux mangeurs de grenouilles ;-))) grald Collex/Geneva CH 12/23/1999 I would like to be the first person to send spam into space.
I have a website called superget.com that I would love everyone to visit.
It allows you to search all the different search engines from alta vista to yahoo.
To make this spam more authentic I'd like to tell you: Visit us at www.superget.com.
Come one come all to the greatest search engine on the planet.
And sometimes off the planet.
Hope your having fun.
Happy Holidays Steven Newman 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas! Have a safe landing! 12/23/1999 Thank you for commitment to excellence.
We are all proud of the job you are doing.
Happy space holliday.
We look forward to safe return.
12/23/1999 Schne Weihnachten und gute aussicht auf die schne Erde Claude Nicollier.
Gruss und einen guten Rutsch wnscht ihnen Ruedi aus Zrich.
12/23/1999 Have a safe flight and enjoy Christmas from a peacefull place.Wishing the whole crew a merry Xmas and a great start in the next Millennium....Andrew Colley,Switzerland 12/23/1999 Seasons greetings and Merry Greatings to the Discovery crew! You all do a great job! Regards to Claude Nicollier - we are very proud of you down here in Switzerland.
Good luck! 12/23/1999 Hello and Merry Christmas from Earth!!! My name is Clint and I just wanted to say thanks for all that you guys do.
I appreciate all the hard work that you guys accomplish.
You guys are my heroes.
I have always wanted to be an astronaut.
I spent seven years at space camp in Hunstville Alabama.
I am now in college and hope on day to be foloowing your footsteps.
Good luck on the mission and godspeed...we are all praying for you guys..
Take care and Merry Christmas!!! 12/23/1999 Congratulations on the great job with the Hubble.
Be careful that you don't bump Santa as he goes by with his sleigh full of toys: those will take a lot longer than 8 hours to catch.
Merry Christmas to all from Bill and Kitty Gietzen in Norton Shores, Michigan.
Ham call signs WA8HDG and KB8DPR 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, I want to wish you a very Merry Christmas.
Thank you for your hard work and dedication.
Everytime I watch the mission on TV, I almost burst with pride.
Everyone on earth is very proud of you! Have a safe trip home.
12/23/1999 God bless to those who take upon the challenge of risking life so that we may peer beyond our scope, into the void and perhaps glimpse life across time and distance beyond comprehension.
I gaze at my hand and wonder if the cells within realize that they are part of a greater entity, so too I wonder our place in this universe.
What strives you make bring us closer to this answer.
My personal thanks to you for your efforts! 12/23/1999 A Merry Christmas to the crew of the Discovery, especially to our swiss astronaut from Andrea Christian (3.5 years old), Berne, Switzerland, Europe, Earth.
He knows very good that Claude Nicollier is now in space and that he can follow your work on our computerscreen, his parents.
12/23/1999 The fowling message is in Portuguese.
Um Feliz Natal e um prspero Ano Novo, e que o vosso trabalho seja mais um passo para chegar s estrelas e muito particularmente aquela que  2000 anos esteve sobre Belem.
Victor Rocha Obs.
Why dont make a litle explosion with Sodio (Na) in the space, so we can see on the Eart ?? 12/23/1999 CONGRATULATIONS FOR YOUR PERFECT MISSION!!YOU ARE THE BEST!! MERRY MERRY CHRISTMAS TO THE CREW OF THE DISCOVERY FROM FABRIZIO ANTONUCCI AND FAMILY.
ROME.
ITALY.
12/23/1999 A VERY HAPPY HOLIDAY FOR ALL OF YOU. 12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS TO THE SHUTTLE CREW OF THE DISCOVERY.
WHAT A WONDERFUL VIEW YOU MUST BE EXPERIENCING.
THANK YOU FOR A JOB WELL DONE.
MARTHA AND DICK BEVAN 12/23/1999 Myi Zhelayem vam uspekhov! Best wishes from New Innovation in La Fayette Ga.
Joshua Dobos Ann Rucker 12/23/1999 Thank you for spending your holiday fixing the telescope for the rest of us.
We are grateful.
May God bless you.
12/23/1999 WISH U HAPPY CHRISTMAS.
12/23/1999 A VERY MERRY CHRISTMAS to all aboard STS 103, and a safe return to you all.
Let's get Hubble up and running again, and bringing us more discoveries and breathtaking images of the cosmos.
I would also like to take this oppertunity to remember those who have given their lives in the pursuit of space exploration.
From Jason, Shivonne, Kayleigh and Natasha Headington, Oxford.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Alan and Jacky, London, England.
PS Don't drop the screwdriver.
12/23/1999 Thank you for what you are doing for us! Tom 
From the first flights of the 1960s up to your present flight ,I cannot stop feeling that same thrill and pride that I felt as a youth .
Happy Holidays.
12/23/1999 An Claude Nicollier Alles Gute zu Weihnachten und ein glckliches Neues Jahr aus der Schweiz.
Moritz M. Inderbitzin 12/23/1999 Absolutely Awesome! I just wish I could watch it live.
My TV carrier doesn't cover it.
Damn good job guys.
Have a very Merry Christmas! The hearsts and souls of all America are with you and thinking of you constantly.
12/23/1999 Good Luck with the mission! Have a safe christmas!!! Say hello to the man on the moon from me! 12/23/1999 ich wnsche euch und euren familien frohe weihnachten und ein glckliches neues jahr kommt gesund wieder zurck good luck Michael Lackas 12/23/1999 A very merry Christmas from Sweden - good luck with your work - we are looking forward to get new pictures from Hubble.
Regards Per, Henrik and Mikael 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas 
12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew, I wish to all of you a merry Christmas and I would like to thank you for giving us so much dreams.
You are really the new Heroes of the end of this Millenium and of the newcoming one ...
Cher Claude je te souhaite depuis la Suisse le meilleur des Nols.
Sachant que tu dois en ce moment accomplir un rve fabuleux, tous mes voeux t'accompagnent.
Laurent Knoepfli, Fribourg, Suisse.
12/23/1999 Viva Internationale! Now that astronauts of international heritage are showing the rest of the world that it does pay to be peaceful and cooperative, may the fruits of your efforts prove as beneficial to the rest of us groundhuggers as does your comeraderie has for you! Merry Christmas to you all from one of French, Swiss, English and American decent.
Corby Calvin of Prairie Village, KS 12/23/1999 To Mr. Claude Nicollier Dear Sir while you are working,we do wish you calm hands and cool blood too.
Merry X-mas to you and your crew Juerg 
and may the New Millennium bring everything we wish for and more ! Keep up the Great Work.
Gordon Richards Toronto, Canada 12/23/1999 Hello I'm Maarten.
I wich jou a mary X-Mas and for the frence one Bon Nol.
I'm from the Netherlands(les Pays-Bas).
I'm not to good in Frence.
I hope your mision will be a succes.
And that you come home safe.
Ofcours I also wanrt to be an astronaut.
I hope the job is not to diffecult(you are profs so I have confidence).And ofcours a happy new year(bonne anne).:) 12/23/1999 Hope Ya'll have a Merry Christmas ! We in the state of Tennessee are all proud of each one of you.
Good Luck !!! 12/23/1999 Bonne chance a toutes! Gabrielle Andri Kurt Muehlheim 12/23/1999 your work in space is , i think, the ultimate challenge and the most important thing any person can really do in theyr lifetime to serve the future of mankind.
GRATEFULLY YOURS GEORGE PERRONE 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from all of us down here at Pearl Harbor Naval Shipyard and Intermediate Maintainance Activity....ShipSup office.
Keep up the good work! 12/23/1999 The Christmas Carollers are outside singing - and Santa's sleighbells will soon be ringing - The Children only have one wish - and that is for a little gift - Children hang stockings at the fire - for a present that they will admire - they go to bed and have a sleep - to hear the little reindeers feet - everyone has something to say from down here - have a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
Kirsty Graham (age 11) Alloa, Scotland 12/23/1999 Hello, my name is Sebastian.
Do the best up there, to let Hubble make new great pictures from the end of the univers.
It must be an amazing view down to earth.
I wish I could see it with my own eys.
Very best X-Mas wishes to the Discovery Crew, their families and to the Mission Control Crew from Rgen, its the biggest Isle, in the North of Germany.
Hope youll return savely to earth.
Bye and have nice days in Space Sebastian 12/23/1999 Here's wishing all of you the most enjoyable and enviable Merry Christmas of all.
As you circle this beautiful earth of ours, you will be viewed as the Christmas Star of hope by the world and with pride by the citizens of the United States of America.
12/23/1999 Dear brother.
I wish you a very happy Christmus and a happy newyear.
My whole famely will think to you on Christmus evening.
Have a good voyage, boys! Greatings of Theo Scheepers, Holland.
12/23/1999 Boldog Karcsonyt! Merry Christmas! Klara and George Reti from Budapest, Hungary 12/23/1999 Happy Christmas and God bless from Bruce Barbara Samantha 
May God bless you.
DL Blair Microfilm Department Gloria, Angie, Peggy and Jan 12/23/1999 Right on guys, You have the best view in the Universe.
Keep up the great job, be carefull, and have a wonderfull Christmas.
Looking forward to Hubbles new pictures.
Diff************ Boise ID. 12/23/1999 We commend you guys for the sacrifices you make and for doing such a great job! Merry Christmas and a Happy New Millennium! Mark Gagnon Seattle, WA 12/23/1999 To the crew of STS-103 I hope that when Christmas arrives in many parts of the world, you can look down on this planet we call earth, I send a message of peace on earth and good will to men.
This may be an old saying but it still means what it says.
To me your crew IS closer to God and in that respect you have a special gift in that for me and others I hope, you serve as a link from the heavens to earth.
Although you are away from your families, friends, and admirers, you nonetheless are held dear to our hearts.
In your own special way up there, have the Merriest of Christmas and have a very special trip home to enjoy the Year 2000.
I refuse to say the " M " word.
Godspeed Dean Yemm 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas / Happy Holidays in Space! Good luck in your mission to fix Hubble so we can see into the past and thus, better understand the furure.
DM Ealley 12/23/1999 hi a very merry christmas.instead of decorating a christmas tree you got the chance to decorate the hubble space telescope :-) .thanks for the lovely christmas present.--from adheraj,new delhi 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays to the crew of the shuttle Discovery and your family! I want to thank you all for the great work you are doing.
Your work is important to mankind.
Happy Holidays! Rob Segredo 12/23/1999 Good luck guys.
You did a fantastic job.
As a scientist, I am very proud and grateful for what you achieved.
Merry X-mas from the Netherlands wim engels, biochemist maastricht university the netherlands 12/23/1999 I hope your task will be succesfull upp there in the space, where so few of us here on earth can visit.
You are servicing a manmade vehicle which can see beyond times we ever cuold emagine.
I hope that everyone of you, up there, could comprehend the meaning of X-mas.Hope you return safely Last but not least:I envy you! You can spent a X-mas where so few can do! 12/23/1999 Really interesting video on CNN of spacewalk, and I read about spacewalk being like a ballet, that was interesting.
Good luck, you guys.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year.
Beautiful pictures.
There is a lot on the Internet about your mission.
signed, John Delmos in Berkeley 12/23/1999 Wishing all of you a wonderful Christmas, a great New Year and a safe return to Earth .
PEACE 12/23/1999 Dear STS-103 -- What a joy it is to watch you all on this amazing mission.
The happiness seen on faces of all involved effects everyone.
It must be nice to look forward to your job each day.
We love you.
Merry Christmas! You are the envy of many of us in this human existence.
Our prayers and heartfelt thanks.
Arlene Anderson 12/23/1999 Desde el pequeo Pas de Chile un Carioso Saludo de Navidad para los Abnegados y valientes astronautas del Shuttle, espero que al pasar sobre nuestro hermoso pais, recuerden este e-mail y miren hacia aca, habra un chileno deseandoles lo mejor para su misin y rogando que esta sea un xito para que Uds.puedan volver pronto a sus hogares, junto a sus Familias y puedan disfrutar de la compaia de sus seres queridos en esta Navidad. con todo afecto.
Rafael Gonzlez M. Santiago de Chile, Diciembre 23 de 1999.
12/23/1999 Hello up there im sat here feeling tired after my works christmas party, and for some reason all i can think about this christmas is you lot up there looking at our tiny planet, i only wish you could send me the feeling of how humble you must feel up there, ive only ever been 35 thousand feet up in a 747 looking down on our citys.
I wish you a Happy New Year from Bournemouth in England.
If you can see me up there im the one with the silly hat.
Good Luck Dave 12/23/1999 From the Heart of the people of the little planet we call Earth, here is a wish for all the Joy, Happiness, Good Fortune and Everlasting Peace in the Universe to come to each of your Hearts, in gratitude for your gift of space service.
The world rejoices in your well-being.
Thank you for living a life in which you express your excellence in a way that benefits all humankind.
"Happy trails" as they say in the Westerns! 12/23/1999 Ein gesegnetes Weihnachtsfest der gesamten Crew der Discovery und eine gesunde Heimkehr aus dem All wnschen Irene, Gerhard Christopher und Stephan Prag aus sterreich !!! 12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts, far above the earth Merry Christmas we want to send you from Germany.
We wish, that you can enjoy the Christmas later together with your family, after you have finished the mission successfully and after having a lucky return back to earth.
Do you have a Christmas Tree on board? Many regards from Vivien (9 years old) and Sren (6 years old) 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and my best wishes for a successful fixing of this "eye" of the Universe.
ELIAS GREECE 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, Hope you all are enjoying this Christmas morning in space.
Please get the telescope fixed.
From Quartarious and Quaneisha Bell 12/23/1999 To the crew of Space Shuttle Discovery: If "Giving" is the true meaning of christmas then all of you should feel great as you are all giving the world a great christmas present.
Thanks for the hard work and dedication.
Have a great Christmas on orbit and a safe landing to finish off the old year.
regards Roger Yurkiw Beamsville, Ontario Canada 12/23/1999 You all did a good jop up there !!! Please come back safely !!! Merry chrismas and a healthy and a peacefull 2000, for you and your relatives.
12/23/1999 Let me see...a choice of spending the Xmas night eating turkey with the folks or floating above the Earth in the Shuttle? Merry Xmas...enjoy your turkey upon return.
Francisco 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to the crew of Discovery.
You're in a position to assure every child in the world that Santa is really on his way.
:-) 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to you in the vanguard of mankinds awakening to its real potential beyond our mother earth.
Because of you the world is truely becoming one family around one table.
To those who went before you and those who will come after, we owe our thanks and blessings! Merry Christmas! 12/23/1999 Frohe Weihnachten von Mnchen aus ins All.
Kommen Sie alle unversehrt zurck.
M.Krnzle 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Germany to all the women and men who could not be at home.
This includes you, the service teams and everybody, who works for the "earthlings".
Also Greetings to all Aliens you meet (or met)! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas.
Sorry you can't be on Earth for Christmas, but you are doing a good job fixing the Hubble.
Have Fun and have a happy new year.
12/23/1999 Joyeux nel  claude Nicollier qui  peu etre la chance de voir le pre nel de la haut et bon retour .
12/23/1999 Your dedication and committment,and that of all the NASA employees,contractors and sub-contractors, both current and former, have allowed the USA to grow and prosper.
We thank you for your risk and effort.
God Bless you and protect you.
God Bless America! 12/23/1999 Space Shuttle Crew: We are praying that you will have a safe mission 
Merry Christmas from all us disabled vets across the world.
12/23/1999 hallo herr nicollier viele grsse aus der schweiz.mein name ist widmer anton und ich komme aus grenchen(so).in der letzten zeit verfolge ich die hubble-service mission.ich finde es super das ein schweizer in der raumfahrt eine wichtige rolle bernimmt. ich wnsche ihnen gutes gelingen und trotz der arbeit schne festtage und alles gute im nchsten jahrtausend und hoffe man hrt noch viel von ihrer arbeit in der nasa. mit freundlichen grssen anton widmer 12/23/1999 Joy to the World! and the Solar System and the Universe.
MERRY CHRISTMAS and an EXPANSIVE NEW YEAR! -Samson 
And best sucess in space.
Have a nice trip back to home.
This wishes are from Denis Kramer(12years old, I will become an astrophysicist when I grow up).
P.S.
Do you have a christmas tree in the shuttle? 12/23/1999 Discovery Crew, Have a Merry Xmas a safe journey home.
Long live Hubble! Wave to us when you pass over California.
Take care, Rene, Lidy, Matthew, and Andrew C. 12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS TO ALL OF YOU FROM "STUDIO LOGOS" CREW FROM ITALY.
NICO STEFANO GUIDO PAOLO MARINA BARBARA FANCA GILBERTO CRISTINA RAFFAELLA MARISTELLA 12/23/1999 Best regards and good luck from the Austrian Society for Aerospace Medicine (ASM) - we are keeping our fingers crossed If anybody of you will find some leisure time for this, please check out our website: http://www.asm.at May the force will be with you!! Helmut G. Hinghofer-Szalkay, MD General Manager, ASM http://www-ang.kfunigraz.ac.at/~hinghofe 12/23/1999 merry christmas and a happy new year to all of you in space and remember safety first 12/23/1999 merry christmas and a happy new year to all of you in space and remember safety first 12/23/1999 Hallo, merry Xmas from Italy 
12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew: What better place to stay, just before the dawn of the year 2000, than in orbit around the Earth? I envy you.
I wish you a happy and safe Christmas and New Year, and a successful outcome for your mission.
Sincerely, Elizabeth (age 16) 12/23/1999 Did you see Santa while you were in Space? 12/23/1999 Greetings to you from PETERSFIELD U.K.
The very best of luck to you.
A happy New Year to You and a safe journey home.
John Williams.(Too old to join you,alas) 12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS, HAPPY NEW YEAR AND HAVE A SAFE TRIP HOME 12/23/1999 Have a very merry X-mas there up in space!! Marc Winkelman The Netherlands 12/23/1999 All the best you all this Christmas.
From all of Yorkshire(GB) 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from a very appreciative and proud american.
I applaud your efforts to repair this telescope and help us continue to unlock the mystery of the universe.
My 3yr old daughter Amanda and I watched the launch and she was real exicted! maybe a future asrtonaught? God Bless Larry Starkes 12/23/1999 My son, Sean who is seven, and I watched you work on the hubble yesterday and it was "tight" (his word for far out).
Eight plus hours is a full days work!! We wish the whole crew a very Merry Christmas and a very happy New Year.
My son also wants you folks to keep clear of Santa's sleigh and if Santa sleigh need repairs, you the crew that could handle it!! Thnak-you! Mike and Sean Walsh 12/23/1999 To all the members of the Discovery Team: Wishing you and your families a very merry Christmas! Thank you so much for your gift of sight of the heavens! Yours Truly, David and Maryellen Knox 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays from the Army Reserve here in Rutland Vermnt.
Our prayers and thoughts are with you at this time and we say a little prayer for your families.
You are blessed to see the earth in it's full glory without the borders man has imposed on it.
Your mission enables the rest of the world to be in space even if it's through your eyes.
One can imagine peace throughout the world by viewing our wonderful world miles above.
Thank you for giving us a glimpse of the stars! SFC Joseph Dowling 
I beleave you seven have the best Christmas gift of all, being able to view our small world from above.
Best of luck and Merry Christmas... 12/23/1999 muy feliz navidad a ustedes con cario desde santiago de chile 12/23/1999 ABSOLUTELY CRAZY BEYOND BELIEF! MERRY CHRISTMAS! Adriano, Bassano del Grappa, Italy 12/23/1999 Dear shuttle crew, All of us send our warmest wishing for a wonderful Christmas and a great New Year.
We realize that all of you are away from your loved ones at this time and want you to know that we appreciate all the work you are doing and the sacrifices you are making to advance the science of space exploration that will benefit the entire world.
May God bless you all and bring you home soon.
Rick, Chris, 
On Christmas Day could you please say a prayer up there for all of us down here on Earth - for Peace On Earth - just like the angels proclaimed ages ago? How awesome it must be to see our Earth from where you are.
Never forget it.
I wish you continued success! Merry Christmas - safe arrival home.
Alison from Long Island, New York (give us a wave) 12/23/1999 I certainly can't imagine the rush of thoughts and feelings which must come over you when you have a chance to relax and contemplate exactly where you are.
But I am envious for at least one reason.
Perhaps better than any place on earth, you are in the best place to truly be quiet and to allow God's presence to penetrate you and let you know He is God.
I pray that you are able to experience, if only for a moment, the immeasureable peace and deep joy of this season.
I also pray that while you are gone, your families are held safe within His arms and also know of our Savior's peace.
Thank you for valuing your duty above your desires.
And may God bless you...everyone.
12/23/1999 I wish you a Merry Christmas even if you are far from home.
Thanks for you work, so that we will be able to see the wonderful HST pictures soon !! Have a nice time in space and greetings from Palermo, Sicily (Italy) Gaetano Bonanno 12/23/1999 From NASA Headquarters Public Affairs: Thanks, guys! You make us all remember why we come to work every day...you make us proud.
We've been getting lots of "atta-boy" e-mails here too.
Best wishes to all of you.
12/23/1999 To the crew of Discovery - Thanks for spending your Christmas on orbit, repairing Hubble; that's what I call 'above and beyond' the call of duty.
Of course, if you'd rather be home for the holidays, I'm sure I could hustle up a few volunteers to fill in for you :-) Merry Christmas et Joyeux Noel, Steve Zimmermann Longmont, Colorado 12/23/1999 Thanks for all your hard work! Merry Christmas and we hope to see you soon.
Good work there !!! 12/23/1999 Stay Safe, and Merry Christmas 12/23/1999 Be carefull where you poke those mince pies, I'm sure you know how much that bloody thing cost! Merry Christmas, take it as easy as you can...
Get home safe.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas, and have a safe journey home.
Whatever you do in the next few days don't drop the screwdriver! 12/23/1999 I wish to all Shuttle Crew warmest thoughts and best wishes for a wonderful Christmas and a very happy New Millenium.
Kind regards, Vera Lucia Simoes 12/23/1999 We hope you have a Merry Christmas up in space! Andrea, Emily, Katie and Mom in Columbus, Ohio will be thinking of you on the holiday and throughout your mission.
Can you bring us back a star for our Christmas tree? Merry Christmas! 12/23/1999 Greetings to the stars,and to you!!!! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas to everyone up there! 12/23/1999 The Goddard Space Flight Center Education Office staff and the thousands of teachers and tens of thousands of students we support, congratulate you on your success, and thank you for the opportunity you have provided to inspire our youth and teachers to be pioneers in the 21st Century.
Thanks also for sacrificing your holidays and family on behalf of the American public.
Your efforts are very much appreciated.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas from Mary-Kathryn 
We know you will miss your families on Christmas day, but we also know that being in space on Christmas is something special that you will never forget.
Watch out for Y2K! Ha! Ha! 12/23/1999 I believe one of the greatest accomplishments of this century was to see Earth from a distance.
Thanks to you and NASA for the work on the Hubble telescope, so we may continue to explore our universe.
Merry Christmas 
I'll be the one waving to you.
All the best, Mark Morris / klmmorris@home.com P.S.
Where do you hang the mistletoe in zero gravity? 12/23/1999 THANK YOU! 12/23/1999 YOU GUYS ARE GREAT.
THERE ARE A LOT OF PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY THAT DO NOT KNOW HOW LUCKY THAT THEREARE MAN LIKE YOU TO GO INTO SPACE AND DO THE THINGS THAT YOU DO.I ONLY WISH THAT I WAS YOUNG AGAIN TO BE ONE OF YOU I CHECK THE SPACE WEB SITE EVERY DAY TO TRY AND KEEP UP TO THE THINGS THAT ARE GOING ON.
GOOD LUCK AND COME HOME SAFE I WILL BE WATCHING YOU PAUL RICCOBENE 12/23/1999 Dear Shuttle Crew: Enjoy your "Home Away From Home" for the holidays :-).
We think you are doing a great job and making a huge sacrifice for the benefit of all mankind.
It would seem appropriate, if you have the time, for you to sing, hum or whistle the song "Nearer My God to Thee" sometime on Christmas Day.
Ed 
My Dad and I have been watching your mission on the web.
You are doing a great job and we are all proud of you.
I am looking forward to the great pictures we will get from the Space Telescope now that you have fixed it.
Merry Christmas Discovery crew!! 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas gang, I'm very proud of you!!! Hope the stars shine bright for you on this special night as you gaze amoung the universe and witness God's greatnest.
You are truly blessed to have such a wonderful view - now you know how Santa must feel looking upon sweet Mother Earth.
Merry Christmas and get home safely.
12/23/1999 Dear Astronauts: Joyeux Noel and Merry Christmas! As always, we are proud of you and fascinated by your work on behalf of humankind.
This is especially so on this, the last space mission of the 20th century, and one which repairs Hubble, our eye on the universe.
Please be vigilant in your duties.
We look forward to your safe return.
Sincerely, Joseph Cronin 12/23/1999 Hey ....
MERRY CHRISTMAS !!!!!! Keep up the great work.
I wish I where there to help you.
Anybody up there need a analyst\programmer, carry your luggage, tell you whats outside the widow? Naw all things aside.....
have a good one.
12/23/1999 Hi Shuttle Crew! Good work up there.
I wish you a Merry Christmas and a good trip back to earth!! Wish to work a astronaut in space via hamradio, perhaps from International Space Station later......
The station is already on my new QSL-card hihi...
Greatings from The Netherlands, Han van Ulsen (PE1PNB) http://www.xs4all.nl/~hanvu 12/23/1999 Thank you, thank you, thank you for the wonderful job you did fixing the Hubble.
Our prayers are with you for a wonderful Christmas and a safe journey home.
Mary Gruman, Aberdeenn, SSD 12/23/1999 Happy Holidays!!!! It must be fun being in space.
I really need you to answer this question.
What would happen if you poured water onto the surface of the moon or poured water in space while being outside? PLEASE ANSWER! Happy New year and hope you come home safely!!!!!!!!!! Victoria Gonzalez 12/23/1999 Hi!! I did a report on the Hubble and I think it is a great thing!!!!!!! Keep up the good work.
Dan Roditski PS Please mial me and tell me what it is like in space.
HAPPY HOLLIDAYS 12/23/1999 A very Merry Christmas and a blessed New Year to brave adventurers who have struck out and paved the way for the people of the new Millenium.
12/23/1999 To the crew on Hubble servicing mission SM3A.
I have been particularly interested in this mission due to the HST being involved.
I am doing a research project on Edwin Hubble and have been reading everything on Mr. Hubble and the HST.
As a former US Navy submariner I know what it is like to only be away from home on Chistmas but to also not be able to contat home on such an important day.
I spent Chistmas ,92 underwater somewhere in the Med.
I noticed that it brings a crew together and makes special bond that can never be replaced.
Happy Holidays and Merry Chirstmas from Conway, Massachusetts Quentin, Elizabeth and our new baby girl Abigail 12/23/1999 To wish you a very Merry Christmas and to say that you are letting us see what a bright future the new century has in store for us! What a time we live in ! Safe return.
A Canadian Lorna Helen Wills 12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Discovery Crewmembers! I wish I could be up there with you.
Dear NASA,all I want for Christmas is......
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas Discovery! What a wonderful vantage point to see God's handywork! Please be careful and may God grant you a truly wonderful Christmas.
I will pray that all goes well and you return safely when your mission is completed.
Thanks for all you do to help expand our frontiers.
Regina Bonner 7th grade Math Teacher 12/23/1999 Hello there in space! My family and myself wish everybody occupied with this project a merry christmas and a splendid new year! Keep up the good work and a save journey home.
When you thake a good look to Zwolle in the netherlands you can see us waving to you all.
Vera Holwerda Holland 12/23/1999 BOG Vas pozivi.!! Zahvaljuem, Vama svima, na ovom sto ste nam dali.H V A L A .!! Mi smo uz Vas. i.... molimo se Bogu da "Hubleka" osposobite.
Iz male drzavice u veliko Srce Vase,za dobrobit ljudskog roda.
Pokorni, sa kuglice Zemaljske.
12/23/1999 TO ALL THE MEN IN SPACE WE HEAR THAT YOU'LL HAVE A GOOD LOOK OUT FOR SANTA WHEN HE IS OUT RUNING FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE,PLEASE SEE THAT HE DON'T MISS OUR HOUSE FOR OUR MOMY IS FAR AWAY FROM US THIS YEAR .
JUST LIKE YOU ARE FAR AWAY FROM YOUR KIDS,BUT SHE IS HERE IN THE STATES (WASHINGTON).i KNOW YOU'LL ALL HAVE A TERKY DINNER UP THIER AND WE'LL HAVE ONE DOWN HERE TOO.
MY GRANDPAP IS SENDING THIS TO YOU FOR US MY NAME IS AUTUMN,AND MY SISTER NAME IS KAYLA.WE LOOK UP IN THE SKY AT NITE AND DON'T SEE YA,BUT GRANDPA SAY TO SAY HI ANY WAY TO YOU- MARRY X-MESS FROM ME AND K TOO .
AND MAY GOD BLESS YOU ALL UP THERE, FOR HE IS WHATCHING YOU TO,BYE BYE AUTUMN AND KAYLA 12/23/1999 Dear Crew, Just a note to say "Thanks" and God Bless all of you and your families while your up in action repairing the Hubble Telescope.
While all of us will be off for Christmas you folks will be taking care of business.
I am also part of the support team here at KSC being a buyer for flight and GSE hardware for the Shuttle under the USA/NASA SFOC contract.
Its always been an honor and blessing to put my small part of my work to keep all of you with safe and high performance flight and support hardware for all the shuttles.
My prayers will be with all of you and you guys are doing a great job!! Take Care 
Merry Christmas and happy new year from Brazil.
12/23/1999 HELLO I HOPE YOU CAN FIX THE HUBBEL AND SPENDING CHRISTMAS IN SPACE IS SOMETHING SPECIAL.
SO WE HERE IN STANGE CITY IN NORWAY WISH THE SHUTTLE CREW A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW MILLENIUM TAKE CARE GRETTINGS FROM PETTER MARTINSEN 2335 STANGE NORWAY 12/23/1999 Here, from Brazil, we all wish you merry christmas and happy new year.
12/23/1999 Hello, i wish you all Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year from Germany.
At this Time i begin to look at the Deep Sky with a Teleskope from Vixen NP-R114s.
I hope that i can also see the Stars and Galaxies.
12/23/1999 Merry Christmas and be careful up there.
God bless you all.And have a safe trip back to earth.
12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS! Thank you for fixing the telescope, your on the news every day.
Detroit, MI. Amy Goodman 12/23/1999 TO ALL THE SHUTTLE CRW, CHRISTMAS GREETTINGS.WE JUST WANTED YOU ALL TO KNOW HOW PROUD WE ARE OF YOU FOR DOING SUCH AN IMPORTANT JOB FOR THE USA AND FOR THE SACRIFICE OF BEING AWAY FROM YOUR LOVED ONES ON AT THIS SPECIAL TIME OF YEAR.
OUR THOUGTS AND PRAYERS WILL BE FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILIES!! THANK YOU SO MUCH THE HAUSNER AND BROWN FAMILIES 12/23/1999 Obviously you don't know me, but hey who's worried! I have to covey my total jealousy of where you are right now.
You are seeing something which I shall never have the chance to see, there isn't much call for a new graduate geologist in space! Still I hope everything has gone smoothly for you, I'm sure it will have done, there have been no news reports in the UK to say otherwise.
I would do almost anything to be able to have the chance to experience what you're doing and seeing, I shall just have to imagine! I wish all of you, all the luck in the world for your future missions! Don't forget if there's a spare seat, I'll be more than happy to fill it!! I hope you all have a fantastic Christmas and an equally good New Year.
Best wishes to you all.
Miss Louisa Groves.
(22,West Sussex, England).
12/23/1999 MERRY CHRISTMAS HAVE A GREAT SPACE WALK AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR.
PLEASE FIX THE HUBBLE TELESCOPE SO THAT THE WORLD CAN SEE FUTURE PICTURES FROM OUTER SPACE.
I AM LOOKING FORWARD TO THESE PICTURES.
PLEASE TELL ME IF YOU SEE SANTA CLAUS DELIVERING HIS PRESENTS ON CHRISTMAS EVE.
DOES HE LOOK HAPPY? PLEASE WISH HIM A GREAT CHRISTMAS IF YOU SEE HIM. Q.
HOW IS THE SPACE SHUTTLE POWERED, FROM LIFT-OFF TO OUTER SPACE.
ONCE IN ORBIT HOW MUCH FUEL IS REQUIRED TO MAINTAIN ORBIT.
THANK YOU 
If I had one wish , It would be to be able to work outside the shuttle on the Hubble telescope with you.
The pictures of you all working out there is the most awesome sight I will ever see in my lifetime.
It is like looking into
