The Corporation for National Service banner, click here for the home page.
News : Fact Sheets : National Service And Faith-Based Organizations Across the country, faith-based organizations are on the front lines, working to improve lives in some of the hardest pressed communities in America.
Giving vital help to these efforts are the volunteers supported by the Corporation for National and Community Service.
Created by Congress in 1993, the Corporation provides opportunities for 1.5 million Americans of all ages to engage in service to address the nation's pressing unmet needs through three programs: AmeriCorps, Service-Learning and the National Senior Service Corps.
Tens of thousands of these volunteers serve with faith-based organizations.
Habitat for Humanity, Catholic Network of Volunteer Service, Lutheran Social Services, and churches of numerous denominations all have recognized the value that national service volunteers bring to their organizations' missions.
Volunteers are helping to strengthen communities while providing affordable housing, food, job skills, education, and other support to people in need
.
National service support comes in different ways.
AmeriCorps members and Senior Corp volunteers provide full-time or intensive service to faith-based organizations, which often operate with limited resources.
In addition, they help faith-based organizations accomplish more by recruiting, training, and supervising additional volunteers.
Each AmeriCorps member recruits an average of 12 new volunteers.
Helping Faith-Based Organizations Get Things Done The Corporation for National Service supports faith-based and nonprofit groups through three initiatives: * First, the National Senior Service Corps involves more than half a million volunteers ages 55 and older who serve communities through the Foster Grandparent, RSVP and Senior Companion Programs.
More than 45,000 Senior Corps volunteers serve with 122 local projects sponsored by faith-based organizations.
Last year these volunteers provided more than 10.8 million service hours to organizations including Catholic Charities, the Salvation Army, Lutheran Social Services and Interfaith Ministries.
Foster Grandparent volunteers and Senior Companion volunteers with faith-based projects helped more than 41,000 children and adults in need during 1999-2000.
* Second, AmeriCorps, the domestic Peace Corps, gives citizens the opportunity to engage in full-time service to their community.
Working through more than 1,000 national and local nonprofit and faith-based organizations, AmeriCorps members tutor and mentor at-risk children; make schools and neighborhoods safer, build homes, and do other things that make communities stronger.
Of the 50,000 AmeriCorps positions this year, more than 6,000 are in faith-based organizations.
* Finally, Learn and Serve America supports service-learning programs in schools and community organizations that help more than one million students from kindergarten through college meet community needs while learning the habits of good citizenship.
K-12 grants go to state and local education agencies and nonprofit organizations, many of which in turn work with or have programs located at faith-based sponsors.
Through these grants and others to institutions of higher education, tens of thousands of students carry out service-learning projects with faith-based organizations.
Examples of Success *
In partnership with Habitat for Humanity, more than 600 AmeriCorps members help build homes for low-income families across the nation.
With AmeriCorps members providing leadership and recruiting additional volunteers, Habitat has been able to dramatically increase the number of homes they build.
AmeriCorps members have served 1.3 million hours, directly supervised 241,000 Habitat volunteers, and built more than 2,000 houses that otherwise would not have been built.
Habitat's founder Millard Fuller initially opposed getting involved with AmeriCorps but is now is an ardent champion who wants an AmeriCorps member for every Habitat chapter in the country.
More than 300 Senior Corps volunteers are also serving with Habitat.
* More than 800 Retired and Senior Volunteer Program (RSVP) volunteers serve with Catholic Social Services in Lansing, Michigan, where they help to prevent truancy, provide clothing for the homeless, build homes, and work with the homeless.
The program director says "RSVP is a cost-effective way to solve critical problems in education, public safety, the environment and other critical human needs.
I am proud to work with all of them."
* Last year The Catholic Network for Volunteer Service placed over 2,000 AmeriCorps members through 120 national, state, and local faith-based organizations, including Jesuit Volunteer Corps, the Christian Appalachian Project, Lutheran Volunteer Corps, and Holy Cross Associates.
Across the country, these AmeriCorps members recruited an additional 35,000 volunteers, assisted over 30,000 homeless people, taught and/or tutored thousands of school children, and helped more than 8000 low-income pregnant women access pre-natal care and other services.
* Working to meet the educational needs of disadvantaged youth and their families, the Notre Dame Mission Volunteer Program involves more than 100 AmeriCorps members each year in tutoring children, providing literacy and GED classes to single mothers and high school dropouts, teaching English as a Second Language to immigrants, and operating after-school programs at seven sites: Boston, Baltimore, Washington DC, Seattle, the San Francisco Bay Area, Apopka, FL, and Cincinnati, OH.
* Through the Church Council of Greater Seattle, eight AmeriCorps*VISTA members are developing partnerships between churches, schools and youth organizations to create and strengthen existing in-school and after-school tutoring programs to improve reading and math proficiency by K-5 students.
* Since 1996, a total of 36 RSVP and Senior Companion projects have received Faith in Action grants from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.
Through this effort, senior volunteers assist persons living at home with disabilities, including frail older persons, and work in formal partnership with faith congregations, health and social services provider agencies.
* In Minnesota, Lutheran Services in America sponsors 425 Senior Companions, who help 1,500 clients live independently by assisting them with daily living activities.
They also help 150 developmentally disabled clients live in their homes and provided respite care to 350 caregivers.
* Xavier University of Louisiana, the only Catholic historically Black university, involves 750 students in service-learning projects through co-curricular service and 20 courses, spanning 12 academic disciplines.
Projects include tutoring in math and reading, teaching computer literacy, assisting with youth entrepreneurship, implementing violence prevention projects, supporting neighborhood gardening, and helping public housing residents to become first time homeowners.
* The National Jewish Coalition for Literacy works in eight cities to mobilize tutors and reading partners for children in kindergarten through third grade.
In addition to serving as the primary conduit between the organized Jewish community and literacy programs in these cities, AmeriCorps Promise Fellows help promote involvement with childhood literacy programs within various Jewish community institutions.
"AmeriCorps has earned the respect of politicians of all ideological stripes, community and religious leaders, and those who benefit from the services provided."
- Rev. Theodore Hesburgh, president emeritus of the University of Notre Dame.
"
Habitat for Humanity and AmeriCorps have much in common.
We share a goal of community building.
We share a belief in self-help and service.
AmeriCorps is a partner in the movement to eliminate poverty housing."
- Millard Fuller, founder and president, Habitat for Humanity International "With AmeriCorps members in our program, we've been able to expand our services and reach 10 times the number of people we had been."
- Sister Katherine Corr, SND, executive director of the Notre Dame Mission Volunteers, a national program based in Baltimore, MD.
AmeriCorps | Senior Corps | MLK Day of Service Learn 
