Welcome to California California Home Welcome to California - images of Golden Gate Bridge, ocean sunset, waterfall, flowers, and city skyline CCRC Home Find a Facility Find California City/County Information Senior Information Frequently Asked Questions Questions to ask at Communities Continuing Care Resident's Bill of Rights Publication 240 Comments or Questions? CDSS Department Seal Continuing Care __________ search (_) My CA Resident Home Page As a prospective or current resident of a senior living community, you may be interested in the services provided to members of each residential community.
CCRCs offer distinct alternatives within the housing industry.
This website will assist you in selecting a CCRC that best meets your individual needs.
You will be able to find information about facilities, their locations and surrounding neighborhoods, current disclosure statements and other useful information.
There are links to California cities and counties, to senior related sites, and to other care associations.
Because you may expend a significant portion of your savings and future income to purchase care in a CCRC with the expectation of receiving that care for the rest of your life, it is important to learn as much about a facility as possible before making any financial commitments.
Each provider must have disclosures available to prospective residents concerning the terms of agreements made between the residents and the continuing care provider, and concerning the operations of the individual CCRC.
Residents Choose to Live In CCRCs for Many Reasons
CCRC residents frequently choose a facility to be near family, to feel secure that their future needs will be met, and for many other reasons.
Generally, continuing care providers seek to provide for the physical, mental, and spiritual aspects of a resident's life.
Selecting a Continuing Care Retirement Community
CCRC providers are authorized by the Department of Social Services, to contract for the provision of care for more than one year.
Generally, this includes three levels of care: independent, personal care or assisted living services, and nursing care.
Most CCRCs require an entrance fee to be paid by the applicant upon admission.
Life care facilities, a type of CCRC, provide all levels of care, including acute care and physicians' and surgeon's services for the duration of the resident's life.
Skilled nursing services must be provided in a facility located on the CCRC premises and monthly care fees cannot be increased based on the resident's level of care.
Additionally, life care providers must subsidize residents who become financially distressed.
All CCRCs are different and offer unique living environments.
CCRC's claim that they provide security, independence, access to health care, companionship of friends and neighbors of similar age, access to community facilities, privacy, and the pursuit of lifelong interests.
Consider the community size when making your decision; do you prefer a large community with many options and services, or something smaller and more individualized? Would you prefer a more "formal" environment or are you a casual person at heart? There are CCRCs of all types and sizes, both high rise and single family dwellings.
Some are in urban settings and others are in more rural settings.
Another factor to consider is the geographic location.
California has a variety of climates, from coastal to inland valleys, to deserts.
There are CCRCs located in each climate-in all parts of California.
If you are interested in living at a CCRC, you should be able to find one where you will feel most at home.
Back to Top of Page 2003 State of California.
Conditions of Use Privacy Policy The content found herein may not necessarily represent the views and opinions of the Schwarzenegger Administration
