California Wing [ptroff.gif] Home [ptroff.gif]
The cadets arrived on June 21^st and will conclude their training on July 2^nd.
Operations Center for this National Flight Academy - Glider is at Civil Air Patrol's Squadron 41 Headquarters situated on the Los Alamitos JFTB.
Activity Director is Col Ernie Pearson, Director of California Wing Glider Program.
This activity is one of many sponsored by National Headquarters, Civil Air Patrol.
Its objective is to provide cadets (ages 14 and over) quality flight experience through soaring.
Lessons learned and flying skills acquired can be applied to future powered flight training.
National Flight Academy - Glider training locations include California, Colorado, Georgia, New Mexico, and Wisconsin.
Soaring is ideal for cadet orientation to flying.
Gliders are simple and straightforward with just the basic instruments and controls.
Flying silently, like a bird, with the blue sky above and the earth below in its entire splendor stretching towards the horizon.
All this while experiencing and mastering the principles of flight by maneuvering the aircraft in the direction of one's choice.
The cadets will be receiving their flight training in one or both gliders (Blanik l-23 and Schweizer 2-33) being used.
These gliders will be towed and released at an altitude of 1,000 feet or 2,000 feet by a Cessna 182 or a Maule MT-7-235 aircraft During the ten days of glider flight training, the students will have completed twenty flights.
They will also be taught glider assembly/disassembly, aerodynamics, preflights, ground handling, aero tow procedures, instruments and pitot static system, communications procedures, cross country planning, and other related aspects of the glider and required knowledge to safely fly it.
Upon the completion of their training, each cadet student will be receiving a Civil Air Patrol Pre-Solo Badge signifying that they have completed the National Flight Academy - Glider course.
For their participation, they will also be awarded the Civil Air Patrol's National Cadet Special Activities Ribbon
--More--
Civil Air Patrol cadets attending the Glider Flight Training are C/A1C Jason L Atwell (ID); C/TSG Joseph G Berger (CA); C/SMS Jacob W Forst (NV); C/MSG Joshua D Gray (CO); C/A1C Dustin D Littleford (ID); C/CMS Edward R Netcher (NV); C/TSG Carol J Nielson (ID); C/2Lt Michael T Padgett (IN); C/TSG Michael K Rafferty (CA); C/MSG Patrick D Ramirez (CA); C/MSG Nicholas P Wikar (IN); and C/A1C Michael R Worl (NV).
Glider Instructors are Capt David Bowden; MG George Harrison, USAF (Ret); Capt Tom Hird; Capt Ron Hodge; Col Ed Lewis; SM Jim Martellotti; Col Ernie Pearson; and Maj Dave Widrig.
All are Civil Air Patrol members and qualified glider pilots/instructors.
Civil Air Patrol tow plane pilots being Capt David Bowden; Lt Col Joe Chizmadia; Capt Woody Fowler; Capt Tom Hird; SM Peter Morejon; and 2Lt Mark Pearson Command staff personnel: Capt David Bowden - Chief Instructor; Chaplain (Lt Col) Dan Dyer; Capt Ron Hodge - Aircraft Manager; Col Ed Lewis - Safety Officer; Lt Col Fred Mahadocon - Public Affairs Officer; Col Rick McDow, USAF (Ret) - National Headquarters Cadet Programs Support Manager; Lt Col Virginia Nelson - Administration and Finance Officer; Col Ernie Pearson - Activity Director; Lt Col Mike Prusak, USAF (Ret) -Project Liaison Officer; Lt Col Jim Welliver - Project Officer; Maj Dave Widrig - Standard/Evaluation Officer; and Lt Col Charles Wiest - Activity Deputy Director.
Support staff members includes C/SRA David Bowden Jr - Ground Crew; 2Lt Timothy Rafferty - Cadet Support; C/SRA Shaun Strobridge - Ground Crew; Capt Gary Swift - Ground Instructor; Capt Ernie Zoeter - Flight Line; and Capt Kitty Zoeter - Flight Release Officer.
Civil Air Patrol, the official USAF Auxiliary, is a nonprofit organization.
It performs more than 85% of inland search and rescue missions tasked by the Air Force Rescue Coordination Center in the continental United States.
Volunteers also take a leading role in aerospace education and serve as mentor to America's youths through Civil Air Patrol's cadet programs.
--30--
Lt Col Fred Mahadocon Public Affairs Officer 909 371 2154 (Tel) 909 898 9154 (Fax) mahadocon@sbcglobal.net
