Skip Navigation to Main Content OTT Logo Office of Transportation Technologies Home What's New? Fact of the Week Calendar of Events Site Map About Us Partnerships Technologies Search ____________ Search What's New This page provides up-to-date news and information related to alternative and advanced fuel and vehicle technologies and describes new items added to this Web site.
Some of the following documents are available as Adobe Acrobat PDFs (download Acrobat Reader).
May 2003 * Bioenergy Program Changes and Signup Agriculture Secretary Ann M. Veneman announced key revisions to the Bioenergy Program to expand industrial consumption of agricultural commodities by promoting their use in the production of ethanol and biodiesel.
Sign-up for the program will begin May 7 and end June 6.
Any bioenergy producer who expects to have eligible production between October 1, 2002, and September 30, 2003, must enroll in the program during this signup period.
The program will promote sustained increases in bioenergy production and related industrial agricultural commodities, and will help improve the environment.
Under the program, the Secretary of Agriculture makes payments through the Commodity Credit Corporation to eligible producers to encourage increased purchases of eligible commodities (energy feedstocks) for the purpose of expanding production of bioenergy and supporting new production capacity.
Payments to eligible producers are based on the increase in quantity of bioenergy they produce during a fiscal year over the quantity they produced during the preceding fiscal year.
For more information visit the USDA Web site.
* Six High Schools Win Hydrogen Fuel Cell Model Car Challenge Six high school teams were winners today of the first Hydrogen Fuel Cell Model Car Challenge, part of the DOE National Science Bowl.
The teams of four students in each race received $1,000 for their science departments.
Ten of the 66 National Science Bowl high school teams competed in the Model Car Challenge by designing, building, testing, and racing hydrogen fuel cell model cars.
The cars were no larger than one foot wide and two feet long.
The cars used electricity from small solar panels to convert water into hydrogen and oxygen.
The teams then stored the hydrogen on the car and used it to run a fuel cell that generated electricity to power a motor.
Since no combustion was involved, the only by-products were heat and water.
Engineers from DOE, and GM provided technical advice.
GM provided the model car components.
Visit the Office of Science Web site for information on the teams and on the National Science Bowl.
* Mayor Rocky Anderson Receives EPA Climate Protection Award Mayor Rocky Anderson of Salt Lake City received the EPA Climate Protection Award, recognizing unprecedented efforts to slow global warming.
Salt Lake City is the only municipality being recognized for its efforts, on a local level, to set an example for other cities.
It is taking concrete steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and health-endangering air pollutants.
Mayor Anderson has spearheaded a broad range of cost-effective, innovative initiatives to lower greenhouse gas emissions, and has leveraged the international spotlight to draw attention to this issue.
The EPA nominated Anderson because of his commitment, announced early in 2002, to reduce greenhouse gases to 7% below 1990 levels by 2012.
Salt Lake City now has a comprehensive Local Climate Action Plan, which involves actions in transportation, energy, waste, and forestry.
Some actions are well underway, including the installation of 861 LED traffic signals; switching of airport ground service equipment to biodiesel; and an initiative to convert city fleets to 100% alternative fuel vehicles.
A broad-based stakeholder group known as the Green Team, which includes representatives from city/state agencies, industry, academia, and environmental groups, is helping to develop this plan and guide its implementation.
* AFDC Adds New Infrastructure Section The Alternative Fuels Data Center now has a section on infrastructure that includes information on fueling appliances and fuel availability; training, contacts, publications, and success stories; standards; and safety.
* AFDC Web Site Includes Updated Alternative Fuels Information The Alternative Fuels Data Center has updated its alternative fuels pages to include information on safety, infrastructure, environmental benefits, and much more.
There is now a chart that compares fuel attributes and characteristics for alternative fuels, as well as gasoline and diesel; links to infrastructure development resoruces, publications, and fuel properties.
more information on specific fuels.
* AFV Niche Market Information Now on Clean Cities Site The Clean Cities Web site now highlights select niche markets (airports, school buses, transit buses, shuttle buses, refuse haulers, and heavy-duty trucks) for alternative fuel vehicles.
The site contains links to success stories, funding information, contacts, and available vehicles, all grouped by market sector.
* Fleet Buyer's Guide Redesigned The Fleet Buyer's Guide has been completely redesigned to improve its functionality.
This site contains information on the benefits of purchasing alternative fuel vehicles; which models of light- and heavy-duty vehicles are available (including specifications); and up-to-date information on incentives and laws, fueling locations, and dealers.
* Hydrogen Fuel Cell Vehicles Kick Off Road Rally The California Fuel Cell Partnership launched its three-day, 400-mile Rally Thru The Valley, a caravan that will take advanced fuel cell vehicles from Sacramento to southern California, making stops in air quality hot spots such as Fresno, Bakersfield, and Los Angeles.
The vehicles will refuel and be available for public display in Stockton, Ripon, Merced, Tulare, and Valencia.
Zero-emission fuel cell vehicles from DaimlerChrysler, Ford, Honda, Hyundai, Nissan, and Toyota will demonstrate the roadworthiness of fuel cell technology.
BP, ChevronTexaco, Shell Hydrogen, Ballard Power Systems, Stuart Energy, Air Products, Praxair, the California Air Resources Board, and the South Coast Air Quality Management District are also participating.
* Cross-Country Drive to Survive Showcases Alternative Fuels The Drive to Survive, a cross-country journey to raise awareness for alternative fuels, began in Los Angeles on May 1 and is scheduled to conclude in Washington, D.C. on May 14.
Participants will stop in cities to showcase cutting-edge vehicles powered by electricity, hydrogen, cmpressed natural gas, biodiesel, methanol, and ethanol.
Actor and activist Dennis Weaver is leading the caravan in his own Toyota Prius hybrid electric vehicle.
The drive team will make stops in Bakersfield, Fresno, Sacramento, San Francisco, Reno, Salt Lake City, Denver, Kansas City, St. Louis, Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland, and Philadelphia.
In Washington, D.C., Weaver will deliver petitions with thousands of signatures to Congress urging lawmakers to declare energy independence by increasing fuel efficiency, promoting alternative fuels, and decreasing our dependence on foreign oil.
Contact: Jenna Higgins, National Biodiesel Board, at 800-841-5849.
* Demonstration and Validation Project Solicitation The DOE Office of Hydrogen, Fuel Cell, and Infrastructure Technologies is soliciting financial assistance applications with the objective of supporting industry efforts and the Hydrogen Fuel Initiative to develop a path to a hydrogen economy.Under this solicitation, DOE is soliciting applications for validation projects that include testing, demonstrating, and validating hydrogen fuel cell vehicles and infrastructure, and the required vehicle and infrastructure interfaces for complete system solutions.
The projects should also include a comprehensive safety plan, a program that enhances the development of codes and standards, and a comprehensive, integrated education and training campaign.
Awards will be cooperative agreements, with a five-year project period.
Teams must include an automobile manufacturer and an energy company, with one entity proposed as the applicant.
Three to five applications will be selected for negotiation toward the award.
Subject to Congressional appropriations, the total cumulative funding available for all projects will likely be $150-$240 million.
Applicant cost share is required.
For more information, contact James Damm at 303-275-4744 or visit the Web site and click on the link under File Attachment at the bottom of the announcement to read the solicitation.
March 2003 * DOE Ethanol Workshop to be Held in Sacramento DOE will sponsor the California Ethanol Workshops, April 14 and 15 at the Embassy Suites in Sacramento, California, as part of its Ethanol Workshop Series, intended to educate key officials and the public about ethanol as a transportation fuel.
The theme will be "Developing Ethanol's Role in California's Energy, Economic and Environmental Future."
The keynote address will present the role of ethanol in supporting the state's agricultural sector.
Presentations will include discussions of the state's transition from MBTE to ethanol; the future of E85 and other ethanol markets in California, a corn-to-ethanol plant in Colusa County, a sweet sorghum and sugar cane ethanol facility in Imperial County, biomass-to-ethanol process technology, lignocellulosic feedstocks, and state-sponsored biomass-to-ethanol R
Contact: Anne Wester, BBI International, 800-567-6411.
* APCI, MAP to Collaborate on Kentucky Hydrogen Facility Air Products and Chemicals, Inc.
(APCI) has entered into an agreement with Marathon Ashland Petroleum (MAP)subsidiary Cattlesburg Refining to build, own, and operate a new 34 million ft^3/d hydrogen facilitya natural gas-based hydrogen steam methane reformeradjacent to MAP's refinery in Cattlesburg, Kentucky.
The facility is expected to be on-stream in November.
APCI will supply hydrogen to MAP's 220,000 bbl/d refinery to help it produce cleaner transportation fuels from heavy sour crude feedstocks.
Contact: Alexander Masetti, APCI, 610-481-7461.
* DOE Says Private and Local AFV Mandates Not Necessary DOE issued a Notice of Public Rulemaking (PDF 204 KB) announcing that private fleet and local government fleet mandates are not necessary and therefore should not be imposed under EPAct.
According to the rule, additional fleet mandates would not significantly reduce American dependence on fossil fuels.
DOE said that even if it did impose acquisition requirements, market conditions could result in their eventual suspension because there is little alternative fuel infrastructure, suitable AFVs are not available, and some alternative fuels cost more than conventional motor fuels.
The decision will apply to business fleets and local government fleets, and will eliminate potential mandates for law enforcement fleets and transit buses.
However, mandates already in place for state governments and fuel provider fleets remain in force.
There is a 90-day period for interested parties to submit written comments on this determination.
DOE will issue its final determination in late summer or fall.
January 2003 * Bush Announces Hydrogen Initiative President Bush announced a $1.2 billion hydrogen initiative during his State of the Union address.
The initiative will include $720 million in new funding over the next five years to develop the technologies and infrastructure needed to produce, store, and distribute hydrogen for use in fuel cell vehicles and to generate electricity.
The initiative complements the President's FreedomCAR initiative, which is developing technologies needed to mass produce safe and affordable hydrogen-powered fuel cell vehicles.
Through partnerships with industry, these two initiatives seek to make these vehicles cost effective for large numbers of Americans by 2020.
The new hydrogen initiative and FreedomCAR will dramatically improve America's energy security by significantly reducing the need for imported oil, and are key components of the President's clean air and climate change strategies.
For more information about hydrogen technologies, see the National Hydrogen Energy Roadmap.
* WMPI Awarded DOE Grant to Develop Diesel Fuel The DOE Clean Coal Power Initiative grant program has approved a $100-million grant to Gilberton, Pennsylvania-based Waste Management and Processors, Inc. to develop a new program for converting coal sludge to diesel fuel with the Fischer-Tropsch gas-to-liquid technology.
The plant will be the first to commercialize this process and is expected to produce approximately 60 million gallons per day of domestic transportation fuel.
* General Motors to Offer Hybrid Vehicles GM will offer hybrid options on several vehicles, starting later this year with the GMC Sierra and Chevrolet Silverado pickups for use in commercial fleets.
The hybrid versions of the trucks will increase fuel economy by 10% to 12%.
The vehicles will be publicly available in 2004.
Depending on demand, GM may produce a million or more a year by 2007.
In 2005, GM will begin producing a hybrid Saturn VUE sport utility.
It will also include a hybrid option on its Chevy Equinox SUV in 2006 and its Chevy Malibu sedan in 2007.
Ford Motor Co. and DaimlerChrysler also plan hybrid models.
Buyers in some areas qualify for a federal tax deduction and local tax breaks.
Even though a hybrid could cost $4,000 more than a conventional vehicle, an owner could save nearly $5,500 in gasoline expenses over the vehicle's driving life.
December 2002 * NESEA Launches Online Club for AFV Owners The Northeast Sustainable Energy Association launched the new Green Car Club Web site, which aims to provide a sense of community to owners and supporters of environmentally friendly cars.
The site is designed to allow green car owners to share their experiences and find answers to questions about green vehicles, and offers an independent source of information on green cars, the latest news in green car development and new car reviews, and information on AFV equipment and fuel.
The site also offers Web-based discussion groups, a forum for exchanging performance data, driving tips, and information on public outreach activities and club-sponsored events.
* American Automakers Roll Out Hybrid and Diesel Vehicles U.S. automakers, facing tougher government rules on fuel economy, tout diesel engines as a way to improve efficiency, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and cut U.S. dependence on imported oil.
Additionally, hybrid electric vehicles have the attention of the public and of the U.S. Army, which sees combat versions of hybrid trucks helping to reduce its fuel demand.
DaimlerChrysler will roll out a gasoline-electric Dodge Ram Contractor's Special hybrid pickup in 2003 and a diesel-powered Jeep Liberty sport-utility vehicle in 2004.
It will build only about 5,000 diesel Liberty models to test consumer acceptance.
Ford plans to introduce a hybrid Escape SUV in late 2003 and GM plans to roll out a hybrid pickup in 2004.
November 2002 * DOE Opens Hydrogen Fueling Station in Nevada DOE recently opened a new hydrogen energy station in Las Vegas, Nevada, that will produce both electric power and hydrogen fuel.
The station is the result of a public-private partnership between DOE, the city of Las Vegas, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (which designed and constructed the facility) and Plug Power, Inc. (which manufactured and installed the site's proton exchange membrane fuel cell).
The facility can dispense hydrogen, hydrogen-enriched natural gas, and compressed natural gas.
The $10.8-million station features an on-site hydrogen generator and compressor, liquid and gaseous hydrogen storage tanks, dispensing systems, and a stationary fuel cell.
DOE plans to join with the City of Las Vegas and NRG Technologies, Inc., to convert and operate hydrogen-powered vehicles for use at the new facility.
* Toyota to Lease Fuel Cell Cars Toyota is marketing a limited number of fuel cell passenger cars.
It will lease 20 cars in Japan and the United States during the coming year, which will be available to government bodies, research institutions, and energy-related companies.
German-U.S. automaker DaimlerChrysler AG was the first to bring to market a limited series of fuel cell buses in 2000; Honda expects government approval to begin marketing its fuel cell vehicle in December, probably on the same day as Toyota.
The Japanese government has set a goal of having 50,000 fuel cell vehicles on the road in Japan by 2010.
* National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition to Help Establish E85 Stations As a result of the FY 2002 Congressional Appropriation to advance the development of an E85 fueling infrastructure, the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition now has funds to help establish new public and private E85 fueling stations.
To apply for the funds, each applicant must download a form and vendor contract from the NEVC Web site and submit the application electronically.
Any vendor that receives NEVC funds for this purpose must provide E85 for at least 4 years.
Contact Michelle Saab at 877-485-8595 with questions.
* DOE Completes Testing of Hydrogen Vehicles DOE announced that it has finished testing three hydrogen-fueled vehicles featuring internal combustion engines.
The primary testing objective was to evaluate thesafety and reliability of operating vehicles on hydrogen/CNG blends.
Secondary objectives included quantifying vehicle emissions, cost, and performance.
The test vehicles were a Ford F-150 pickup truck operating on as much as 50% hydrogen, an F-150 running on as much as 30% hydrogen, and a Mercedes Sprinter van fueled with 100% hydrogen.
The vehicles operated safely for 26,000 miles and released extremely low emissions.
Results also indicated that oil change intervals could be extended significantly.
October 2002 * Ford, NCC to Provide Funds for Clean Cities National Clean Cities Inc.
(NCC) joined with Ford Motor Company to launch a new program that will provide incentives for NCC chapters and other Clean Cities coalitions.
The program, which will be administered by NCC and funded by Ford, will award incentives for grants and other funds and for sales of Ford alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs).
NCC is a nonprofit organization, unaffiliated with the federal government, that was established to assist local Clean Cities organizations.
The program will provide for graduated cash incentive awards based on the level of funding sought for vehicle purchases.
All Ford bi-fuel and dedicated AFVs using either propane or compressed natural gas will be eligible.
The aim of the program is to help Clean Cities coalitions and NCC chapters achieve a level of self-sustainability.
The initiative will foster closer relationships between Clean Cities groups and Ford, and help promote Ford's AFV offerings.
Contact: Carol Butler, NCC.
* DOE National Laboratories Earn Awards DOE national laboratories contributed to 24 of the year's top 100 practical applications of science, according to R
The awards encompass all industries and are conferred only upon leading-edge products of technical significance that are currently available to license or purchase.
A number of this year's awards relate to energy efficiency and renewable energy, including a hybrid electric engine, a supercapacitor with the energy density of a battery, a technology for removing carbon dioxide from landfill gas, and more.
Descriptions of all 100 awardees were published in the September edition of R
* Advanced Battery Technologies Show Commercial Promise Two advanced battery technologies--sodium sulfur and lithium-metal-polymer (LMP) batteries--have attracted media attention for their commercial potential.
American Electric Power (AEP) recently dedicated a sodium sulfur battery system at its suburban office park near Columbus, Ohio.
Sodium sulfur batteries have the advantage of providing very high power outputs for short durations.
DOE's Sandia National Laboratories was one of many partners in the project to reduce peak power loads and guarantee high-quality power.
Details.
The Canadian company AVESTOR announced last month that it's starting production of the world's first commercial LMP battery at its new plant in Boucherville, Quebec.
According to the company, LMP batteries are one-third the size and one-fifth the weight of traditional valve-regulated lead-acid batteries.
Although the company's initial product is designed to provide power backup for telecommunications relays, the batteries could also be used in electric and hybrid electric vehicles, as well as in utility applications similar to the AEP installation.
Details.
* DOE Funds 23 Alternative Fuel Vehicle Infrastructure Projects To support expanded use of alternative fuels in DOE fleets nationwide, the Field Operations Testing Activity and Federal Fleet AFV Activity selected 23 alternative fuel infrastructure projects at 12 DOE facilities to receive $2.7 million.
DOE targeted projects that have the greatest potential to help fleets comply with Executive Order 13149, and were evaluated for their potential to provide alternative fuels to state and local government fleets, commercial fleets, and the public.
The 11 E85 projects, 8 CNG projects, and 4 B20 projects involve the construction of fueling stations and storage tanks.
For more information, visit the AFV USER Program Web site or the Field Operations Program's testing activity Web page, or contact Mike Anderson at (208) 526-7418.
* Public Workshops on Improvements to Greenhouse Gas Reporting Scheduled DOE, the USDA, and EPA announced the first series of workshops and meetings for people interested in improving the guidelines that govern the DOE Voluntary Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program and related programs.
Four workshops have been scheduled: Washington, D.C.
(November 18-19); Chicago (December 5-6); San Francisco (December 9-10); and Houston (December 12-13).
EPA plans to include a session on greenhouse gas reporting issues at the State and Local Climate Change Partners Conference in Annapolis, Maryland, November 20-22.
In January 2003, the USDA will host two meetings in the Washington area to solicit input on the accounting rules and guidelines for forest and agriculture greenhouse gas offsets that will be used in the DOE 1605(b) greenhouse gas reporting system: + Agriculture Accounting Rules and Guidelines, January 14-15.
+ Forest Accounting Rules and Guidelines, January 23.
* October Marks 25th Anniversary of DOE The U.S. Department of Energy was opened on October 1, 1977 to house energy, science, and technology programs and some defense and nuclear activities.
DOE celebrates its 25th anniversary this month.
Check out the new anniversary Web site, which features a chronology of major DOE events, information about former secretaries, and a section honoring the 25-year employees.
* California Goal: 600,000 Natural Gas Vehicles by 2012 California will gain 600,000 new natural gas vehicles in the next 10 years if the newly formed California Natural Gas Vehicle Partnership gets its way.
The public-private partnership includes government air quality, transportation, and energy agencies, together with vehicle and engine manufacturers, natural gas suppliers, vehicle fleet operators, and environmental organizations.
The partnership has set 3-, 5-, and 10-year goals for the growth of natural gas vehicles (NGVs) in the state.
Its 10-year goals aim to boost the number of California NGVs by a factor of 30 from the current 19,000 NGVs in use in the state.
Details.
* DaimlerChrysler to Launch Fuel-Cell Mercedes-Benzes in 2003 The luxury car market took a leap ahead in technology yesterday, as DaimlerChrysler announced plans to deploy 60 fuel cell-powered Mercedes-Benz A-Class models in the United States, Europe, Japan, and Singapore next year.
The cars will be tested in fleets through cooperative ventures with companies.
Ballard Power Systems will provide its latest-generation 85-kW fuel cell engines for the vehicles.
Ballard claims the new unit achieves a 60% improvement in power density over its previous model.
DaimlerChrysler will also supply 30 fuel cell-powered city buses to public transport companies in 10 major European cities in 2003.
For more information, refer to the October 8 "Daily News" section on the DaimlerChrysler Web site.
* GM Unveils Hywire Fuel-Cell Car, Carbon Fiber-Bodied Cars General Motors Corporation (GM) unveiled three concept vehicles this week at the Paris Auto Show.
The most anticipated debut was that of the Hywire, GM's fuel cell-powered concept vehicle.
It is fully functional and drivable, incorporates three hydrogen fuel tanks, a 94-kW fuel cell, an electric motor, and all-electric steering and braking components in an 11 inch-thick aluminum chassis.
A fiberglass body connects to the chassis using 10 mechanical linkages and one electrical "docking port" that conveys all the control signals from the driver to the chassis.
Weighing in at less than 4,200 pounds, the car sports a top speed of 99 mph.
GM's Ultralite concept car counts on low weight and a minimal drag coefficient to achieve high mileage using today's fuel technologies.
The carbon-fiber body allows the four-seat car to achieve a weight of only 1,400 pounds; a computer-controlled suspension gives it a drag coefficient of only 0.192.
Those factors combine to yield a fuel efficiency of 84 mpg.
The Ultralite features a modular drive train that can be switched between gasoline, natural gas, and electric drive systems.
GM's Opel brand brought a turbo diesel approach to fuel efficiency in an aggressive sports car called the Eco-Speedster, which again features a carbon-fiber body.
The 112-hp two-seater concept car achieves 94 mpg and can reach a top speed of 155 mph.
September 2002 * DOE to Fund as much as $70 Million in Fuel Cell Research DOE recently announced a solicitation for the research, development, and demonstration of fuel cell technologies.
The Energy Department intends to enter into about 15 cooperative agreements with teams of industry, utility, and university partners as well as end users.
The solicitation seeks activities for stationary fuel cell systems and an economic analysis of using polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells in various stationary applications.
In addition, it seeks activities that address barriers to stationary and automotive fuel cells, including improved materials for high-temperature membranes, more durable fuel cell components, new approaches for managing the water and heat produced within fuel cell stacks, and advances that reduce the cost and increase the availability of catalysts.
DOE will also consider fuel cell demonstrations that have strategic value in terms of energy and environmental benefits.
For more information, refer to the DOE news release.
* Electric Vehicles on the Rise in California Los Angeles is now home to the largest fleet of electric vehicles in the country.
The U.S. Postal Service rolled out its new 400-vehicle fleet of delivery vehicles last week.
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power helped pay for the vehicles, which increase the Postal Service's total number of electric vehicles to nearly 600 nationwide.
Details.
Organizations located throughout California have new incentives to add electric vehicles to their fleets, provided they're located in "environmental justice" areas (typically communities with significant low-income or minority populations).
The California Zero Emissions Vehicle Program offers grants of as much as $11,000 per qualifying vehicle.
These grants are awarded using a competitive process.
* Detroit Picked as Location for Michigan's NextEnergy Center The Michigan Economic Development Corporation recently announced that its NextEnergy Center will be located in Wayne State University's Research and Technology Park in Detroit.
The new center will serve as the nucleus for the NextEnergy Initiative, which is intended to help Michigan become a world leader in the research, development, commercialization, and manufacture of alternative energy technologies such as hydrogen fuel cells.
The NextEnergy Initiative is taking form through a package of six legislative bills introduced to both chambers of the Michigan legislature in May.
Of the six bills, three have passed into law.
The first bill allows the NextEnergy Center location to be designated as a tax-free zone for the next 20 years for alternative energy companies located there.
The second bill exempts alternative energy systems, vehicles, and businesses throughout the state from personal property taxes for the next 10 years.
The third bill provides tax credits for all alternative energy companies in the state, with additional credits for those located within the NextEnergy Center.
* EPA Provides Certification Guidance for Alternative Fuel Converters Aftermarket parts suppliers and service providers that convert vehicles to run on gaseous alternative fuels such as CNG and LPG have received clarification of new emissions certification requirements from the EPA.
The changes stem from regulatory changes in early 2002, following the expiration of one part of EPA's Mobile Source Enforcement Memorandum 1A, widely known as Memo 1A.
Previously, aftermarket converters were allowed to comply with emission standards by modifying the vehicle or engine, conducting chassis or engine dynamometer exhaust test for emission compliance, and maintaining all records related to the conversion.
The new EPA policy allows such companies to be designated as Small Volume Manufacturers, and requires emissions test data to be submitted routinely.
The EPA has provided two draft documents, "Alternative Fuels Converters Workshop, February 13, 2002 "Potential Questions," and "Test Requirements for Alternative Fuels Converters," that provide a revised and expanded list of questions and answers and the testing requirements for aftermarket alternative fuel converters.
For more information, see "Certification Guidance for Alternative Fuel Converters" (PDF 646 KB) or contact Martin Reineman at 734-214-4430.
* DOE Completes Testing of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles DOE's Field Operations Program has completed its baseline performance testing of 10 neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs).
This testing focused on range, acceleration, top speed, braking, handling, gradeability, and charging efficiency.
The range test results for the NEVs varied from 31 to 53 miles per charge; the average range was 38 miles per charge.
The vehicles were produced by: + Frazer Nash: 2 models tested + Global Electric Motors (GEM): 4 models tested + ParCar: 2 models tested + Th!nk (Ford): 2 models tested For more information, visit the testing results/neighborhood EVs links on the Light-Duty Electric Vehicles Web page or contact Jim Francfort at 208-526-6787.
* Fischer-Tropsch Diesel Workshop Notice in Federal Register DOE's plans to hold a workshop on the FTD fuel petitions were announced in the Federal Register on September 10.
Refer to the EPAct Web site for the notice and related documents.
* DOE Review Meetings Focus on Fuel Cells, Hydrogen The DOE Fuel Cells for Transportation, Fuels for Fuel Cells, and Hydrogen Programs held their inaugural combined Annual Program/Lab R
You may view the Fuel Cells Lab R
* Engineers Develop Process to Make Hydrogen from Glucose Chemical engineers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have developed a new process to produce hydrogen from glucose, a sugar produced by many plants.
The process shows particular promise because it occurs at low temperatures in the liquid phase, so it doesn't require the energy needed to heat and vaporize the glucose solution.
The low temperature also yields very little carbon monoxide, which can damage fuel cells.
In fact, the process produces fuel-cell-grade hydrogen in a single step.
However, the researchers note that the hydrogen yields need to be improved and the catalyst cost reduced.
Glucose is manufactured in vast quantities from corn starch, but can also be derived from sugar beets or low-cost waste streams like paper mill sludge, cheese whey, corn stover, or wood waste.
There research was published in last week's edition of the journal Nature.
* Toyota Teams with Nissan on Hybrids Toyota Motor Corporation recently announced that it's teaming with Nissan Motor Company, Ltd. to produce hybrid electric vehicles.
Initially, Toyota will supply Nissan with a hybrid system currently under development for use in Nissan vehicles to be sold in the United States in 2006.
Nissan expects to sell 100,000 hybrid vehicles per year by 2011.
The partners plan to maintain a business relationship for 10 years or longer by sharing technical information and jointly developing hybrid electric components.
Although Toyota is currently the largest producer of hybrid vehicles with cumulative sales of 120,000 vehicles, Nissan sold a limited number of Tino Hybrid models in 2000 and has operated a department to develop hybrid technologies since February 2001.
For more information, refer to the Toyota news release.
August 2002 * Energy Secretary Visits Michigan Fuel Cell Plant Fuel cells received recognition earlier this week when Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham toured the fuel cell/hydrogen storage technology manufacturing plant of Energy Conversion Devices (ECD), Inc. in Rochester Hills, Mich.
ECD researches hydrogen storage technologies and hydrogen refueling infrastructure, which will be required for automotive fuel cell technology.
"President Bush has encouraged the department to undertake public-private technology partnerships in pursuit of a cleaner, more sustainable energy future that is ultimately independent of foreign sources of energy," Secretary Abraham told the Detroit-area audience, adding, "The automotive industry must be one of the most important partners in this effort."
For more information, refer to the DOE news release.
* ASTM Issues Biodiesel Fuel Standard ASTM has issued a fuel specification for biodiesel, an alternative fuel that can be made from any fat or oil, such as soybean oil.
Specification D 6751, Standard Specification for Biodiesel Fuel Blend Stock for Distillate Fuels, applies to all biodiesel fuel bought and sold in the United States.
Biodiesel can be used in any diesel engine, usually with no modifications.
It performs comparably to diesel, with similar Btu content and higher cetane.
It offers excellent lubricity and lower emissions than petroleum diesel.
D 6751 covers the incorporation of pure biodiesel into conventional diesel fuel up to 20% by volume.
Higher blend levels may be acceptable, depending on the experience of the engine company.
Biodiesel is registered with the Environmental Protection Agency as a fuel and fuel additive.
Pure biodiesel is nontoxic, biodegradable, and essentially sulfur free.
It reduces emissions of particulate matter, unburned hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, sulfates, and carbon dioxide.
For more information, refer to the National Biodiesel Board.
* IRS Certifies HEVs for $2,000 Tax Deduction The IRS has certified hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) as eligible for a $2,000 tax deduction offered to cleaner-burning vehicles.
In a recent letter, the agency said it has determined that an HEV purchaser may rely on the certification concerning the incremental cost of permitting the use of electricity to propel the vehicle.
Purchasers can use or take this certification to their individual tax advisors to determine how they can take advantage of this important federal tax benefit.
They should retain normal proof of purchase documentation and the recent correspondence as further substantiation for the federal tax deduction.
Almost 40,000 HEVs have been sold in the United States since they were introduced in 1999.
* Online Information About New ReFUEL Lab Now Available DOE's new Renewable Fuels and Lubricants (ReFUEL) Research Laboratory in Denver is part of a broad effort to find domestically produced alternatives to petroleum and improve the nation's air quality.
Refer to the new ReFUEL Web pages for information on this high-altitude facility for testing alternative and advanced fuels and heavy-duty engines and vehicles.
From the biodiesel page to the heavy-duty chassis dynamometer page, the site provides information about how this unique facility is designed to increase the use of renewable diesel fuels and help engine manufacturers meet stringent heavy-duty emissions standards set for 2007.
July 2002 * EPA Is Developing Dedicated E85 Vehicle The EPA has announced that a dedicated E85 vehicle is now in the works.
This new clean-burning vehicle is expected to produce low criteria emissions and have one-third higher fuel efficiency than a gasoline engine.
The EPA estimates that the dedicated vehicle will cost consumers less than an E85 flexible fuel vehicle.
Automakers are concerned about the limited volume potential of dedicated vehicles, given the availability of E85.
However, E85 is becoming increasingly available.
DOE recently granted funds to Clean Cities coalitions to install 20 new E85 pumps.
* GM Unveils Fuel Cell Development Center General Motors Corporation recently unveiled its new Fuel Cell Development Center and announced its commitment to be the first company to sell one million fuel cell vehicles.
GM's new research facility, located in Honeoye Falls, New York, will develop fuel cells for stationary and transportation applications.
For more information, refer to the GM press release.
* Honda to Begin Leasing Fuel Cell Vehicles by Year End American Honda Motor Co., Inc., announced last week that it will begin leasing "a limited number" of its fuel cell-powered vehicle, the Honda FCX, in the United States by the end of this year.
The California Air Resources Board recently certified the vehicle as a zero emissions vehicle, and it also earned the lowest national emission rating from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Honda plans to lease 30 FCXs in California and Tokyo over the next three years, but currently has no plans for mass-market sales of the vehicle.
The hydrogen-fueled vehicle requires access to a hydrogen fuel supply, which, thanks to the efforts of the California Fuel Cell Partnership, is available in several California locations.
For more information, refer to the Honda press release.
* ReFUEL Lab Opens in Denver The U.S. Department of Energy recently dedicated a new research facility in Denver that will develop cleaner fuels for trucks and buses.
The Renewable Fuels and Lubricants Research Laboratory (ReFUEL) is part of a broader DOE effort to find domestically produced alternatives to petroleum and improve the nation's air quality.
"The ReFUEL facility will become an important new resource to help meet our national goals for reducing our reliance on foreign energy sources and at the same time improving our environment," DOE Assistant Secretary David Garman said.
* Toyota to Lease 20 Fuel-Cell-Powered SUVs by Early 2003 Toyota Motor Corporation announced on July 1st that it will begin leasing a limited number of its fuel-cell-powered sport utility vehicles (SUVs) in the United States and Japan around the end of this year.
The announcement follows successful road tests of the company's fuel cell prototype, the FCHV-1.
The U.S. version of the hydrogen-fueled fuel cell SUV will be based on the Toyota Highlander.
Toyota plans to lease a total of 20 vehicles to entities that have access to a hydrogen fueling system and to Toyota's service specialists.
Because of the vehicle's high cost and decreased performance in cold weather, Toyota will only offer the leases to select private businesses, technology-related companies, institutional organizations and research facilities.
See the Toyota press release.
* EERE Launches Redesigned Web Site to Match New Organization DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) launched its redesigned Web site on July 1 as the reorganization of the office became official.
On June 28, the U.S. Congress gave its final concurrence for the new organization, allowing EERE to proceed with its new program structure.
The new organization is a streamlined, flatter structure that places more emphasis on the office's 11 programs, while allowing each program to focus on its technology development or deployment goals.
The new EERE Web site highlights the 11 new programs by placing them front and center on the home page.
The portal aspect of the Web site, providing a directory of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies and topics, runs along the left-hand column of the home page.
Regularly updated news items, drawn from DOE press releases and the site's newsletter (EREN Network News), are posted along the right-hand column.
* DOE Funding for CARAT Projects Boosts Research in Automotive Technologies DOE has selected five small businesses and one university to help develop automotive components and subsystems for cleaner, more efficient cars and light trucks.
The projects total more than $1 million in cost-shared research, of which DOE will provide up to $900,000 through its Cooperative Automotive Research for Advanced Technology Program.
The objective is to tap the creativity and resourcefulness of the small business and academic communities to overcome technical challenges and make promising, energy-efficient, automotive technologies a reality.
The projects include developing an advanced diesel injector system, a catalyst for converting diesel fuel to hydrogen, materials for converting engine waste heat into electricity, high-efficiency auxiliary motors, controllers for those motors, and solid oxide fuel cells.
For more information, refer to the recent press release.
* $4.6 Million Awarded for Alternative Fuel Vehicles and Infrastructure On June 28 Secretary Spencer Abraham announced the selection of awards totaling more than $4.6 million to 24 states and the District of Columbia for building local markets for alternative fuels and vehicles in 55 communities that participate in the department's Clean Cities Program.
The winners of the competitive grants will purchase alternative fuel vehicles, develop refueling stations and infrastructure, deploy alternative fuel school buses, and develop alternative fuel vehicle platforms.
To learn more and see which states received grants, visit www.energy.gov/HQPress/releases02/junpr/pr02131.htm.
* DaimlerChrylser FCV Completes Cross-Country Trip On May 20, 2002, in San Francisco, DaimlerChrysler's NECAR 5 began a historic cross-country trip.
It became the first fuel cell vehicle to complete the 3,000-mile trip, arriving in Washington, D.C., on June 4.
NECAR 5 is powered by methanol, an alcohol-based alternative fuel used to carry hydrogen to the vehicle's fuel cell.
A chemical reaction takes place when hydrogen combines with oxygen in the fuel cell "stack" to produce electricity used to power the motor and auxiliary systems.
Members of the NECAR 5 team provided methanol for the trip every 300 miles.
Ferdinand Panik, head of the DaimlerChrysler fuel cell project, said, "Our goal was to make it to Washington, D.C., to deliver the message that fuel cell technology is rapidly advancing."
June 2002 * 2002 Future Car Congress Held in Arlington, Virginia More than 800 attendees from 16 countries helped make the 2002 International Future Car Congress (held June 3-5) a success.
It included three days of technical sessions; cutting-edge exhibits and vehicle displays; dynamic panels with officials from government, industry, and academia; and opportunities to test drive the latest state-of-the-art vehicles.
The Congress was dedicated to addressing issues in the development of automotive technologies aimed at dramatically reducing the world's transportation energy consumption and minimizing vehicle emissions.
For more information, visit the Future Car Congress Web site.
* University of Wisconsin Team Wins FutureTruck Competition A hybrid electric Ford Explorer running on biodiesel fuel led the student team from the University of Wisconsin-Madison to victory in the FutureTruck competition on June 21.
The team cut greenhouse gas emissions of a Ford Explorer in half while boosting its fuel efficiency by 45 percent.
The revamped vehicle was built on a frame of both aluminum and steel and featured a titanium exhaust system.
Second place in the competition was earned by Michigan Tech University, which entered a hybrid electric Explorer fueled with reformulated gasoline.
Of 15 teams in the competition, 7 improved the Explorer's fuel economy and 2 improved the vehicle's performance.
For more information, refer to the press release.
* FutureTruck Competition Now Underway Teams of students from 15 top North American universities are demonstrating the advantages of the latest vehicle technologies at DOE's FutureTruck 2002 competition, now underway.
FutureTruck challenges students to reengineer Ford Explorers into low-emissions vehicles with at least 25 percent higher fuel economy--without sacrificing performance, utility, safety, and affordability.
Student teams use a variety of technologies, including hybrid vehicle technologies and fuel cells.
The teams are enduring a number of challenges during the 10-day competition, including performance tests, emissions tests, and an independent judging of the vehicles' look and feel.
After starting at Ford's Arizona Proving Grounds, the competition swings through the California Air Resources Board facilities in El Monte, Ca., and the California Motor Speedway in Fontana, Ca., before concluding with an awards ceremony in Los Angeles on June 21st.
* NAFTC Announces Summer Course Offerings The National Alternative Fuels Training Consortium (NAFTC) recently announced its summer training course offerings: + Natural Gas Vehicles: System Integration and Service + Natural Gas Vehicles: Cylinder Inspection and Certification + Propane Vehicle Training + Forklift and Material Handling Applications + Natural Gas Vehicles: System Integration and Service + Natural Gas Vehicles: Cylinder Inspection and Certification + Transient Emission Testing Refer to the "course section" of the NAFTC Web site for details, prices, and registration forms for these courses, which will be held at NAFTC headquarters in Morgantown, W.Va.
May 2002 * Diesel Emission Standards, Fuel Rule Upheld The D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals recently ruled in favor of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), upholding its 2007 emission standards for heavy-duty diesel truck and bus engines and the ultra-low-sulfur diesel regulation.
Some refiners, engine manufacturers, and automakers challenged the rule; the court rejected arguments raised by the petitioners.
The EPA, the Department of Justice, emission control manufacturers, and environmentalists applauded the ruling.
In its ruling, the court referenced DOE's Diesel Emission Control Sulfur Effects Program.
DECSE focused on the effects of various levels of sulfur in fuel on emission exhaust control systems, which could be used to lower nitrogen oxides and particulate matter from diesel vehicles.
Beginning with model year 2007, emissions from new heavy-duty diesel truck and bus engines will be reduced by more than 90 percent.
Sulfur in diesel fuel must be lowered to enable modern pollution control technology to be effective on these engines.
The regulation requires a 97 percent reduction in the sulfur content of highway diesel fuel.
* DaimlerChrysler Adds Three New Flex-Fuel Vehicles to 2003 Line-Up DaimlerChrysler recently announced that it's adding three new flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs) to its 2003 product line.
FFVs can be fueled with E85 (a blend of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline), gasoline, or any combination of the two fuels.
The new E85 models will include: + Dodge Stratus Sedans with 2.7-liter 16-valve V-6 DOHC engines + Chrysler Sebring Sedans and Convertibles with 2.7-liter 16-valve V-6 DOHC engines + Dodge Cargo Minivans with 3.3-liter 16-valve V-6 SOHC engines.
These new vehicles will complement DaimlerChrysler's flexible-fuel product line and give fleets covered by Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct) alternative fuel vehicle acquisition requirements more choices when selecting vehicles.
Dodge Stratus was specifically targeted to these EPAct-mandated fleets, because buyers for this market are often interested in purchasing mid-sized vehicles.
DaimlerChrysler hopes that the Stratus, a mid-compact, will fill an existing void in the FFV market.
In 2002, DaimlerChrysler's popular line of FFV minivans were sold to customers without added incremental costs for the E85-compatible engines.
The 2003 additions to the DaimlerChrysler fleet of FFVs will also retail at the same price as their conventional gasoline counterparts, making them a cost effective solution for fleets that need to comply with EPAct.
For more information about the FFVs, visit the DaimlerChrysler Fleet Web site.
* DOE Announces 2002 Clean Cities Awards DOE recently announced its Clean Cities Program awards for 2002 at the 8th National Clean Cities Conference in Oklahoma City, Okla.
Tom Gross, representing DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, presented the National Partner and Local Coalition Awards.
The National Partner Awards honor companies, municipal agencies, and individuals who have made significant, long-term contributions to advance the use of alternative fuels in cars and trucks.
The Local Coalition Awards recognize coalitions for their efforts.
DOE's Clean Cities Program supports public-private partnerships that deploy alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) and build supporting infrastructure.
By encouraging AFV use, the program supports President Bush's National Energy Policy call to ensure energy security and improve environmental quality at both the national and local levels.
For more information, refer to the DOE press release.
* Farm Bill Boosts Bioenergy Production President Bush recently signed the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002, ushering in a variety of programs to encourage the production of energy products on farms, while providing incentives for farmers to increase their energy efficiency and use of renewable energy resources.
Title IX of the bill specifically addresses energy, providing $204 million in subsidies over the next four years for producers of fuel-grade ethanol and biodiesel.
It also provides $5 million to educate consumers about biodiesel and $6 million to establish a new program to encourage the purchase of biobased products by federal agencies.
In addition, the bill extends the Biomass Research and Development Initiative through 2006, providing $75 million to continue the initiative.
* DOE to Host International Conference on the Future of Transportation Technologies Building on FreedomCAR, the new fuel-cell automobile research initiative, Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham recently announced that DOE will host an International Conference on the Future of Energy Transportation Technologies in Detroit in the fall of 2002.
The conference will provide a forum to discuss many significant transportation research issues in a collaborative manner with nations and companies from around the world.
The conference agenda is expected to include sessions on FreedomCAR, energy-efficient vehicles, lower-emission two-wheelers, alternative fuels, urban form and traffic management, and public transport.
Under the FreedomCAR Program, the government and private sector will fund research into advanced, efficient fuel cell technology that uses hydrogen to power automobiles without creating any pollution.
The long-term results of this cooperative effort will be cars and trucks that are more efficient, cheaper to operate, pollution-free, and competitive in the showroom.
For more information on the conference, refer to the DOE press release.
April 2002 * Updated Web Page Focuses on Transportation-Related Funding Resources Looking for information on financial resources for projects related to alternative and advanced fuel and vehicle technologies? A revised Web page on this site offers a host of information about solicitations, funding resources, and incentives.
Check it out.
* New Document Focuses on Advanced Transportation Technologies The marketplace for advanced transportation technologies and the focus, direction, and funding of transportation programs are continually changing and developing.
A new document produced by DOE's Field Operations Program features the latest information about energy use in the transportation sector, emissions, advanced vehicle availability, vehicle sales, and other key issues.
To view this new document and related information, refer to the Field Operations Program Web site.
* New EC-Diesel Emissions Test Results Available New results from the latest round of emissions tests from the EC-Diesel Technology Validation Program are now available in the Advanced Petroleum-Based Fuels' Fuels Property Database.
These results are part of a government-industry research effort to evaluate ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel in vehicles with and without catalyzed diesel particle filters.
The database provides key data on advanced compression ignition fuels and focuses on various physical, chemical, operational, and environmental, safety, and health properties.
You can search the database in various ways, depending on what you're interested in.
For the new heavy vehicle emissions data, choose the "heavy vehicle chassis emissions" link.
* Redesigned Energy Education Site Offers New Information The newly redesigned Energy Education and Training Web site features substantially more links to educational and training resources on energy, particularly energy efficiency and renewable energy.
Resources include lesson plans for teachers and information on science projects, student competitions, continuing adult education opportunities, energy careers and jobs, and much more.
This site is part of DOE's Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Network.
* Georgia Tech Students Win DOE Energy Challenge Windsurfing on a sailboard made of paper, a team of chemical engineering students from the Georgia Institute of Technology raced away with $15,000 at Energy Challenge 2002 on April 6.
Sponsored by DOE, the competition allows engineering students to work with energy efficiency and waste minimization concepts that have real applications in the pulp and paper industry.
Overall scoring for the event was based on best paper sailboard performance during a timed race, written reports, gross weight, material composition, tensile energy absorption, stiffness, and novelty of design.
The teams designed the sailboards exclusively from paper products, including corrugated paperboard or linerboard.
Commonly used paper chemicals were allowed in the finishing and bonding of the board.
* New Ford Focus Concept Vehicle Combines Hybrid and Fuel Cell Technology Ford Motor Company has developed a new four-passenger Focus concept vehicle that uses both hybrid electric and fuel cell technology.
This revolutionary new zero emission vehicle was unveiled at the New York International Auto Show this week and has sparked public interest because it's one of the first to combine both types of advanced vehicle technologies.
Developed by Ford's environmental TH!NK group, the Focus fuel cell vehicle (FCV) is a "mild" hybrid, meaning the 300-volt Sanyo battery pack augments the main power source, in this case the fuel cell, providing improved performance and added power when climbing hills or passing.
A regenerative braking system recaptures energy normally lost during braking and recharges the hybrid battery system.
Hybrid electric technology was first introduced in the United States by Japanese auto manufacturers Toyota and Honda with their compact Prius and Insight models.
Ford will release the hybrid Escape sport utility vehicle in 2003, which employs much of the same hybrid technology featured in their Focus fuel cell vehicle.
At the heart of the Focus FCV is a Ballard Mark 902 fuel cell stack, which uses hydrogen gas to produce electricity to power the vehicle's main motor.
Fuel cells produce energy from a chemical reaction that occurs when hydrogen is combined with oxygen.
This process of electrical generation occurs without combustion, so the only by-products of the reaction are heat and water.
A vehicle powered by a fuel cell can be highly efficient and can reduce emissions significantly.
The Focus FCV also features an improved hydrogen storage tank, which can be filled to 5,000 pounds per square inch (psi), a significant improvement over the 3,600 psi of a previous version.
Together the improvement of the fuel cell and hybrid electric systems will give the four-passenger Focus FCV a range of approximately 200 miles.
A fleet of five Focus FCVs have been developed for testing and evaluation by the California Fuel Cell Partnership.
Ford hopes to make the Focus FCV available to customers by 2004.
Full Story.
* DOE Announces Solicitation for Biomass R
The solicitation seeks applications related to fermentation, hydrolysis, pyrolysis, gasification, and/or other biochemical or thermochemical conversion systems.
Visit the funding page for more information.
* FreedomCAR: Advancing Fuel Cell Vehicles Looking for information on FreedomCAR? A new Web page on this site focuses on the government-industry program, which was launched in January to develop technologies for hydrogen-powered vehicles.
The page provides basic program information, along with links to general information on fuel cell technology, technical program goals, and technical papers on fuel cells.
* DOE Offers New Portals to Technical Information Through subject-specific Web sites or portals, the DOE Office of Scientific and Technical Information provides access to full-text DOE scientific and technical reports on energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies, as well as links to news releases and journal literature.
These subject portals focus on fuel cell technologies, hydrogen energy, heavy vehicle technology, biofuels, biopower, photovoltaics, geothermal energy, superconductivity, wind energy, concentrating solar power, hydropower, and solar buildings.
Each portal also features a distributed search capability, which allows the user to conduct parallel searches across other databases with similar information.
March 2002 * DOE Contracts Promise Energy Cost Savings at Federal Sites DOE recently announced that five energy service companies have been selected to use performance-based contracts to reduce energy use, manage utility costs, and promote renewable energy at federal facilities by using biomass and alternative methane energy sources.
Biomass includes dedicated energy crops and trees, agricultural crop residues, aquatic plants, wood and wood residues, animal wastes, and other organic waste materials.
Alternative methane is generated in landfills, wastewater treatment plants, and coalbeds.
The companies will develop, finance, and implement projects that guarantee energy-related cost savings at federal facilities by using biomass and alternative methane fuels.
In return, the companies will receive payments derived from the energy cost savings achieved.
For more information, refer to the DOE press release.
* Wake Tech Recognized by NAFTC Wake Technical Community College in Raleigh, N.C., has been recognized by the National Alternative Fuels Training Consortium (NAFTC) as a national training center for alternative fuel vehicle (AFV) maintenance and repair education.
Wake Tech will add courses in AFV service to its transport technologies curriculum.
The college developed AFV classes in response to the need for automotive technicians with the ability to repair and perform maintenance on AFVs.
* Study Demonstrates Negative Effects of Air Pollution The American Heart Association (AHA) recently released a University of Toronto study that demonstrates that air pollution negatively affects the blood vessels of healthy individuals.
After study participants inhaled elevated concentrations of fine particles and ozone for two hours, researchers determined that the individuals' blood vessels constricted between two and four percent.
Participants exposed to ozone- and particle-free air did not experience constriction.
For more information, refer to the AHA Journal Report.
* Honda Purchases Equity Stake in Flexcar American Honda Motor Company, Inc. recently announced its purchase of an 18.4 percent equity stake in Mobility, Inc., a privately held company operating car-sharing programs under the brand name Flexcar.
The Seattle-based Flexcar program provides members with access to a fleet of vehicles located throughout a particular metropolitan area.
Members reserve the vehicles for hourly use, with Flexcar covering the cost of the car, gas, parking, insurance, and maintenance.
Members pay only for the time they use the car.
Honda will provide technology and support for Flexcar's vehicle tracking and management system, based on the knowledge acquired from its Intelligent Community Vehicle System operations.
(Honda press release, 3/12/02)
* PERC Approves Three Airport Projects The Propane Education 
The projects, which include converting airport vehicles to propane and building a refueling site for air- and ground-side vehicles, support PERC's Propane Airport Demonstration Initiative (DOC. 10396).
Each organizations received a PERC grant ranging from $135,000 to $300,000 to help pay for a portion of their projects.
For more information, contact Jill Hamilton, PERC program manager at (703) 322-4484 or hamilton@altfuelsconsulting.com.
* New LNG Facility to be Constructed in Bakersfield Pacific LNG reached an agreement with Coastal Petroleum, Inc., for the lease of property at the Paloma Refinery in Bakersfield, Calif., to construct and operate a 25,000-gallon/day gas-to-liquid (liquefied natural gas) facility.
The facility, which is expected to be operating by January 2003, will be owned and operated by Pacific.
The LNG processing facility, a first in Southern California, is designed and manufactured by Cosmodyne, Torrance, Calif.
Cosmodyne's state-of-the-art LNG fuel production system, with storage and dispensing, will cost $5 million.
The new plant can fuel over 400 heavy-duty vehicles per day with high quality LNG and CNG.
February 2002 * EPA Extends Deadline for Memo 1A Option 3 Memo 1A, the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) guidance for certifying aftermarket converted vehicles, consists of three options for certification.
Option 3, the most streamlined and cost-effective method, was set to expire at the end of 2001.
However, in January 2002 EPA agreed to extend Option 3 through March 31, 2002 in response to various stakeholder concerns about vehicle converters' readiness to certify vehicles using Memo 1A Options 1 or 2.
EPA is currently in the process of reviewing and streamlining some of these processes and procedures, and converters should take advantage of the extension of Option 3 to develop their own procedures for full certification.
* Writing Effective AFV School Bus Proposals DOE provides funding for a variety of Special Projects under its State Energy Program (SEP).
To facilitate the use of alternative fuel school buses in fleets across the nation, DOE allows states to submit proposals for implementing projects to add such vehicles to their fleets.
Many states may want to take advantage of this funding, but writing grant proposals can be a confusing process.
A new tutorial, How To Write An Effective AFV School Bus Proposal (PDF 191 KB), provides key information.
This useful document offers important tips for preparing and submitting winning proposals, completing the required forms, avoiding common pitfalls, and more.
Another new document, SEP Special Projects Proposal Template (MS Word 117 KB), provides the basic layout for organizing a proposal.
For more information on SEP Special Project solicitations, visit the Clean Cities funding page at www.cleancities.doe.gov/support.shtml#doe.
For more information about a wide variety of funding opportunities, refer to the Clean Cities Coordinator Toolbox at www.ccities.doe.gov/toolbox/funding_ops.shtml.
* New DECSE Report Summarizes Project Findings A new report, Diesel Emissions Control-Sulfur Effects Project (DECSE) Summary of Reports, describes a government and industry cost-shared project to determine the impact of fuel sulfur levels on emission control systems that could be used to lower emissions of nitrogen oxides and particulate matter from compression ignition, direct injection diesel vehicles.
The sulfur in diesel fuel adversely affects the operation of diesel exhaust emission control systems.
Tests were conducted and data collected and analyzed for various combinations of fuel sulfur levels, engines, and exhaust emission control systems.
To view this report, visit www.ott.doe.gov/decse.
* New Study Highlights Barriers Facing Fuel Cell Vehicles A new study released by the Environmental Defense Council highlights some of the barriers facing the automotive industry's commercialization of fuel cell vehicles.
Produced by senior fellow John DeCicco, Fuel Cell Vehicles: Technology, Market, and Policy Issues identifies these barriers and calls on the automotive industry to take a proactive approach in addressing them.
While several manufacturers have made the commitment to putting fuel cell vehicles on the road by 2005, the report identifies a gap of an additional 10 - 15 years before it is economically feasible to mass market them.
DeCicco points out that the absence of higher fuel economy requirements for the industry will inevitably slow the development of fuel cell technology and concludes that the quickest way to close this "deployability gap" is for the automotive industry to address the fuel economy issue.
Full Story.
* New Fact Sheets Shed Light on Advanced Vehicle Technologies How does a fuel cell work? How clean are hybrid electric vehicles? How is ethanol made? A collection of new fact sheets answers these and other questions about technologies being developed through the DOE Office of Transportation Technologies.
The fact sheets provide overviews on fuel cells, diesel engines, electric vehicles, biodiesel, ethanol, liquefied petroleum gas, and natural gas.
January 2002 * AVS Electric Buses to Begin Service in Lower Manhattan Advanced Vehicle Systems (AVS) of Chattanooga, Tenn., announced the sale of eight UltraPower electric buses to New York City.
These zero emission vehicles will provide shuttle service to routes in lower Manhattan, and improve access to businesses and restaurants in the area devastated by the Word Trade Center bombings.
The AVS UltraPower bus uses a new energy storage technology that combines traditional batteries with ultracapacitors.
This combination of batteries and ultracapacitors will help increase both the life and efficiency of the system by allowing the bus to go through more charging cycles.
Use of the new energy storage system will also increase the amount of "free" energy that can be recovered from regenerative braking in stop-and-go city traffic.
New buses are expected to begin service in the downtown area by next summer.
* Millenium Hydrogen Fuel Cell System Powers DaimlerChrysler Minivan DaimlerChrysler unveiled its new fuel cell Town and Country Natrium minivan at the Electric Transportation Industry Conference and Exposition in Sacramento, Calif.
This third-generation fuel cell-powered automobile is the first of its kind to integrate an on-demand hydrogen system that is contained on-board the vehicle.
It's also the first fuel cell vehicle capable of traveling as far as 300 miles without refueling.
The production of the fuel cell Natrium involved over 18 months of collaboration between DaimlerChrysler's Liberty and Technical Affairs Group and Millennium Cell Inc., developers of the on-board hydrogen fuel system.
Millennium Cell's on-demand fuel system uses a material derived from sodium borate (more commonly known as borax) to produce the hydrogen used to power the fuel cell.
Electricity generated from the chemical reaction that takes place inside the fuel cell is then used to run the vehicle's electric motors.
Borax is an environmentally friendly material that can be found in abundant quantities throughout the world.
Full Story.
* Bush Administration Backs Fuel Cells, Cuts Fuel Efficient Vehicle Program Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham announced that the Bush Administration plans to help American automakers develop fuel cell cars that run on hydrogen.
Abraham's announcement was made at the Detroit Auto Show where the big three U.S. automakers rolled out their futuristic fuel cell concept cars.
Bush's FreedomCAR program will help U.S. auto manufacturers produce less expensive, more efficient, and more reliable versions of their fuel cell concept vehicles.
If successful, the program could bring an end to the internal combustion engine that has dominated American roads for more than a century.
The shift to a hydrogen-based transportation economy would also mean an end to U.S. dependence on foreign oil, and the elimination of pollution caused by vehicle emissions.
Fuel cells produce energy from a chemical reaction that occurs when hydrogen is combined with oxygen.
When pure hydrogen is used, heat and water are the only byproducts of the reaction.
The FreedomCAR project supercedes the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles, which was established in 1993 as a joint venture between the government and the big three domestic automakers.
See the DOE press release.
* New York Spending $4.2 Million on Clean-Fueled Buses On December 26, 2001, Governor George Pataki announced that the state will use $4.2 million in Clean Water/Clean Air Bond Act funds to purchase 128 compressed natural gas buses and 35 hybrid electric buses for use in New York City, Syracuse, and Long Island.
The Clean Water/Clean Air Bond Act funding is targeted at reducing pollution in urban areas and curtailing the state's greenhouse gas emissions.
Purchase of the buses also will provide significant economic benefits for a number of upstate manufacturers.
More information is available at www.nyserda.org/pressother2001.html.
* CEC Funds Natural Gas and Propane Refueling Stations The California Energy Commission (CEC) announced that it would provide grants to help build natural gas and propane refueling stations for public vehicle fleets in the state.
CEC grant money will cover up to one-fifth the total cost of city, corporate, and other independent agency alternative fuel infrastructure projects estimated at approximately $13 million.
Projects covered by CEC grant money are part of the agency's Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Program, which is designed to help the state meet air quality standards and reduce the consumption of petroleum-based fuels.
For more information, contact Percy Della at (916) 654-4989 or pdella@energy.state.ca.us
* SCAQMD Funds CNG Taxi Purchases California's South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) agreed to provide almost $3 million in funding to encourage the purchase of compressed natural gas (CNG) taxis.
These new alternative fuel vehicles will serve regional airports and allow cab operators to comply with the January 1, 2002 ruling that requires all new airport taxi purchases to be clean burning vehicles.
SCAQMD funding will enable taxicab operators to purchase more than 300 new Ford Crown Victoria CNG sedans.
May 1002 * New Web Site for Students and Teachers The Alternative Fuels Data Center now has a one-stop shop for students and teachers who are looking for resources about alternative fuels.
The Educational Tools for Students and Teachers K-12 Web site includes links to teaching materials, fun activities, helpful links, and competitions.
Teachers will find a wide array of curriculum ideas to help their students better understand the alternatives to fossil fuels and internal combustion engines.
What's New Archives
2001 2000
Skip Footer Navigation to End of Page Home | DOE | Webmaster | Feedback
