FLOOR STATEMENT OF HONORABLE HENRY J. HYDE
ON H.R. 371, THE "HMONG VETERANS'
NATURALIZATION ACT OF 2000"
MAY 2, 2000
Today this body considers legislation to facilitate citizenship opportunities for Hmong refugees who were recruited by the United States to assist our combat effort in Indochina.
Twenty-five years after the end of the Vietnam War, we honor the heroism and sacrifices of the Hmong.
At great personal peril and loss of life, they fought with us and performed critical roles in dangerous missions on our behalf.
As a former CIA officer pointed out in a statement submitted to the Committee on the Judiciary's Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims in the last Congress:
"Throughout the war, CIA's paramilitary forces collected intelligence, used it in combat operations to tie down some 50,000 North Vietnamese forces in Laos, rescued downed American pilots and protected sensitive American installations at remote mountain tops. . . ."
Those Hmong veterans who survived the war faced severe persecution for their association with us.
H.R. 371 acknowledges that many Hmong veterans face unique language problems that present insurmountable obstacles to U.S. citizenship.
The Hmong we recruited during the Vietnam War - - including some at a very early age - - lived in a predominately preliterate society.
Lt. Col. Wangyee Vang, National President, Lao Veterans of America, explained in his statement for the 1997 hearing of the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims: "Cultural barriers and the fact that a written Hmong language was not used in much of Laos until late in its history have compounded the problems of literacy for the Hmong. . . ."
In recognition of their compelling circumstances and extraordinary sacrifices, H.R. 371 provides for an exemption from the English language requirement and authorizes special consideration relating to the civics requirement.
The Gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Vento), the author of this legislation, may have put it best when he testified as follows before the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims in the last Congress: "[T]hey probably have passed the most important test, Mr. Chairman, and that is risking their lives for the values and beliefs that we revere as Americans and saving American lives.
. . ."
The step we hopefully will take today is overdue.
In the 104^th Congress, this body passed an omnibus immigration reform bill in a form that included provisions designed to expedite naturalization for those who served with special guerilla units in Laos - - but these provisions were not incorporated in the final version of the legislation.
In the 105^th Congress, the Gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Vento) introduced as H.R. 371 language virtually identical to the original House passed provisions from the previous Congress.
In June 1997, the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims held a hearing on H.R. 371.
The following year the Subcommittee favorably reported an amended version of the bill to the full Committee on the Judiciary.
As amended, H.R. 371 addressed concerns about the potential for fraud by delineating steps to be taken in determining eligibility and limiting to 45,000 the number of potential beneficiaries.
Although the full Committee on the Judiciary, in June 1998, ordered the bill - - as amended in subcommittee - - favorably reported, no further action was taken in the 105^th Congress.
In the 106^th Congress, the gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Vento) reintroduced his bill under the same number - - H.R. 371 - - incorporating changes the Committee on the Judiciary supported in 1998.
In March of this year, the full Committee on the Judiciary again acted favorably - - this time ordering H.R. 371 reported by voice vote.
As this history documents, the details of this legislation have been considered thoroughly by the Committee on the Judiciary - - and we bring it up on the floor today with improvements my Committee approved in both the last Congress and the current Congress.
In our most recent markup, I displayed a Pandau "story cloth" depicting the escape of Hmong refugees across the Mekong River to a camp in Thailand after their villages were strafed by Communist forces in Laos.
Such story cloths were a way of communicating Hmong history by people who knew no written language.
This bill will permit a limited number of lawful permanent residents of the United States who served with special guerilla units or irregular forces in support of the U.S. military during the Vietnam War to become citizens.
They must have been legally admitted to this country as refugees from Laos.
Provision is also made for certain spouses who came as refugees.
It is particularly significant that the bill before us focuses on people who already are here in the United States legally and permanently.
In view of their commitment to our democracy, and the great hardships they endured when they made common cause with us, we act appropriately by extending a hand to them now and helping them become citizens of their adopted land.
This is just and humane legislation Members can endorse regardless of political affiliation.
Governor Ventura of Minnesota appealed to me on behalf of these freedom fighters in February, and I welcomed the opportunity to assure him and the Gentleman from Minnesota (Mr. Vento) that I would do whatever I could to help get H.R. 371 enacted into law.
Supporters of this important bill include the American Legion and the Special Forces Association.
I urge my colleagues to support enactment of H.R. 371.
Mr. Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
