[newbanner.jpg] LABOR COMMISSIONER ADDRESSES COUNTY OFFICIALS ABOUT LOCAL WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT EFFORTS TRENTON, March 7, 2003 - New Jersey Depa
"From Sussex to Salem, our county one-stop career centers are taking the lead in preparing our workforce to deal with the challenges of new economic realities," Kroll told a roomful of officials at the New Jersey Association of Counties meeting Friday morning.
Kroll told attendees how customers are benefiting from professional job search workshops, retail skills centers, reverse commute services, and computer-based distance learning.
"Each area of the state has its own unique needs for job training and workforce development," Kroll said.
"We're tailoring our one-stop career centers to meet those needs on a county-by-county basis."
A common concern for workers and employers is finding straightforward, clear direction on employment and training programs.
The one-stop system, coupled with the state's decision to integrate all workforce development and job training programs under a new "Department of Labor and Workforce Development," is in the process of eliminating this fragmentation and confusion.
One-stop career centers across the state are reaching out to young people via computer systems at high schools, using evening hours to let individuals who work access English as a Second Language and literacy classes, and providing free drop-in child care centers for individuals involved in job search activities or training, Kroll told attendees.
Specific county one-stops are also taking the lead.
In Cumberland County, there is a career services lab that offers short-term distance learning over the Internet.
Included in the lab are 58 programs on professional development and 51 programs in technical fields.
Local one-stop career centers in Bergen, Essex, Hudson, Passaic, and Monmouth are participating in the Sept. 11 Employment Assistance program.
The program identifies individuals who worked in Chinatown and below Canal St. and who lost jobs and earning because their places of employment were destroyed, closed, or lost business as a result of the tragedy.
Eligible dislocated workers are offered job training, job development, and placement services, as well as job search allowances, job training allowances, and paid health benefits while training.
This is part of the Sept. 11 Fund's Ongoing Recovery Program and is expected to be offered through January 2004.
The Camden one-stop is creating a Camden Business Forum and Business Service Center, as well as establishing a retail sales and customer service skills training center, creating a list of entry-level civil service job openings in the city, and awarding a grant to conduct pre-employment training in construction trades for city residents.
Additionally, literacy labs are scheduled to open in Salem, Hudson, Mercer, Newark, Ocean, Passaic, Burlington, Somerset, Middlesex, Sussex, Atlantic, Essex, Warren, Morris, Cape May, Cumberland, Hunterdon, and Union counties in the coming months.
The program, available in English and Spanish covers computer and workplace communication skills, and teaches math and reading as well.
Kroll also addressed the ongoing consolidation of workforce development and job training programs.
"In order to make employers more competitive, it's our duty to provide a better educated, better trained, and more highly skilled workforce," Kroll said.
Details on the consolidation, announced by Governor James E. McGreevey this winter, are currently being worked out between the various departments that currently handle workforce programs.
An action plan will be implemented by July 1, with the changes to be fully implemented by June 30, 2004.
