[Skip Navigation] [Text 
Where Can I Find the Law? The general law on naturalization is located at Section 312 and Section 316 of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
You may also access the Hmong Veterans' Naturalization Act of 2000.
You can also access the November 1, 2000, revisions to the Act.
Who is Eligible? You may be eligible to apply for the exemption and special consideration if you can answer "yes" to any of the following questions: * Were you admitted to the United States as a refugee from Laos (pursuant to section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act), AND did you support the United States military by serving with a special guerrilla unit (SGU), or irregular forces operating from a base in Laos at any time between February 28, 1961 through September 18, 1978? OR * Are you the widow of such a veteran described above who died or was killed in Laos, Thailand, or Vietnam and were you admitted to the United State as a refugee from Laos (pursuant to section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act)? OR * Were you married to such a veteran the day the veteran applied for admission into the United States as a refugee from Laos and were you admitted into the United State as a refugee from Laos (pursuant to section 207 of the Immigration and Nationality Act)?
How Do I Apply? Eligible applicantsincluding those who currently have pending naturalization applicationscan request this benefit at the time of their naturalization interview.
There are no additional forms to be completed and no additional fee.
See A Guide to Naturalization and Form N-400.
Form N-400 is filed with the BCIS Service Center having jurisdiction over your place of residence.
Is There More Information? Read The Hmong Veterans Naturalization Act of 2000.
How Can I Check the Status of My Application? See Finding the Status of My Case.
Can Anyone Help Me? If advice is needed, you may contact the BCIS District Office near your home for a list of community-based, non-profit organizations that may be able to assist you in applying for an immigration benefit.
Please see our field offices home page for more information on contacting BCIS offices.
In addition, please see Finding Free Legal Advice.
Last Modified 02/19/2003
