Regional CQI Team Notes April 3, 2003 Attending: Jim O., Alex K., Kathy K., Kathy H., Brian H., Malinda B. Don W.
Agenda: 1.
Meeting Schedule 2.
Mystery Shopper Data 3.
Comment Card Link on Go2WorkSource 4.
Business Comment Card--updates and review of where we are.
5.
Data Display--how is this going? 6.
WSQA Symposium on 5/20/03 7.
Other 8.
Next Meeting Agenda
I. Meeting Schedule
It was suggested that we look at changing the regularly scheduled meeting times of the CQI team as some members had on-going schedule conflicts.
Decision was to keep it the same at this time, not enough representation at this meeting to select a time that works for everyone.
II.
Mystery Shopper Data
Noted that the team will have this on our agenda in May upon receipt of
Gary 's action item from the last meeting- a draft commentary report of the information for staff use.
Discussion: on trending this data and how the data fits into our aggregate CQI system had the following key points:
· The Mystery Shoppers (MS) appear to enter the system with a given scenario- e.g. disability issues, business services issues.
What are they looking for with each scenario and how does this impact our services to customers systemically?
· Does their data correspond to our comment card data or are there mismatched areas?
· Noted that in "trending" we would not trend a theme, but rather trend responsiveness, wait time, hand-offs/appropriate referrals, and courtesy.
· In looking at the MS data, would we want the Council to request additional MS visits? Noted that data is useful based on the frequency of collection.
· When looking at the MS data are we simply to present the results or are we to develop recommended actions? And how does this fit into our notion of the CQI system?
ACTION for all team members (in response to a discussion during the last DAIT reviewing the charge and work of partnership teams in order to evaluate the teams' systemic efficacy and in connection with the last bulleted item): Review the strategic and operational plans and ID 1) what need updating and 2) are we actually working the system as described in the strategic and operational plans?
Based on the above discussion points we developed three overall questions:
1.
Are there items we want to collect regular data on?
2.
Is there anything we want to address now?
3.
How does MS data fit into our overall system or how do we build this in our system?
It was noted that prior to the implementation of the Mystery Shopper, Barbara Bergener visited DAIT and our region developed three key questions we wanted incorporated into the mystery shopper for local CQI improvements.
They were:
Job Seeker Customers: Did you get your questions answered? Did you know what your next steps are? Did the products seem to work with the flow? Business Customers: Were you introduced to additional services? Were you provided the opportunity to give feedback? Were you asked enough questions to develop a plan to meet your needs?
ACTION ALEX: Get a copy of the MS report that goes to the WDA Directors to see if we glean some detailed information--answer/speak to above questions/issues.
III. 4^th Quarter Narrative Summary--review and comment.
Noted that presenting the data in this narrative format (a trendline rather than comparing discreet same quarters or discreet quarter to previous quarter comparisons) was well received at DAIT.
Questions: Should we follow this format with the annual report? Should we follow this format with the leadership report?
Noted that our leadership report should not be exclusive to customer comment cards, but should also include center usage numbers and workshop evaluations.
Noted that leadership meets in one week's time.
The team would like to improve in the total content of its reports to leadership for future reports.
Appropriate time will be devoted in future agendas to ensure we are analyzing and presenting the necessary data in a timely fashion.
ACTION KATHY H.: provide the team with an annual schedule outlining timelines of various reports.
Zoomerang: Brian pointed out during this discussion that the Zoomerang product "enhanced" itself once again--that we can access data for only 10 days after the launch of a survey.
He also stated that this product continues to increase in cost, and will now cost $600 to use - to be able to access the survey results after that initial 10 days.
(Previous cost was $399 per year).
System wide we are using Zoomerang for comment cards, follow up surveys for staff trainings, and internal 
It was noted that our data collection system format is driven by the compatibility with Zoomerang.
ACTION BRIAN: convene a meeting in Skagit the next time Mel is down south with Angela to take a look at the Zoomerang product.
Questions to be addressed at this meeting: Is there a competitive product that is better/can meet our needs? Can we develop something in-house that meets our needs (and we can control)?
Continual Analysis of Data: As we continue to review the comment card data we noted that there might be a way to focus our efforts.
Decision: instead of averaging measures and comparing a measure to itself, the team will average all measures and concentrate on the lowest measure in comparison to the total.
Increasing the lowest areas in comparison to the total would have "more bang for the buck" in terms of brining up overall ratings.
IV.
Comment Card Link on Go2
Discussion around prospective need or advantage of capturing customer satisfaction data for those accessing services via the internet by attaching our comment card on our local link.
Noted that Snohomish has a web we may want to visit.
Noted that our questions/comments do not fit web-accessed customers.
Could propose the question, "have you visited a center?" then proceed to questionnaire.
Noted that we may want to focus our energy to capturing data from phone customers prior to web customers.
Noted that state Go2 has a feedback mechanism, but not a customer satisfaction survey.
Decision was made to leave this alone at this time.
V. Business Comment Card--updates and review of where we are.
· Bob and Shannon have been oriented to the business customer comment card.
· Minnie has this linked up, unsure of what her version looks like.
Discussion points:
· Should be look at this for improvements and bring to DAIT.
· Unsure where the data lies and how do we access it
· There is a difference between business comment cards and business services.
Would this team have a better handle on what to do with this data if business core services is better defined?
NEW ACTION ALEX: find out if there is any current business satisfaction data other than ASCI.
(Old action was bring samples of state survey and ASCI questions/responses to next).
ACTION GARY : check with other workforce areas to see what products/mechanisms they have in place for gathering Business satisfaction data.
VI. Comment Card Data Display
It's out there.
We want to know how customers receive this.
ACTION GARY and KATHY K.: during your staff meetings with resource specialists, ask targeted question regarding customer feedback to the data display.
How is it received? Are customers noticing this? Does it seem this prompts them to fill out a feedback form? Request that they start attending to this if they haven't noticed anything.
VII.
WSQA Symposium on 5/20/03
Noted that this was something Michael brought to the table--we want to know more and what value this brings to our team.
ACTION KATHY H.: connect with Michael and find out what he feels would be of benefit, would he like to represent the team, does he have ES funds available for this, would having a local presence there be meaningful?
ACTION ALEX: connect with Gay to determine if this a 1-rock, 2-bird deal--benefit to the team in terms of 1.
obtaining information that improves our approach to CQI and 2.
building relationships w/ local business regarding the MB process and prospective local interest in becoming a certification member for the Council.
VIII.
Other
Abby Cooper and a team from DVR will be coming to complete assessments of our Centers in regards to disability access issues.
The team wondered if we could make the debrief session open to staff at Centers with the goal being raising our awareness of serving people with disabilities, increasing access, and improving customer satisfaction.
ACTION JIM: connect with Abby to see who could be involved in the debrief cc- Malinda this correspondence.
ACTION ALEX: connect with leaders to see if they think the above is a good idea.
Noted in our last meeting that team member Don experienced capacity issues in working the data in the variety of ways.
Reminder that we are trying to reach a point in how we want to consistently analyze and display the data.
Reminder that we may want to research the cost/efficiency of contracting this work out.
Noted that this topic links to the Zoomerang issue, and where we go from there.
Noted that we should be considering if Excel is the appropriate program--may want to look at Statistica.
Noted that Don has more time allotted to this work now.
Decision--when we are ready to make big changes, we will have the conversation around getting consulting expertise.
ACTION ALEX: connect with Gay to discuss the possibility of requesting resources/expertise from Barbara Bergener's shop regarding CQI data.
Next Agenda(s) Items:
4/17/03
1.
Data relating to our lowest performance areas--which and what to do?
2.
Look at the new performance measures under WIA reauthorization.
3.
Data from the Mystery Shopper
4.
1^st Quarter Data '03
5/1/ 0 3
1.
Business Comment Cards
2.
Strategic Plan Discussion
3.
A Systemic approach at how we capture phone customers' data.
