skip navigation United States Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Administration FHWA Home Feedback Picture of a bridge with the sun behind it 2001 FHWA Report to the American People Picture of a bridge with the sun behind it administrators's message america's lifelines our roles Role 1 Role 2 Role 3 Role 4 Role 5 Role 6 Closing Results Financial Supporting Transportation System Improvements At FHWA, we help our partners enhance the U.S. transportation system, supporting our country's economic vitality, quality of life, and environment.
This is the heart of the FHWA mission.
To meet our national needs, we make funds available for projects chosen by state departments of transportation (DOTs), metropolitan planning organizations, and other partners.
We focus on the contracting process and timelines and ensure compliance with federal requirements.
The projects profiled in this section illustrate the range of FHWA's recent work with a variety of public and private-sector partners.
Jump to: In and Out in 72 Hours: U.S. 395, Washington State An Ecological Treasure: Tweeds Mill Bridge, Delaware Expedited Project Delivery: State Highways 4 and 17, New Jersey Design-Build Successes: Cooper River Bridge, South Carolina, and I-15 reconstruction, Utah The Big "I": I-25/I-40 interchange, New Mexico Life in the Mixing Bowl: Springfield interchange, Virginia The Wildlife Highway: U.S. 441 ecopassage, Florida Environmental Streamlining: U.S. 119, Pennsylvania Rural Public Transit and More: RYDE, Nebraska More Freight, Less Delay: Alameda Corridor, California Preserving the Spirit of Place: U.S. 93, Montana The Sparkling Necklace: San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, California The Mega-Projects Team: Central Artery/Tunnel Project, Massachusetts Building a Smarter Roadway: U.S. 15, Maryland and Virginia
In and Out in 72 Hours | Back to Top Faced with the prospect of lengthy work zone projects to reconstruct three intersections on U.S. 395 in Kennewick, the Washington State Department of Transportation (WSDOT) took a bold step.
It decided to shut down each intersection completely for one weekend, enabling work to be completed on an aggressive timeline built around hours instead of days.
An intensive information campaign for motorists and the use of quick-setting Portland cement concrete were instrumental in the ahead-of- schedule completion of each project.
An open-house co-hosted by WSDOT, the American Concrete Pavement Association, and FHWA drew attendees from surrounding states and Canada who wanted to learn more about this innovative way to complete major projects with minimal impacts on mobility and safety.
A similar weekend closure of New Circle Road for bridge repairs in Lexington, Kentucky, was also welcomed as the technique of the future by local residents and press.
Picture of the pedestrian bridge spanning White Clay Creek Tweeds Mill Bridge, Delaware
An Ecological Treasure | Back to Top The Tweeds Mill Bridge over White Clay Creek, Delaware, built of hand-cut stone more than 150 years ago, fell into disrepair and out of service early in the 20th century.
Given the significance of White Clay Creek as "a national ecological treasure," the Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control and the Delaware Department of Transportation constructed a new pedestrian bridge on the surviving stone bridge abutments and wing walls.
The state combined federal funds (Transportation Enhancement and Recreational Trail) with state funds to build the bridge.
The new 90-foot, self-weathering steel span was dedicated on June 1, 2001, and enhances the safety and pleasure of visitors to White Clay Creek State Park.
Expedited Project Delivery | Back to Top The intersection of State Highways 4 and 17 in Paramus, New Jersey, was built in the early 1930s and currently accommodates more than 280,000 vehicles per day.
The state DOT expected reconstruction of this critical and congested intersection, located near three shopping malls, to take four years.
Innovative contracting methods promoted by the FHWA, including a complex contractor cash-incentive program, shortened the federal-aid project time by 15 months.
Construction costs amounted to approximately $57 million, with an additional $40 million in right-of-way (ROW) funds.
The state of New Jersey was nominated for a National Partnership of Highway Quality Achievement Award for its work on the State Highways 4 and 17 project.
Picture of a road construction site
Design-Build Successes | Back to Top The design-build concept allows contractors maximum flexibility for innovation in selecting design, materials, and construction methods.
With design-build procurement, the contracting agency identifies the end result and establishes the design criteria.
Prospective bidders then develop design proposals that optimize their construction abilities.
From the contracting agency's perspective, the potential for time savings is a significant benefit.
Since the design and construction are performed through one procurement, construction can begin before all design details are finalized.
The following describes two current major projects featuring design-build construction.
An Economic Boost Two aging bridges, the narrow Grace Bridge and the three-lane Pearman Bridge, span the Cooper River and connect Charleston and Mt. Pleasant, South Carolina.
The bridges have been unable to meet steadily increasing traffic demands, and their low heights have limited shipping activities in Cooper River.
As a result, mobility, safety, and productivity have been affected.
In 2001 the South Carolina Department of Transportation and officials of Charleston, Mt. Pleasant, and FHWA agreed to use design-build contracting to erect a 2.5-mile cable-stayed bridge that will provide a link to vital federal defense facilities, major employment centers in North Charleston, and residential and recreational areas east of Cooper River.
It will also enhance national and international shipping accessibility to the Port of Charleston and ensure the continued economic development of the region.
With its 1,546-foot main channel span, the bridge is one of the longest cable-stayed structures under construction in the world.
An Olympic Undertaking The I-15 reconstruction in Utah involved more than 142 bridges, 18 miles of interstate, eight interchanges with urban crossroads, and three major junctions with other interstates, including I-80 and I-215.
All work had to be completed before the 2002 Winter Olympic Games.
FHWA and the Utah Department of Transportation's I-15 Team used design-build contracting to complete the project on time and on budget.
The agencies also developed a public relations initiative to offer the latest traffic information to the traveling public via: a website with real-time photos, toll-free telephone numbers, faxes to businesses, advertising, and public meetings.
The PR campaign helped to achieve widespread public approval of the project despite the significant disruption to travel in the Salt Lake Valley.
Dedicated on May 14, 2001, the new I-15 will help meet the crush of Olympics traffic and serve motorists in Utah for years to come.
The Big "I" | Back to Top The I-25/I-40 interchange in downtown Albuquerque, New Mexico, was originally designed for daily volumes of 40,000 vehicles.
In 2002 it will handle 400,000 vehicles a day.
Innovative designs were submitted to meet the New Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department's (NMSHTD) aggressive 24-month construction schedule.
If met, this schedule will establish a national record for most rapid completion of an urban freeway interchange of this size.
FHWA committed an on-site bridge engineer to work with NMSHTD for the duration of the project to accelerate construction changes and work order adjustments.
This unusual measure has proven to be a significant factor in moving the Big "I" project ahead of schedule, shortening the period of inconvenience for city travelers.
Aerial view of the interchange of Interstates 25 and 40 Big "I," Albuquerque, New Mexico
Life in the Mixing Bowl | Back to Top The Springfield Interchange Project in northern Virginia is an eight-year, seven-phase construction project in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area.
One of the largest reconstruction projects in the nation, it began in 1999.
Known for years as the Mixing Bowl, this interchange blends I-95 through-traffic with local traffic on I-495, I-395, and VA 644.
The question was how to keep 400,000 vehicles a day moving through the interchange area as construction progresses.
Working with the FHWA, the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) created an extensive congestion management plan, featuring no lane closures during rush hours, subsidized train and bus fares, and additional park-and-ride lots at shopping mall transit pick-up points.
As a result, traffic is running smoother now than before construction began.
Aerial view of the Springfield Interchange Springfield Interchange, Springfield, Virginia
The Wildlife Highway | Back to Top Along a two-mile stretch of U.S. 441 in Florida's Paynes Prairie State Preserve, frogs, snakes, alligators, and 75 other wildlife species were falling victim to motor vehicles and posing a serious threat to traveler safety.
To solve this problem, a group composed of state transportation and natural resource agencies, environmental groups, and the University of Florida came up with an innovative strategy: construct concrete walls to contain area wildlife.
The three-and-a-half-foot walls feature a six-inch lip at the top, similar to walls in zoo serpentariums, that channel animals along the roadway and into one of eight culverts beneath U.S. 441.
The Florida Department of Transportation, working with the FHWA, completed the project in one year, enhancing safety on U.S. 441.
The design has since been dubbed an ecopassage.
Picture of wall and culvert alongside U.S. 441 in Florida
Environmental Streamlining | Back to Top To meet the mandates of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century and the National Environmental Protection Act (NEPA), FHWA is working in partnership with federal agencies and the states to make good, sound project decisions faster.
Environmental streamlining--primarily shortening the number of months to complete environmental studies--is a priority throughout FHWA.
For example, on the U.S. 119 improvement project in Indiana County, the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (PennDOT) completed and FHWA approved the environmental impact statement in only 22 months instead of the average 3 years for similar projects.
Combining early agency coordination and the creative use of technology, PennDOT engaged the public and accomplished better environmental results in less time.
Features included use of CD-ROM technology to review permits and make decisions, a revised NEPA coordination process, and development of regional environ--mental streamlining approaches.
FHWA recognized the PennDOT project team with an Environmental Excellence Award.
Rural Public Transit and More | Back to Top Reach Your Destination Easily (RYDE) began operation in central Nebraska in January 2000 with two buses and a van, transporting elderly persons and other special needs passengers to such destinations as medical facilities and shopping areas.
That first month, the system carried 1,180 passengers a total of 5,471 miles.
Less than one year later, monthly boardings increased to 4,055 passengers traveling 10,797 miles.
In July 2001, FHWA provided funding for a computerized dispatch to cover the large distances in the service area.
RYDE performs a vital service by transporting medical patients, who comprise 20 to 30 percent of daily riders.
Thirty percent of riders are wheelchair users.
Partners for RYDE include the Buffalo County Community Health Partners, Mid-Nebraska Community Action, Nebraska State Department of Roads, Buffalo County, and the Federal Transit Administration.
More Freight, Less Delay | Back to Top FHWA works closely with states, localities, and the private sector to alleviate congestion and improve the efficiency of freight transportation.
In 1996, the U.S. DOT provided $400 million in loans for work on the Alameda Corridor in California, one of several high-priority transportation corridors identified in TEA-21.
The project will improve railroad and highway access to the Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, two of the busiest ports in the United States.
Along the 20-mile corridor, all freight rail operations will be consolidated into one high-capacity route and 200 rail-highway-grade crossings will be eliminated, a move that will significantly increase safety.
These changes will save an estimated 15,000 hours of delay per day for vehicles at railroad crossings.
Alameda Street, which runs from downtown Los Angeles to the ports, also will be improved to provide better access to highway ramps.
The $2.4 billion Alameda Corridor project will create economic benefits that extend well beyond Southern California to other parts of the nation by helping to maintain U.S. competitiveness in international trade.
Currently, the project is on schedule for expected completion in April 2002.
Loan paybacks are guaranteed by charging rail lines a fee of $30 per container to use the Corridor.
Preserving the Spirit of Place | Back to Top The widening of a 56-mile portion of U.S. 93 in Montana posed a special challenge to the Montana Department of Transportation (MDT).
This stretch bisects the reservation of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) of the Flathead Native American Nation-two groups who felt strongly that any reconstruction project to improve safety and operations should show respect to their homeland and allow the highway traveler to enjoy the beauty of the country.
In December 2000, the FHWA, the MDT, and the CSKT agreed to create a context-sensitive design that includes animal crossings and a focus on cultural and historic preservation within a concept termed Spirit of Place.
This sensitivity has raised the bar for future partnerships within communities; the design will be adapted to improve safety and mobility within the state and region.
Aerial view of U.S. 93 in Montana
The Sparkling Necklace | Back to Top In July 2001, the FHWA approved the Record of Decision that concluded the environmental review for replacing the earthquake-damaged east span of the historic San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, which opened in 1936.
A few days later, the California Department of Transportation advertised the first of four construction projects in the area.
FHWA worked closely with federal, state, and local officials to overcome many challenges before selecting the best replacement alternative, a unique design that not only complements the west span and the nearby Golden Gate Bridge but is constructed using the latest technology for resisting future earthquakes.
The design for the new east span has been called one more diamond in the sparkling necklace of bridges that ring the Bay.
Picture of the east span of the historic San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge
The Mega-Projects Team | Back to Top The Central Artery/Tunnel Project (CA/T), in Boston, Massachusetts, is one of the most spectacular engineering challenges in the history of the Interstate System.
Known as the Big Dig, the CA/T Project includes building a tunnel to replace the 1950s era elevated I-93 freeway while the freeway remains in operation; providing a third harbor tunnel that will extend I-90 to improve access to Logan International Airport; and creating a signature I-93 cable-stayed bridge across the Charles River.
Controversy has added to the challenge.
Project management and cost increases have made the Big Dig, at more than $14 billion, the most expensive interstate project ever.
Experience on the CA/T and other projects prompted DOT to establish a task force on oversight of large transportation infrastructure projects.
As a member of the task force, FHWA is implementing the recommendations on all large and complex (mega) federal-aid projects.
Although state transportation departments will retain primary responsibility for managing mega-projects (projects over $1 billion), FHWA will ensure improved planning to meet the TEA-21 requirement of annual approval of a financial plan for all such projects.
Though controversial, the CA/T project has been responsible for innovative design, construction, and other technologies that advance highway, bridge, and tunnel technology.
Building a Smarter Roadway | Back to Top Although a narrow two-lane roadway, U.S. 15 serves as an important and heavily traveled corridor between Maryland and Leesburg, Virginia.
This road has recently experienced an increased number of traffic crashes involving injuries and fatalities.
While it is not involved in funding the reconstruction project, FHWA participates in a task force consisting of citizens, elected officials, local agencies, VDOT, and the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration, which has identified many low-cost, short-term improvements to increase safety.
The improvements include lowering the speed limit, installing flashing yellow beacons to alert drivers to the lower limit, new traffic signals, center line rumble strips, and widening shoulders and edge lines.
The results have been rewarding.
Average speeds decreased (from 60 mph to 45 mph) as have serious injuries and fatalities.
FHWA continues to participate in the task force, which meets regularly to see if other adjustments are needed.
An FHWA participant says this project is one of the best examples he has ever seen of small improvements having big safety impacts.
Report Home | Disclaimer _________________________________________________________________
FHWA Home | Feedback
FHWA
United States Department of Transportation - Federal Highway Administration
