Statement of the Honorable Dan Miller, M.C., Florida Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Trade of the House Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on the United States Negotiating Objectives for the WTO Seattle Ministerial Meeting August 5, 1999 Chairman Crane, Ranking Member Levin, Distinguished Colleagues: Thank you for allowing me to testify about the important WTO ministerial meeting that will take place in Seattle later this year.
I feel this is "fish or cut bait" time for the United States in seeking free and fair trade and to truly help our farmers and industry.
I applaud this committee for holding this important hearing.
Much of the financial hardship being experienced by our nation's farmers is due to contraction of overseas markets for U.S. agricultural exports.
What I want to stress to you today is the importance of having the United States Trade Representative enter into the Seattle Round with "clean hands" in order to change that troublesome trend.
Ostensibly, Seattle is an opportunity to knock down barriers to trades and allow American industry a greater opportunity to export into other countries.
This would result in greater incomes for U.S. farmers and businesses.
The sugar program undermines our trade objectives and is colliding with efforts to help small farmers.
The Seattle meeting is the best opportunity to be pro-U.S. farmer if we have the courage to knock down barriers.
If every country is allowed to exempt politically well connected commodities from trade negotiations by taking them off the table before they enter the room, then there can be no progress on free trade.
For example, if the United States continues to knock out foreign sugar, then Canada can justify kicking out United States dairy and Europe can knock out US oilseed crops, and so on.
Seattle must not allow this protectionist and wasteful cycle to continue.
Quite simply, our negotiators must decide whether it is more important to preserve an outdated sugar program than to open markets for competitive American farm products.
Remember the US sugar program hurts more people than it helps.
I would like to concentrate my remarks on how the domestic sugar program hurts our economy and hampers the competitiveness of many important American industries.
As you know, I have been very active in reforming the sugar program and I have introduced H.R. 1850 to phase out this program.
Through price supports, the sugar program keeps the price of sugar in the United States artificially high.
By tightly limiting the amount of sugar that may be imported into the United States, and subsidizing the operations of sugar producers through federal loans, the sugar program forces the price of domestic sugar to be at least twice as high as the price of sugar on the world market.
While this is a sweet deal for sugar producers, it leaves a sour taste in the mouths of taxpayers, consumers, American workers, and the environment.
The GAO estimates that the sugar program costs consumers more than $1 billion every year in higher prices for food and table sugar.
Jobs for American workers have been eliminated because of sugar refineries that have been forced to shut down and because of companies relocating overseas where sugar is cheaper.
A more recent GAO study shows that domestic users incur a cost of $200 million annually for each penny in excess of the estimated price needed to avoid forfeitures.
This does not even address the higher costs forced on users by the inflated prices of the program.
The environment is damaged by sugar production in Florida.
The subsidized production of sugar in Florida results in phosphorous-laden run-off flowing into the Everglades, which contributes to the destruction of this fragile ecosystem.
Amazingly, the federal government continues to subsidize sugar producers, even as Congress participates in a multi-billion dollar project to repair the damage done to the Everglades.
Recently, the Army Corps of Engineers announced a long-awaited and ambitious plan to save the Everglades.
For the past several Congresses I have introduced amendments to the Agriculture Appropriations Bill as well as stand alone legislation to reform the federal sugar program.
This year I introduced H.R. 1850 with Congressman George Miller (D-CA).
H.R. 1850 has the support of national taxpayer, consumer, and environmental advocacy groups.
It has also been co-sponsored by Trade subcommittee Chairman Crane and subcommittee members Clay Shaw and Jim Ramstad.
As my time is limited let me concentrate on several troublesome aspects of this program.
Specifically, how the sugar program costs consumers over $1 billion dollars a year and benefits a select few sugar producers.
Moreover, I will discuss how the sugar program kills U.S. sugar refinery and manufacturing jobs.
Costs to Taxpayers
In 1993, the GAO has estimated that the present sugar program costs over $1 billion per year in higher prices for table sugar and food.
This cost has been confirmed by Public Voice for Food and Health Policy.
I believe this cost is probably higher today due to the disparity of world sugar prices and the US sugar program price.
Not only do higher costs affect the prices paid at the cash register, they affect the taxpayer in the costs of government.
Higher food costs mean higher entitlement spending under Food Stamps or other government programs such as school lunches and Meals on Wheels.
It is a regressive form of corporate welfare benefitting a select few producers while making every consumer pay more at the cash register to justify this program.
The U.S. Department of Commerce has noted that the "effect of the sugar program is similar to a regressive sales tax, which hits lower-income families harder than upper income families."
If you support regressive taxation, then I guess you have no problem with the U.S. sugar program.
If you do not favor taxing the poor more heavily, however, you should favor changes in our sugar policies.
Finally, the flight of businesses out of the country due to the high domestic cost of sugar results in lost revenue at the local, state and federal levels.
Although no calculation of this lost revenue is currently available, it is significant in light of the many thousands of displaced workers.
Benefit to a Select Few
The GAO reported that 42% of the sugar programs benefits went to just 1 % of the sugar producers in 1991 and 33 big sugar barons each received more than $1 million in extra revenues under the program.
One producer even received $65 million in one year.
Time Magazine did a story last November on the Fanjul family that outlined how the U.S. sugar subsidy has helped propel this family into the ranks of the multi-millionaires.
I commend it to your reading as it fairly captures how the sugar program helps a few well connected folks while sacrificing the good of the rest of the country.
I must emphasize this because you will hear; "Don't kick farmers when they are down" or "the family farm needs support, not a kick in the teeth."
Great sound bites, but totally inappropriate with the sugar program.
Sugar plantations are not family farms in the normal sense of that phrase.
In 1995, the USDA compared the non-cash economic benefits that accrue to farmers of various commodities thanks to government action.
Wheat gets $23 per acre in government benefits, cotton farmers $87 per acre.
Sugar gets $472 per acre.
Moreover this artificially high price per acre of sugar acreage complicates efforts to restore the Everglades by creating an economic incentive to utilize more Everglades for sugar farming.
And all this benefit goes to a select few sugar barons.
So when our trade representatives defend the US sugar program in global trade talks, they are defending the Fanjuls, the politically well connected, the select few, but definitely not the average family farmer hurt by the contraction of overseas markets.
The USTR must not protect a few folks who are profiting from an overpriced subsidy program at the expense of cattlemen, corn growers and other important American commodities.
Nor must the USTR protect the select few sugar barons at the expense of the many important domestic users of sugar such as candy makers and refineries which are important US industries.
Jobs Lost
The two main American industries adversely affected by our sugar program are sugar refineries and manufacturers of products that utilize sugar.
Often, sugar refineries are unable to find a consistent and adequate supply of sugar to operate year round.
The variations create economic inefficiencies and waste which result in these facilities being unable to stay in business.
Moreover, refineries process sugar and require sugar cane and beet to operate.
Needless to say, buying this raw material in the United States is overly expensive when compared to the world price.
Why would a company buy large quantities of sugar cane at $ .22 per pound when they can buy at $.045 per pound in a foreign nation and take advantage of other favorable economic factors such as labor costs and government regulation? Defending the status quo will only send more jobs overseas.
Accordingly, it is not hard to see why our sugar system is sending refinery jobs overseas.
As recently as 1981 there were 23 sugar refineries in the United States.
Today, there are only 11 refineries.
Over 3,500 jobs have been lost by closures at the refineries due to a sugar program that only benefits a select few.
Similarly, manufacturers of products that rely on sugar are greatly affected by the present sugar subsidy.
Ask any businessman would they rather buy sugar at 22 cents per pound or at 4.5 cents per pound and they would all agree they would like the cheaper sugar.
Even with a duty that raises the cost to over 19 cents per pound when sugar is brought into America, businessmen know that 19 cents is cheaper than 22 cents.
And businessmen know that they need to pack up and leave the United States if they want to get that cheaper sugar.
Also, the incentive remains to move operations overseas if the company is pursuing an aggressive export strategy.
I think the best example of the present sugar program driving jobs out of America is the story of Bob's Candies.
Bob's Candies was the largest producer of candy canes in America.
Candy canes are a very cyclical industry and are made to be a low cost candy.
However, the U.S. sugar program throws large roadblocks in the way of domestic candy makers.
Accordingly, Bob's Candies moved to Jamaica where sugar is much cheaper.
The president of Bob's Candies recently told Reader's Digest that the company would save more than $2 million a year in raw materials if the sugar program was scrapped.
This savings would enable the company to keep jobs in America and lower retail prices.
Unfortunately, it just makes good business sense to go overseas to get cheaper sugar to make candy.
How many Bob's Candy Canes will this Committee tolerate?
Also, the Committee should note that the cost of our sugar program was a main reason why Coke and other soda companies do not use sugar in soft drinks.
Sugar got too expensive.
The program priced sugar out of the lucrative soft drink industry.
Instead, soft drinks now use high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) which does not have the high costs and economic inefficiencies of the sugar program.
Finally, I ask this committee to keep in mind the fact the sugar industry is not large in comparison to other aspects of the economy.
According to USDA data there are between 40,000 and 70,000 jobs directly related to the sugar program.
This is a small number compared to the 520,000 jobs in the food processing industry or the thousands of lost Everglades related tourist jobs.
Congress and our trade representatives must not blindly protect a small special interest sugar program at the expense of the greater good.
The U.S. sugar protection program and its implementation causes odd distortions in the world wide import and export of sugar that are utterly inconsistent with free trade and free markets.
According to the GAO study on the sugar program released just this week, the United States allocates import levels to some 40 trading partner countries in a manner that bears little relationship to the realities of supply and demand.
For example, Brazil and the Philippines are both "allowed" by the USTR to import approximately the same tonnage of sugar under this bizarre quota system despite the fact that Brazil produces 21 times more sugar (5,215,000 tons) than the Philippines (249,000 tons).
Furthermore, 10 of the 40 countries who are given sugar quota allocations by the United States to import sugar here are actually net importers of sugar themselves.
11 of the 40 countries who receive an allocation have average worldwide export levels that are less than their U.S. allocation level.
Can such a system really be consistent with our free trade message? How would the United States react if one of our trading partners gave American corn farmers a quota level that was the same as that of Honduras? Would we take seriously another country's admonitions about free trade if that country allocated imports of American beef at the same low level as those of Liberia? These are the questions that naturally flow from examination of our sugar program and I hope that our trade representatives at Seattle do not feel compelled to expend valuable credibility defending such an archaic and economically inefficient system that does not advance the overall interests of the United States.
Put another way, the Seattle meeting must be the forum for the United States to effectuate the greater good.
Many more American jobs and consumers need cheaper sugar and many more non-sugar farmers need our trade policy to be freed from the millstone of our domestic sugar subsidy.
If the Seattle Ministerial is successful, the USTR can save American jobs in refining and manufacturing of anything that uses sugar.
Also, the USTR will save the taxpayers billions of dollars.
Again, I thank you Mr. Chairman for not only allowing me to testify but for your continued leadership on the efforts to end the sugar subsidy.
It is in America's best interests to get rid of foreign and domestic subsidies like our sugar program and I am appreciate all the efforts this subcommittee will undertake to accomplish this goal.
_________________________________________________________________
