Main Street Minutes May 21, 2002 8:00 A.M.
Members Present: Robert Sprayberry Patsy Gullett Lane Brown Al Hovey-King Gary Baumgardner Scott Burrell Nancy Price Ann Woodall Sabrina Snowden
Members Absent:
Staff Present: Call To Order:
Joe Morton
Chairman Sprayberry called the May 21, 2002 meeting to order.
Minutes: No previous minutes due to lack of quorum.
Manager's Report:
Nancy reviewed the manager's report and presented the State reports.
Nancy reported we have received the National Main Street Certification.
Old Business:
Chairman Sprayberry gave an update on the Amphitheater.
Chairman Sprayberry asked the Board Members to present their ideas to help raise money for this project.
Chairman Sprayberry asked Nancy to email him any new prospects for him to contact.
Morton stated Nancy has a list of specific items that are needed for the Amphitheater.
Nancy stated $20,000 is needed for the House Sound System.
- Brick Pavers: Trying to get the brick pavers donated from and Company in Tyrone. - Lighting: Working with Cooper Lighting already on the lighting system.
Chairman Sprayberry asked the Board Members to get an Amphitheater package from Nancy before they leave today.
Committee Reports: Nancy reported the Taste of Fayette was a successful event, and revenues received were around $9,000, with expenses totaling approximately $6,000.
Gullett reported on she received the Fa Scholarships to the $1,000 to the Main the Art Show.
Gullett stated that with the revenues yette County Art Association gave four (4) $1,000 High School students.
Gullett donated a check Street Chairman from the Art Association.
Gullett presented the check to Chairman Sprayberry and specified that the check be used for the Holliday Dorsey Fife House, to be applied for art displays.
No report from the Economic Restructuring Committee.
Baumgardner Depot to verif Baumgardner will do a cost bid.
reported he had a structural engineer to look at the y and certify the proposal he had made for the structure.
has received two proposals from the engineer and he analysis and report to Nancy and Joe for re-submittal for
Baumgardner showed a revised rendering of the cemetery site plan for Hwy 54 entrance, which would avoid violating the right-of-way.
Motion by Hovey-King, seconded by Gullett to adopt and pursue the proposed cemetery landscaping gate plan as proposed.
For Motion: Hovey-King, Gullett, Snowden and Baumgardner Motion Carried.
Nancy reported on the Memorial Day Tribute/Concert.
The pre-concert begins at 7:00 pm and Mac Frampton will perform at 8:00 pm. Chairman Sprayberry reported Ron Feldner with Integrated Science Engineering will co-chair with John Young on this year's Golf Tournament.
New Business: Nancy proposed to increase the $150.00 rental rate to $200.00 for 5 hours or more ( all day ).
Non-profit rate $100.00.
The 1 ­ 4 hours rental rates of $100.00 remain the same.
2
Morton advised Nancy to submit her proposal to the Mayor 
Motion by Baumgardner, seconded by Snowden to increase the rental fees as proposed.
For Motion: Baumgardner, Snowden, Gullett ­ Motion Carried.
Abstained: Hovey-King Nancy showed a rendering of Christmas lights that she's presenting to Mayor 
Nancy and Baumgardner reviewed materials from three companies and Baumgardner conveyed his views and supports the concept presented by Nancy to the Board.
Motion by Hovey-King, seconded by Baumgardner to show support concept and present to Mayor 
For Motion: Hovey-King, Baumgardner, and Gullett 
Chairman Sprayberry reported he would like to have the plaque that's presented to the Art Students each year to be displayed in the Show Case at City Hall.
Patsy could inform the students that their names are on display at City Hall and this would show a real value towards community involvement by the students.
Chairman Sprayberry commented Gullett on the completion of repainting the mural.
Chairman Sprayberry reported Gullett has arranged for a landscaper to landscape the area in front of the Mural.
Gullett advised the landscaper will incorporate the landscaping to the Mural.
Motion by Baumgardner, seconded by Snowden for approval on landscaping the area in front of the Mural.
For Motion: Baumgardner, Snowden, Hovey-King 
Chairman Sprayberry turn the meeting over to Gary Baumgardner, due to his leaving the meeting before adjournment Nancy showed the materials and colors that will be used in the
3
construction of the Amphitheater.
Adjourn: Motion by Hovey-King and seconded by Snowden to adjourn meeting.
For Motion: Hovey-King, Snowden, and Gullett ­ Motion Carried.
Next meeting: June 18, 2002 ­ 8:00 a.m.
­ City Hall Respectfully Submitted, Ann Woodall Main Street Assistant
4
