Biodiversity Connecting with the Tapestry of Life Smithsonian Inst itut ion Monitor ing 
Thank you a lso goes out to Br uce Stein for assistance w ith the photographs.
This book let was made possible w ith the cooperation of the Smithsonian Nationa l Museum of Nat ura l Histor y and the Nationa l Zoologica l Park.
Editors : A l fonso A lonso Francisco Da l lmeier E l i s e G r a ne k Peter R aven Second Editors : Rosina Bierbaum Tom Muir Frances Shar ples Design and A r tistic Production : Wm. Keith Harrison Draw ing Nat ure, Inc.
&
Printed on rec ycled paper.
Photog raphs by : Lincoln Brower : p. 29 John Bishop : p. 1, 27 Mark Brown : p. 7, 21, 2 4, 29 T. C. Brown : p. 19 Patrick Campbel l : p. 16, 30 Francisco Da l lmeier : p. 1-4, 6 -10, 12-14, 16 -21, 26 -27, 29-30 Wm. Keith Harrison : p. 1, 6, 29 Jason Lindsey : p. 21 Brian McCar thy : p. 21 El l iot t Norse : p. 17-18 A ndy Parsons : p. 21 Heinz Plenge : p. 2 4 Riverside Municipal Museum: p. 21 Christopher Ros : p. 4 Merl in Tut t le : p. 10 Suggested citation : A .
A lonso, F. Da l lmeier, E .
Granek and P. R aven. 2 0 01.
Biodiversit y : Connecting w ith the Tapestr y of Life.
Smithsonian Instit ution / Monitoring and Assessment of Biodiversit y Prog ram and President 's Commit tee of Adv isors on Science and Technolog y. Washing ton, D.C., U. S.
A .
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service: p. 25 Debora h Wa l ler : p. 17 Carlton Ward : p. 1, 4 -5, 7, 9-12 , 16, 18-23, 29, 31 Erin Wisniesk i and Ir v ine Nat ure Center : p. 1, 26 Il lustrations by : Wm. Keith Harrison : p. 5, 14 -15, 30 ©2 0 01 by Smithsonian Instit ution Monitoring and Assessment of Biodiversit y Prog ram A l l R ights Reser ved ISBN # 1-893912- 0 8- 6 Librar y of Cong ress Cata log Card Number : 0 0 -193578
About this Booklet
Biodiversit y is the extraordinar y variet y of life on Ear th ­ from genes and species to ecosystems and the va luable f unctions they perform.
E.O. Wilson, the noted biologist and author who coined the term " biodiversit y," explains it as "the ver y st uff of life."
Species and the ecosystems in which they live are indelibly linked.
Conversion or loss of ecosystems inev itably impairs the species that depend on them.
As wel l, changes in the life c ycle of one species cou ld impact the life c ycles of many other species (including humans), a lter ecosystems and ecosystem f unctions, and contribute to loca l, regiona l and, u ltimately, globa l changes.
Life as we k now it w il l not be the same if our rich biodiversit y heritage is dramatica l ly a ltered.
And the signs indicate that this is precisely what is happening.
Biodiversit y is threatened, and not because of catastrophic events such as the asteroid crash that scientists believe caused the extinction of the dinosaurs.
The current threat to biodiversit y, and thus to the tapestr y of life, stems primarily from expanding human popu lations and increased human consumption of nat ura l resources.
For t unately, together we can take steps to protect our rich biodiversit y.
The Smithsonian Instit ution's Program on Monitoring and Assessment of Biodiversit y, under the Conser vation and Research Center of the Nationa l Zoologica l Park , and the President 's Committee of Adv isors on Science and Technolog y worked together to prepare this book let.
It explains what biodiversit y is, why it is so impor tant, why it is threatened, and what can be done to conser ve this va luable resource.
Read on to learn more about what we can a l l do to help.
Table of Contents I .
W h a t I s B i o d i v e r s it y ? Species diversit y .......................................................................
4 Genetic diversit y ......................................................................
6 Ecosystem diversit y ..................................................................
7 II.
T he Impor tance of Biod iversit y Direct products ........................................................................
8 Inspiration and cu lt ura l va lues .................................................
9 Ecosystem ser v ices .................................................................
10 Put ting a price on ecosystem ser v ices ....................................
13 III.
Stat us and Trends in Biod iversit y Current stat us and rates of loss of biodiversit y ......................
Factors leading to biodiversit y loss ........................................
Consequences and implications of biodiversit y loss ................
The stat us of Nor th A merican biodiversit y ...........................
14 16 19 20
I V. Act ions to Conser ve Biod iversit y Resea rch and sound science ...................................................
22 Approaches for conser v ing biodiversit y .................................
24 Susta inable development and conser vation............................
27 V. Protect ing Biod iversit y in Nor t h A mer ica United States ..........................................................................
Canada and Mex ico ...............................................................
W hat you can do to help ........................................................
W here to go for more information.........................................
28 29 30 31
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 3
I. What is Biodiversity? For at least 3.8 billion years, a complex web of life has been evolv ing here on Earth.
Millions of species now inhabit land, freshwater and ocean ecosystems.
A ll species, including human beings, are intricately linked.
Biodiversit y ­ short interactions.
Scientists diversit y.
In effect, the influencing the others.
for biologica l diversit y ­ is the variet y of all these liv ing things and their often speak of three levels of diversit y ­ species, genetic and ecosystem se levels cannot be separated.
Each is important, interacting with and A change at one level can cause changes at the other levels.
Species Diversity
Species come in all shapes and sizes, from the tiny organisms that we can see only through a microscope to huge redwood trees.
They include f ungi, flowering plants, ants, beetles, butterflies, birds, and large anima ls such as elephants, whales and bears.
Each species is a group of organisms with unique characteristics.
An indiv idual of a species can reproduce successfully, creating v iable offspring, only with another member of the same species.
We are still learning how many species exist and how they relate to each other and to their physical env ironment.
Thus, we cannot predict the precise ripple effects that the loss of one species will have on others and on ecosystems.
W hat we do k now is that certain species, called keystone species, play critical roles in the ecosystems they inhabit because they affect the abundance and health of many other species.
Examples of keystone species include brown algae, commonly k nown as kelp, in Pacific coasta l ecosystems, fr uit-eating bats in southwestern deserts, and cora ls in tropical coastal waters.
Their loss may well endanger other species.
4 | I. What is Biodiversity?
Some species such as wha les, seag u l ls and sea g rass a re nat u ra l ly common a round the world.
A number of species such as euca ly pt us a re common worldw ide because humans int roduced them in places where they d id not occu r nat u ra l ly.
Other species, ca l led endemic species, a re found exc lusively in a pa r ticu la r a rea, ind icating the ex istence of unique habitats in l imited geog raphic a reas.
T he F lor ida scr ub jay, for example, is found in shr ubby scr ub vegetation on ly in the state of F lor ida.
T he O wens pupfish is found on ly in O wens Va l ley, Ca l ifornia.
If these habitats a re damaged or dest royed, it a lmost cer ta in ly means the end of the endemic species they shelter.
Scientists estimate that there a re mi l l ions of species on Ea r th -- perhaps 10 mi l l ion or more -- that have not yet been identi fied.
Many of the und iscovered species l ive in t ropica l and ocean env ironments that have not been thorough ly ex plored.
Approx imately 20 4,0 0 0 species have been identi fied in the United States, which is 8 percent of the world 's tota l k now n species.
Many species of insects, f ung i and other microscopic organisms in this count r y rema in unidenti fied.
Scientists estimate that the tota l number of species in the United States is bet ween 4 0 0,0 0 0 and 60 0,0 0 0 ­ t wo to three times the number now k now n.
Flo r i d a Scr ub Jay
Known Species 12,000 species of amphibians and rept iles 4,000 species of bac ter ia 4,500 species of mammal s 5,000 species of v iruses
10,000 species of birds 22,000 species of fish 70,000 species of fungi
270,000 species of plant s 400,000 species of inver tebrates (excluding insec t s) 960,000 species of insec t s, approximately 600,000 of which are beetles Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 5
Genetic Diversity Biodiversit y is much more than the variet y of species.
It also includes the genes that ever y indiv idua l inherits from its parents and passes on to the next generation.
Genetic diversit y is ever y where, from the variet y of songs and feather colors of the birds in your back yard to the many colors, tastes and text ures of apples and other foods in your grocer y store.
Genetic diversit y exists within your own family.
For instance, you and your siblings might have different eye and hair colors, body shapes and heights.
Genetic variation is extremely important to the sur v ival of species.
As experienced gardeners k now, certain seeds from the same packet produce plants that grow ta l ler or have more leaves than others, or that mat ure faster or are more resistant to diseases and insect attacks.
Genetic variabilit y, responsible for these different traits, interacts with local env ironmental conditions to determine the extent to which populations can adapt to env ironmenta l changes and sur v ive exposure to new diseases.
Isolated populations such as those on ocean islands or in small patches of habitat cut off from the surrounding env ironment tend to have less genetic variation than populations in large, intact ecosystems.
Therefore, those isolated populations are more susceptible to extinction.
Where does most of the world 's biodiversity exist? Biodiversit y is ever y where.
In deser t s, oceans, f reshwater bodies, tropical rainforest s, temperate zone forest s and your back yard.
The rainforest s of Central and South Amer ica, equator ial Af r ica, and Southeast Asia may house at least half of the world's spec ies.
A large number of plant and animal spec ies call coral reefs ­ the "rainforest s of the seas" ­ their home.
Lakes, estuar ies, the deep ocean floor and the soil beneath your feet are al so r ich in biodiversit y, while ex treme arc t ic climates and torr id deser t s contain some of the most unusual liv ing organisms.
6 | I. What is Biodiversity?
Ecosystem Diversity Genes determine the traits of the indiv iduals that form populations of a species.
Populations and the non-liv ing env ironmenta l components ­ such as water or minerals ­ surrounding them interact dynamica l ly to form an ecosystem.
Ecosystem interactions include predators consuming prey, pollinators selecting flowers and species responding to physica l processes, such as heav y rainfa l l.
Plant and animal communities make up the many k inds of ecosystems we are familiar with today ­ from est uaries, ponds, f jords, marshes, cora l reefs and other aquatic ecosystems to savannas, prairies, forests, deserts, mountaintops and other terrestria l ecosystems, including neighborhood parks, school grounds and back yards.
Species are not evenly distributed around the globe.
Some ecosystems such as tropical forests and cora l reefs are ver y complex and host a large number of species.
Other ecosystems such as deserts and arctic regions have less biodiversit y but are equally important.
Photos at right f rom top to bottom : a Florida sand dune ripe with vegetation ; national forest in the Smoky Mountains of North Carolina ; summer flowers in a mountain meadow near Homer, Alaska ; one of the Florida keys - a diverse coastal ecosystem ; red rock with arid ecosystem vegetation in Monument Valley on the Arizona-Utah border.
Background : the Florida coast at sunset.
II.
The Importance of Biodiversity Biodiversity produces goods and serv ices for the most fundamental of our needs ­ clear air, fresh water, food, medicines and shelter.
It also prov ides people with recreational, psychological, emotiona l and spirit ua l enjoyment.
Some people believe we should protect and restore biodiversit y because of its benefits to us.
Others believe that we have a moral responsibilit y to protect biodiversit y simply because all organisms have va lue, whether or not we understand their benefits to us.
Direct Products Food Simply stated, our food comes directly or indirectly from plants.
More than 90 percent of the ca lories consumed by people worldwide come from 80 plant species.
Fr uits, nuts, mushrooms, honey, spices and other foods that humans and wildlife consume originate from nat ural ecosystems.
In the United States, most food is the result of large-scale intensive agricult ural production of a few hundred crops and animals that originated from varieties found in nat ure.
Medicines An estimated 4.5 bil lion people (about 80 percent of the world 's population) still use plants as their primar y source of medicine.
The use of most of these medicines is based on ancestral k nowledge.
Close to 30 percent of all pharmaceutica ls on the market today were developed from plants and anima ls. Antibiotics such as penicillin are extracted from fungi and from such unlikely sources as the A frican clawed frog's sk in.
The saliva of the vampire bat is used in treatment to unclog arteries.
Wild yams have chemicals with anti-inflammator y properties.
Ovarian and breast cancer treatments have been developed from the bark of the Pacific yew tree found in the northwestern United States.
Many plant species contain chemica ls that are used to make paink illers, blood pressure boosters, anti-ma laria l dr ugs and anti-leukemia dr ugs.
Most plants have yet to be tested for their potential medicinal properties.
The oceans are a lso a rich source of both biological and chemical diversit y. Nat ural marine products have potentia l as pharmaceuticals, nutritional supplements, agricult ura l chemica ls, and biomedical research probes that give us valuable insight into understanding and treating human diseases.
As species in oceans, tropica l rainforests, and other habitats go extinct, we may be losing valuable medicines for as yet untreatable diseases.
8 | II.
The Importance of Biodiversity
Fuel, Timber, Fiber and Other Resources Most houses, furnit ure and even many clothes are made from nat ural products, including wood, oils, resins, wa xes, g ums and fibers.
The cocoons of silk worms are the basis of the va luable, cent uries-old Asian silk-mak ing industr y.
For cent uries, Brazilians have extracted r ubber from trees, and many people rely heav ily on wood and other plant parts to build homes.
Far left: A totem of a beaver f rom a Native American group in Alaska.
Left: Trees are tapped to extract rubber and other gums used in products such as tires, elastics and chewing gum.
Right: Cocoons f rom the silk worm are woven into thread .
Inspiration and Cultural Attributes The ethical and religious beliefs of cult ures around the world include respect for and protection of nat ure.
Some species such as the ba ld eagle are part of cult ural heritages, while others ­ for example, t urtles and bison ­ are integral to religious and spirit ua l beliefs.
Species inspire songs, stories, dances, poetr y, my ths, crafts, regiona l cuisines, decorations, rit ua ls, festiva ls, holidays and even names for sports teams.
Our connection with biodiversit y is a lso ev ident through common activ ities such as gardening, keeping pets and watching birds.
And for many of us, nat ure is an unsurpassed source of rela xation, wonderment, rejuvenation, beaut y and peace.
Research indicates that mental health and social conditions may be affected by loss of contact with the nat ural env ironment and its life forms.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 9
Ecosystem Services Biodiversit y prov ides us with life-sustaining ser v ices.
As stated below, these ecosystem ser v ices have a much higher va lue than most people realize.
Pollination For ever y third bite you take, you can thank a pollinator.
Many flowering plants rely on animals such as bees, butterflies, moths, wasps, beetles, birds, and bats for pollination to produce fr uit. Thirt y percent of our food crops, including a lmonds, apples, blueberries, cherries, cranberries and chocolate, rely on the free ser v ices of pollinators.
Feed crops like a lfa lfa and hay for domesticated animals also depend on pol linators, and many wild plants such as fig trees that prov ide food and shelter for animals depend on pollinators.
But pol linators, including the managed honeybee colonies used extensively in U.S. agricult ure, are threatened.
Increasingly fragmented and degraded habitat, pesticides, and the introduction of diseases and nonnative species are causing some pollinator populations to decline.
Imagine farmers hav ing to hand-pollinate their crops if we lose nat ural pollinators.
Air and Water Purification Biodiversit y maintains the air we breathe and the water we drink.
Forests purif y our air and our water by tak ing in carbon dioxide, reg ulating water vapor, releasing ox ygen, and cycling nutrients.
Through photosynthesis, trees and other plants give off ox ygen that helps maintain a breathable atmosphere.
As a result of these processes, plants play a cr ucia l role in maintaining the planet 's water cycle.
Wetlands and the vast array of bacteria and other microscopic species they house also act as water fi lters ; wetland vegetation releases ox ygen and absorbs carbon dioxide.
10 | II.
The Importance of Biodiversity
Climate Modification By giv ing off moist ure through their leaves and prov iding shade, plants help keep us and other animals cool.
Forests are especia l ly good climate modifiers.
As trees and other plants in forests release ox ygen and take up carbon dioxide (CO2 ) ­ the most preva lent greenhouse gas ­ the forests act to store carbon and help reduce global warming.
So do oceans as they interact with the atmosphere.
A lgae liv ing in the ocean take up carbon dioxide, and ocean currents and winds help control the world 's climate.
Drought and Flood Control Plant communities, especia l ly forests and wetlands, help control floods.
The root systems of plants hold soils in place, preventing erosion and mudslides.
Plants a lso hold moist ure in soils and thereby help reduce the effects of drought.
Lands that have been deforested and cleared, on the other hand, have less abilit y to hold water.
These nat ural drought and flood control ser v ices are particularly important to people liv ing a long rivers and coastlines and for people in arid regions.
Cycling of Nutrients Pick up just a tiny bit of soil and you will discover a whole new world.
Researchers have found that one pinch of soil can contain more than 30,0 0 0 protozoa, 50,0 0 0 algae, 40 0,0 0 0 fungi and bil lions of indiv idual bacteria ; larger organisms like worms, insects and mites also live in the soil.
These organisms break down dead plants and animals and recycle the nutrients into organic materia ls that enrich the soil.
Habitat Nat ural ecosystems prov ide habitat for the world 's species.
Forests, coral reefs and deep ocean bottoms house many species.
Wetlands, through their mi x of aquatic and terrestrial env ironments, nourish and shelter thousands of bird, fish and other animal species.
Est uaries, where the currents and tides of salt water and fresh water meet, are the world 's nurseries for many of the aquatic species we consume, including fish and shell fish such as clams and crabs.
Lakes and rivers, for example, constit ute only 0.01 percent of the planet 's water, but they contain a quarter of all k nown species.
Even open spaces in cities and towns can house significant biodiversit y.
Young trees grow out of a fallen, decomposing old growth tree in a Pacific Northwest forest - the ultimate cycling of nutrients.
Inset: Coral reefs provide habitat for a rich diversity of marine species.
Economic Value Biodiversit y ser ves as an income-generating activ it y for countries around the world.
Many people v isit forests, beaches, mountains, grasslands, lakes, ponds, est uaries and streams for extended vacations or shorter periods of rela xation.
More than 130 mil lion people v isit U.S. national parks each year, and millions of dollars are spent annually on nat ure activ ities such as hik ing, camping, fishing, hunting, whale watching and wildlife photography.
In the United States a lone, people spent $16 billion in 1991 on sport fishing ­ far more than the $ 8.2 billion produced that year from globa l commercial har vesting of freshwater fish for consumption.
More people v isit zoos and aquariums in the United States and Canada than attend a l l professiona l sporting events in the t wo countries combined.
A round the world the number of ecotourists, people traveling to enjoy nat ure and various cult ures, is increasing.
Putting a Price on Ecosystem Services Ecosystem ser v ices are pr iceless since no life, including our own, would exist w ithout them.
But if we tr y to est imate the value of ecosystem ser v ices worldw ide, they would be approximately $33 tr illion a year ­ almost tw ice the est imated $18 tr illion value of all goods and ser v ices produced by people.
For example, currently the Cat sk ill watershed prov ides New York Cit y 's water.
To replace it would cost $6-8 billion and the annual operat ion would cost around $300 million ­ a high pr ice for a resource prov ided f ree by healthy ecosystems.
Imagine hav ing to replace the ecosystem produc t s and ser v ices listed in this char t. ECOSYS T E M PRODUC T S A N D SERV ICE S EST I M ATED VA LU E I N U. S. DOLL A R S
Soil bac ter ial ser v ices such as conver t ing nitrogen into a usable form for crops, pastures, forest s and natural vegetat ion Insec t pollinat ion of over 40 U.S. commerc ial crops Economic ac t iv it y generated by the 350 million v isitors to U.S. nat ional parks, w ildlife refuges and other Depar tment of the Inter ior and Depar tment of Agr iculture public lands through expenditures on fishing, hiking, hunt ing, whale watching and w ildlife photography 1990 sales in the U.S. of prescr ipt ion drugs containing ingredient s taken or der ived f rom w ild plant s Genet ic trait s f rom w ild crop var iet ies introduced into domest ic agr icultural crops in the U.S. Commerc ial and spor t fishing revenue lost because of destruc t ion of U.S. estuar ies between 1954 and 1978 Annual ocean fish catch wor th to the U.S. economy Value of flood control ser v ices prov ided by marshlands near the Charles River in Boston, Massachuset t s Products from natural and managed forests including timber, fuelwood, game, fruits, nuts, mushrooms, honey, etc. contr ibuting to U.S. economy
$33 billion per year $30 billion per year More than 400,000 jobs and $28 billion per year
More than $15 billion $ 8 billion per year More than $200 million $2.5 billion $72,000 per acre of marshland $3 billion - $ 8 billion per year
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 13
III.
Status and Trends in Biodiversity Even without human actions, a few species nat urally become extinct over time.
However, during certain periods of geologica l time, great numbers have been lost relatively quick ly ­ on the scale of thousands of years.
Scientists have documented five mass extinctions since the emergence of life on this planet some 3.8 bil lion years ago.
It is thought that each of these episodes, during which a large fraction of all species were lost, was caused by a catastrophic nat ural event.
For example, the disappearance of t wo-thirds of a l l species liv ing on land during the time of the dinosaurs was probably the result of a large asteroid crashing into Earth about 65 million years ago.
Because today's extinction rates are exceptiona l ly high, many scientists consider this the si xth extinction episode.
Current Status and Rates of Loss of Biodiversity
Based on fossil records, pa leontologists estimate that 1 to 10 species go extinct as part of nat ural processes ever y year.
Today's extinction rate is severa l hundred times greater than the nat ural rate and higher than any other on record.
Many scientists think that we are now in the midst of an unnat ural mass extinction.
This time, it is caused primarily by our growing population and the demands that we place on nat ural resources.
If this high extinction rate continues, it wil l grow to as much as 10,0 0 0 times higher than the nat ural rate, and result in the extinction of as many as t wo out of ever y three terrestria l species by the end of the cent ur y.
A growing human population, increased human consumption, and the grow th of technolog y are placing tremendous stress on Earth 's nat ura l systems.
Over the past 50 years alone, world population grew from 2.5 billion to 6 billion people, and globa l energ y use tripled.
More than 6 billion people now inhabit the planet, and the United Nations predicts that by the year 2050 there may be about 9 billion.
More people require more land, water, food, energ y and minera ls.
As our consumption of Earth 's resources grows, we are likely to see a corresponding loss of biodiversit y around the world.
If all people worldwide enjoyed the standard of liv ing of the United States, it would require four more planet Earths to support today's human population.
A lthough developed countries such as the United States, Canada, Japan, Australia and most European nations have only 20 percent of the world 's human population, they consume 80 percent of global energ y use and 85 percent of the world 's economy - a disproportionate share of nat ural resources.
These developed countries also produce far more waste than developing nations, such as China, India and many Latin American and A frican nations.
For this reason, the choices we make are important for the conser vation of biodiversit y.
Fossil imprint of a prehistoric species
14 | III.
Status and Trends in Biodiversity
Documented Island Extinctions Caused by Human Activities Crete, Sic ily, Malta, and other Mediterranean Sea islands West Indies H
Large mammal spec ies including land tor toises, dwar f elephant s and hippopotamuses Endemic sloths, monkeys, rodent s, snakes and others 24 spec ies of mammal s, birds and tor toises An est imated two-thirds of all nat ive ver tebrates and more than 90 percent of all land bird spec ies Frogs, lizards, and an est imated 30 bird spec ies including 11 endemic spec ies
Madagascar Hawaii New Zealand II
A W A
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 15
Factors Leading to Biodiversity Loss A recent gathering of biodiversit y experts concluded that the leading causes of biodiversit y loss during the coming cent ur y will include land-use changes, changing levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide, changing climate, invasive species and nitrogen deposition (air pol lution).
Most of these stresses will cause degradation and loss of habitat, rather than direct harm to species.
Habitat Loss Most species need undist urbed habitat ­ unpolluted liv ing space to find food and nutrients, water, shelter and mates.
But people are a ltering habitats a l l over the world.
We log forests, fi ll in wetlands, plow prairies for farms, graze livestock in once-undist urbed grasslands, mine, and build new settlements.
We build housing developments, roads, shopping ma l ls, office buildings, golf courses and vacation resorts.
A ll of these actions change landscapes, nat ura l water flows, and the species composition of an area.
Aquatic habitats are destroyed as we dam rivers and trawl the ocean beds.
In many sit uations, habitat loss is the result of multiple stresses that operate together.
For example, frogs, lizards and birds in Costa R ica's high-elevation cloud forests are disappearing as their habitat declines.
Climate and land-use changes are reducing the amount of moist ure-laden winds needed to form the cloudbanks upon which the habitat depends.
W here habitats are not completely destroyed, they are fragmented into smaller patches, creating islands of habitat in a sea of development.
Fragmentation exposes species to more light, wind and temperat ure effects than are nat ural, thus affecting the species' sur v ival as food and water sources are lost and few mates remain.
In fragmented landscapes, many species soon become isolated from others of their own k ind, resulting in inbreeding, loss of genetic diversit y, and loca l extinction.
When natural habitat is f ragmented - by clearcutting forests, damming rivers, clearing land for development or farming, or filling in wetlands - the land may become an incomplete tapestry, like a puzzle with missing pieces.
16 | III.
Status and Trends in Biodiversity
Invasive Species Purposely or accidenta l ly, people often bring non-native species into new areas where the species have few or no nat ural predators to keep their populations in check.
These invasive species ­ a lso ca l led alien, introduced or exotic species ­ are considered the second most important cause of biodiversit y loss, after habitat destr uction.
For example, invasive species have played a major role in the listing of 35 to 46 percent of a l l species currently considered endangered or threatened in the United States.
Invasive species a lso w reak economic and env ironmenta l havoc.
Invasive plants, mamma ls, birds, amphibians, reptiles, fish, arthropods and mol lusks cost the United States an estimated $137 billion annually.
In the Great Lakes and other North American freshwater systems, the invasive zebra mussel has caused hundreds of millions of dol lars in damage to water equipment, power plants and other facilities.
The f ul l ecologica l impacts of the zebra mussel are stil l unk nown, but native freshwater ecosystems that this creat ure invaded have undergone significant changes, including the loss of many populations of native mussel species.
Invasive species can a lso alter fire cycles, nutrient cycling, and the hydrolog y and energ y budgets in native ecosystems.
Fire ants have a major impact on the U.S. economy
Examples of Impacts of Invasive Species Invasive plant s cover an est imated 100 million acres in the United States and are spreading annually across three million addit ional acres, an area tw ice the size of Delaware.
U.S. farmers spend billions of dollars ever y year on pest ic ides, which are used in par t to eliminate weeds ­ many of them non-nat ive invasive spec ies.
The invasive sea lamprey collapsed lake trout and other nat ive Great Lakes fisher ies.
The United States and Canada spend $13 million per year at tempt ing to control this pest.
Invasive brown tree snakes have bit ten at least 200 people, caused 1200 elec tr ical outages and dr iven most ground-dwelling nat ive birds to ex t inc t ion on Guam.
Overuse of Resources People use some plant and animal species at a greater rate than the species can replace themselves, which can lead to extinction.
Nine of the world 's major ocean fisheries are declining because of too much fishing as wel l as water pollution and habitat destr uction.
Popular commercial species such as the southern bluefin t una, the Atlantic halibut and the Pacific and Atlantic salmon are now threatened.
Current logging rates threaten to eliminate mahogany and other tree species that take many years to grow and mat ure.
The $10 billion-a-year global market in wildlife ­ for pets, folk medicines, gourmet foods, decorative objects and other uses ­ threatens elephants and rhinos, sea horses and colorful corals, tropical plants and birds, and bears, pandas and tigers.
Each year, consumers in the United States a lone buy as many as 12,0 0 0 primates, 2.5 million orchids, 20 0,0 0 0 live birds, 2 million reptiles, 250 million tropical fish and a large number of wildlife products.
Nearly one-fourth of the trade in wildlife relies on poaching.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 17
Pollution The more we consume, the more we generate waste and pollution, which threatens biodiversit y and our own health.
Pollution comes in many forms ­ oil spills, acid precipitation, toxic chemicals in fertilizers and pesticides, and urban and suburban sewage r unoff, to name a few.
Pollution may k il l organisms outright or it may weaken them by interfering with v ita l processes such as mobilit y and reproduction.
Pesticides harm wild insect pollinators, including managed honeybee populations, which can in t urn reduce crop y ields.
Runoff seeping into rivers, lakes and coasta l env ironments can produce negative impacts on entire aquatic ecosystems.
In the United States alone, pesticides k ill an estimated 75 million birds and billions of non-target insects on croplands ever y year.
Some 140,0 0 0 people become sick because of pesticides and pesticide r unoff each year.
Several pesticides banned in the United States are stil l exported to developing countries.
Of particular concern are chemica ls ca l led endocrine disr upters such as DDT, DDE and PCBs.
These substances mimic or interfere with normal hormones in liv ing organisms.
Reproductive abnormalities have been found in alligators, terns, sa lmon and g ulls exposed to high levels of chemicals from pesticides and anima l hormones in their env ironment.
Global Climate Change National park s, like Canyonlands in Utah, are among our most pristine areas, serving as laboratories for research on the ef fects of pollution, global climate change and other impacts on biodiversity.
Substantial ev idence demonstrates that people are contributing to measurable changes in the global climate, threatening life as we k now it.
By burning fossil fuels such as oil, nat ural gas and coal and by burning trees to clear forests, we have dramatically increased the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere.
W hile scientists do not k now the exact effects of increased CO2 , they predict that it will lead to higher overall global temperat ures, increasing sea levels, and changes in climate patterns.
The changed atmospheric conditions that result from global warming could create greater numbers of intense storms and prolonged droughts.
The warming may lead certain species to expand their ranges, including mosquitoes that carr y malaria and encephalitis among other diseases.
On the other hand, the expected speed of climate changes coupled with direct loss of nat ural habitat may prevent some species from adapting quick ly enough.
They are likely to become extinct, locally or more broadly, and their roles in nat ural systems will be lost forever.
Many ecosystems are highly v ulnerable to the projected rate and magnit ude of climate change.
Corals are " bleaching" (losing their necessar y symbiotic algae) throughout the world because of increased water temperat ures, and many are not recovering.
A few ecosystems such as a lpine meadows in the Rock y Mountains and some barrier islands could potentially disappear in certain areas.
Others such as forests in the Southeast are likely to experience major shifts in the makeup of their species or become fragmented into pieces of grasslands, woodlands and forested areas.
The goods and ser v ices lost as ecosystems are fragmented or disappear, including changes to and loss of biodiversit y, are likely to be ver y costly or impossible to replace.
Consequences and Implications of Biodiversity Loss The continued loss of biodiversit y wil l greatly impact human societ y as well as ecosystems and their valuable ser v ices.
It is difficult to quantif y these impacts.
But look ing at all the products and ser v ices biodiversit y prov ides ­ and the difficult y of their replacement ­ gives us an idea of the magnit ude of the consequences we face if we do not conser ve the biodiversit y that remains.
Biodiversit y loss wil l severely limit our qua lit y of life, not to mention the potential to feed, clothe and shelter fut ure generations.
It is not possible to account accurately for the costs of losing undiscovered species that may be the source of new varieties of foods, medicines, fuels, timber and other resources.
Furthermore, the loss of ecosystem ser v ices such as pol lination, clean air and water, climate reg ulation, drought and flood control, and nutrient recycling wil l impact a l l species of plants and animals, not just humans.
Not even factored into the equation is the cost of unk nown ripple effects that a change in one species or ecosystem may have on other ecosystems and on the entire planet.
Loss of biodiversit y can have indirect and unforeseen effects on jobs and the economy.
In the Pacific Northwest, the loss of sa lmon populations due to habitat degradation has v irt ually eliminated one of the largest industries in the region and resulted in significant impacts on the regional economy and cult ure.
There is no way, of course, to estimate losses of psychological, emotional and spirit ual well-being that will result from r uined forests, beaches, lakes and other places people rely on for rejuvenation.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 19
The Status of North American Biodiversity North America contains a variet y of species temperate rainforests, grasslands, wetlands, the United States include grizzly bears, spot horned puffins and redwood trees, as only a and ecosystems, including deserts and more.
Species in ted owls, ghost-faced bats, few examples.
Like the tropics, North America's storehouse of biodiversit y is being threatened.
As of May 20 0 0, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Ser v ice and the National Marine Fisheries Ser v ice combined had listed 1, 231 species (496 animal species and 735 plant species) as endangered or threatened in the United States.
Hundreds of other species are being considered as possible additions to the list.
According to The Nat ure Conser vancy, one-third of all U.S. plant and animal species are in need of protection.
Many freshwater fishes and wetland species such as mussels, cray fish and amphibians are particularly v ulnerable.
Nearly 50 0 species in the United States may already be extinct.
Canada's endangered species list included 353 species as of May 20 0 0.
Among them are the wolverine, k iller whale, eastern barn owl, western rattlesnake, tailed frog, white-throated swift, peregrine fa lcon and whooping crane.
Many of Canada's ecosystems are also in danger.
According to the Canadian Nat ure Federation, 240 acres of wildlife habitat are converted or fragmented ever y hour in Canada, and habitat destr uction threatens more than 80 percent of Canada's endangered species with extinction.
In the United States, we have lost hundreds of species to ext inc t ion and thousands more are endangered or threatened.
Here are some commonly known species:
Extinct Species L abrador Duck Passenger P igeon Carolina Parakeet Great Auk Silver Trout Harelip Sucker Fish Palo Alto Thistle Xerces Blue But ter fly Wabash Rif fleshell West Indian Monk Seal
Endangered Species California Condor Flor ida Panther Gray Wolf West Indian Manatee Black-footed Fer ret Golden-cheeked Warbler Indiana Bat Stellar Sea Lion Atlant ic and Chinook Salmon Green Sea Tur tle
20 | III.
Status and Trends in Biodiversity
Mexico's rich biodiversit y is a lso being lost.
Home to nearly 10 percent of the world 's terrestrial species, Mexico has a high number of endemic species, the richest diversit y of reptiles and cacti, and the second richest diversit y of mammals in the world.
But a lmost ha lf of Mexico's 25 million hectares of tropical dr y and humid forests have been cleared for agricult ure and grazing, leav ing only 10 percent in stable condition.
More than 50 percent of Mexico is dr y scr ubland or desert, and overgrazing and human-caused fires have degraded much of this land.
Consider the following facts compiled by the World Wildlife Fund:
North American Ecosystem Or iginal Nor th Amer ican tallgrass prair ie ­ More than
PERCENTAGE OF ECOSYSTEM LOST
99%
transformed
Or iginal pr imar y forest in the 48 cont iguous United States ­ More than
95
% lost
Midwest oak savanna ­ More than
98
% altered cleared
Old grow th forest in the Pac ific Nor thwest ­ About
90%
Wild or scenic r ivers in the United States ­ Bet ween
90-98%
degraded
Coastal sage scrub in the United States ­ Bet ween
70-90
% disturbed
Or iginal wetlands in the United States ­ More than
50
% drained and filled Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 21
IV.
Actions to Conserve Biodiversity Protecting biodiversity over the long term involves balancing the immediate needs, rights and desires of indiv idua ls and communities with protection of species and ecosystems.
People around the world require food, water, shelter, clothes and medicine.
These needs are real and immediate, and they must be considered along with biodiversit y conser vation choices.
The complexit y of factors contributing to global biodiversit y loss, coupled with human values and needs, means that there is no one perfect strateg y to combat and reduce biodiversit y loss.
Scientists, conser vationists, economists, government officia ls, business and communit y leaders and citizens debate the pros and cons of various approaches.
No matter what the course of action, however, credible science should underlie ever y plan and decision.
Research and Sound Science Slowing biodiversit y loss requires accurate, reliable, scientific information from nat ural and social sciences.
Research can reduce uncertainties about why species decline and can lower the costs of carr y ing out appropriate policies to protect biodiversit y and the ser v ices it prov ides.
Sound science allows us to dev ise suitable env ironmental and socia l policies and to develop management strategies that experts can apply to complex systems.
Federal agencies such as the Nationa l Science Foundation, the U.S. Forest Ser v ice and the U.S. Geologica l Sur vey are actively pursuing basic and applied research in biodiversit y, as are universities and private foundations.
And recently, public and private entities began a cooperative vent ure to make information on biodiversit y more accessible through the Nationa l Biologica l Information Infrastr uct ure, and at the international level through the Global Biodiversit y Information Facilit y.
A number of programs around the world focus on biodiversit y field research.
Fol lowing caref ul ly tested protocols, biodiversit y researchers enter an area to make an initial assessment of what is there.
They record all plants and anima ls and note their size, condition, location and numbers.
This information, the v ital signs of life, is caref ul ly entered in daily logs and statistical sheets.
Specia lists in vegetation, aquatic systems, insects, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals and other biologica l groups, as wel l as data analysts and statisticians, make up the research teams.
On their next v isits to the area, the researchers again record what is there to compare against the baseline information gathered during the initia l field assessment.
Continuous monitoring of v ita l signs wil l indicate if populations are shifting.
The researchers may choose one or more " indicator" species for long-term monitoring.
If populations of the indicator species shift, it is likely that changes in the nat ura l system have occurred.
The next step is to determine why and how those changes came about and the extent to which they may negatively impact the nat ural system.
This research is critica l to reliably establish the specific causes of the measured changes and may require considerable time and cost.
It may take the form of monitoring hy pothesized changes in climate, distribution of land uses, loss of food sources, increase of atmospheric contaminants, or a my riad of other factors.
Most declines in populations are caused by multiple stressors operating together.
Indeed, the biologica l populations may not be particularly v ulnerable to any one of the factors alone.
But unless researchers document the causes of decline and the interrelationship of those causes, any actions taken to reduce harmf ul impacts wil l likely be ineffective in restoring population hea lth.
Approaches for Conserving Biodiversity Increase Knowledge St udy ing biodiversit y helps us understand how nat ure works and our role in it.
We need to k now more about how ecosystems work and about their fundamental parts ­ species, their genetic richness, and complex habitats.
Through standardized methods to assess and monitor biodiversit y and the stresses that cause it to change, scientists can detect changes in species over time and determine why those changes occurred.
As a result, people wil l have the k nowledge to make the best decisions regarding the cha l lenges associated with resource conser vation and development.
We should be better positioned to meet our current needs for food, shelter and energ y without compromising the abilit y of our children and their children to do the same.
We should be better able to ensure the well-being of the millions of plant and animal species that share Earth with us, including those as-yet unrecorded species and their potential benefits.
The env ironmenta l data needed to associate the causes and effects in biodiversit y decline are sparse at best and must be improved.
We k now little about most insects, arthropods, fungi, bacteria, other soil and sediment microorganisms and marine invertebrates, let alone what comprises healthy populations.
We k now little about the plants and anima ls that inhabit the oceans and how marine species are affected by human activ ities.
Less than 30 percent of a l l species in the United States have been catalog ued. Biodiversit y assessments help fi l l the gaps in our scientific k nowledge.
Protected Areas Many protected areas around the world are established with the goal of conser v ing species and intact nat ura l systems, and help slow the loss of biodiversit y.
There are numerous examples of such areas ­ from nationa l and regional parks and forests, wildlife and game preser ves, recreation areas, buffer zones and biological corridors to areas dedicated to educationa l, scientific, and cult ural or traditional purposes.
In the United States, the Nationa l Wilderness Preser vation System protects areas that are important as habitat for imperiled species, as watersheds and as scenic and non-motorized recreation areas.
We should keep in mind that populations in small preser ves are especially v ulnerable to stress from chronic climate change and that their isolation from other populations may act ually increase the effects of the stresses.
The mere existence of preser ves may not be adequate to protect imperiled species.
Research into the factors leading to population declines and measures to reduce the impacts is needed, as well as the creation or designation of biologica l corridors to connect reser ves.
Only about 5 percent of the world 's land mass is designated as parks or reser ves.
In countries with limited resources to manage and conser ve their biodiversit y, a more economica l way to improve conser vation is to focus on " biodiversit y hotspots" --areas with exceptionally high concentrations of endemic species that are suffering high rates of habitat loss.
Currently, 25 hotspots containing 4 4 percent of all k nown plant species and 35 percent of all k nown vertebrate species (mammals, amphibians, reptiles) have been identified worldwide.
Si xteen of these hotspots are in the tropics where the threats are greatest and conser vation capabilities are scarcest.
Conser vation of
24 | I V. Actions to Conserve Biodiversity
large tracts of remaining humid tropica l forest is also essential to protect wide-ranging species whose habitat range exceeds the boundaries of the hotspots.
In many cases, land around reser ves is zoned for multiple, sustainable uses.
Designated biological corridors allow species to migrate to other protected areas or colonize new patches of habitat.
Conser vation efforts must respect the rights of indigenous peoples who live close to the areas and often draw their sustenance from resources in the areas.
These people are an integral part of the conser vation equation.
Ecological Restoration Ecological restoration is the process of bringing a degraded ecosystem as close as possible back to its original state.
It involves recolonization of native plant and animal species and the gradual reestablishment of ecosystem processes such as nat ura l fire cycles.
Terrestrial and aquatic ecologica l including Midwestern prairies, Paci However, the cost of restoring habit over the next 36 years to restore the restoration projects are currently in progress across the United States, fic Northwest rivers, Northeastern beaches and the F lorida Everglades.
at can be substantial.
It will cost the countr y an estimated $7.8 billion F lorida Everglades.
Due to the extent of habitat degradation in the U.S. and around the world, ecological restoration will be a necessar y component of biodiversit y conser vation strategies.
However, it should be emphasized that protection of hea lthy ecosystems is the most cost-effective strateg y. Before : A Montana creek that cattle have trampled thus damaging stream banks and native vegetation ; this has increased sediments and stream temperature that harm fish and other aquatic organisms.
After: The restored creek after cattle have been excluded and the native vegetation and physical attributes of the stream restored .
An alternative water source has been designated for the cattle and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Partners for Fish and Wildlife Program assisted in the private landowner's habitat restoration.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 25
Botanical Gardens and Zoos Botanical gardens play an important role as both seed banks and breeding grounds for endangered plant species.
Seeds from plants are preser ved to ensure that a variet y of native plants are available for fut ure cultivation of food crops, medicinal plants and other uses.
About 85,0 0 0 of the estimated 270,0 0 0 species of plants are in cultivation to learn more about their nat ura l histor y and preser ve their genetic stock.
Botanical gardens also ser ve as educational and recreationa l areas.
Like ever y where else, these gardens can be v ulnerable to climate change, and may not be able to support necessar y levels of genetic diversit y. Increased resources and many new gardens may be needed to ensure the sur v iva l of large numbers of unrelated indiv iduals and populations of each species.
Zoos are great educationa l and research instit utions.
They bring wildlife closer to the general public, and some play an important role in captive breeding.
Threatened or endangered species raised and bred outside their nat ural habitats in zoos and aquariums contribute to captive breeding efforts and therefore to conser vation of such species.
Captive-bred species have been reintroduced into the wild to increase dwindling populations.
Examples include whooping cranes, red wolves, black-footed ferrets, the A rabian or y x and the California condor.
There has been some degree of success.
Breeding centers do not have the resources or space to accommodate a l l threatened or endangered species, and scientists still have much to learn about the habitat needs, ecolog y, biolog y and social patterns of the anima ls they are breeding.
Sometimes captive-bred animals lack the sk ills to sur v ive in the wild: they must be taught.
Lack of genetic diversit y can present great challenges to the effectiveness of captive breeding programs.
Environmental Education Educating ourselves and our children about the value of biodiversity and how we can protect it may be the salvation of biodiversity for future generations.
Government agencies, national and international nonprofit organizations, schools and other academic institutions, zoos, aquariums, museums, botanical gardens, national parks and many other entities are working hard to provide scientificallybased environmental information to citizens so that they can make informed decisions.
Scientific and Industry Collaboration Sustainable development includes collaborat ion between sc ient ist s and industr y to create env ironmentally f r iendly projec t s. Here, sc ient ist s f rom the Smithsonian Inst itut ion and their Peruv ian counterpar t s hold an open house on biodiversit y at Royal Dutch/Shell Group of fice in Lima, Peru.
26 | I V. Actions to Conserve Biodiversity
Sustainable Development and Conservation Sustainable living has been defined as the abilit y to meet the needs of today's generation without compromising the abilit y of future generations to meet their needs.
Sustainable living does not deplete natural resources or cause declines in biodiversit y.
It succeeds when governments, nongovernmental organizations, scientists, private industr y and citizens use their knowledge of the resilience and v ulnerabilities of populations and ecosystems to meet economic needs, deal effectively with local and foreign demands for resources, and promote social equit y while preser ving the abilit y of natural systems to continue to function.
An example of innovative and sustainable development is the new Chesapeake Bay Foundation offices, which feature geothermal heating, composting toilets, solar panels and recycled construction materials.
Solar panels serve as an alternative source of sustainable energ y.
In the U.S., where resource consumption is high, adopting a sustainable lifest yle is an important way to benefit biodiversit y. Ever yday choices such as opting for public transportation, turning off unnecessar y lights, choosing organic foods that grow using natural alternatives to pesticides, recycling and reducing the volume of waste produced all contribute to environmental sustainabilit y.
At a communit y and ecosystem level, our decisions about where to live and how we use our resources also make a difference.
For example, reser ving open spaces within an urbanized area positively affects the abilit y of some species to persist in the modified landscape.
Choosing to create new subdivisions or developments in a sustainable manner ­ or choosing to create them at all -- will impact the long-term abilit y to maintain the biodiversit y and ecosystem functions that support our qualit y of life.
Biodiversit y conser vation can be compatible with large-scale habitat modifications with proper planning.
The challenge is to make choices and develop lifest yles that promote the sustainabilit y of all life ­ ours, other species, and generations of all to come.
From bird-watching trips in Latin America to photography safaris in Africa and diving trips in Australia and Belize, ecotourism has expanded in recent years as part of the movement toward sustainable development.
Ecotourism creates incentives to protect biodiversit y and reduce the impacts of development on local ecosystems.
As the industr y grows, such incentives should increase.
Ecotourism also benefits local economies by boosting demand for food, lodging and native guides as well as crafts and other products created by local people.
Legal Measures Over the years, a series of national and international treaties and conventions have been initiated to protect biodiversit y and promote sustainable development.
The United States Endangered Species Act calls for the protection and restoration of populations of imperiled species and the habitats on which they depend.
The Clean Water and Clean Air Acts help protect the habitat on which plants and animals rely.
U.S. legislation also guides management of national parks, forests, refuges and marine sanctuaries, in part for biodiversit y conser vation.
International treaties include the 1992 Convention on Biological Diversit y, drawn up at the United Nations Trade of the Showy Lady's Slipper Conference on Environment and Development, and the 1975 Convention on Orchid is regulated by the international International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (cites). convention cites.
The Convention on Biological Diversit y became international law in 1993, but the United States has not become a member.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 27
V. Protecting Biodiversity in North America In the United States, Canada and Mexico, national parks, forests, grasslands, refuges and other public lands present an opport unit y to protect biodiversit y and prov ide the public with many other ser v ices.
As examples, prairie restoration is occurring in some Midwestern parks.
Introduced goats that destroy native plants are being removed from national parks in Hawaii.
Experts are raising peregrine fa lcons in the wild to re-establish the bird 's populations in Rock y Mountain Nationa l Park in Colorado.
Park employees are screening off sea t urtle nesting sites from predators and other dist urbances at Cape Canaveral, Cape Lookout, Cape Hatteras and other areas a long the Atlantic Coast and Gulf of Mexico.
The United States The U.S. Department of Agricult ure's Forest Ser v ice administers national forests and grasslands, which combined comprise 10 percent of the tota l area of the United States.
Legislation requires that these areas prov ide for a diversit y of plant and anima l communities and be maintained for multiple uses, including outdoor recreation, rangeland, watershed protection, wildlife and fish protection, and timber extraction.
The U.S. Department of Defense manages nationally protected land, both on militar y bases and in A rmy Corps of Engineers recreation areas.
The National Wildlife Ref uge System encompasses 3.4 percent of the United States, with the largest ref uges in A laska.
The ref uge system protects plants, fish, waterfowl and other species, including t wo-thirds of a l l U.S. mammals, more than one-ha lf of a l l U.S. birds and t wo-fifths of all U.S. reptiles and amphibians.
The Fish and Wildlife Ser v ice's Endangered Species Program officially identifies and lists threatened or endangered species and develops recover y plans.
The Bureau of Land Management (BLM) administers more than 12 percent of the total U.S. land area, primarily in the western portion of the countr y and A laska.
These lands are managed mostly for multiple use, including livestock grazing, minera l and timber extraction, wildlife protection and recreation.
Many threatened or endangered plant and anima l species are located on BLM lands.
Similarly tribal lands, again primarily in the West, ser ve to protect a portion of our national biodiversit y heritage.
The National Park Ser v ice is responsible for 378 national park units in 49 states, the District of Columbia, and 5 U.S. territories.
These units include Yellowstone National Park, which Congress established in 1872 as the first national park in the world.
State-r un parks cover more than 11.6 million acres and host 725,50 0,0 0 0 v isitors annually.
Private reser ves managed by groups such as The Nat ure Conser vancy, National Audubon Societ y and the Land Tr ust A lliance a lso contribute to biodiversit y conser vation.
The Land Tr ust A lliance alone has assisted in the acquisition or classification of 4 mil lion acres of private lands to be protected as conser vation easements or land tr usts.
28 | V. Protecting Biodiversity in North America
Canada and Mexico Canada has a similar system of protected areas, including wildlife areas, recreation areas, wilderness areas, ecological reser ves, and nationa l, prov incia l and regional parks.
Mexico maintains a system of protected nat ura l areas with funding from sources such as the Global Env ironment Fund channeled through the Mexican Nat ure Conser vation Fund.
In 1992, the President of Mexico established the National Commission for the K nowledge and Use of Biodiversit y (conabio) to coordinate conser vation and research efforts designed to preser ve biologica l resources.
conabio focuses on research, sustainable use and public awareness.
Biodiversity in North America
3 1 5
2
6
4
1.
Home to g rizzly bear, caribou , and wolves, Banf f National Park in Alberta , Canada protects biodiversity in the C a n a di a n R o cki e s .
2.
Beautiful water falls and g roves of giant sequoias - among the world 's largest living things - are found in Yosemite National Park in California .
3.
Millions of visitors are attracted to Yellowstone National Park for its famous geyser, Old Faithful, and its diverse wildlife including wolves, trumpeter swans, bison and g rizzly bear.
4.
Monarch butter flies mig rate to the forests of the Monarch Butter fly Special Biosphere Reserve in Michoacan, Mexico to spend the winter months.
5.
Acadia National Park protects some of Maine's natural treasures including spectacular coastline, mountains, w o od l and s and l a k es .
6.
Mang roves in Florida's Everglades National Park serve as nurseries for a m u l t i t u d e o f m a r i n e sp e c i e s a n d a s habitat for alligators and sea birds.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 29
W hat you can do to help Because most people around the world live in cities, it is easy for us to forget the origin of our resources.
But cities and the people in them depend on giant tracts of land for food, water, transportation, clothes, wood for constr uction and many other needs.
The average U.S. citizen relies on 25 acres (the size of 25 football fields) to support her or his lifest yle.
However, worldwide, the biologically productive space available per person is only 5.4 acres.
This is referred to as an "ecological footprint."
To determine your footprint, v isit 
W hile it may sound like an over worked message, it is tr ue that the indiv idual actions we all take make a difference when it comes to conser v ing biodiversit y. You've already taken one step in the right direction by reading this book let.
Other steps include : Live a more sustainable life : Walk, bike, carpool and /or take public transportation.
Recycle.
Take your own bags and containers to the grocer y store and to restaurants when you order to go.
Take your own mug to the coffee shop.
Compost.
Much of our organic waste does not need to fi ll up landfi lls. Conser ve water.
Water your lawn at night and take shorter showers.
Purchase food and wood products made from crops and trees that are grown and har vested in a sustainable manner.
Grow a pollinator-friendly garden in your back yard or school grounds.
Plant species native to your area.
Continue to read, ask questions and v isit museums, botanical gardens, zoos and aquariums, which sponsor educational programs.
Contact your state invasive weed and plant officials to learn how you can help stop the spread of these pests.
Don't plant exotic plants and seeds in your gardens.
Share what you learn with your children, your parents, your coworkers, your friends and your neighbors.
Support biodiversit y conser vation efforts.
Travel, learn and engage people from other cult ures to gain an appreciation of how they value, protect and depend on biodiversit y. Consider careers in biodiversit y sciences and policy such as marine biologist, field ecologist, zoologist, env ironmental law yer, env ironmental educator, env ironmental economist, and many others.
Each of us makes choices that will af fect generations to come.
The future of Earth's biodiversity depends on those choices.
30 | V. Protecting Biodiversity in North America
Where to go for more information L o c a l a n d R e g i o n a l B i o d i v e r s i t y. Cit y zoos, botanical gardens, science m u se u m s , l o c a l c h a p t e r s o f n a t i o n a l a n d s t a t e c o n se r v a t i o n organizations, national forests a n d w i l d l i fe r e f u ge s , B u r e a u o f L a n d M a n a ge m e n t , s t a t e a n d n a t i o n a l p a rk s .
For additional information please contact Smithsonian Institution Monitoring 
Other organizations interested in biodiversity: North American Biodiversity Animal Diversity Web Canadian Nature Federation Center for Marine Conser vation Defenders of Wildlife Mexican Biodiversity Commission Mexican Nature Conser vation Fund National Audubon Society National Fish and Wildlife Federation National Invasive Species Council National Wildlife Federation Natural Resources Defense Council The Nature Conser vancy U.S. Fish and Wildlife Ser vice U.S. Geological Sur vey U.S. National Marine Fisheries Ser vices The Wilderness Society The Wildlands Project Wildlife Conser vation Society World Wildlife Fund, U.S.
Global Biodiversity Conser vation International Convention on Biological Diversity, Secretariat Ecological Society of America The World Conser vation Union Latin American Alliance Biodiversity O ver view Marine Conser vation Biology Institute United Nations Environment Programme Virtual Librar y of Ecology and Biodiversity
Bibliog raphy The Ecotourism Societ y. 20 0 0.
Market Data .
<
20 0 0.
Biological Diversity.
<
E. and E. McCu l lum (eds).
1993.
Biodiversity in British Columbia : Our Changing Environment.
Env ironment Canada, Conser vation and Protection, Pacific and Yukon Region.
Vancouver, Canada.
Meine, C. 1999.
Humans and Other Catastrophes : Perspectives on Extinction.
A merican Museum of Nat ura l Histor y, New York .
Myers, N. 1996.
The rich diversit y of biodiversit y issues.
in Biodiversity I I : Understanding and Protecting our Biological Resources.
Joseph Henr y Press, Washing ton, D.C.
Myers, N., R .
Mit termeier, C. Mit termeier, G. da Fonseca and J. Kents.
20 0 0.
Biodiversit y hotspots for conser vation priorities.
Nature 4 03 : 853-858.
Nabhan, G.P. and S.L .
Buchmann.
1997.
Pol lination ser v ices : Biodiversit y 's direct link to world food stabilit y. Pages 133-150 in G. Daily (ed) Nature's Services : Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems.
Island Press, Washing ton, D.C.
Nationa l Assessment Sy nthesis Team.
20 0 0.
Climate Change Impacts on the United States : The Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change.
US Globa l Change Research Program, Washing ton, D.C.
Nationa l Association of State Park Directors.
1993.
State Park Acres, Revenues, and Expenses.
<
(~1990 ) Biological Diversity Makes a World of Dif ference : A Cur riculum for Teachers and Interpreters.
Nationa l Parks and Conser vation Association.
Nationa l Research Council, Commit tee on Biologica l Diversit y in Marine Systems.
1995.
Understanding Marine Biodiverisity.
Nationa l Academy Press, Washing ton, DC.
Naylor, R . and P. Ehrlich.
The va lue of nat ura l pest control ser v ices in agricu lt ure.
Pages 151-174 in G. Daily (ed) Nature's Services : Societal Dependence on Natural Ecosystems.
Island Press, Washing ton, D.C.
Nordic Conference on Env ironment and Development.
1987.
Towards Sustainable Development: Four teen Case St udies Prepared by A frican and Asian Journa lists.
Sa ltsjöbaden, Stock holm (8-10 May).
PCAST Panel on Biodiversit y and Ecosystems.
1998.
Teaming with Life : Investing in Science to Understand and Use America's Living Capital.
Executive Of fice of the President, Washing ton, D.C.
Pimentel, D., L .
Lach, R .
Zuniga and D. Morrison.
1999.
Environmental and Economic Costs Associated with Non-indigenous Species in the United States.
Cornel l Universit y, Col lege of Agricu lt ure and Life Sciences.
Ithaca, N Y.
Pimm, S. and T. Brooks.
1999.
The si xth extinction : how large, where, and when ? In Nature and Human Society : The Quest for a Sustainable World .
The Nationa l Academy of Sciences, Washing ton, D.C.
Pimm, S. and P. R aven. 20 0 0.
Extinction by numbers.
Nature 4 03 : 843-845.
R aven, P. 1999.
Remarks at Mil lennium Sy mposium.
St. Louis, Missouri.
R aven, P.
In Press.
Sustainability : prospects for a new millennium.
In Frontiers of the Mind in the 21st Century.
P. Gifford (ed).
Stein, B., L .
Kutner and J. Adams (eds.).
20 0 0.
Our Precious Heritage.
Ox ford Universit y Press, New York .
United Nations Env ironment Programme.
20 0 0.
Global Environmental Outlook GEO-20 0 0.
<
1993.
World Agriculture: Trends and Indicators, 1970-91.
Washington, DC: USDA.
Wilcove, D., M. 1993.
W hat exac A n ana lysis of th List: 1985-1991.
87-93.
Mc Mil lan and K .Winston. t ly is an endangered species ? e U.S. Endangered Species Conservation Biolog y 7:
A lonso, A. and F. Da l lmeier.
20 0 0.
Working for Biodiversity.
Smithsonian Instit ution / Monitoring and Assessment of Biodiversit y Program.
Washing ton, D.C.
A nony mous Charting the Herbarium.
Bron x, New .
1994.
Systematics Agenda 20 0 0 : Biosphere.
Available from SA 20 0 0 New York Botanica l Gardens, York .
Binder, D., S. Guy and B. Penn.
1994.
Backyard Biodiversity 
Ministr y of Env ironment, Lands and Parks and Ministr y of Forests.
Prov ince of British Columbia, Canada.
Cheva lier, J., J. Cracraf t, F. Grifo and C. Meine.
1997.
Biodiversity, Science, and the Human Prospect.
A merican Museum of Nat ura l Histor y, New York .
Cincot ta, R .
P. and R .
Engelman.
20 0 0.
Nature's Place : Human Population and the Future of Biological Diversity.
Popu lation Action Internationa l.
Washing ton, D.C.
Costanza, R . (ed).
1991.
Ecological Economics : The Science and Management of Sustainability.
Columbia Universit y Press, New York .
Council for Agricu lt ura l Science and Technolog y Task Force.
1999.
Benefits of Biodiversity.
Council for Agricu lt ura l Science and Technolog y. Repor t No. 133.
A mes, Iowa.
Daily, G., S.
A lexander, P. Ehrlich, L .
Gou lder, J. Lubchenco, P. Matson, H. Mooney, S. Postel, S. Schneider, D. Tilman and G. Woodwel l. 1997.
Ecosystem ser v ices : benefits supplied to human societies by nat ura l ecosystems.
Issues in Ecolog y 2 : 1-16.
Dobson, A.P., J.P. Rodrig uez, W.M. Rober ts and D.S. Wilcove.
1997.
Geographic distribution of endangered species in the United States.
Science 275: 550 -553.
Wilcove, D., D. Rothstein, J. Dubow, A. Phillips and E. Losos.
1998.
Quantifying Threats to Imperiled Species in the United States.
Bioscience 48: 607-615.
World Resources Instit ute ( W R I).
1994.
World Resources : A Guide to the Global Environment.
Ox ford Universit y Press, Ox ford.
World Resources Instit ute. 20 0 0.
Ecosystems.
People and Ecosystems : The Fraying Web of Life.
<
Sustainable Agriculture.
ht t p : // w w w.w ri.org /sustag /index.html.
World Wild life Fund.
1999.
Windows on the Wild : Biodiversity Basics.
St udent Book and Educator's Guide versions.
Acorn Nat ura lists, Tustin, CA.
Biodiversit y : Connecting with the Tapestr y of Life | 31
Smithsonian Institution Monitoring and Assessment of Biodiversity Program 1100 Jefferson Drive, SW Washington, DC 20560-0705 202.357.4793 (telephone) 202.786.2557 (fax) Email: simab@ic.si.edu Internet: www.si.edu/simab President's Committee of Advisors on Science and Technology
Smithsonian Institution
