Window on State Government Carole Keeton Strayhorn, Texas Comptroller __________ [search_blu.gif]-Submit Texas School Performance Review Texas School Performance Review _________________________________________________________________ Grape Creek Independent School District August 2001 Chapter 2 EDUCATIONAL SERVICE DELIVERY This chapter discusses the Grape Creek Independent School District's (GCISD's) educational service delivery system in five sections: A. Student Performance B. Curriculum and Instructional Resources C. Special Programs
Part 1 Part 2
D. Health Programs E. Safety and Security
C. SPECIAL PROGRAMS (PART 2)
In a TSPR survey of district staff, the gifted and talented program in the district received mixed reviews.
Forty-nine percent of teachers and 22 percent of principals and administrators indicated that the gifted and talented program is not an effective educational program.
Thirty-eight percent of teachers and 65 percent of support staff and administration felt that the district has an effective gifted and talented program.
Recommendation 8:
Ensure that the goals and objectives of gifted and talented education established in the District Improvement Plan are implemented.
Full implementation of the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted and Talented Students will result in a cohesive program that effectively addresses the concerns expressed by both parents and teachers.
This recommendation can be accomplished in a number of ways.
One alternative is to actively pursue a relationship with neighboring districts to create an Advanced Academic Cooperative.
Through the membership that already exists with Region 15, member districts should reassess the services that are needed and which services the Region is adequately providing.
Region 15 should serve as a liaison between districts to establish relationships that go beyond the services currently provided by the Region.
With an expanded agreement, districts could share teachers, curriculum and other resources.
A summer exchange program would help gifted and talented teachers.
The implementation strategies and fiscal impacts of this report are based on improving the district program without seeking a cooperative arrangement until the internal gifted and talented program is more effective.
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
The superintendent creates a district-level Advanced Academics advisory committee.
October 2001 2.
The Advanced Academics advisory committee conducts a needs assessment of the gifted and talented program.
October - November 2001 3.
The committee determines the extent to which each school in the district is implementing the recommendations in the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted and Talented Students.
October - December 2001
4.
The superintendent and Region 15 review the contract for gifted and talented services and ensures that appropriate services are provided to the district.
October 2001 5.
The Advanced Academics committee develops a three- to five-year plan for achieving exemplary status as outlined in the state plan and secures staff and board approval.
Ongoing 6.
The Advanced Academics committee develops measures to ensure that the district follows the state plan and that principals incorporate these measures into campus improvement plans.
August 2002 7.
The superintendent approaches neighboring districts and Region 15 to create an Advanced Academics cooperative that would create the means for sharing teaching staff, services and expertise.
October 2001 8.
The Advanced Academics committee contacts other school districts with exemplary, cost-effective gifted and talented programs and other Regions that have Advanced Academic Cooperatives.
Ongoing
FISCAL IMPACT
To implement this recommendation, $1,200 would have to be set aside to cover travel expenses and the registration fees for one state conference or training session per year.
Recommendation 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 2005-06 Ensure that the goals and objectives of gifted and talented education established in the District Improvement Plan are implemented.
($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200) ($1,200)
School to Career Education
Section 29.181 of the TEC requires school districts to provide a curriculum that gives each student the opportunity to "master the basic skills and knowledge necessary for managing the dual roles of family member and wage earner; and for gaining entry-level employment in a high-skill, high-wage job or continuing their education at the post-secondary level."
The Texas Administrative Code (TAC), chapter 74 subchapter A, requires school districts to offer career and technology education courses selected from three of eight career and technology areas: agricultural science and technology, business, health science technology, home economics, technology/industrial technology, marketing, trade and industrial.
The State Plan for Career and Technology Education 2000-02, required under TEC Section 29.182, was developed as a guide to assist school districts in their efforts to offer effective career and technology education programs that prepare students for further education and eventual employment.
The plan is based on the premise that a rigorous academic foundation contributes to success in school and in life, that all students should be provided equal opportunities for success and that career and technology education should complement and enhance academic preparation by enabling students to apply academic principles to a variety of community and career situations.
Exhibit 2-23 presents the number and percent of students enrolled in career and technology courses.
GCISD has the third-lowest percent of students enrolled in career and technology courses compared to its peer districts.
The district ranks last in expenditures per student compared to its peers, Region 15 and the state.
Exhibit 2-23 GCISD Actual Expenditures for Career and Technology GCISD, Peer Districts, Region 15 and State 1999-2000
District Number and Percent of Students Enrolled Number and Percent of Career and Technology Education Teachers* Actual Career and Technology Expenditures Percent of Actual Expenditure Per Student Expenditure Number Percent Number Percent Amount Percent Amount Shallowater 300 24.4% 8.3 10.2% $400,757 7.6% $1,336 Hutto 190 17.9% 6.1 7.5% $284,484 5.8% $1,497 Troy 265 21.3% 5.6 6.4% $277,346 5.5% $1,047 Celina 176 17.2% 3.6 4.4% $203,121 4.1% $1,154 Grape Creek 222 19.8% 1.3 1.6% $107,158 2.3% $483 Region 15 11,645 22.8% 213.1 5.5% N/A N/A N/A State 741,806 18.6% 11,445 4.3% $759,455,669 4.0% $1,024
Source: TEA, AEIS, 1999-2000 and PEIMS, 1999-2000.
*Reported in full-time equivalents.
GCISD's new Career and Technology Program offers courses in Agricultural Science and Technology and in Family and Consumer Science Education.
Exhibit 2-24 lists the course offerings of these two programs.
Exhibit 2-24 GCISD School-to-Career Program Offerings by Career Clusters 2000-01
Agricultural Science and Technology Cluster Course Offerings Introduction to World Agricultural Science and Technology Applied Agricultural Science and Technology Home Maintenance and Improvement Animal Science Equine Science Wildlife and Recreational Management Introduction to Horticulture Science Floral Design and Interior Landscape Development Landscape Design Construction and Management Introduction to Agricultural Mechanics Agricultural Metal Fabrication Technology Agricultural Electronics Agricultural Cooperative Training Family and Consumer Science Course Offerings Personal and Family Development Apparel Food Science and Nutrition Consumer and Family Economics Interior Design Parenting and Child Development Food Production Management and Services Home Economics Cooperative Education
Source: GCISD, 2000-01.
FINDING
While the district has some basic courses and programs already in place, it is actively pursing articulation agreements whereby higher education institutions and the district cooperatively provide instruction and potentially college-level course credit, distance learning opportunities and dual-enrollment opportunities with area colleges and technical schools.
In 1999-2000, the district entered into an articulation agreement with Howard College and is developing relationships with other area colleges and organizations to serve students in the career and technology program.
Now a program is offered by the GCISD Tech Prep program through local colleges.
Qualified students can enroll in the local college and attend class during the school day at the student's high school and receive college credit as well as high school credit for the course.
Students must pay tuition to attend this program.
In 2000-01, the district added a Cisco networking technology course that allows students to become Cisco Certified Network Associates.
With this certification, students obtain the knowledge and skills to install and maintain Cisco-related networking equipment in a Local Area Network or Wide Area Network.
COMMENDATION
GCISD has made a commitment to develop, enhance and expand the career and technology program to include both traditional trades and technology education courses.
FINDING
Despite these efforts, GCISD still lacks a comprehensive career and technology education program.
While the courses and course sequences offered at Grape Creek High School in Agricultural Science and Technology and Family and Consumer Science are comprehensive and students interested in pursuing a degree in these areas can obtain a good foundation by taking these courses, only a limited number of options exist for students interested in technology or other trade and industrial education other than concurrent enrollment programs.
There are 22 different courses offered in Agricultural Science and Technology and Family and Consumer Science.
No courses are offered in Tech Prep except dual enrollment courses offered with a local college or university.
The Technology Education Essential Knowledge and Skills adopted in 1997 are guidelines to assist communities in planning, developing and implementing technology education programs.
They provide a framework that describes what students should know and be able to do in six technology content areas and recommend a coherent sequence of courses for middle and high school programs.
TEA defined these six areas as Bio-related Technology, Computer Technology, Construction Technology, Energy Power, Manufacturing Technology, and Transportation Technology.
Sample trades include electric engineering technician, electrician, computer systems analyst, computer programmer and Computer Aided Design Drafter.
Some of these courses are not available in GCISD.
Tech prep courses are fully accredited and faculty members must meet the same accreditation standards as those required by four-year colleges and universities.
The emphasis in Tech Prep courses is on teaching with real-world applications of learning and smaller class sizes that enhance faculty and student interaction.
Recommendation 9:
Expand the career and technology program by establishing more relationships with area colleges and trade schools and by sharing teachers and courses with neighboring districts.
GCISD can strengthen its existing technology program, which provides an enormous benefit to students, by actively pursing grant opportunities.
Several Internet sites, beginning with Region 15 and TEA, provide useful links to a variety of institutions that provide grant-related information.
In addition, GCISD should contact neighboring districts to establish cooperative agreements for sharing curriculum, courses and teachers.
Grape Creek, for instance, can offer the Cisco Networking class to students in a neighboring district in exchange for Grape Creek students enrolling in a course or using a specialized teacher from another district.
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
Counselors help students understand the benefits of tech prep courses.
November 2001 2.
The superintendent, high school principal and vocational director consider courses to be offered in each year based on course enrollment and subsequent education and work patterns of recent graduates.
March 2002 3.
The superintendent directs a change in course offerings.
April 2002 4.
The superintendent, high school principal and vocational director consider course enrollment and post-graduate plans to maintain an appropriate mix of school to career courses.
Ongoing 5.
The superintendent and counselors develop an awareness campaign for students beginning middle school that promotes the advantages of technical training programs.
Ongoing
FISCAL IMPACT
This recommendation can be implemented with existing resources.
Compensatory Education
In addition to its regular classroom instruction program, GCISD provides special support for students at risk of dropping out and for students who are not performing at grade level.
The federal government provides funds for students who are not meeting performance standards.
These Title I funds are sent to schools through TEA and are based on the number of economically disadvantaged students in the district.
Economically disadvantaged students are typically those students eligible for free or reduced-priced meals.
The students served, however, are selected based on educational need, not economic status.
The amended law allows a school to be designated as a Title I, Part A school-wide program if 50 percent or more of students at the school or in the attendance zone are in low-income families.
In GCISD, the elementary school is designated as a Title I, Part A school-wide program.
FINDING
GCISD elementary school has a comprehensive support program with demonstrated results and uses federal Title I funds to support five instructional aides.
The percent of economically disadvantaged students passing TAAS is much closer to the state average.
Funds are directed to the Creative Education Institute reading lab, which targets kindergarten through grade 3 in a supplementary reading program.
In addition, GCISD elementary schools serve students in a summer reading enrichment program funded by Title I funds.
A parental involvement program provides informational booklets on parenting skills to parents as well as sending teachers, an administrator and a parent representative to the state compensatory education conference.
Of the 43 students registered for the summer enrichment program, 37 completed the four-week course.
Students identified as at-risk at the elementary level are placed in programs to address their needs.
These programs include summer enrichment, counseling, mentorship programs, special education and tutoring.
Performance measures are indicated based on six-week grade reports, TAAS scores, other achievement test scores and year-end program evaluations.
As seen in Exhibit 2-13, the progress of students who have previously failed the TAAS, as measured by the TLI, exceeded the state and Region 15 gains for the last two years.
In addition, Grape Creek Elementary also exceeded the gains of the elementary schools in the peer districts.
As published in AEIS reports, this new measure examines the progress of students who had previously failed TAAS.
A TLI of 70 is set as the passing standard for TAAS.
The TLI generally ranges from 5 to 100, although this range may vary by grade level and subject matter.
COMMENDATION
GCISD elementary school has effective programs for increasing student performance for students who have failed TAAS.
FINDING
The district and campus improvement plans lack detail regarding the sources of funds for activities for students at-risk of dropping out required by state law and rule.
Accelerated or compensatory education, as defined in Section 42.152 (c) of the Texas Education Code, is a program designed to improve and enhance the regular education program for students at risk of dropping out of school.
In determining the appropriate accelerated or compensatory program, districts must use student performance data from state assessment instruments and other tests administered by the district.
Based on needs assessments, district and school staff design the appropriate strategies and include them in the school and/or district improvement plan.
By law, the improvement plan must include the comprehensive needs assessment, measurable performance objectives, strategies for student improvement, resources and staff, timelines for monitoring each strategy, and formative evaluation criteria.
Each district is responsible for evaluating the effectiveness of the locally designed program.
State funding for compensatory education is allocated based on the number of economically disadvantaged students in the district.
The number of economically disadvantaged students enrolled in a district is determined by averaging the six months with the highest monthly enrollment in the national school lunch program of free or reduced-price lunches for the preceding school year.
Compensatory Education and Title I funds are supposed to provide additional services to at-risk students, thereby supplementing the dollars that a district dedicates for regular educational programs.
Districts are prohibited from using these dollars to supplant, or be used in lieu of regular education expenditures.
In general, GCISD's DIP entries under "Resources Needed" were often vague, with statements such as "TAAS objectives."
One statement under "Resources Needed" describes "$500 for resource materials" without identification of the source of funds.
It was difficult to ascertain if expenditures, which were often not included, were supplemental in nature.
Additionally, some of GCISD's performance measures are not appropriately stated nor was a needs assessment included to show how programs match students' needs.
Under the Evaluation heading, there were instances of more specific results such as "Improved TAAS writing performance by 3 points on TLI scores," although there is no such score.
In other cases, statements under evaluation such as "improved attendance, reduced dropout rate" do not have specific objectives.
New statutory language passed during the 2001 77th Legislature in SB 702 may also create a larger incentive for districts to more accurately identify the use of Compensatory Education funds on regular campuses.
Previously, districts could expend their total Compensatory Education allotment on Disciplinary Alternative Education Programs (DAEPs).
The new law limits a district's use of Compensatory Education funds at DAEPs to 18 percent of the district's Compensatory Education allotment.
Properly identifying accelerated and intensive compensatory education program resources and expenditures on regular campuses in their campus improvement plans will not only help the district more effectively evaluate particular compensatory education instructional strategies, it may also help the district meet the new statutory requirement regarding DAEP expenditures.
Districts that fail to accurately report these measures could jeopardize state and/or federal funds.
Recommendation 10:
Incorporate performance measures for at-risk students into district and campus improvement plans.
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
The superintendent and school principals develop campus improvement plans that contain sufficient fiscal information to determine supplement versus supplant issues.
October 2001 2.
The superintendent and principals include the results from needs assessments in the improvement plans.
October 2001 3.
The superintendent reviews each campus improvement plan to ensure that appropriate outcome measures reflecting student needs are included.
November 2001
FISCAL IMPACT
This recommendation can be implemented with existing resources.
_________________________________________________________________
Carole Keeton Strayhorn Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts Window on State Government Contact Us Privacy and Security Policy
