Coor News Releases Radio Stories The Weekly Wrapup Legislation Media Staff E-Mail List Other Links Media Home House Home Page Task Force Seeking Funds To Reduce Fire Ants OKLAHOMA CITY (Dec. 21) -- A legislative task force is seeking additional funds to reduce an army of insects from raiding the country under our feet.
Red imported fire ants infesting Oklahoma can cause property damage, are thought to be reducing some animal species, and the alkaloid-based venom in their bite can be lethal to humans.
Research indicates the ants have entered all or parts of 11 southern states.
Eight southern Oklahoma counties have been quarantined after confirmation of red imported fire ant infestation; they are McCurtain, Choctaw, Bryan, Johnston, Carter, Marshall, Love and Comanche counties.
And the imported variety of fire ants are continuing their march northward.
They are established as far north as Oklahoma County; researchers believe they were transported on nursery stock like plants, trees, etc., from infested fire ant areas.
Rep. James H. Dunegan, D-Calera, said he believes first blight of red imported fire ants in Oklahoma reportedly was brought from Texas in round bales of hay delivered to Bryan County, which borders the Lone Star state.
"The best I remember, a guy delivered some hay," Dunegan said, "and that was the first time we noticed them in southeastern Oklahoma."
"The bad news," said Rep. Randall Erwin, "it appears red imported fireants are here to stay."
The Nashoba Democrat is chairman of the Appropriations and Budget Subcommittee on Natural Resources.
Erwin turned the task force meeting over to Dunegan, who from the beginning has encouraged research and state appropriations to help control the South American fire ant infestation.
But the fire ant eradication budget is almost depleted, and lawmakers are considering supplemental funding.
Professor Russell Wright, who heads Oklahoma State University's Department of Entomology and Plant Pathology, recommended a half-million-dollar appropriation over the next five years to continue research and control of the red imported fire ant in Oklahoma.
Dunegan said his House Bill 2914, passed by the Legislature in 1998, formed the Oklahoma Fire Ant Research Management Advisory Committee.
The panel has met three times each year for the past three years to discuss the best ways of controlling the fire ant invasion.
The committee is an oversight panel which helps seek funding avenues,establishes new locations of fire ant infestations, and oversees chemical and biological control through test plots.
Dunegan said he has attended fire ant meetings in Atlanta, Ga., and has visited a research center in Gainesville, Fla.
"I'm convinced there are chemicals for controlling them, but I'm not convinced chemicals exist that will totally rid us of the fire ants,"
Dunegan said.
"I believe our only avenue is through research and biological control."
Florida researchers are trying to raise the fly en masse for release in ant-infested areas, and Mississippi researchers are attempting a new technique for raising Phorid flies.
Dr. Wright told the task force that 20,000 Phorid flies have been released at three sites in southeastern Oklahoma and "indicate a lot of potential as a management tool."
Wright said the most economical and ecological means of controlling fire ants is by using poison bait.
The bait is taken into the mound but takes three to four weeks for results.
He said the best new chemical control product is Thiomethoxan, which looks promising but is not yet licensed in Oklahoma.
Research indicates the potion knocks fire ants down in a day and keeps them down for approximately 35 days, he said
.
Wright said, "One thing I've learned when going to fire ant meetings across the country: There are more products that are listed for fire ant control, but they do not work better than any other single product I've encountered."
Wright indicated one of the most effective ways of controlling the redimported fire ant march across America is through education.
"People need to understand fire ant behavior and biology before they can know how to control them," he said.
County extension agents are being armed with pamphlets, banner posters, and flip charts for use anywhere inquisitive people gather to discuss fire ant control.
Wright said over 50 educational meetings have been conducted along with 24 demonstration trials, and education officials have worked closely with more than 32 professional agencies in the southern states.
Abatement projects are successful, Wright said.
Homeowners are banding together to rid entire neighborhoods of fire ants.
Bait that was distributed in those neighborhoods was picked up by ants in four to five hours of distribution.
The bait will not harm children or pets, he said.
"Where the homeowner was spending $50 to $60 each year on contact poisons, the neighborhood was averaging $8.50 per household while using the ant bait," Wright said.
The initial allocation from the state budget for fire ant research and control was $110,000 the first year, he said; it was reduced to $60,000 the second year and $35,000 this year.
"We have a problem," Wright said.
"There is only $1,400 left in the fund for the remainder of the year, and we're losing one valued researcher."
David Ligon, the Agriculture Department's director of administrative services, suggested pursuing an agricultural emergency fund containing $2 million in "rainy day" money.
Depending on how broadly the funds could be used, Ligon said the emergency fund could cover fire ant control as well as a paying emergency rural fire expenses and hay transportation.
"That's an alternative I suggest we pursue," Ligon said.
"The amount spent each year from the emergency fund would be reimbursed up to the $2 million cap."
Sancho Dickinson, Oklahoma Department of Agriculture director of Plant Industry and Consumer Services, echoed sentiments that "red imported fire ants are here to stay in Oklahoma."
Dickinson said the Plant Industry is the regulatory division of the Agriculture Department.
He said inspectors are searching for new fire ant infestations in Oklahoma.
"We're beefing up plans and brainstorming for other ways to do a better job of inspecting sod and nursery stock in order to prevent red imported fire ants from invading Oklahoma in the first place," Dickinson said.
He also encouraged the Legislature to continue funding fire ant research and control.
"We feel like the villains in this matter," said Arlie Perry, president of the Oklahoma Nursery and Landscape Association.
He said he is aware fire ants infest most areas via imported nursery stock into areas where red imported fire ants don't exist.
He said other states are enforcing regulations to prevent the spread of fire ants.
"When our trucks reach another state, they aren't interested if our trucks are legal or our paperwork is in order," Perry said.
"They are interested if the trucks carry fire ants."
He said his industry is vitally concerned about the fire ant takeover and will lend assistance.
"We don't want to be a part of the problem we want to be part of the solution," Perry said.
"We will have to look at supplemental appropriations," Erwin said.
"Obviously, we don't want fire ant control research and education to collapse."
-- 30 --
Top of Page
