Feedback Cabeza Prieta NWR Home Page Southwest Refuges Index Southwest Regional Home Page National Wildlife Refuge System USFWS National Home Page Fws_col2.gif (2468 bytes) U.S. Fish 
In order to survive in the harsh Sonoran desert environment, mammals adapt through a variety of means, including nocturnal life styles, extreme efficiency in obtaining and conserving water (some live on water extracted from plant life only), and protective coloration.
Water sources on the Refuge are natural rock basins called "tinajas," a few man-made storage areas, flowing washes after rains, and one intermittent seep.
Natural adaptation has enabled species to live for thousands of years with only the available resources.
While the majestic bighorn and rare pronghorn receive a lot of attention, there are more than 40 other species of mammals whose presence is necessary to maintain the ecological balance of the refuge.
You will notice that bats, squirrels, mice, rats, and gophers make up the majority of mammal residents on Cabeza.
These small creatures play a major part in sustaining the chain of life that includes the larger and better-known residents.
So when you catch a glimpse of any of these shy desert dwellers, you have had a unique opportunity to experience a part of this complex and fragile Sonoran desert ecosystem.
[Bats] [Rabbits and Hares]
The following list includes mammals that have been verified within Cabeza Prieta NWR boundaries.
*denotes endangered status
Bats California leaf-nosed bat Macrotus californicus Lesser long-nosed bat Leptonycteris curasoae verbabuenae* California myotis Myotis californicus stephensi Pallid bat Antrozous pallidus pallidus Western pipistrelle Pipistrellus hesperus hesperus Townsend's big-eared bat Plecotus townsendii Big free-tailed bat Tadarida macrotis Big brown bat Eptesicus fuscus pallidus Hoary bat Lasiurus cinereus Pocketed free-tailed bat Nyctinomops femorosacca Silver-haired bat Lasionycteris noctivagans [Back to Index]
Rabbits and Hares Squirrels Antelope jackrabbit Lepus alleni alleni Harris antelope squirrel Ammospermophilus harrisii Black-tailed jackrabbit Lepus californicus eremicus Rock squirrel Spermophilus variegatus grammurus Desert cottontail Sylvilagus audubonii arizonae Round-tailed ground squirrel Spermophilus tereticaudus neglectus
[Back to Index]
Pocket Gophers Pocket Mice Botta's pocket gopher, three subspecies Thomomys bottae growlerensis, phasma, pusillus Arizona pocket mouse Perognathus amplus taylori Kangaroo Rats Bailey pocket mouse Perognathus baileyi baileyi Merriam's kangaroo rat Dipodomys merriami merriami Desert pocket mouse Perognathus penicillatus pricei Desert kangaroo rat Dipodomys deserti arizonae Rock pocket mouse Perognathus intermedius phasma
[Back to Index]
Mice and Rats Cactus mouse Peromyscus eremicus eremicus Pinacate cactus mouse Peromyscus eremicus papagensis Canyon mouse Peromyscus crinitus disparilis Southern grasshopper mouse Onychomys torridus torridus White-throated wood rat Neotoma albigula mearnsi Desert woodrat Neotoma lepida auripila
[Back to Index]
Doglike and Foxlike Animals Raccoons and Relatives Coyote Canis latrans mearnsi Ringtail Bassariscus astutus yumanensis Kit fox Vulpes macrotis macrotis Gray fox Urocyon cinereoargenteus
[Back to Index]
Weasels and Relatives Cats Badger Taxidea taxus berlandieri Bobcat Felis rufus baileyi Western spotted skunk Spilogale gracilis leucoparia Mountain lion Felis concolor
Peccaries Deer and Relatives Collared peccary or "javelina" Tayassu tajacu Mule deer Odocoileus hemionus crooki
[Back to Index]
[prong.gif] Sonoran Pronghorn Pronghorns Sonoran pronghorn Antilocapra americana sonoriensis
Sheep and Relatives Desert bighorn Ovis canadensis mexicana
[Back to Index]
Unverified Species Following are animals that have been seen near the refuge and would be expected to be resident or transient, but no verified sightings have been made on the refuge.
Mexican free-tailed bat Tadarida brasiliensis mexicana Underwood's mastiff bat Eumops underwoodi Little pocket mouse Perognathus longimembris White-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus couesi [Back to Index]
Suggested Reading List
William H. Burt 
Donald F. Hoffmeister, Mammals of Arizona, University of Arizona Press, 1986.
James A. MacMahon, Deserts (Audubon Society Nature Guide), Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., 1988.
Gale Monson 
Olaus A. Murie, A Field Guide to Animal Tracks (Peterson Field Guide Series) Houghton Mifflin Co.
USFWS, Endangered and Threatened Species of Arizona, Ecological Services Field Office, Phoenix, AZ., Summer 1991.
Top of the Page
Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge 1611 North Second Avenue Ajo, Arizona 85321 Phone: 520/387-6483 Fax: 520/387-5359 r2rw_cp@fws.gov
Last Updated April 15, 2002
Disclaimer
