Skip to Page Content National Fish 
Horicon National Wildlife Refuge
Centennial Link
W4279 Headquarters Rd., Mayville WI 53050 Phone: 920-387-2658 Privacy ------ 508 Accessibility Support
Refuge Locator Link
Recreation Events Education History News Volunteers Contact s SiteMap/Links FAQ Welcome
Geology | Glaciation | Native Americans | American Settlement
Native Americans - The First People
Overview Stained Glass Window of Native Americans Ever since the end of the last Ice Age, for about 12,000 years, people have been attracted to the rich resources of the Horicon Marsh area.
The original people likely hunted native fauna, using musk oxen and mastodon migratory trails.
These trails followed natural land contours and probably became the first well-used human trails.
The oldest known human artifact in the state of Wisconsin, an 11,200 year old projectile point, was found near the Ledge in Oakfield, just north of Horicon Marsh.
Every major prehistoric group of people occupied the marsh area during the last 10,000 to 12,000 years: the Copper, Red Ochre, Woodland, and Effigy Mound peoples.
Native peoples never had a great negative impact on this marsh that sustained them for millenniums, as opposed to European settlers.
The Mound Builders The prehistoric people of the Effigy Mound culture, a division of the Woodland Indian people, lived in the upper Midwest from around 500 A.D. to 1400 A.D.
The mound builders left behind little evidence of a permanent village.
Their origins are unknown.
They disappeared around 1400 A.D. leaving few traces of their culture or of what happened to them.
However, one interesting artifact of their life remains: the effigy mounds they built.
Mound-building is considered an art form.
Their effigy mounds are earthen mounds and vary in size from 25 feet to over 300 feet long, average three feet in height, and were formed into animal or geometric shapes.
Animal shapes include panther, bear, bison, deer, birds, and others.
Still other mounds are shaped into lines and circles (linear and conical mounds).
Some mounds that have been excavated contain artifacts including pottery, bone tools, and copper awls.
The Horicon Marsh-Kettle Moraine-Sheboygan Marsh area was an apparent center of religious worship, a trail-shrine complex.
Along the east side of Horicon National Wildlife Refuge, County Z generally follows an ancient Indian trail below the high ledge of the Niagara Escarpment.
Mound groups face the trail and the marsh.
The city of Horicon is built on a large group of at least 200 mounds, many of which were destroyed as houses were built and the town grew.
Many skeletons were found as building excavations began.
Dr. Increase A. Lapham surveyed these mounds in 1851.
He wrote that they were extensive, varied, and intricate, located below the town and on the high bank of the Rock River on both sides.
Most were small and round.
The seven-mile border along the eastern edge of Horicon Marsh contained over 500 mounds and other important sites (such as more recently used campsites, earth works, village sites, gardens, etc.)
Effigy mounds tell the story of our heritage and landscape.
Wisconsin contains 98% of the effigy mounds found in North America.
Today, over 75% of the mounds once found in Wisconsin have been destroyed by construction, agriculture, and curio seeking.
But many of the surviving mounds are being preserved.
Top of Page
Buffalo Effigies Buffalo effigies, also found around the Horicon Marsh, are rocks naturally shaped like a buffalo.
Some of the rocks have been changed only slightly by Native Americans and may date back to over 5,000 years ago.
Prehistoric shrines with bison effigies are found on hilltops because the people believed that high ground was a reflection of heaven.
Located on high points, all key sites are mutually visible.
The effigies all face a cardinal direction or are aligned with a solstice sunrise or sunset.
Native Americans marked the sun's movement because they believed the sun represented the physical presence of God in the sky.
Fires represented the presence of God on earth.
Their circle of worship includes naturally occurring, interrelated cycles: prairie, fire, the sun, and buffalos.
Buffalo effigies also helped orient people to other geographic destinations, possibly all the way to the Black Hills of South Dakota.
A "herd" of these bison are scattered throughout Dodge and Fond du Lac Counties.
Like the mounds, they are still visited by Native Americans today.
Protect our Native Culture If you live in the Horicon Marsh area, you may have effigy mounds on your property.
If you work for a local government, you may make decisions about saving or losing this important part of our history and culture.
As a tourist, you can enjoy the mounds without destroying them.
Walk around mounds.
Avoid plowing them, paving over them, or digging into them.
Curio seeking molests effigy mounds and is illegal.
To record mound locations or for more information, contact the State Archaeologist at the Historical Society of Wisconsin, 1-800-342-7834.
Visiting Effigy Mounds Horicon Marsh Today the best place around the marsh to see the mounds is along County Highway Z just south of Highway 49.
These mounds are on private land and must be viewed from the roadside.
Do not trespass.
Look to the west of these mounds and you'll see the Bud Cook Hiking Area, located within the Horicon National Wildlife Refuge.
Top of Page
Effigy Mound Sites in Wisconsin
Many of our state parks have protected mounds including: * Wyalusing State Park (Bagley), * Devil's Lake State Park (Baraboo), and * Lizard Mound State Park (West Bend)
Early European Settlement Many different native groups lived at Horicon Marsh and the Rock River at and prior to European exploration and settlement.
According to a Dodge County History printed in the 1878 Historical Atlas of Wisconsin, "The Indians were attracted to Rock river, probably on account of the numerous fish in its waters and the abundance of game in the adjacent forests.
Points adjacent to the different rapids or fording places of the streams were favorite sites for their villages."
One of the early (1640) names of Horicon Marsh was "Winnebago Marsh" and "The Great Marsh of the Winnebagos," a testament to Horicon Marsh's proximity to Lake Winnebago and to its Ho-Chunk inhabitants.
The Miamis, Mascoutens, and Kickapoos lived in Dodge County as early as 1640.
In addition, the Sioux, Sac, Sauk, Menominee, Algonquin, Illinois, and Chippewa visited or made their homes at one time or another at the marsh, sometimes seasonally.
They hunted, gathered, and harvested their food from the marsh.
In 1664 when Jean Nicolet explored Wisconsin, the main tribe was the Ho-Chunk (or Winnebago, a branch of the Sioux).
Ho-Chunk, as they prefer to be called today, means "People of the Big Voice."
They greeted Nicolet at Red Banks (Green Bay) when he waded ashore waving his pistols and wearing Oriental robes, as he planned to greet an Oriental people.
Their territory extended west along the Fox River and south through Lake Winnebago and down to the Rock River in Illinois.
The Rock River was known as Eneenneshunnuck, which means, River of Big Stones.
It was also called Atch-a-wa-kah-har-ah.
Nicolet was the first white person to explore the Rock River.
In 1634 he mapped the region, calling the Rock River the Marian River.
The Illinois Indians may have used the Rock River and may have visited Horicon during conflicts with the Ho-Chunk at various times.
The Fox succeeded the Miamis, Mascoutens, and Kickapoos in Dodge County into the early 1700s and then moved further west to the Wisconsin River.
During the 1700s, the Ho-Chunk were generally pushed further west by encroaching Potowatomiowotomis (which means "Keepers of the Fire") from the east who entered Wisconsin from the north and south ends of Lake Michigan.
Ho-Chunk living at Lake Winnebago came from Green Bay, emigrating along the Rock River further south.
From about 1725 to 1832, the Ho-Chunk controlled the Rock River from East Waupun, Wisconsin to Dixon, Illinois.
Besides an incredible food source, the Rock River and Horicon Marsh served as important territorial landmarks.
But it was primarily the Ho-Chunk and secondarily the Potowotomi who dominated the area most recently, the Ho-Chunk generally to the west of the marsh and the Potowotomi to the east.
The Horicon Marsh area was laced with foot trails used by Native Americans at the time of European settlement, making ideal trade routes.
They were usually two feet wide and often 10 inches deep! Seven trails met at the present city of Horicon, a well-known location.
The largest, the Sauk or Dekorrah Road, led from Port Washington through Horicon to Columbus and Prairie du Sac.
Other trails included: * Watertown, through Hustisford, and on up to Fond du Lac.
* Horicon through Rolling Prairie to Fox Lake; * Horicon through Beaver Dam to Portage; * Horicon to Hartford to Milwaukee; * Horicon through Beaver Dam to Fox Lake; * Horicon to Mud Lake.
Top of Page
Bent trees often marked the trails.
Sometimes, they tied two trees together as saplings to achieve a "bent" tree.
Over the years, the main trunk would become what looked more like a thick, low side branch.
An actual side branch would take over growing as the main trunk.
On other trees, they tied the branches so they would grow in all four of the cardinal directions or so a branch would bend around the tree and point in different direction.
A few of these trees still survive today on privately owned property near the marsh.
European explorers surely traveled these trails.
Many of the trails developed into the roads and highways we drive today with motorized vehicles.
Villages Dr. N. W. Jipson wrote in the 1923 Wisconsin Archeological Bulletin: "That the Winnebago loved the Rock River is a matter of common knowledge.
Its waters were well stocked with fish; water fowl of various species were plentiful, and fur bearing animals dwelt along it shores."
He said, according to the Indian Agent at Rock Island, Illinois in 1824, "On Rocky River there are 12 or 15 Winnebago villages.
The principal one is called 'Cosh-co-nong,' and lies about 34 miles west from Mil-wakee on Lake Michigan.
On both sides of Rocky River, the land is low and full of marshes and sands, and makes it very disagreeable to travel by land; particularly after the first 90 miles from the mouth of Rocky River.
Indeed, it is one continual swamp, marsh, and pond from the mouth of the Rocky River to its source, and all the traveling is done by means of canoes."
He said that according to Maximilian, Prince of Weid, in 1825, "On Rock River, the Indians caught 130,000 muskrats.
The next year's catch was about half that number.
Within two years afterward, the muskrat was nearly exterminated on the Rock River field.
(From Steven's St. Louis Record)" The Indians were paid about 23 cents per muskrat skin between 1800 and 1832.
Fur traders, including the Spanish coming from St. Louis up the Mississippi River, dealt with Indians at an Illinois trading post.
Millions of fur pelts such as muskrat, mink, ermine, and beaver taken from Horicon Marsh by the Indians were sent to Europe by the French, Spanish, and British fur traders.
The Indian census of 1828-1832 by John M. Kinzie, Indian agent at Fort Winnebago (Portage, Wisconsin) lists Elk Village (at the present-day city of Horicon) with six lodges and 110 people and Old Fox as their chief.
Deputies took the census with corn kernels, a red one for each man, yellow for women, and white for children.
Indians also called the Horicon area Hochurunga (Fish Eaters), Maunk-shak-kah (White Breast), and Parachera (Fire Village).
The oil painting in the one-room school house behind Satterlee Clark's house in Horicon depicts this Ho-Chunk village and their wigwam dwellings, and a spring which provided fresh water for them.
According to another source, Maunk-shak-kah and his group of 2,000 Ho-Chunk lived in a village at the present-day city of Horicon in 1830 when Satterlee Clark came to the area, the first local European.
Maunk-shak-kah's father and grandfather sometimes lived at Lake Koshkonong, a principal Ho-Chunk village on the Rock River.
Maunk-shak-kah also maintained two villages on the Sugar River, and his territory extended all the way south to Dixon, Illinois.
Early settlers and local Ho-Chunk lived together peacefully.
The Ho-Chunk continued working their gardens north and east of their village.
They camped on the marsh during the winter and fished through the ice.
They harvested wild rice in their canoes in fall.
In addition, they harvested water lily and bulrush roots, greens and wild fruits.
In spring they made maple sugar.
They hunted game with bows and arrows.
They walked or using horses, pulled a travois, which was two poles attached to the side of a pony to make a sled that could haul trade goods or other items.
It is possible that Point Road, located north of the Horicon National Wildlife Refuge visitor center, is a named shorted from Smut's Point.
Smut's Point was the name given by early European settlers because there was an Indian village there said to have smelled very bad, leading the local people to calling it Smut's.
(White settlements probably didn't smell much better though without modern sanitation!)
Early Horicon settlers, often frightened of the Indians, related wonderful stories of their inquisitive and generous native neighbors.
Freedman and Bussewitz described them in their book, History of Horicon:
"Usually they peeked in windows and walked in without rapping.
One day Mrs. Connit was playing her melodian, when she became aware of someone standing behind her.
There was an Indian enjoying the music and combing his hair with her brush."
" Mr. and Mrs. John Haniff, south of town, saw some Indians come out of the woods towards their house.
They were so frightened that they crept into bed to die decently.
The Indians seeing how they were shivering built a rousing fire in the fireplace, made them a hot tea, and covered them with extra blankets."
" Mr. Hiram K. Ward gave some cooked parsnips to one who had come into his cabin cold and hungry.
Parsnips were new to the Indian, who liked them so well that he returned the next day with bows and arrows for the little boys."
John Hustis, founder of Hustisford, nine miles south of Horicon, said that the Menomonee lived on the east side of the Rock River and the Ho-Chunk on the west.
In Watertown, further south, in 1837, the Ho-Chunk lived on the west side of the Rock River and the Potowotomi on the east.
Mrs. George H. Beers wrote in 1845 that Horicon was wild but beautiful.
The first night she stayed, the Indians' ponies grazing around her house kept her awake all night with the tinkling of their bells.
She said they called themselves Potowatomis or Menomonees, and that settlers could tell the Winnebago by their red blankets, while the others wore blue or white.
O.H.W. Hornby recalled the days when the Ho-Chunk taught him to swim in the Rock River near Waupun.
One of his favorites was "Big Injun George" who was one of the 75 who camped along the river east of Waupun.
Big Injun George was the father of Chief Yellow Thunder of the Wisconsin Dells.
In summer they hunted and fished and in winter they disappeared to the woods.
According to the Izaak Walton League, "The Indians knew Horicon Marsh as a paradise for hunting wild fowl.
C.A. Hart, in 1885, stated, 'Nearly every species of migratory water-fowl known to the inland waters of North America can be found here.
Specimens of over twenty varieties of wild ducks are known to have been taken during the season in 1883.
Mallard and blue-winged teal breed here in immense numbers.
Wood-duck, widgeon, spoon-bill and red head are plentiful.
The canvas-back is occasionally taken, and when the autumn flight southward fairly sets in, the pin-tails seem to outnumber all other varieties.'
Wild bear and deer roamed here in quantities and elk were also reported.
In addition, the Rock River was filled with many kinds of eatable fish, clams, and wild rice, and the soil was rich for the cultivation of Indian corn, squash, pumpkins, and vegetables."
The fact that the marsh was a great hunting ground is also indicated by the large numbers of arrowheads and other stone tools which have been found in the area by the hundreds if not thousands over the years since European settlement.
Top of Page
Treaties, Removals, and the Black Hawk War The Ho-Chunk fought a war with England and agreed to peace in the St. Louis Treaty in 1804 or 1816, but did not "give up" any of their land.
In 1820, the U.S. government spent $15,000 per year in presents and rations of bread and pork for the Ho-Chunk on the Rock River.
The Horicon Reporter at one time published an account that in 1820 there were 14 Ho-Chunk villages around the marsh and on the Rock River and its tributaries.
In general, in Wisconsin, they were forced to move from their land for the first time in the 1820s to northeastern Iowa and south central Minnesota and to a reservation in 1863 in South Dakota.
As European settlement grew, the Ho-Chunk were forced to leave their land starting in the 1830s.
Through a series of treaties, their land was ceded to the government, and they were to move west and receive annuities, or annual payments to each tribal member meant to compensate for their lost land.
(Annuities were often withheld or delayed.
The Potawatomi, for example, were not completely compensated until 1988 for the five million acres of land they gave up.)
Dr. Increase A. Lapham eloquently described the marsh, "where the several sources of the Rock River run into the lake at various points and their united waters discharge at Horicon."
Lapham said that the famous Sauk Chief, Black Hawk, lived at Horicon Marsh, presumably prior to the Black Hawk War of 1832.
His Indian name was Mak-ka-tai-mch-shi-ka-la.
In 1832, in defiance of a scandalous treaty signed in 1804, Black Hawk, 67 years old, led a group of 500 to 1,000 Sac and Fox men, women, and children to their ancestral home from Iowa back across the Mississippi River, across Illinois, and into Wisconsin.
Due to complaints from land squatters, the government issued Illinois militia and regular troops to pursue them.
They were chased up the Rock River towards Horicon Marsh by General Atkinson and camped at Lake Koshkonong.
Black Hawk demonstrated an intimate knowledge of the Rock River, crossing it at Watertown, Hustisford, and Horicon.
Abraham Lincoln and Zachary Taylor were among the soldiers in the howling ranks.
Black Hawk's people may have hid on Cranberry Lake (Horicon Marsh), and one story tells that Black Hawk hid in an oak tree (on South Hubbard Street at the train tracks), and soldiers camped under that tree that same night! It seems that the troops only came as far north as Hustisford before heading west.
Black Hawk led his people towards the Wisconsin Dells somewhere just south of Horicon.
During the chase, Black Hawk's group kept ahead of the soldiers over difficult terrain and weather.
However, towards the end, his people were exhausted and starving, the dead bodies of elders left along the trail and vultures circling overhead.
The militia closed in, and Black Hawk was outnumbered 4 to 1.
He managed to get his remaining group across the Wisconsin River by canoe, looking for the next location to cross the Mississippi to the west using the Wisconsin and Bad Axe Rivers.
Fighting ensued with cannon and musket fire.
Black Hawk's band was massacred near Prairie du Chien on August 27, 1832.
Some were hunted down by enemy Menominee and Sioux.
Many fell or jumped into the Mississippi River and drowned.
A few women tried to swim carrying small children on their backs.
Black Hawk was not among the 115 prisoners, nor was his body found among the dead.
He left prior to the battle, perhaps tired and sick at heart.
Perhaps he tried to lead part of Atkinson's troops away from the Indian families, or maybe he just gave up.
His people did not blame him for his absence.
Black Hawk had lost.
A shameful peace, won.
Black Hawk escaped the militia and sought refuge among the Winnebago before surrendering to the militia at Prairie du Chien in late August 1832.
They kept him for a time in chains before he was eventually taken to Washington, where he had a brief meeting with President Jackson.
Black Hawk then toured the eastern seaboard, where he was gawked at and glorified.
A condition of his release was that he renounce any claims to leadership of the Sauk, that position going to the more pliable Keokuk.
He settled in Burlington, Iowa, and was treated as a respected citizen, often invited to listen to debates in the state assembly.
He wrote his autobiography in 1833 and gave his reason for fighting the whites: "My reason teaches me that land cannot be sold," he said.
"The Great Spirit gave it to his children to cultivate it; they have the right to the soil.
Nothing can be sold but such things as can be carried away."
He died in 1838 of an unspecified illness.
His body was stolen from his tomb by white settlers, and a doctor boiled his bones, fled to Illinois with the skeleton, and started a touring exhibition.
By intercession of the governor of Iowa, the body was returned to Burlington, but in 1853 a fire finally destroyed the remains.
The Ledge near Horicon Marsh was part of the land last ceded to the U.S. government in this part of Wisconsin.
On September 26, 1833, the U.S. government signed a treaty in Chicago with the Potawatomi, Ottawa, and Chippewa.
Ceded land included eastern Dodge County and all but the northeast part of Washington County to the east.
For strategic and religious reasons, this area was significant to them.
Signal points, including fire-blackened holes burned into rock near the 200-foot-high outer ledge, have been found on the Ledge near Oakfield and also on the Ledge east of Horicon.
These holes measure eight to 14 inches in diameter.
Mutually visible, the vantage points offer outstanding views of both the southern and northern portions of Horicon Marsh.
With clear skies, they could see far beyond the 50 square mile marsh to Horicon, Juneau, Beaver Dam, Burnett, Waupun, and one mile north into Fond du Lac County.
They could signal as far east to Theresa and Highway 41.
In early pioneer days, and likely prior to European exploration, the marsh was practically impenetrable.
The best way to navigate would have been to circle all the way around to the north or south ends as crossing directly from the west was impossible.
These signal locations are probably also related to religious ceremonies.
Two hundred year old (or older) rock paintings stand nearby, and the sites overlook formerly heavily used trails to the north along the eastern border of the marsh.
The Eagle's Nest site near Oakfield probably functioned as a critical religious setting.
Its use has been confirmed today by widely respected tribal elders - the site and its surroundings make up a central, key position on the native trail system.
Many prehistoric landmarks are visible from this location, regarded as sacred.
In about 1841, Indians of this area held a council meeting on Badger Mound near Rolling Prairie (located between Horicon and Beaver Dam).
Their purpose? To discuss the extermination of all whites in Wisconsin.
However, Solomon Juneau attended, was able to persuade them against their plan, and they abandoned it.
Juneau was apparently highly regarded by local Native Americans.
They first were forced to migrate in 1845 to Minnesota and met up with their former enemies, the Sac and Fox, so they began drifting back into Wisconsin by foot.
They also missed the rolling hills, clear water, and forests of their homeland.
In 1850, a second Indian migration began.
Hundreds of Indians gathered at the city of Horicon, and Solomon Juneau's son was responsible for the organization and movement.
Men had to walk on foot.
Wagons with ox teams were provided for women and children and to move canoes, equipment, and three wagon-loads of corn to the Wisconsin River.
The Ho-Chunk marked the event by putting out old fires and starting new ones, inviting happiness to their new, unfamiliar home which lay ahead.
They traveled to Dakota County, Nebraska this time, further west.
Still, over the years, some drifted back by foot to their marshland home, drawn by happy memories.
They camped near the Rock River and in the woods.
On Monday, August 26, 1861, the famous "Indian Scare" took place (or didn't take place, depending upon how you look at it).
A Hartford railroad stockholders paper, the Home League, printed this headline: "Horrible massacre by Indians near Kekoskee - Several villages in ashes - Horicon threatened."
The Beaver Dam Argus stated: "The greatest excitement we have seen in this city in may a day was caused on Monday by the circulation of a story that 800 Indians were in camp the other side of Horicon, that they had murdered 15 families and were ready to sack Horicon."
What really happened was a dispute between a German or a Dutchman and an Indian over the Indian's horse going into the settler's wheat.
The settler threatened to shoot the pony, and the Indian in return threatened to scalp him.
The pony may have been shot.
He may have chased the white away, causing his children to run and spread alarm.
Nonetheless, panic resulted, as rumors spread like wildfire as the story became taller with each telling: 14 houses had been burned and some whites murdered in their beds and 800 warriors -- no, 1,500! -- were on their way to Horicon! Men armed themselves, women quickly gathered their children from school or they came wailing home, people came into town by the wagon load, and help came from other cities.
Scouts returning from Kekoskee reported that all was quiet, and other scouts investigated via steamer on Lake Horicon.
All that for just a disagreement.
The government forced a third and final Indian removal in about 1880.
According to witnesses, the Indians gathered and sadly walked single file through the city of Horicon, stretching four blocks, most never to return again.
A young Indian woman rode a white pony, wore a red blanket, and held a white puppy.
A few lingered on at Horicon or near the marsh.
Ho-Chunk occupied the area in decreasing numbers up until 1890.
They camped at what is now the River Bend Park.
The last known Native American considered to live at Horicon Marsh as a result of European settlement was Red Wolf.
He died in 1937 at the age of 84, a resident of Burnett Corners.
He was born in Kentucky of Kickapoo ancestry and actually lived on part of what is now the Horicon Marsh State Wildlife Area.
As a young man, he traveled extensively across America with the Wild West shows and performed as a sharpshooter doing stationary trick shooting and shooting from a horse.
He raised his daughter and two sons by the marsh, a single parent, and Mendota, his daughter, graduated from Horicon High School.
(His wife was French-Canadian.)
The Ho-Chunk Today Today, no reservation lands exist in Wisconsin for the Ho-Chunk Nation.
They own 2,000 acres of land (which they once owned and have since repurchased).
There are 4,490 members.
They love their land and wish to preserve it along with their culture.
Ho-Chunk gaming helps provide the resources needed for education and health care for tribal members.
Every Labor Day a pow-wow is held as a thanksgiving for a bountiful harvest.
This is a spectacular display of Ho-Chunk heritage.
A pow-wow is also held on Memorial Day.
Resources * Burial Sites Preservation in Wisconsin brochure, The State Historical Society of Wisconsin * Historical Atlas of Wisconsin 1878.
* History of Horicon by Allie B. Freeman and Walter R. Bussewitz * Ho-Chunk Nation Phone: 1-800-255-9466 * Horicon Marsh Field Trip Guide Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources * Horicon Marsh's Living History: Effigy Mounds brochure, Horicon National Wildlife Refuge * Horicon Historical Society * Horicon Reporter, "History...From Wilton's Rug" by Wilton E. Erdman, February 1 and 8, 1973.
* Military History www.thehistorynet.com * Native Wisconsin booklet, Special Sesquicentennial Edition by Great Lakes Inter-Tribal Council * Radke Memorial Dedication booklet, "Brief History of Horicon Marsh," Wisconsin Division Izaak Walton League of America, August 19, 1950.
* Wisconsin Archaeologist "The Mayville Indian Rock Paintings" by Dr. Edgar G. Bruder, December 1949.
Compiled and written by Molly Stoddard, Ranger, Horicon National Wildlife Refuge.
Thanks to Herman Bender of ASHCO for his assistance.
Top of Page
_______________________________________________________________________ _________________________ Welcome | Facilities | Events | Education | History | News | Volunteers | Contacts | Site Map 
