spacer graphic spacer graphic left end U.S. Representative Anna Eshoo, 14th Congressional District of California right end
spacer graphic spacer graphic spacer graphic spacer graphic
home spacer graphic Home constituent services spacer graphic Constituent Services our congressional district spacer graphic Our Congressional District Student Page spacer graphic Student Page Anna's Legislative Work spacer graphic Anna's Legislative Work
spotlight Agriculture spotlight Animal Rights biotechnology Biotechnology Energy California Energy Crisis crime Crime 
Anna's Votes spacer graphic Anna's Votes Schedule of the House of Representatives spacer graphic Schedule of the House of Representatives district news spacer graphic Current Press Releases town hall meetings spacer graphic Town Hall Meetings biography spacer graphic Biography How to Reach Anna spacer graphic How to Reach Anna mail icon monthly e-newslatter sign up spacer graphic Monthly E-Newsletter Sign Up
spacer graphic
left end top right end Anna's Legislative Work : California Energy Crisis spacer graphic bottom
Over the past two years, California - the sixth largest economy in the world - has been brought to her economic knees by unlawful electricity rates.
Enron and other power-sellers employed ruthless and illegal practices to game Western energy markets and gouge consumers.
While rolling-blackouts appear to be less of a threat today, we still bear the burden of the crisis.
We see it in our utility bills every month.
While the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the Administration, and House Leadership fight every reform that I and my California colleagues have sought to protect California consumers, I'm still working to make sure that California is made whole and that such a crisis never strikes our state or any other again.
* Refunds for California Consumers On March 26, 2003, the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) released a detailed report on the California Energy crisis, concluding that there was widespread manipulation in the California energy market.
However, FERC did not propose increasing refunds substantially to reflect the gaming that took place.
In particular, FERC continued to insist that the State of California could not receive refunds on the short-term electricity purchases it made to keep the lights on.
During the Energy and Commerce Committee markup of the Energy Policy Act (H.R. 6) on April 2, 2003, I offered an amendment to increase the refunds for California consumers by $5 billion.
The amendment simply required the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) to refund all unjust and unreasonable charges the State of California incurred for the short-term energy purchases it made to keep the lights on during the California energy crisis in 2001.
The amendment leaves aside the issue of the State's long-term contracts which FERC is still scrutinizing.
The amendment was critical because FERC has failed to follow the law, which requires the refund of rates that are "unjust and unreasonable."
Regrettably the amendment failed on a vote of 21 to 30 in the Energy and Commerce Committee.
I attempted to work with my California Republican colleagues and made a number of changes to the amendment at their request.
Unfortunately, not one California Republican would support the amendment when I tried to bring it to the floor of the House, and the amendment was never considered there.
(Read my statement from the floor debate on H.R. 6, Energy Policy Act) * Read a Comprehensive Timeline of the California Energy Crisis * FERC Decision on Energy Refunds to California On January 9, 2003, I led my California colleagues in calling for the Chairman of the Federal Regulatory Energy Commission (FERC) Patrick Wood, III, to substantially increase the refund amount which was proposed on December 12, 2002, by Administrative Law Judge Bruce Birchman in the California Refund Case (EL00-95-045).
Click here to read my letter.
Judge Birchman recommended that the energy generators who supplied power to California during the 2000-2001 energy crisis should refund $1.8 billion.
This amount is far less than the $8.9 billion that California was seeking and it is, in my view, far less than what California consumers deserve.
In fact, the decision leaves us owing $1.2 billion dollars.
The parameters for the decision were set by FERC on July 25, 2001, long before the revelations of widespread malfeasance by Enron and other suppliers.
These limitations significantly reduced the refund.
For example, the Judge was allowed to only examine transactions beginning October 2000 instead of May 2000 and was also forced to rely on spurious data supplied by the industry.
My letter calls on the FERC Commission to reject the Judge's findings and take into account everything that has happened since the original parameters for this decision were handed down.
FERC should be fulfilling its responsibility to protect consumers and bring about the refund of monies secured by generators through the gorging of California consumers.
* California Energy Investigation As Congress investigated Enron's shady accounting practices earlier this year, I pressed House Leaders to also investigate the role that Enron and other energy suppliers played in the California energy crisis and the role they played in disrupting energy markets across the country.
I've led my California colleagues in making the case for a full Congressional investigation.To date, the House Leadership has refused to hold hearings or investigate what energy companies have actually admitted doing.
My constituents and all Californians deserve better.
* Energy Legislation I've introduced legislation to control excessive energy prices and return the excessive rates charged by energy suppliers to consumers.
* Energy Town Hall Meeting In the summer of 2001, over a thousand constituents from throughout the 14th Congressional District attended a highly informative Town Hall Meeting about the energy crisis in California.
* National Radio Address and Op-ed On June 2, 2001 I had the honor of giving the national Democratic response to the President's weekly radio address (click here to read or listen to the Radio Address).
I shared with the country the problems Californians faced because of the energy crisis and highlighted our priorities for a national energy policy.
I also wrote about these issues in an op-ed piece that appeared in several newspapers (click here to read the op-ed).
* Helpful Energy-Saving Links for Consumers
Email us your suggestions! spacer graphic spacer graphic spacer graphic spacer graphic left end California Office 698 Emerson Street Palo Alto, California 94301 Telephone (650) 323-2984 or (408) 245-2339 or (831) 335-2020 Fax (650) 323-3498 Email annagram@mail.house.gov Washington, D.C.
Office 205 Cannon Building Washington, D.C. 20515 Telephone (202) 225-8104 Fax (202) 225-8890 right end spacer graphic Privacy Statement · This site is Section 508 compliant ©MMII, http://www.house.gov/eshoo/, All Rights Reserved.
