[te_photo_sm.jpg] [congressman.gif]
House Passes Ban on All Human Cloning March 3, 2003 Last Thursday, the US House passed the Human Cloning Prohibition Act (HR 534).
As an original cosponsor, I joined with a majority of the House in voting for this absolutely vital legislation to protect the integrity of human life.
This marks the second year in a row that the US House has stood up against human cloning.
Perhaps it was just an ironic news item or maybe it was a fateful warning, but two weeks before the House took up legislation on human cloning, the world's most famous cloned mammal was euthanized.
Six years ago, "Dolly" the sheep was hailed as a successful attempt to clone an animal.
This fact is she was the only lamb born from the 277 embryos created and transferred to the uterus of a surrogate sheep.
Moreover, Dolly, turned out to live only half the lifespan for her species and was plagued by lung disease.
Furthermore, many scientists believe that she suffered from rapid aging.
If modern science cannot perfectly replicate life from life on the level of sheep, it is certainly incapable of doing so in the most complex of all life forms, humankind.
And even if such a feat were indeed possible, to do so would be highly immoral.
The idea of creating life from life only to destroy it is the ultimate indignity and must never be allowed.
In his State of the Union address last month, President Bush said "because no human life should be started or ended as a result of an experiment, I ask you to set a high standard for humanity, and pass a law against all human cloning."
In response, on February 27, the House voted 241 to 155 to ban all human cloning.
Specifically, the Human Cloning Prohibition Act bans the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer techniques to create human embryos.
This legislation bans both "therapeutic" (research) and reproductive cloning.
HR 534 would make it a crime to produce or import cloned human embryos.
This measure carries fines of up to $1 million and penalties of up to ten years in prison.
It mirrors a ban that passed in the House in 2001 but stalled in the Senate.
Such harsh penalties are absolutely necessary in order to safeguard human life from those who would wish to corrupt and defile it.
Additionally, the US House last week successfully voted down an attempt to allow human cloning as long as the clones were killed before growing to maturity.
Supporters of such human cloning argue that it holds potential for fighting disease in humans.
However, they fail to consider that there are more viable and moral alternatives.
For example, adult stem cell research holds much more promise and has already been used successfully in over 45 human clinical tests.
Conditions that are currently treated with adult stem cells include brain tumors, retinoblastoma, ovarian cancer, solid tumors, testicular cancer, breast cancer, leukemia, non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, renal cell carcinoma, autoimmune diseases, stroke, immunodeficiencies, anemia, corneal scarring, blood and liver disease, and osteogenesis imperfecta.
The list of potential diseases that could be treated from adult stem cells is equally long.
Meanwhile, where therapeutic cloning has been tried in animals, it has not worked - there has been tissue rejection.
With the rapid rate that medical technology is advancing, it is important to strike a balance of encouraging efforts to find cures to debilitating diseases while at the same time ensuring that such actions are legally and ethically responsible.
Now that the House has passed the Human Cloning Prohibition Act, I call upon the US Senate to follow our lead.
[backtotop.gif]
[spacer.gif]
[black_horiz_gold.gif]
home | about | news
