United States Department of Agriculture - Economic Research Service - The Economics of Food, Farming, Natural Resources, and Rural America...
search our site _________________________ Submit Search
Home Research Emphases Key Topics Briefing Rooms Publications Data Site Map About ERS
home 
Briefing Room Icon
Briefing Room
farm and commodity policy: 1996-2001 program provisions
Sugar program The two main elements to the U.S. sugar program are the price support loan program and the tariff-rate quota (TRQ) import system.
The loan program supports the U.S. price of sugar.
The tariff-rate quota system ensures that there is an adequate supply of sugar at reasonable prices for both consumers and producers.
U.S. commitments under international trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), affect the level and allocation of the TRQs.
The United States also operates the Refined sugar and Sugar-Containing Products Re-Export Programs to allow U.S. refiners to be competitive in global refined and sugar-containing products markets.
Sugar loan program.
The primary policy tools available to the USDA to assist sugarcane and sugarbeet producers are contained in the 1996 Farm Act.
The U.S. sugar program provides for USDA to make loans available to processors of domestically grown sugarcane at a rate of 18 cents per pound and to processors of domestically grown sugarbeets at the rate of 22.9 cents per pound for refined sugar.
Loans are taken for a maximum term of 9 months and must be liquidated along with interest charges by the end of the fiscal year in which the loan was made.
Unlike most other commodity programs, sugar loans are made to processors and not directly to producers.
This is because sugarcane and sugar beets, being bulky and very perishable, must be processed into sugar before they can be traded and stored.
To qualify for loans, processors must agree to provide payments to producers that are proportional to the value of the loan received by the processor for sugar beets and sugarcane delivered by producers.
USDA has the authority to establish minimum producer payment amounts.
A nonrecourse sugar loan program was authorized in the Food and Agriculture Act of 1981 and continued in subsequent farm acts.
The nonrecourse aspect means that when the loan matures, the USDA must accept sugar pledged as collateral as payment in full in lieu of cash repayment of the loan, at the discretion of the processor.
The 1996 Farm Act authorized recourse loans for sugar for the first time.
Sugar program loans are required to be recourse in years when the tariff-rate quota is established at or below 1.5 million short tons, raw value (STRV), but such loans convert to nonrecourse loans if the tariff-rate quota is increased above 1.5 million STRV for that year.
Sugar loans are issued as nonrecourse loans as long as the raw sugar TRQ is set higher than 1.5 million tons.
Sugar loans have been nonrecourse in all years since the implementation of the 1996 Farm Act.
The fiscal 2001 Agricultural Appropriations Act amended the 1996 Farm Act to eliminate the trigger for nonrecourse loans.
Thus, USDA will be able to offer nonrecourse loans for the 2002 and 2003 sugar marketing years to processors even if the sugar TRQ is established at a level of 1.5 million short tons or less.
In order to discourage forfeiture of nonrecourse loans, the resulting sugar price must be high enough to cover the loan principal plus interest and other expenses.
Cane processors share interest expenses with their growers, but beet processors do not and must therefore recover the entire interest expense of loan repayment in their share of the sugar's selling price.
Cane processors incur transportation and distribution costs in moving sugar to the refiner and also face location discounts required by some refiners.
These additional costs must be included in calculating the minimum price to avoid forfeiture.
Because beet sugar is refined sugar requiring no further processing, the minimum price for beet sugar does not include transportation adjustments.
However, because beet sugar is normally sold at a 2-percent cash discount to cane sugar, this amount must be added to arrive at the minimum price.
Also, the 1996 Farm Act required that processors who forfeit sugar pledged as collateral for a nonrecourse loan face a penalty of 1 cent a pound for raw cane sugar and 1.072 cents a pound for refined beet sugar.
Processors would have to consider these penalties when deciding whether to forfeit sugar to the Commodity Credit Corporation (CCC).
For fiscal 2000, the minimum raw sugar market price to discourage forfeiture was about 19.6 cents a pound, while the corresponding minimum refined sugar price was about 24.84 cents a pound.
Prior to the 1996 Farm Act, the Sugar Program had to be administered at no net cost to the taxpayer.
The "no net cost provision" meant that the CCC was barred from accumulating sugar acquired under loan rate operations.
The means of accomplishing the mandate were to adjust sugar import quotas or use domestic marketing quotas.
However, the "no net cost" provision was not included in the 1996 Farm Act, and the marketing allotment authority was not renewed.
Sugar Payment-in-Kind Program.
The Sugar Payment-in-Kind Program (PIK) offers sugar beet farmers the option of diverting a portion of their crop from production in exchange for receiving CCC sugar held in inventory.
In August 2000 and in August 2001, the Secretary of Agriculture activated the PIK program to address large sugar supplies and low prices in the domestic sugar market in 2000 and 2001.
Under the PIK program, which is authorized by the 1985 Farm Act, producers offer bids for the amount of CCC inventory they would accept in exchange for forgoing harvest of the number of planted acres they specify.
Bids are subject to a per-acre bid cap based on a producer's average sugar production over the previous 3 years, and each farmer is limited to a value of $20,000 in PIK sugar payments.
The PIK program was intended to reduce the amount of sugar in CCC inventories, the amount of sugar forfeitures, and overall CCC storage costs.
Marketing assessments.
Beginning with fiscal 1997, sellers of domestic raw cane sugar were required to pay to the Treasury an assessment of 0.2475 cents per pound, raw value, of sugar sold.
Sellers of domestic refined beet sugar were required to pay an assessment of 0.2654 cents per pound.
Sugar marketing assessments were paid on all processed, domestically grown sugar for fiscal 1997 through 1999, but were eliminated for FY 2000 and 2001 by the 2000 Agriculture Appropriations Act.
Tariff-rate quotas.
A tariff rate quota (TRQ) is a two-tiered tariff for which the tariff rate charged depends on the volume of imports.
The low-tier (in-quota) tariff is charged on imports within the quota volume.
The high-tier (over-quota) tariff is charged on imports in excess of the quota volume.
The United States establishes separate TRQs for imports of raw cane sugar and for imports of certain other sugars, syrups, and molasses.
Authority to establish the TRQs is under Additional U.S. note 5(a)(I) to chapter 17 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS).
Each year, the Secretary announces the quantity of sugar that may be imported at a nominal tariff rate.
Any additional annual quantity may be imported at a higher tariff rate.
In the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the United States agreed to import a minimum quantity of raw and refined sugar of 1.256 million STRV, each marketing year (October to September).
Included in this amount is a commitment to import at least 24,251 STRV of refined sugar.
The raw cane sugar TRQ is allocated to 40 countries based on a representative period (1975-81) when trade was relatively unrestricted.
An additional quantity of sugar is made available to Mexico to satisfy U.S. obligations under the NAFTA.
The refined sugar tariff rate quota includes several components, including specific allocations to Canada, Mexico, and a quantity of refined sugar that is available to all countries on a first-come, first-served basis.
The first-come, first-served section of the refined sugar TRQ also includes a category for specialty sugars such as organic sugars.
In addition, the United States administers TRQs on imports of various sugar-containing products that originally had been subject to absolute quotas under Section 22 of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933.
There are three TRQs on imports of sugar-containing products from Mexico and six TRQs on imports of the same products from countries other than Mexico.
Re-export programs.
The United States also operates two re-export programs to help U.S. sugar refiners and manufacturers of sugar-containing products compete in world markets.
The Refined Sugar Re-Export Program establishes a license against which a refiner can import world-priced sugar either for refining and export as refined sugar, or for sale to licensed manufacturers of sugar-containing products.
The Sugar-Containing Products Re-Export Program allows U.S. participants to buy sugar from any of the refiner participants for use in products that will be exported onto the world market.
Imports under these two programs are not subject to the sugar TRQs.
North American Free Trade Agreement and U.S-Mexico sugar relations.
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) went into effect on January 1, 1994.
The original agreement contained provisions that related to trade in sugar.
In order to secure U.S. congressional support for the NAFTA, the U.S. and Mexican Governments exchanged side-letters that altered the sugar provisions of the original NAFTA text.
Although Mexico has since rejected the validity of the side-letter agreement, the United States maintains that the side-letter provisions supersede those of the original NAFTA agreement.
The original provisions of the NAFTA subjected Mexico's sugar exports to the United States to several conditions.
* During the 15-year transition period, Mexican exports were to be limited to no more than Mexico's net production surplus of sugar - domestic sugar production less domestic sugar consumption, but, at a minimum, Mexico was allowed to ship 7,258 metric tons of raw cane sugar duty-free.
* For the first 6 years of NAFTA, duty-free access was limited to no more than 25,000 metric tons, raw value.
In year 7, the maximum duty-free access quantity was to become 150,000 metric tons, and, in each subsequent year, the maximum duty-free quantity was to increase by 10 percent.
* Importantly, the NAFTA provided that these maximums could be exceeded if one of two conditions prevailed.
The first condition required that Mexico achieve net production surplus status for 2 consecutive marketing years.
The second condition specified that Mexico be a net surplus producer for the first year and be projected as a net surplus producer in the second year unless it was subsequently determined, contrary to the projection, that Mexico was not a net surplus producer for that year.
The side-letter agreement changed key sugar provisions of the NAFTA.
The agreement stipulates that projected Mexican sugar production would have to exceed Mexico's consumption of both sugar and HFCS for Mexico to be considered a net surplus producer.
For the first 6 years of the NAFTA, Mexico was entitled to duty-free access for sugar exports to the United States in the amount of its projected net surplus production, up to a maximum of 25,000 metric tons.
If Mexico was not a net surplus producer, it still would have duty-free access for 7,258 metric tons.
From fiscal 2001 through 2007, Mexico will have duty-free access to the U.S. market for the amount of its surplus as measured by the formula, up to a maximum of 250,000 metric tons.
The NAFTA specifies a declining high-tier tariff schedule for raw and refined sugar over the transition period to duty-free sugar trade in calendar year 2008.
For 2001 the raw sugar tariff is 10.58 cents a pound, and the refined sugar tariff is 11.21 cents a pound.
The raw sugar tariff drops about 1.5 cents each year, and the refined sugar tariff drops about 1.6 cents a year.
Both rates reach zero in calendar year 2008.
The economic incentive for Mexico to export high-tier tariff raw sugar exists if a price threshold is less than or equal to the U.S. sugar price.
The threshold is equal to the sum of the world price of sugar (New York Number 11 Contract), the high-tier NAFTA tariff rate, unit marketing costs (about 1.1 cents a pound for raw sugar), plus any marketing premiums.
The threshold price is compared to the U.S. price for entry in Gulf ports.
This U.S. price runs about 1 cent lower than the New York Number 14 contract price.
If the threshold is below the U.S. Gulf price, then Mexico would be encouraged to export sugar to the United States up to that point where the marginal returns from exporting to the United States and the world markets are equalized.
If the return to exporting to the United States is at all levels higher than shipping to the rest-of-the-world, then Mexico ships all exportable sugar to the U.S. market.
The following provide further information about U.S. sugar policies: * Provisions of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (September 1996) * Provisions of the 1996 Farm Bill, special Agricultural Outlook supplement (April 1996) * Fact Sheet: Sugar Program, Farm Service Agency, USDA (February 1999) * U.S. Sugar Program Fact Sheet, Foreign Agricultural Service, USDA (September 1996) * September 21, 2000, press release issued by the Office of the United States Trade Representative for information about the allocation of the FY2001 sugar tariff-rate quotas * Auctioning Tariff-Rate Quotas for U.S. Sugar Imports, Economic Research Service, USDA (May 1998)
for more information, contact: Farm policy team (Edwin Young, Paul Westcott and Anne Effland) web administration: webadmin@ers.usda.gov page updated: May 24, 2002
Key Topics Image [Ag Chemicals 
Select a Topic
Shortcuts Image [What's New..........]
Select a Shortcut _________________________________________________________________
USDA / FedStats / accessibility / privacy policy / contact us / advanced search / site map
