CHESAPEAKE BAY OFFICE OF NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION AUTHORIZATION -- (House of Representatives - April 03, 2001) --- Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, I move to suspend the rules and pass the bill (H.R. 642) to reauthorize the Chesapeake Bay Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and for other purposes, as amended.
The Clerk read as follows: H.R. 642
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled,
SECTION 1.
CHESAPEAKE BAY OFFICE.
(a) REAUTHORIZATION OF OFFICE.--Section 307 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Authorization Act of 1992 (15 U.S.C. 1511d) is amended to read as follows:
``SEC.
307.
CHESAPEAKE BAY OFFICE.
``(a) ESTABLISHMENT.--(1) The Secretary of Commerce shall establish, within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, an office to be known as the Chesapeake Bay Office (in this section referred to as the `Office').
``(2) The Office shall be headed by a Director who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Chesapeake Executive Council.
Any individual appointed as Director shall have knowledge and experience in research or resource management efforts in the Chesapeake Bay.
``(3) The Director may appoint such additional personnel for the Office as the Director determines necessary to carry out this section.
``(b) FUNCTIONS.--The Office, in consultation with the Chesapeake Executive Council, shall--
``(1) provide technical assistance to the Administrator, to other Federal departments and agencies, and to State and local government agencies in--
``(A) assessing the processes that shape the Chesapeake Bay system and affect its living resources;
``(B) identifying technical and management alternatives for the restoration and protection of living resources and the habitats they depend upon; and
``(C) monitoring the implementation and effectiveness of management plans;
``(2) develop and implement a strategy for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration that integrates the science, research, monitoring, data collection, regulatory, and management responsibilities of the Secretary of Commerce in such a manner as to assist the cooperative, intergovernmental Chesapeake Bay Program to meet the commitments of the Chesapeake Bay Agreement;
``(3) coordinate the programs and activities of the various organizations within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Chesapeake Bay Regional Sea Grant Programs, and the Chesapeake Bay units of the National Estuarine Research Reserve System, including--
``(A) programs and activities in--
``(i) coastal and estuarine research, monitoring, and assessment;
``(ii) fisheries research and stock assessments;
``(iii) data management;
``(iv) remote sensing;
``(v) coastal management;
``(vi) habitat conservation and restoration; and
``(vii) atmospheric deposition; and
``(B) programs and activities of the Cooperative Oxford Laboratory of the National Ocean Service with respect to--
``(i) nonindigenous species;
``(ii) estuarine and marine species pathology;
``(iii) human pathogens in estuarine and marine environments; and
``(iv) ecosystem health;
``(4) coordinate the activities of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration with the activities of the Environmental Protection Agency and other Federal, State, and local agencies;
``(5) establish an effective mechanism which shall ensure that projects have undergone appropriate peer review and provide other appropriate means to determine that projects have acceptable scientific and technical merit for the purpose of achieving maximum utilization of available funds and resources to benefit the Chesapeake Bay area;
``(6) remain cognizant of ongoing research, monitoring, and management projects and assist in the dissemination of the results and findings of those projects; and
``(7) submit a biennial report to the Congress and the Secretary of Commerce with respect to the activities of the Office and on the progress made in protecting and restoring the living resources and habitat of the Chesapeake Bay, which report shall include an action plan consisting of--
``(A) a list of recommended research, monitoring, and data collection activities necessary to continue implementation of the strategy described in paragraph (2); and
``(B) proposals for--
``(i) continuing any new National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration activities in the Chesapeake Bay; and
``(ii) the integration of those activities with the activities of the partners in the Chesapeake Bay Program to meet the commitments of the Chesapeake 2000 agreement and subsequent agreements.
``(c) CHESAPEAKE BAY FISHERY AND HABITAT RESTORATION SMALL WATERSHED GRANTS PROGRAM.--
``(1) IN GENERAL.--The Director of the Chesapeake Bay Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (in this section referred to as the `Director'), in cooperation with the Chesapeake Executive Council, shall carry out a community-based fishery and habitat restoration small grants and technical assistance program in the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
``(2) PROJECTS.--
``(A) SUPPORT.--The Director shall make grants under this subsection to pay the Federal share of the cost of projects that are carried out by entities eligible under paragraph (3) for the restoration of fisheries and habitats in the Chesapeake Bay.
``(B) FEDERAL SHARE.--The Federal share under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed 75 percent.
``(C) TYPES OF PROJECTS.--Projects for which grants may be made under this subsection include--
``(i) the improvement of fish passageways;
``(ii) the creation of natural or artificial reefs or substrata for habitats;
``(iii) the restoration of wetland or sea grass;
``(iv) the production of oysters for restoration projects; and
``(v) the prevention, identification, and control of nonindigenous species.
``(3) ELIGIBLE ENTITIES.--The following entities are eligible to receive grants under this subsection:
``(A) The government of a political subdivision of a State in the Chesapeake Bay watershed, and the government of the District of Columbia.
``(B) An organization in the Chesapeake Bay watershed (such as an educational institution or a community organization)--
``(i) that is described in section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and is exempt
from taxation under section 501(a) of that Code; and
``(ii) that will administer such grants in coordination with a government referred to in subparagraph (A).
``(4) ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.--The Director may prescribe any additional requirements, including procedures, that the Director considers necessary to carry out the program under this subsection.
``(d) BUDGET LINE ITEM.--The Secretary of Commerce shall identify, in the President's annual budget to the Congress, the funding request for the Office.
``(e) CHESAPEAKE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL.--For purposes of this section, `Chesapeake Executive Council' means the representatives from the Commonwealth of Virginia, the State of Maryland, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Environmental Protection Agency, the District of Columbia, and the Chesapeake Bay Commission, who are signatories to the Chesapeake Bay Agreement, and any future signatories to that Agreement.
``(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Commerce for the Chesapeake Bay Office $6,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
(b) CONFORMING AMENDMENT.--Section 2 of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Marine Fisheries Program Authorization Act (Public Law 98-210; 97 Stat. 1409) is amended by striking subsection (e).
(c) MULTIPLE SPECIES MANAGEMENT STRATEGY.--
(1) IN GENERAL.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Chesapeake Bay Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall begin a 5-year study, in cooperation with the scientific community of the Chesapeake Bay, appropriate State and interstate resource management entities, and appropriate Federal agencies--
(A) to determine and expand the understanding of the role and response of living resources in the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem; and
(B) to develop a multiple species management strategy for the Chesapeake Bay.
(2) REQUIRED ELEMENTS OF STUDY.--In order to improve the understanding necessary for the development of the strategy under paragraph (1)(B), the study shall--
(A) determine the current status and trends of fish and shellfish that live in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries and are selected for study;
(B) evaluate and assess interactions among the fish and shellfish referred to in subparagraph (A) and other living resources, with particular attention to the impact of changes within and among trophic levels; and
(C) recommend management actions to optimize the return of a healthy and balanced ecosystem for the Chesapeake Bay.
The SPEAKER pro tempore.
Pursuant to the rule, the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST) and the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD) each will control 20 minutes.
The Chair recognizes the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST).
Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I want to say up front that the staff on both sides of the aisle, the Democrat and Republican staff, both in our personal offices and the committee, have done excellent work on this bill to make it a bipartisan bill supported by everybody.
It is also an excellent piece of legislation.
I also want to thank the ranking member, the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD), for his support of the legislation and for working with us to make sure that this bill passed the committee and will now pass the House and eventually become law.
I know the bill does not deal with Guam exclusively, it deals with the Chesapeake Bay region and the China watershed, but his tireless efforts to support this legislation bodes well for his professionalism.
Madam Speaker, H.R. 642 reauthorizes the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's Chesapeake Bay Office and clarifies its role in coordinating NOAA's bay activities.
This legislation is similar to a measure we introduced last year.
It is also similar to separate legislation introduced last year by my colleague, the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CARDIN).
Those bills were the subject of a committee hearing last fall.
H.R. 642 is a result of that hearing and is supported by the entire Maryland delegation.
In addition to reauthorizing the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office, H.R. 642 would create two new very interesting requirements.
The first would be a 5-year study leading to the development of a multiple-species living marine resources management strategy for the Chesapeake Bay.
I do not want to go over that too fast.
It is a multiple-species living marine resources management strategy.
What exactly does that mean? Let me give just a small example.
In the Chesapeake Bay, we have sunlight and we have nutrients.
The sunlight is the engine behind what gives the Chesapeake Bay life.
So to a certain extent, the sunlight and nutrients generate a microorganism, something called phytoplankton, a little tiny microorganism, which is then eaten by another tiny microorganism called zooplankton.
The zooplankton is then eaten by a little fish called menhaden.
The menhaden is eaten by a bigger fish called rockfish, or striped bass.
Now, to a small extent, that is an example of a food web, or something we refer to today as an ecosystem.
In the bill, it talks about a multiple-species management strategy.
What has happened in the Chesapeake Bay, and the reason there is a need for this legislation, is that we have sunlight and nutrients now, but now we have too many nutrients.
That means we have too much of the first microorganism, or phytoplankton.
When we have too much of that phytoplankton, the zooplankton cannot eat enough of it, so a lot of the phytoplankton, that microorganism, falls to the bottom after it dies.
It uses a lot of oxygen as it decays.
As a result of that loss of oxygen, we do not have a good-quality environment for the phytoplankton anymore, and we come up with another microorganism called the dynoflagellate.
Because the dynoflagellate can prosper in low oxygen, it is not nearly as good a quality food for the zooplankton.
Then the zooplankton are not as nutritious.
Then the menhaden that eat the zooplankton, they begin to fail, not only because the quality of their environment is reduced, but because they are overharvested by way too many times.
So what does that do to the rockfish at the top of the food web? The rockfish do not have enough menhaden to eat.
So what do the rockfish do? They go after the crabs.
What I am trying to explain here is as soon as human activity, which causes too many nutrients in the Chesapeake Bay, interrupts or disrupts the ecosystem or the food web, we need to employ some quality legislation to understand the mechanics of the natural processes.
That is what this bill does.
The second requirement of this bill would be to establish a community-based fishery and habitat restoration small grant program for the Chesapeake Bay watershed, a small grant program for activities to understand the nature of the food web that we have disrupted.
How do we get back in to bring that food web back into originally what it was designed for? It was designed; it has a design to it.
Sometimes we refer to it in the Chesapeake Bay region as the mechanics of creation.
If we can understand that, we can fix these problems.
So the small watershed grants will plant grass to improve the quality of the water; build oyster reefs to filter out some of those nutrients; stabilize shore lines, I think the way they are supposed to be stabilized so they can be habitat for other wildlife; and spawning areas for fish.
As a representative of the district that surrounds the Chesapeake Bay, I am well aware of and appreciate the quality of the work done by the Chesapeake Bay office.
I commend Judith Freeman, director of the Chesapeake Bay Office, for her efforts to improve the environmental quality and public stewardship of the bay.
The Chesapeake Bay is vitally important to our district and the mid-Atlantic States.
Every corner of Maryland's first district is dependent in one way or other on the health of the Chesapeake Bay.
From the State capital in Annapolis, home of constituents as diverse as the United States Naval Academy, recreational boaters, to the Eastern Shore, where thousands of watermen rely on the health of the bay to sustain their families, the Chesapeake Bay is a focal point of life for my constituents; therefore, the success of the Chesapeake Bay Office is of critical concern to them and myself.
Madam Speaker, I want to quote one more person in this dialogue we are having here, and that is Rachael Carson, the author of the book that exploded the idea that the environment is important in her book ``Silent Spring.''
Rachael Carson always found it a strange phenomenon that individual people when you talk to them about science consider the only people concerned with the details and the mechanics of natural processes or science were scientists locked away in some obscure laboratory, and they very rarely ever left that scientific perspective.
Madam Speaker, science is a wonderful form of dialogue and conversation not only for us, but certainly for young children in school.
To understand what keeps life on this planet alive is an extraordinary thing that all of us should talk about a little bit more.
Madam Speaker, I urge an aye vote on this important legislation.
Madam Speaker, I also want to thank my colleagues from Maryland and the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD) for their support.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. UNDERWOOD.
Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
(Mr. UNDERWOOD asked and was given permission to revise and extend his remarks.)
Madam Speaker, I support H.R. 642, a noncontroversial bill, which would reauthorize the Chesapeake Bay Office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and as indicated by the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), chairman of the Subcommittee on Fisheries Conservation, Wildlife and Oceans, who has aptly demonstrated not only his commitment to this particular piece of legislation, but certainly his knowledge about the mechanics of it and the necessity for it.
Since 1992, the Chesapeake Bay Office has functioned effectively to incorporate NOAA's impressive scientific research and marine resource management programs into the comprehensive Federal and multi-state effort to restore the Chesapeake Bay ecosytem.
It is one of the best examples I know of that demonstrates how NOAA brings science and service together.
H.R. 642 would provide a much-deserved increase in funding for this office.
The bill would also authorize some new activities, many of which have been outlined already by the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), most notably a local fishery and habitat restoration grant program, which will promote new opportunities for NOAA to contribute throughout the bay.
The legislation has received strong bipartisan support from the entire Maryland Congressional delegation.
The administration also supports H.R. 642, and I urge an aye vote on this common sense good piece of legislation.
Madam Speaker, I reserve the balance of my time.
Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, I yield 4 minutes to the gentlewoman from Maryland (Mrs. MORELLA).
Mrs. MORELLA.
Madam Speaker, I, first of all, want to thank the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), the sponsor of this legislation for yielding the time to me and obviously for sponsoring the legislation.
Madam Speaker, I rise in strong support of H.R. 642, the NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office Reauthorization.
The gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), my good friend, should be commended for this fine legislation.
In addition, I offer my congratulations to the gentleman as he embarks as the chairman of the Subcommittee on Fisheries Conservation, Wildlife and Oceans.
It is only appropriate that the first legislation considered by his subcommittee is this bill, which will benefit and improve the Chesapeake Bay.
I want to also thank my colleagues from Maryland, I see the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CARDIN) over there and I see the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD), and I want to thank the others who have supported this legislation.
The Chesapeake Bay, our Nation's largest estuary, is an incredibly complex ecosytem.
The bay is one of our Nation's most valuable natural resources.
Its rich ecosytem, with rivers, wetlands, trees, and the bay, itself, supports and provides a natural habitat for over 3,600 species of plants, fish, and animals.
We know that about 15 million people now live in the bay watershed, which include parts of six States and the entire District of Columbia.
These persons are at all times just a few steps from one or more of the 100,000 stream and river tributaries ultimately draining into the bay.
Every person, plant and animal within this watershed depends on each other to help the Chesapeake Bay system thrive and function properly.
These complex relationships are countless.
NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office was first created in 1992 to coordinate NOAA's efforts under the Chesapeake Bay Program, which was a unique regional partnership of State and Federal Government agencies that has been encouraging and directing the restoration of the bay since 1983.
I am pleased that important progress has been made in renewing the bay since the Chesapeake Bay Agreement was signed in 1983.
Restoration efforts, led in part by the dedicated sciences at NOAA, have had a profound impact on the health and vitality of the bay.
Scientific research has led to a better understanding of the bay, including how it works, and what must be done to continue its restoration.
The NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office brings incredible scientific knowledge and expertise.
They are involved in protecting and preserving the Chesapeake Bay in many ways, from rebuilding oyster reefs to restoring critically important subaquatic vegetation.
However, we still have a long way to go before we reach our goals for a completely restored Chesapeake Bay.
Many questions about the future of the bay remain unanswered.
For example, blue crabs, perhaps the best-known and most important resource of the bay, have been below the long-term average level for several years.
The oyster harvest has declined dramatically.
Further efforts to reduce nutrient and sediment pollution are needed.
Madam Speaker, I am pleased that this legislation today will help us address these concerns.
It will allow us to move towards the goal of a restored Chesapeake Bay.
H.R. 642 will provide the NOAA's Chesapeake Bay Office with the necessary resources and authorization to continue to lead the way towards long-lasting environmental restoration of the bay.
Madam Speaker, we must preserve and protect the Chesapeake Bay, and I do support H.R. 642.
I urge its swift passage.
Mr. UNDERWOOD.
Madam Speaker, to prove this is not simply a Maryland State concern, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. SCOTT).
Mr. SCOTT.
Madam Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD) for yielding the time.
Madam Speaker, I want to thank also the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), because he and I cochair the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Task Force, and I want to thank him and the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD) for their dedication to protecting the Chesapeake Bay.
The bill before us today reauthorizes the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Chesapeake Bay Office through 2006.
The Chesapeake Bay Office was established in 1992 to provide a focal point for NOAA's efforts and those efforts undertaken by partners of the Chesapeake Bay Program.
For nearly 10 years now, the Chesapeake Bay Office has played a vital role in coordinating efforts between NOAA and Federal and State governments in the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
It has acted as a positive force in managing and preserving this unique natural treasure.
This legislation before us not only authorizes the appropriations for the Chesapeake Bay Office, but it also begins a new small grant program.
Local governments and organizations, such as educational institutions or community organizations within the Chesapeake Bay watershed would be eligible for grants which may make improvements to fish passageways, create natural or artificial reefs for habitats, restore wetlands or sea grass or produce oysters for restoration projects.
These projects could advance the essential knowledge and information that is necessary in order for us to restore our Nation's most cherished waterway, the Chesapeake Bay, which not only has significant environmental impact on Virginia and many other States, but also contributes enormously to our recreational activities and to our economy.
I, therefore,
Madam Speaker, urge my colleagues to support the bill.
Mr. UNDERWOOD.
Madam Speaker, I yield 2 minutes to the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CARDIN).
Mr. CARDIN.
Madam Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD), my friend, for yielding this time to me and for his leadership in moving this legislation, and also the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST), my colleague, in working together to bring forward this very important reauthorization legislation that will help continue the Federal partnership in restoring the Chesapeake Bay, the largest estuary in our Nation.
In 1991, original authorizations for NOAA's participation was passed by this Congress, and since that time, NOAA has been an instrumental partner in our efforts that involve not only the State of Maryland, but our surrounding States; not just State government, but local governments; not just government, but the private sector.
We have worked together in partnership and have made tremendous progress in restoring the Chesapeake Bay.
This legislation not only reauthorizes NOAA's participation, but establishes small grant programs to local governments, community organizations, educational institutions to restore fisheries and habitats.
Madam Speaker, I say personally I know the groups that qualify for these funds.
They are out there every day helping us restoring the waters and stirring the banks, cleaning up the waters, helping us in a major way.
This legislation will mean that there will be additional resources available to these local groups to help them.
The legislation also provides for a 5-year study, which I think is extremely important on the multispecies management plan.
For too long, we have been looking at individual species.
This legislation will allow us to look at all the species within the bay as to how they interact with each other.
We increase the authorization to $6 million through fiscal year 2006; and in combination, this legislation will increase NOAA's participation in partnership to restore the bay.
Madam Speaker, I congratulate all for moving this legislation so early.
It will help us in our efforts not only in Maryland, not only in the communities that surround the Chesapeake Bay, but as a model for our Nation as to the right way to clean up a major body, a multijurisdictional body of water.
Madam Speaker, I urge my colleagues to support the legislation.
Mr. UNDERWOOD.
Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume to urge everyone to vote aye on this, and also to congratulate the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST) for this very fine piece of legislation.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, I yield myself such time as I may consume.
Madam Speaker, I thank the gentleman from Guam (Mr. UNDERWOOD) once again, and certainly the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. CARDIN) for helping us with this legislation.
One last very brief comment on the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
The Chesapeake Bay itself, about 100 years ago, at the turn of the century, we took out of the bay on an annual basis up to 15 million bushels of oysters, 15 million.
It was the engine that drove the economy of the State of Maryland and Virginia and, to some extent, Pennsylvania, for the commercial harvest, for the recreational activities, for all the spin-off economic resources that depended on the Chesapeake Bay, 15 million bushels the oysters.
We are, in a good year now, in a very good year, down to 300,000 bushels of oysters.
With this legislation, we can understand the nature of the mechanics of the ecosytem, how the food web works.
Human activity degraded the bay; human ingenuity will restore it.
I urge an aye vote on H.R. 642.
Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, I yield back the balance of my time.
The SPEAKER pro tempore (Mrs. EMERSON).
The question is on the motion offered by the gentleman from Maryland (Mr. GILCHREST) that the House suspend the rules and pass the bill, H.R. 642, as amended.
The question was taken.
The SPEAKER pro tempore.
In the opinion of the Chair, two-thirds of those present have voted in the affirmative.
Mr. GILCHREST.
Madam Speaker, on that I demand the yeas and nays.
The yeas and nays were ordered.
The SPEAKER pro tempore.
Pursuant to clause 8 of rule XX and the Chair's prior announcement, further proceedings on this motion will be postponed.
