CBC test explanations White blood cell count (WBC) Different types of white cells are included in the total count which is used to evaluate myelopoiesis, bacterial and viral infections, toxic metabolic processes and to diagnose/evaluate leukemia conditions.
Normal values range from 4500 to 11,000 /mm3.
Values below 2500 /mm3 or above 30,000 /mm3 should be considered "panic" levels.
Red Blood Cell Count (RBC) This is used to evaluate anemia, bleeding or polycythemia.
Normal values range from 4.6-6 x 10^6/mm3 for males and 3.9 to 5.5 x 10^6/mm3 for females.
Lowered values may be due to bleeding or hemolysis, failure of bone marrow production.
RBCs are normally highe in people at high altitudes (in order to carry more oxygen to body).
Hemoglobin This procedure determines the concentration of hemoglobin (Hgb) in whole blood, which is the major component of the red cell and transports oxygen.
It is important in detection of anemia and polycythemia and in the calculation of MCH and MCHC.
Normal values range from 14.4 to 16.6 for males and 12.7 to 14.7 g/dl for females.
Hgb may be falsely high if white WBC count is 
Hematocrit This is the percent of whole blood that is red blood cells.
This is important in the detection and follow-up of anemia and polycythemia.
It is also used in calculation of MCV and MCH.
Normal adult male values range from 42 to 52%, females: 35 to 47%.
Low levels can indicate anemia, blood loss and other conditions.
Neutrophils A general indicator of immunity for the body.
Lowered levels could indicate an immunity deficiency.
Lymphocytes General measurement of the body's immunity, since lymphocytes are T-cells which fight off infection.
These values change drastically in Aids and other autoimmune diseases.
Eosinophils Aids in the diagnosis of allergy, drug reactions, parasite infections, collagen disease, hodgkins disease and myeloproliferative (myelin = nerve sheath) diseases.
Manual method for analysis has an inherent error of 20-30%.
Normal values are 50-350 /mm3.
These values are decreased with hyperadrenalism (overactive adrenal glands).
Platelet Count This is important in the assessment of bleeding, thrombotic, and malignant neoplastic processes, marrow function assessment and in some autoimmune disease studies.
Normal ranges are 150 - 450 thous/mm3.
Anything below 50 or above 1,000 thous/mm3 values are considered panic values.
Clumping may cause low values.
RDW, MCH, MCV, MCHC Part of red blood cell indices, along with RBC, MCH, MCV.
This is mathematically measured from hemoglobin, hematocrit, and red blood count.
Normal adult values are as follows: MCV MCH MCHC RDW males 80-100 25.4-34.6 31-37 11.5-14.5 females 79-98 25.4-34.6 30-36 11.5-14.5
This is used to evalute red cell parameters, the differential diagnosis of anemia, iron deficiency, hereditary spherocytosis, thalassemia, chronic lead poisoning, vitamin B12 or B6 deficiency and anemia.
Lead in blood This test is used to detect recent lead exposures but do not necessarily measure lead body burden from past chronic exposure.
Normal values are those below 10 ug/dl in adults (preindustrial age human levels is estimated to be about 0.016 ug/dl).
OSHA requires worker notification in writing for levels over 40 ug/dl.
Levels above 80 ug/dl are considered acute lead poisoning.
What high levels mean Current lead exposure.
Limitations Lead poisoning is not ruled out by normal blood levels; clinical findings and heme synthetic enzymes must also be evaluated.
The EDTA lead mobilization test or x-ray fluorescence is needed for diagnosis of lead nephropathy.
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) - types 1254 and 1260 This is a blood test to directly measure the presence of two of the most common types of PCBs used in industry and present in the environment.
This is a direct screen of PCB exposure.
What high levels mean Expsure to PCB either in the form of electrical transformer fluids or other dielectric materials (fluorescent light ballasts,...).
Zinc Protoporphyrin In some cases this is a useful adjunct in diagnosis of iron deficiency, but not useful for lead intoxication, although it is frequently used for that.
ZPP is increased in lead poisoning, but not with thalassemia.
Normal adult levels should be 20-40 ug/dl for adults.
Anything over 100 ug/dl is considered excessive.
In children, the CDC lowered ZPP cutoff levels to 10 ug/dl which is too low to use it for lead poison screening.
What high levels mean iron deficiency, can also represent prior lead exposure if values are very high, but only with other confirmatory testing.
Urinalysis specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin, occult blood, leukocyte esterase, nitrite and bacteria Examination of urine provides a wealth of information in terms of differential diagnosis and by exclusion of many conditions when it is "normal".
It is essential to determining kidney function.
Total urine must be at least 2 milliliters in volume.
High vitamin C intake may underestimate glucosuria or a false-negative nitrite test.
Ammonium cleaning solutions can give a false positive for proteins.
This test has nothing to do with drug testing, but is only used to screen for proper kidney and metabolic function - which can be impaired when exposed to industrial chemicals.
Urobilinogen in urine This urine screening test detects some but not all instances of hemolytic anemia and liver disease, such as hepatitis and cirrhosis, as well as anemia.
Reference ranges should be 0.3 - 2.1 Ehrlich units for males, 0.1-1.1 for females.
Antibiotics may interfere causing low results.
Nitrite in urine This is a bacteria screen test and used to detecte presence of cystitis, pyelonephritis, urinary tract infection in concert with leukocyte esterase.
Should not be any present in the urine and is limited by Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) content in urine.
False-negatives are relatively common.
