Foreign -Trade Zones Board HOME ____________________ Go Import Administration September 2001: New FTZ Mailing Address last update: September 2002 DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE Foreign-Trade Zones Board [Order No. 350]
52 FR 13489
April 23, 1987
Resolution and Order Approving the Application of the Washington Dulles Foreign-Trade Zone, Inc. for a Foreign-Trade Zone at the Washington Dulles International Airport, Virginia
TEXT: Proceedings of the Foreign-Trade Zones Board, Washington, DC:
Resolution and Order
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Foreign-Trade Zones Act of June 18, 1934, as amended (19 U.S.C. 81a-81u), the Foreign-Trade Zones Board has adopted the following Resolution and Order:
The Board, having considered the matter, hereby orders:
After consideration of the application of the Washington Dulles Foreign- Trade Zone, Inc., a Virginia non-profit corporation, filed with the Foreign- Trade Zones Board (the Board) on February 5, 1986, requesting a grant of authority for establishing, operating, and maintaining a general-purpose foreign-trade zone at the Washington Dulles International Airport in Loudoun and Fairfax Counties, Virginia, within the Washington, DC Customs port of entry, the Board, finding that the rquirements of the Foreign-Trade Zones Act, as amended, and the Board's regulations are satisfied, and that the proposal is in the public interest, approves the application.
As the proposal involves open space on which buildings may be constructed by parties other than the grantee, this approval includes authority to the grantee to permit the erection of such buildings, pursuant to @ 400.815 of the Board's regulations, as are necessary to carry out the zone proposal, providing that prior to its granting such permission it shall have the concurrences of the local District Director of Customs, the U.S. Army District Engineer, when appropriate, and the Board's Executive Secretary.
Further, the grantee shall notify the Board for approval prior to the commencement of any manufacturing operation within the zone.
The Secretary of Commerce, as Chairman and Executive Officer of the Board, is hereby authorized to issue a grant of authority and appropriate Board Order.
Grant to Establish, Operate, and Maintain a Foreign-Trade Zone at the Washington Dulles International Airport, Virginia
Whereas, by an Act of Congress approved June 18, 1934, an Act "To provide for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of foreign-trade zones in ports of entry of the United States, to expedite and encourage foreign commerce, and for other purposes," as amended (19 USC 81a-81u) (the Act), the Foreign-Trade Zones Board (the Board) is authorized and empowered to grant to corporations the privilege of establishing, operating, and maintaining foreign-trade zones in or adjacent to ports of entry under the jurisdiction of the United States;
Whereas, the Washington Dulles Foreign-Trade Zone, Inc. (the Grantee), a Virginia non-profit corporation, has made application (filed February 5, 1986, Docket No. 4-86, 51 FR 5571) in due and proper form to the Board, requesting the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a foreign-trade zone at the Washington Dulles International Airport located in Fairfax and Loudoun Counties, Virginia, within the Washington, DC Customs port of entry;
Whereas, notice of said application has been given and published, and full opportunity has been afforded all interested parties to be heard; and,
Whereas, the Board has found that the requirements of the Act and the Board's regulations (15 CFR Part 400) are satisfied;
Now, therefore, the Board hereby grants to the Grantee the privilege of establishing, operating, and maintaining a foreign-trade zone, designated on the records of the Board as Zone No. 137 at the location mentioned above and more particularly described on the maps and drawings accompanying the application in Exhibits IX and X, subject to the provisions, conditions, and restrictions of the Act and the regulations issued thereunder, to the same extent as though the same were fully set forth herein, and also to the following express conditions and limitations:
Operation of the foreign-trade zone shall be commenced by the Grantee within a reasonable time from the date of issuance of the grant, and prior thereto the Grantee shall obtain all necessary permits from Federal, State, and municipal authorities.
The Grantee shall allow officers and employees of the United States free and unrestricted access to and throughout the foreign-trade zone site in the performance of their official duties.
The grant does not include authority for manufacturing operations, and the Grantee shall notify the Board for approval prior to the commencement of any manufacturing or assembly operations within the zone.
The grant shall not be construed to relieve the Grantee from liability for injury or damage to the person or property of others occasioned by the construction, operations, or maintenance of said zone, and in no event shall the United States be liable therefor.
The grant is further subject to settlement locally by the District Director of Customs and the Army District Engineer with the Grantee regarding compliance with their respective requirements for the protection of the revenue of the United States and the installation of suitable facilities.
In witness whereof, the Foreign-Trade Zones Board had caused its name to be signed and its seal to be affixed hereto by its Chairman and Executive Officer at Washington, DC, this 17th day of April 1987, pursuant to Order of the Board.
Foreign-Trade Zones Board,
Malcolm Baldrige,
Chairman and Executive Officer.
Attest:
John J. Da Ponte, Jr.
Executive Secretary [FR Doc.
87-9245 Filed 4-22-87; 8:45 am]
BILLING CODE 3510-DS-M
