[daiywash.gif] *EPF313 01/16/2002 Text: Religious Leaders from Kyrgyzstan Examine Islam in the U.S. (State Department press release on international visitor program) (630)
Six religious leaders from Kyrgyzstan, including Imams and heads of Islamic institutions, have begun a 14-day professional program "Islam in the United States," sponsored by the International Visitor Program of the Department's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, the State Department announced January 15.
In addition to strengthening the participants' understanding of the relationship between religion and government in the United States and to deepening their awareness of the country's religious diversity, the program is intended to establish links between the Islamic community in the United States and Muslims in Kyrgyzstan, according to the following State Department press release:
(begin text) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the Spokesman January 15, 2002 Media Note RELIGIOUS LEADERS FROM KYRGYZSTAN EXAMINE ISLAM IN THE UNITED STATES
A group of six religious leaders from Kyrgyzstan, including Imams and heads of Islamic institutions, have begun a 14-day professional program "Islam in the United States," sponsored by the International Visitor Program of the Department's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.
This program is designed to strengthen the participants' understanding of the relationship between religion and government in the United States and to deepen their awareness that religious diversity is a result of this nation's history of tolerance and religious freedom.
The participants will gain an understanding of the first amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits our government's intervention in religious affairs, as well as U.S. policy and official statements related to Islam.
Intended to establish links between the Islamic community in the United States and Muslims in Kyrgyzstan, the program will reflect not only that Islam and democracy are compatible, but that the United States respects Islam and acknowledges the important contributions of Muslims in this country.
Islam is the single most widely practiced faith in Kyrgyzstan.
(U.S. State Department estimates are that up to 80% of the population is Muslim, 17% is Russian Orthodox, and 3% is Jewish, Buddhist, or Catholic.)
In Washington, DC (January 14-16), Los Angeles (January 17-23), and Houston, Texas (January 23- 26), the participants (see attached list) will meet with American Muslims, consult with experts at university studies centers, and visit a range of religious institutions.
The group will gain first-hand exposure to American religious diversity and to community interfaith initiatives aimed at building religious tolerance.
The program topics include the relationship between religion and government in the United States; the history and development of Islam in the United States; the implications and contributions of religious diversity in U.S. society and approaches to encouraging religious tolerance in religiously diverse communities; and current issues in U.S. policy and the Islamic world.
The International Visitor Program of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs brings participants-current or potential leaders in government, politics, the media, education and other fields-to the United States from all over the world each year to meet and confer with their professional counterparts and to experience the United States firsthand.
More information about the Program is available at the web site http://exchanges.state.gov/education/ivp.
Media Contact: Catherine Stearns, telephone 203-5107 or e-mail cstearns@pd.state.gov.
PARTICIPANTS ISLAM IN THE UNITED STATES Mr. Sadykjan KAMALOV hairman, International Center of Islamic Cooperation, 1995-present Mr. Yusup KEMALO Deputy Mufti, Spiritual Administration of Muslims, Kyrgyz Republic, 2001-present Mr. Abdishukur NARMATOV Rector, Bishkek Islamic Institute, affiliate of the Spiritual Administration of Muslims of the Kyrgyz Republic, November 2000-present Mr. Avaskhon MARIPOV Imam-Khatib, Kara-Suu district, 1991-present Mr. Dilmurat OROZOV Kazy (leader of Muslim community), Djalal-Abad Oblast, 1997-present Mr. Anaskhon TASHKHUJAEV Imam-Khatib, Osh Mosque, 2001 Accompanied by: Ms. Regina KOZAKOVA United States Interpreter Mr. Dmitry ZOLOTOV United States Interpreter (end text) (Distributed by the Office of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State.
Web site: http://usinfo.state.gov) Return to Public File Main Page Return to Public Table of Contents
