Fourth Grade SOL Objective Programs Available VA 4.4 PWC 4.2.1 LIFE SCIENCE STRAND The student will investigate and understand basic plant anatomy.
Key concepts include: * Plant anatomy (roots, stems, flowers); and * Processes and structures involved with reproduction (pollination, stamen, pistil, sepal, embryo, spore, seed).
At School Dandelions
At Park Build a Tree
Knee-deep in a Wildflower
VA 4.4
PWC 4.2.2 LIFE SCIENCE STRAND The student will investigate and understand plant life processes.
Key concepts include: * Photosynthesis; * Transpiration; * Respiration; * Growth; * Reproduction/seed dispersal; * Tropism; and * Growing seasons (annual, biennial, perennial).
At School Dandelions
At Park Build a Tree
Knee-deep in a Wildflower
VA 4.5
PWC 4.2.3 LIFE SCIENCE STRAND The student will investigate and understand how plants and animals in Virginia ecosystems interact with one another and with the non-living environment.
Key concepts include: * Behavioral and structural adaptations; * Organization of communities; * Flow of energy through food webs; * Habitats and niches; * Life Cycles; and * Influence of human activity on ecosystems.
At School or Park Owl Pellets
Oh Deer!
Pyramid of Life
At Park Field, Forest, and Stream
VA 4.8
PWC 4.3.1 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE STRAND The student will investigate and understand important Virginia natural resources.
Key concepts include: * Watershed and water resources; * Animals and plants, both domestic and wild; * Some minerals, rocks, ores, and energy sources; * Forests, soil, and arable land; and * Geologic regions of Virginia: Tidewater (coastal plain), fall line, Piedmont, and Mountain.
At School Planet of Plenty
At School or Park Groundwater Model
Water Wonders
Just Passing Through
Water Works
At Park Planet of Plenty
Field, Forest, and Stream
Stream Ecology
Beaver Tales
Prince William Forest Park Education Program Details
Name: Beaver Tales Duration: 2 hrs
Methods: A hike to a beaver dam.
Targeted Grades: 2,4 Grade Range: K,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 VA SOL: 2.8,4.8
Objectives: Students will investigate the many ways that beavers use and effect plants; describe how beavers effect other animals and water quality.
Subjects: Science
Skills: observing, representing, organizing information, analyzing, brainstorming, communicating
Key Concepts: Plants provide homes and food for many animals.
Indoors: No Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Virginia's State Parks...Your Backyard Classrooms; Chesapeake Edition; The Virginia Sea Grant Advisory Program; 1990
Name: Build a Tree Duration: 15 min
Methods: As a group, students act out the parts of a tree.
Targeted Grades: 4 Grade Range: K,1,2,3,4,5 VA SOL: 4.4
Objectives: Students will describe the parts of a tree and explain how each part works.
Subjects: Science, Performing Arts
Skills: discussion, kinesthetic concept development
Key Concepts: A tree is made up of many parts working together.
Indoors: No Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Ranger Rick's Nature Scope: Trees are Terrific!; National Wildlife Federation 1989
Name: Dandelions Duration: 1.5 hrs
Methods: Through a puppet show and 6 other activities, students learn that the amazing ability of dandelions to survive is the result of their efficient and rugged design.
Targeted Grades: 4 Grade Range: K,1,2,3,4,5,6 VA SOL: 4.4
Objectives: Students will describe some of the dandelion's adaptations and identify the parts of the plant.
Subjects: Science, Art, Social Studies, Reading, Writing, Language Arts, Math
Skills: observing, inferring, brainstorming, communicating, predicting comparing, sorting and classifying, measuring, recording data
Key Concepts: Plants use all their parts as they complete their life cycles.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: Yes At School or Park: No At Park: No
Source: Hands-On Nature: Information and Activities for Exploring the Environment with Children; Vermont Institute of Natural Science; 1986
Name: Field, Forest, and Stream Duration: 1.5 hrs
Methods: Students record data on soil, sunlight, wind, temperature, plant life, and animal life in 3 different environments.
Targeted Grades: 4,5,6,7,8 Grade Range: 4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 4.5, 4.8,5.5
Objectives: Students will describe the similarities and differences they observe among three ecosystems; identify ways that the abiotic components of an ecosystem effect the biotic components; identify ways human activity has influenced the ecosystems.
Subjects: Science, Math
Skills: observing, organizing information, comparing and contrasting, identifying relationships and patterns, graphing
Key Concepts: Each environment has characteristic life forms.
The environment, created and shaped by natural forces and modified by humans, determines what life forms can occupy it.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: Yes At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Project Learning Tree: Environmental Education Activity Guide, Pre K-8; American Forest Foundation; Third Edition 1995
Name: Groundwater Model Duration: 1 hr
Methods: Students observe the flow of water and pollutants in a ground water model.
Targeted Grades: 4 Grade Range: 3,4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 4.8
Objectives: Students will describe how water flows underground; describe ways pollution can enter the ground water.
Subjects: Science, Social Studies
Skills: observation, discussing, identifying relationships and patterns, concluding
Key Concepts: Ground water is a critical natural resource.
Its quality can be effected by surface activities.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: No At School: No At School or Park: Yes At Park: No
Source: Prince William Forest Park Environmental Educators
Name: Just Passing Through Duration: 60 min
Methods: In a whole-body activity, students investigate how vegetation affects the movement of water over land surfaces.
Targeted Grades: 4,5,6 Grade Range: 3,4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 4.8,5.7,6.11
Objectives: Students will: compare the rates at which water flows down slopes with and without plant cover; and identify Best Management Practices that can be used to reduce erosion.
Subjects: Earth Science, Environmental Science, Ecology
Skills: analyzing, comparing and contrasting, interpreting, relating, summarizing, applying, and designing.
Key Concepts: Understanding how vegetation effects water's movement through a site promotes student appreciation of the relationship between water quality and landscape.
Indoors No Outdoors Yes At School Yes At School or Park Yes At Park Yes
Source: Project WET: Water Education for Teaches; The Watercourse and the Council for Environmental Education; 1995
Name: Knee Deep in a Wildflower Duration: 2 hrs
Methods: A pollination puppet show and wildflower walk.
Targeted Grades: 4 Grade Range: 1,2,3,4,5 VA SOL: 4.4
Objectives: Students will describe the basic method of pollination, observe a variety of wildflower and note the differences among them, and creatively express what they have learned about the form and function of a flower.
Subjects: Science, Art, Drama, Reading, Writing, Language Arts, Math
Skills: observing, inferring, brainstorming, communicating, comparing, sorting and classifying, recording data
Key Concepts: Plants use all their parts as they complete their life cycles.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Hands-On Nature: Information and Activities for Exploring the Environment with Children; Vermont Institute of Natural Science; 1986
Name: Oh Deer! Duration: 45 min
Methods: Students become "deer" and components of habitat in a highly involving physical activity.
Targeted Grades: 4 Grade Range: 4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 VA SOL: 4.5
Objectives: Students will describe the importance of good habitat for animals; define "limiting factors" and give examples; and recognize that some fluctuations in wildlife populations are natural as ecological systems undergo constant change.
Subjects: Science, Math, Social Studies, Physical Education
Skills: application, comparing similarities and differences, description, discussion, generalization, graphing, kinesthetic concept development, observation, psychomotor development
Key Concepts: Good habitat is the key to wildlife survival.
A population will continue to increase in size until some limiting factors are imposed.
Indoors: No Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: Yes At Park: No
Source: Project WILD: K-12 Activity Guide; Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Inc.; Second Edition 1995
Name: Owl Pellets Duration: 45 min
Methods: Students examine owl pellets, reconstruct prey skeletons and identify prey.
Targeted Grades: 3,4 Grade Range: 3,4,5,6,7 VA SOL: 3.5,4.5
Objectives: Students will be able to construct a simple food chain.
Subjects: Science
Skills: analysis, comparing similarities and differences, generalization
Key Concepts: Food webs and energy chains illustrate the interrelationships of all living things.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: No At School: No At School or Park: Yes At Park: No
Source: Project WILD: K-12 Activity Guide; Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Inc.; Second Edition 1995
Name: Planet of Plenty Duration: 50 min 2x
Methods: Students acting as "visitors from outer space" will describe, in minute detail, all the life they find in a small plot of land.
Targeted Grades: 4,5 Grade Range: 4,5,6 VA SOL: 4.8,5.5
Objectives: Students will investigate the diversity of plants and animals on a small plot of land and explain the value of a diversity of life forms in a particular ecosystem.
Subjects: Science, language Arts, Visual Arts
Skills: observing, organizing information, classifying and categorizing, concluding
Key Concepts: Biological diversity results from the interaction of living and nonliving environmental components such as air, water, climate, and geological features.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: Yes At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Project Learning Tree: Environmental Education Activity Guide, Pre K-8; American Forest Foundation; Third Edition 1995
Name: Pyramid of Life Duration: 15 min
Methods: Students build a food pyramid with their bodies.
Targeted Grades: 2,3,4 Grade Range: 2,3,4,5,6 VA SOL: 2.5,3.5,4.5
Objectives: Students will be able to describe the different levels of a food pyramid.
Subjects: Science
Skills: analysis, application, comparing similarities and differences, discussion, evaluation, inference, kinesthetic concept development
Key Concepts: Living things are part of a system.
Food webs and energy chains illustrate the interrelationships of all living things.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: Yes At Park: No
Source: Sharing Nature With Children; Joseph Cornell; Dawn Publications; 1979
Name: Stream Ecology Duration: 2-3 hrs
Methods: In addition to capturing and observing stream animals, the students will participate in activities that will enhance their understanding of aquatic ecosystems and our impacts upon them.
Targeted Grades: 3,4,5 Grade Range: 3,4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 3.6,4.8,5.5
Objectives: Students will describe basic adaptations of stream organisms and identify four different organisms.
Subjects: Science, Social Studies, Art
Skills: observation, classification, drawing
Key Concepts: Streams support a variety of different plants and animals.
Indoors: No Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: No At Park: Yes
Source: Connecting People and Nature; Great Smokey Mountains Institute at Tremont;1993
Name: Water Wonders Duration: 50 min 2x
Methods: Introduce students to the various steps of the water cycle and to the various paths water can take.
Targeted Grades: 3,4 Grade Range: 4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 3.9,4.8
Objectives: Students will simulate the paths that water takes in the water cycle, describe the importance of the water cycle to living things, conduct an experiment to see how plants effect the movement of water in a watershed.
Subjects: Science, Language Arts, Physical Education
Skills: organizing information, predicting, comparing and contrasting, inferring
Key Concepts: The water cycle is the system by which Earth's fixed amount of water is collected, purified, and distributed from the environment to living things and back to the environment.
Indoors: Yes Outdoors: Yes At School: No At School or Park: Yes At Park: No
Source: Project Learning Tree: Environmental Education Activity Guide, Pre K-8; American Forest Foundation; Third Edition 1995
Name: Water Works Duration: 50 min
Methods: Students create a "water web" to illustrate the interdependence among water users and producers.
Targeted Grades: 3,4,6 Grade Range: 3,4,5,6,7,8 VA SOL: 3.9,3.10,4.8,6.11
Objectives: Students will: distinguish between direct and indirect uses of water; illustrate the interconnectedness of water users in a community; and demonstrate the complexity of resolving water shortages among interdependent community water users.
Subjects: Government, Environmental Science
Skills: gathering information (observing), analyzing (identifying components and relationships), interpreting (inferring)
Key Concepts: The complexity of water conservation issues becomes more apparent as students experience the needs of and interconnectedness among water users.
Indoors Yes Outdoors Yes At School Yes At School or Park Yes At Park Yes
Source: Project WET: Water Education for Teaches; The Watercourse and the Council for Environmental Education; 1995.
__________________________________________________________________
http://www.nps.gov/prwi/Grade_4.htm Last Updated: Monday, 27-Sept-99
