International Information Programs South Asia | Afghanistan 30 March 2001 Washington File Transcript: State Dept.
Official Describes U.S. Policy on Taliban
(Alan Eastham interviewed on Afghanistan)
The Jim Lehrer News Hour presented a televised segment on Afghanistan and U.S. relations with that country on its regular broadcast March 29.
The interview included excerpts from the pre-recorded interview with Acting Assistant Secretary for South Asian Affairs Alan Eastham along with video footage and an interview with a representative of the Taliban foreign ministry, Said Ramatullah Hashemi.
Hashemi met working level State Department officials in Washington March 19.
Following is the full transcript of the Eastham interview as recorded prior to editing and broadcast:
(begin transcript)
Interview of Acting Assistant Secretary for South Asian Affairs Alan Eastham By Ray Suarez of The Jim Lehrer News Hour
March 21, 2001 Washington, D.C.
MR. SUAREZ: Maybe we could begin with a description from an official American point of view of the nature of our relationship to the government in Afghanistan.
MR. EASTHAM: Well, that occurs on several levels.
We don't have an official relationship with any government in Afghanistan.
We do not recognize the Taliban.
We don't recognize the Northern Alliance, the former Mujahedin government at the formal official level.
At the level of doing business, however, we have contacts with all the factions in Afghanistan.
That includes the Taliban.
We talk to the Taliban when we get an opportunity and when we have things to say, just as we talk to representatives of the Northern Alliance, and just as we talk to representatives of the former king of Afghan and groups outside Afghanistan.
We try to maintain contacts with all parties of Afghanistan, but we do not have a formal government-to-government relationship with anyone there.
MR. SUAREZ: Is there a sorting out of these different Afghans that the United States talks to that sort of recognizes that, official relations or not, the Taliban are the de facto rulers of the country?
MR. EASTHAM: Well, you have to take the country as it presents itself.
There is an Afghan reality as it exists today that has changed over time, and the reality is that the Taliban do control most of the territory of Afghanistan.
Now, whether they function as a government should function in pursuing the benefits of the people of Afghanistan, giving the people of Afghanistan the opportunities that they deserve as people in this modern world, that's another question altogether.
MR. SUAREZ: How much does the nature of a government and the nature of our relationship with a state color decisions that are made about humanitarian aid, about emergency food assistance, about various kinds of things that a people may need at a point in time no matter what kind of government that they have?
MR. EASTHAM: I don't think I can give you a general observation on that.
What I can talk about is Afghanistan.
And our lack of recognition of the Taliban government, indeed our recognition of no government in Afghanistan, has nothing whatsoever to do with the generosity, the necessity that we feel, to try to help the Afghan people survive at this phase in a conflict that has persisted for over 20 years.
We provide 90 percent of the food assistance that goes into Afghanistan.
That's done without regard to our view of the Taliban government.
Now, the question of political relations with the Taliban government is very much colored by issues such as their attitude toward international terrorism, their attitude toward narcotics production, their attitude toward the human rights of their own people, and first and foremost their willingness to engage in peace talks with the opposition and with other Afghans.
MR. SUAREZ: Let's pull apart some of those separate issues.
Right now, Ruud Lubbers, the new head of UNHCR, is reporting that it's pretty difficult to raise interest and raise support for Afghanistan, in part because of the nature of the government there, but that as an international humanitarian organization his can't be a respecter of governments, only an agency that hears the cries of human suffering.
What is tough about giving to Afghanistan right now?
MR. EASTHAM: The delivery of humanitarian assistance is the most difficult part of the problem, from the American Government's point of view.
We have a substantial program of humanitarian assistance.
It was $115 million last year that we've given, and several tens of millions this year.
We are very generous in our contribution to humanitarian assistance for the Afghan people.
Now, as I said, that's not affected by the political relationship which we lack with the authorities in Kabul.
What makes it difficult is the Taliban attitude toward delivery of assistance, and this has been a problem between the Taliban and the international organizations and many nongovernmental organizations for the past several years, since the Taliban have imposed various conditions relating to their social agenda on the delivery of assistance.
The issue of women, for example, of women's employment in humanitarian assistance programs, is a perennial; that's an issue which is always there with the Taliban.
There are a number of other issues as well involving the conditions of delivery.
But from the American Government point of view, there is no political conditioning on humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people.
MR. SUAREZ: The Taliban, for its part, through a spokesman says that they don't interpose themselves between aid agencies and those who need the help.
What kind of roadblocks would you say that they are putting up?
MR. EASTHAM: They have in the past required -- I'll give you one example.
They have required that international humanitarian aid workers who are women not come to Afghanistan to work without being accompanied by a male member of their family.
And when you have a program which needs to deliver humanitarian assistance to a substantial number of war widows and women who are heads of household because their husbands and sons have been killed in the war, in a culture like that of Afghanistan where it is very difficult to admit this, this is difficult for men to interact with women outside the context of a family relationship.
To interpose this requirement that the women who would deliver this assistance and make sure it's getting to the women in Afghanistan, to be accompanied by a family member seems to me to be a bit over the top for the Taliban.
MR. SUAREZ: Have they politically conditioned or tried to influence where the aid goes? There are parts of the country where their rule was not as welcome as in other parts.
MR. EASTHAM: No, they have not.
I don't recall a Taliban effort to direct aid one place or another in recent years.
A couple of years ago, they did impose an embargo on central Afghanistan.
They were not permitting food aid to go into the area of Bamiyan, where the statues were recently destroyed, because the Bamiyan people were still offering resistance to the Taliban.
It was an area which was not under Taliban control.
The Taliban in that case -- this was two years ago -- refused to permit the UN to deliver food aid to that area.
In that case they were using denial of food as a means to coerce the opposition.
MR. SUAREZ: But as far as you know, that kind of thing is not part of the scene today?
MR. EASTHAM: I don't know whether there has been a recent effort to move assistance across the lines of the fighting north of Kabul.
That has been a problem in the past, and I simply don't know if it's a problem now.
MR. SUAREZ: Does the United States have a position at all -- does it take a position -- on the repatriation of displaced persons who are currently in neighboring states?
MR. EASTHAM: We follow the UN High Commissioner for Refugees' lead on that, which is generally if Afghans wish to return home, their return should be facilitated.
If they do not wish to return home, however, if they continue to feel that they would be subject to harm or persecution if they return to Afghanistan, then they should be given full support in the country of refuge.
MR. SUAREZ: Because that would imply having to do business with two other countries with which the United States has had difficult relations in recent years, Iran and Pakistan.
MR. EASTHAM: Yes.
And we do conduct a substantial refugee support operation in conjunction with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees in Pakistan.
We do not directly supply the refugee operations of the UNHCR in Iran, although I suspect that some of the food grain in particular which is provided for distribution in Afghanistan is, in fact, routed through Iran.
But that's fine because the ultimate destination is Afghanistan.
MR. SUAREZ: The Taliban -- and I spoke to their self-styled roving ambassador the other day -- says that, to a degree, the world owed Afghanistan a lot because it is not the author of its own situation today in 2001.
As the battleground for one of the final chapters of the Cold War, it became a country being fought over by interests that had nothing, or little or nothing, to do with Afghans themselves, and that this landed heavily on them and that they're still trying to recover from it.
What do you think of that?
MR. EASTHAM: You can pick any point in the last 20 years to depart on an assignment of responsibility for Afghanistan's troubles.
I would prefer to look out into the future.
If you chose to, you could pick the point at which Afghanistan's politics was destabilized by a communist coup in the late '70s; you could pick the Russian invasion of Afghanistan; you could accuse the United States and other countries that supported the struggle of the Afghan people against the occupying Soviet army; you could assign responsibility to the Mujahedin government which came into power when the Communist government collapsed.
You could pick any point.
But I think the core question is whether, having suffered for 20 years from a civil war, from an occupation, famine, drought, all of the ills to which man is heir these days, whether it wouldn't be better to look to the future and try to construct an Afghanistan that can take its place in the world.
MR. SUAREZ: Do we have to assume that, as with a dozen other places you and I could probably name, that a revolutionary movement that comes to power does need a little time to find its feet, whether this is a government that the United States would happily countenance or not?
MR. EASTHAM: The Taliban government has shown that it can't govern.
They have not addressed the needs of the Afghan people.
They have not taken account of the wishes of the international community with respect to the issues I have identified -- terrorism, narcotics, protection of human rights.
They have had four and a half years now since they occupied Kabul and took the capital of Afghanistan and proclaimed themselves the government of Afghanistan to get their act together.
So far, they haven't.
After four and a half years, you really have to question whether they have the capability to govern or not.
MR. SUAREZ: They point with some pride and accomplishment to the recent eradication of opium cultivation.
Admittedly, this is late in the timeline that this has occurred, long after they were asked to do it, but they say, "But we have done it."
Are there moves of this kind that you can look upon as sort of confidence-building measures that at least there could be a convergence in the conversation, an ability to -- for government-to-government talks that build on these kinds of things?
MR. EASTHAM: We have had discussions with the Taliban about the narcotics situation.
With respect to the ban that they announced last year and for which the evidence of the ban is now becoming more clear, I think the international community, including the United States, will respond very positively to an effective ban.
We are still assessing the extent to which this ban is effective, but it looks now as though it is.
That is a positive step on the part of the Taliban.
Now, there are some additional concerns.
Afghanistan has had bumper crops of opium in the last two years.
There are substantial stocks of opium in Afghanistan.
There is a question about what happens to that.
But these are not insoluble problems and I think under the leadership of the United Nations narcotics control program, which has operated in Afghanistan fairly continuously for the past several years, we and other governments will respond positively to the poppy ban, assuming that we verify that it is the case.
On other issues we have continuously offered a dialogue with the Taliban to discuss in particular the question of terrorism, the question of human rights, and we have had fairly intensive talks with them on ways that they could participate in the efforts that the United Nations is making to bring peace to Afghanistan.
All these things are part of our agenda, and I think that if we see a positive Taliban response we would also respond in our own right positively to what they have put on the table.
MR. SUAREZ: On the subject of human rights, this is a government that has long proclaimed itself as a respecter of human rights under its own standards.
The other day, when I was talking to Mr. Hashemi, he said if the world expects us to change who we are and change our laws and change our standards in the interest of being their friends or getting aid, or under pressure or under coercion from outside, I can tell them now, it's not going to happen.
What responsibility does the United States have to be true to itself and its traditions, but also to respect the sovereignty, the eternal sovereignty, the cultural sovereignty, of other places in the world?
MR. EASTHAM: We feel very strongly that a country which discards half its population, which rules out any productive role outside of home life for half of the population, the female half, is not doing itself very much of a service.
If Afghan society requires that women be treated in hospitals by women, then wouldn't it make sense to educate some women to be nurses and doctors? If Afghan society requires that Afghan women be taught only by women, wouldn't it make sense to educate some women so that they can play that role, so that Afghan women can be, within the Islamic context, productive members of society?
The delivery of aid and assistance, some medical services, maternity-type services to women, requires women to do it in Afghanistan.
And if you deny the ability of half the population to be educated, you are condemning the country to backwardness, essentially.
That is the point of dispute with the Taliban.
It's not a question of disputing their basic societal tenets, or even debating Islam with them.
It is that to become a country which participates in the world, Afghanistan needs its women.
That is our point on human rights.
The respect and tolerance which is a hallmark of most countries in the world is also missing in Afghanistan these days.
The terrible destruction of the Buddhist statues, which as far as I can tell were harming no one, and which were worshiped by no one, which were not objects of veneration by anyone except art historians as a part of the great cultural heritage of the world, their destruction is an act of intolerance, which is not at all in keeping with the spirit of the world today.
And it has, in our view, nothing to do with Islam or with the practice of religion in Afghanistan.
We accept that Islam is the religion of most Afghans, most residents of Afghanistan.
They can practice it in the way they want.
But it should be in a spirit of toleration, in a spirit of acceptance of other faiths and creeds.
MR. SUAREZ: If these other sticking points get taken care of, could human rights be a sort of permanent standing impediment to full relations with a country like this?
MR. EASTHAM: I think we are a long way from talking about full relations.
That would be a decision that would have to be made by the new Administration as they come into office, as the new people who are constitutionally responsible for the country can conduct their reviews of American foreign policy.
So I wouldn't be prepared to put one or the other of these as a permanent impediment.
We, I think, are doing a credible job of maintaining contacts with all Afghans.
We do everything we can to get our work done and to achieve American objectives with respect to the region.
And I think that with respect to the primary American objective, which is ameliorating the human suffering in Afghanistan, we have done a fairly good job.
We have seen less ability to work on the other issues involved.
MR. SUAREZ: Let's talk about Usama bin Laden.
What's the most current state of play in the conversations between the United States and the Afghans over his continued presence in Afghanistan?
MR. EASTHAM: Well, it's not a question of conversations between the United States and the Afghans.
This is a larger issue now.
It is a conversation between the world community and the Taliban over the Taliban continuing to harbor and protect international terrorists -- and that's a plural, it's not just one man -- on Afghan territory.
It might have been a conversation between the United States and the Afghans a couple of years ago, but it has gone much beyond that.
The will of the international community has been expressed in the United Nations Security Council now twice over the last two years.
The Security Council has laid down its requirements for dealing with this matter, with this man and with his associates in Afghanistan, and has imposed certain sanctions on the Taliban leadership in order to encourage them to accept the solution which has been put forward.
Now, we have had many, many discussions.
The United States has had many, many discussions with the Taliban on this subject.
So far, we haven't managed to reach a point where the Taliban find it possible to expel bin Laden to a country where he can be brought to justice, which is the bottom line, or to take steps to close down the terrorist training camps which exist in Afghanistan.
And they will need to find a way to do both of those in order to get this particular impediment out of the way.
MR. SUAREZ: Your phrase "to a country where he can be brought to justice" would seem to be a point of contention between the United States view and the Taliban's view.
The Taliban say that the United States has had very high and intractable demands, sort of New York or nothing, that make it very difficult for them -- for internal reasons -- to surrender Usama bin Laden.
The other day, it was mentioned that if he could be sent to a mutually agreed upon Islamic country to be tried, they could probably go for that.
Does that represent a vastly different version of the story from the one they are giving through official channels?
MR. EASTHAM: I haven't heard that proposal.
They have put forward several ideas, but the notion of the mutually agreeable Islamic country is one that they have not made directly to us.
MR. SUAREZ: What are some of the proposals that have been made in the past and rejected?
MR. EASTHAM: The Taliban have said several things along the way.
It would be better if you'd let them speak for themselves, at the risk of [my] mischaracterizing their position.
But they have said that the United States should not worry, that he is under wraps, and have given assurances that he will not plan terrorist actions against other countries from Afghan soil.
They have proposed that the United States provide evidence to an Afghan court, which would then consider the charges against him.
They have proposed that a council be set up, a council of religious scholars be set up, to make a decision on the disposition of the charges against him.
None of those solutions reaches the bottom line of the Security Council.
That is the basic problem.
The will as expressed in the Security Council is that he depart Afghanistan to a country where he can be brought to justice, and the Taliban proposals have not met that standard.
MR. SUAREZ: Is there any Lockerbie-style solution, or a Hague Tribunal-style solution, involving third-party, third-country venues, fourth-country jurists that might satisfy the United States long-term desires in this regard?
MR. EASTHAM: You have asked me a very broad and very difficult hypothetical question that I don't think I'm in a position to address.
MR. SUAREZ: I realize that.
MR. EASTHAM: We haven't heard that from the Taliban.
They haven't proposed an alternative involving Lockerbie.
Lockerbie was unique, I think.
I'm going to have to defer any response on that.
MR. SUAREZ: Well, they would describe the United States position as "an American federal court or nothing."
Would that accurately describe the current US position?
MR. EASTHAM: I think we'd be glad to have it, but within the Security Council parameters, a country where he can be brought to justice outside Afghanistan.
MR. SUAREZ: Some of the countries that were -- Kenya and Tanzania are home to a large Muslim population.
Have they been parties to the search for a just solution to this, or parties to the United States search for an extradition or means of extradition for Usama bin Laden?
MR. EASTHAM: The party that hasn't been involved is the Taliban.
They are the ones who need to become active in trying to find a solution to the problem.
He is on their territory.
These terrorist organizations operate in territory they control.
And it seems to me that putting forward internal reasons why they can't take steps to bring to justice a man who has been -- and men who have been indicted in American courts for very serious crimes, including murders -- is very difficult to understand.
They are attacking a fairly fundamental principle of international relations; namely, that in cases of terrorism or terrorist attacks, nations are generally obligated, under international law as it stands these days, if I understand it, to prosecute or extradite.
The one option which is not acceptable is to grant safe haven to people who are accused of such activities by other countries.
And the Taliban refusal to address this seriously undercuts that principle very badly, and it creates an impression that the Taliban, and Afghanistan in general, are harboring terrorists, that it is a place where every bad guy in the world can go and find relief and shelter.
This should be a notion that the Taliban fight against, if they wish to participate in the international community themselves.
MR. SUAREZ: Harboring people wanted in American courts is not a situation unique to Afghanistan, though.
I mean, whether it's Robert Vesco or someone who is wanted for murder in a state with capital punishment in the United States, there are all kinds of reasons why people don't get extradited.
MR. EASTHAM: But there is a special body for the international law dealing with terrorist crimes.
And it is in that body -- terrorists, hijackings and bombings and that sort of thing -- where this principle of prosecute or extradite is established by treaty.
Now, Afghanistan is not a party to those treaties, but I think that the principle is very widely established in the world that there are certain things which are beyond the pale, and that these terrorist acts are among them.
And there are special rules for dealing with those.
MR. SUAREZ: Are there reasons for optimism? Are there any seeds of hope in the evolution of the Taliban regime that might give cause for a brighter future, or the expectation of a brighter future in the United States?
MR. EASTHAM: I don't see any evolution in the Taliban themselves.
What I do see is growing concern amongst Afghans.
There are Afghans in the region, in Pakistan, in Iran and Central Asian countries, in Europe, in the United States, who are increasingly concerned that the Taliban control in Afghanistan is a very, very negative factor in Afghanistan's evolution.
There is also increasing concern amongst the governments of the countries neighboring Afghanistan about this.
But either the Taliban need to change, or the Taliban will be defeated by other Afghans.
Afghans are becoming very concerned about this.
The destruction of the Buddhas, for example, met with no approval from non-Taliban Afghans.
The expulsion of the BBC correspondent from Kabul the other day, the increasingly repressive pattern of activities on the part of Taliban in terms of religious expression, in terms of dress, in terms of personal behavior -- all are, I think, causing even those who believed that the Taliban were a positive force for bringing stability to Afghanistan to rethink that position.
So I think that to answer your question in summary, I see no evolution on the part of the Taliban in a positive direction, and I see increasing signs that there is opposition to the Taliban developing amongst Afghans.
MR. SUAREZ: That has any realistic hope of success, now that the Taliban control 90, 95 percent of the land?
MR. EASTHAM: I don't know.
MR. SUAREZ: Would those other elements have any reason to believe that they have a friend in the United States?
MR. EASTHAM: All Afghans have a friend in the United States.
Our focus is very much on the living conditions of ordinary Afghans.
That's what it's all about.
The Afghans try to play back to us a geopolitical argument of some sort, but I think that since the end of the Cold War and since the breakup of the Soviet Union, our focus on Afghanistan has become very much more functional in nature, much more humanitarian in nature, and that's the way we approach it at this point.
If you're talking about the United States backing an Afghan faction, well, we don't do that.
What we do is try to ensure that all Afghans have an opportunity, whether it is on the humanitarian side or whether it's in our efforts to bring peace there.
MR. SUAREZ: For its part, the Taliban says that one fact of its complicating normalization of relations in the neighborhood is interests having to do with Caspian Sea oil and pipelines, and where pipelines go and how product gets moved around former Soviet Central Asia.
Is that part of the calculus when you look at that part of the world?
MR. EASTHAM: It's not a major part of the calculus.
If it were -- you know, I recall a couple of years ago, we were accused of backing the Taliban in order to support American business interests to put a pipeline through Afghanistan.
At this point, Afghanistan is in such an advanced state of dilapidation and crisis that US business interests don't come into it.
MR. SUAREZ: They realize, the Taliban do, that they have got a problem in Usama bin Laden, a problem that maybe they want to get over and around just as much as anybody else does, but there [are] reasons why they can't.
How do you respond to that?
MR. EASTHAM: I'm not sure that's the case.
I have always felt that if the Taliban wished to solve the problem of Usama bin Laden, they could do it.
They claim, after all, that they are in control in Afghanistan.
Their politics are for them to work out.
If there is a political impediment of some sort to complying with the rule of the Security Council in the international community, it's not the international community's job to find a solution.
They need to solve their politics, and we can't do it for them.
MR. SUAREZ: In response to Taliban requests, or what the Taliban describes as its requests for further information on the charges against Usama bin Laden, what has been supplied from the world community to Afghanistan as a reason for extraditing?
MR. EASTHAM: We have presented the Taliban with the indictment from the federal court in New York, which is the basis for the trial which is now proceeding in New York in the case of the East Africa bombings.
We have presented the Taliban with certain aspects of the evidence from that trial, the evidence going into the trial proceedings, in particular the confessional statement by one of the individuals regarding his relationship with Usama bin Laden with respect specifically to the bombing of the Embassy in Nairobi.
We are not going to try a case in Afghanistan.
We have a perfectly good legal system in the United States, which can produce a fair trial and a just verdict.
And the solution is not that [a trial in Afghanistan]; the solution is for bin Laden to come out of Afghanistan and to be subject to justice in another country.
MR. SUAREZ: Has there been any official response to what has been given over by the United States?
MR. EASTHAM: Oh, they essentially say, these are the charges; where's the evidence? That was their response to the indictment.
Ordinarily, in international relations, there are certain credences given to the solemn action of the judicial system of another country.
In this case, the Taliban treated it essentially as news clippings.
MR. SUAREZ: In cases that have involved crimes against Americans on foreign soil, the other countries' domestic police agencies are often brought in in a consultative way, this sharing of information.
Is there anybody even to talk to in Afghanistan in that way about these investigations and what kind of evidence you have, and those kinds of things?
MR. EASTHAM: Well, we have lots of ways to talk to the Taliban.
It's not police to police.
But we have talked to the Taliban representatives who are outside, in Pakistan.
We have talked to the Taliban representative, the fellow who ran the office in New York.
We have talked to various Taliban representatives in this country, in Pakistan, and elsewhere.
The problem is not channels.
It's not ways to talk to them seriously about this.
The problem is achieving some sort of meeting of the minds, and so far we haven't done that.
MR. SUAREZ: And by saying it's not a problem of channels, you are saying that the most recent sanctions that restrict travel, that make it more difficult for Taliban representatives to move around the world, doesn't complicate the task of free communications with that regime?
MR. EASTHAM: Oh, it complicates the task.
But there is a specific exception to the travel sanction against the Taliban leadership to permit them to exit Afghanistan to talk about compliance with the resolution; that is, there is a specific exemption in the resolution for that purpose, so that all that would be required would be a quick pass through the Sanctions Committee in New York and then no problem.
MR. SUAREZ: Do you think the connections between bin Laden and the attack against the Cole are strong enough to make suspect the Taliban's claim that they have got Usama bin Laden in a box, contained, unable to organize activity?
MR. EASTHAM: I'm not going to respond on the Cole specifically, but I will say that there is plenty of information available to us that casts serious question on those assurances.
MR. SUAREZ: Thank you.
__________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
