HYDE ANNOUNCES CHURCH ARSON PREVENTION ACT May 23, 1996 [bl_bar.gif] Responding to the recent rash of church burnings, Judiciary Committee Chairman Henry J. Hyde (R-IL) today introduced the "Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996."
The Committee's ranking Democrat, John Conyers, joined with Hyde in cosponsoring the measure.
"This legislation will give Federal authorities the tools necessary to prosecute and bring to justice people who burn, desecrate, or otherwise damage religious property.
The arson of a place of worship is repulsive to us as a society.
When the fire is motivated by racial hatred, it is even more reprehensible.
There is no crime that should be more vigilantly investigated, and the perpetrators more vigorously prosecuted, than this," Hyde stressed.
Earlier this week, on May 21, 1996, the House Judiciary Committee held hearings on the increase in suspicious church fires, particularly those occuring in the southeastern United States.
Since October 1991 there have been 110 incidents of church arson reported to Federal authorities; 33 of these occurred in the first five months of 1996.
The victims of these crimes are not confined to a particular religious group -- the burnings include synagogues, mosques, and church congregations, both African-American and Caucasian.
but, of the 51 fires reported since January 1995, more than half involve African-American congregations.
Although Federal authorities have been somewhat successful in investigating and prosecuting these cases, the law which makes it a Federal crime to damage religious property, or to obstruct persons in the free exercise of their religious believes, currently contains language which limits its usefulness.
The Hyde-Conyers bill eliminates this language and instead applies criminal penalties if the offense "is in or affects interstate or foreign commerce."
By using this formulation, Federal jurisdiction and prosecution of these cases will be greatly facilitated.
In addition, the bill reduces the dollar value of destruction which must occur before these crimes can be prosecuted.
Current law requires that the loss from the defacement, damage or destruction involved be more than $10,000.
This means that when the damage from a fire is minimal, or when hate is expressed, not through fire but through desecration or defacement of houses of worship, current law is ineffective.
The Hyde-Conyers bill reduces the dollar threshold to $5,000, an amount which will allow Federal prosecution of more cases.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
