Testimony of Congressman John P. Murtha before the
SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE RESOURCES COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL PARKS, RECREATION AND PUBLIC LANDS
On HR 1521, "Johnstown Flood National Memorial Boundary Adjustment Act of 2003" To provide for additional lands to be included within the boundary of the Johnstown Flood National Memorial in the State of Pennsylvania, and for other purposes.
Tuesday, June 23, 2003
Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank the Committee for bringing this bill up for consideration so quickly in this Congress.
This bill will authorize the expansion of the Johnstown Flood National Memorial, a National Park Service site in South Fork, Pennsylvania.
Specifically, the bill will enable the National Park Service (NPS) to acquire adjacent properties and historically significant structures that are an integral part of the story of the Johnstown Flood.
The Great Johnstown Flood, which occurred on May 31, 1889, was the largest news story in the era next to the assassination of Abraham Lincoln.
It swept away an entire city, causing the loss of over 2,209 people.
Though members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club, which owned the earthen dam and was situated above it, worked feverishly during the storm to prevent the dam from bursting, their efforts were futile.
The Johnstown Flood Memorial was dedicated in 1964.
Today the park consists of 165 acres and receives over 126,000 visitors annually.
It preserves the remains of the old South Fork Dam which was breached in the flood, as well as portions of the former Conemaugh Lake bed.
This bill would authorize the purchase or acquisition by NPS, from willing sellers, an additional approximately 14 ½ acres.
This property holds certain related historic structures such as the "Moorhead Cottage" and the "Clubhouse."
Both of these are significant to the story of the Johnstown Flood as they represent the life and role of club members both before and after the flood.
The property offers a unique opportunity to use tangible resources to interpret the events that led to the Johnstown Flood, and the club members' response to the Flood.
Should the Subcommittee move this bill forward, I would request that the bill and related map be amended to exclude the .25 acre parcel owned by Richard Martyak, as he is no longer a willing seller.
I appreciate the Committee's consideration of this bill.
Thank you for your time.
