[USEMAP:caretop_nav2.gif] [arrow_basic_sm.gif]
Environments should be created to enable older people to make the best possible use of their vision.
There are three areas which should be considered: illumination, glare and color contrast.
Illumination: Appropriate lighting in each room of one's home will make activities easier and safer.
It is wise to have lamps in different areas of a room to provide adequate overall illumination.
Direct light sources near chairs and tables is essential.
When reading, ensure that light is directed on the printed matter.
Illuminate entrances, exits and stairwells.
To save on electricity costs, many older adults do not adequately illuminate rooms.
Dimmer switches and three-way light bulbs permit adjustable levels of light and maximize electrical efficiency.
Glare: Reducing glare in an indoor environment benefits all older people, especially those with cataracts.
Glare can hinder sight and may lead to unnecessary falls.
Light-reflecting surfaces, such as glossy plastic tablecloths and highly-waxed vinyl or linoleum floors, are particularly troublesome for older people.
Glare can be reduced and often eliminated with non-glare wax.
Covering flat surfaces with dull (matte) finish tablecloths and placemats will also reduce glare.
Windows should have blinds or shades that can be drawn to protect a room from sunlight glare.
Color Contrast: Using colors to create contrast in a home environment is an important step in helping visually impaired people improve their daily functioning.
Closely-related colors or shades may blend together, making it impossible for a visually impaired person to perceive differences.
For example, if a white plate is placed on a white tablecloth, and the plate contains rice, cauliflower and fish, a person with low vision may be unable to differentiate anything on the table or the plate.
It would be better to use a dark cloth with a white plate and serve peas instead of cauliflower.
Similarly, if carpets and furniture are all in the same color family, it may be hard to distinguish specific items.
Try to introduce color contrasts wherever possible to differentiate objects such as doorknobs or switches.
When vision loss is severe, additional products and special services are available to help people maintain independence at home and in the community.
There are several commercial products which may help older adults with severe vision loss.
These include large print clocks and telephone dials; sewing aids; bold color marking devices; pouring devices; and "Talking" watches, scales, thermometers and calculators.
For leisure activities, large print playing cards are available.
Games like checkers, bingo and scrabble have been adapted for people with vision loss.
The Library of Congress lends special cassette players and books on tape to the visually impaired.
Details are available at all local libraries.
Many cities offer special radio programming for people with visual impairments.
Older people with vision loss may need special services, such as mobility instruction to travel independently in the community or rehabilitation instruction in techniques of daily living and home management.
Professional instructors can assess a person's functional ability, recommend useful products and, when appropriate, teach severely visually impaired people to compensate for vision loss.
For more information, contact your local agency for the visually impaired or one of the agencies listed.
Contents | Previous Page | Next Page
[divider.gif]
Back to top of this page
