Legislative Update March 11, 2003 Vol. 20, No. 9
South Carolina House of Representatives David H. Wilkins, Speaker of the House
OFFICE OF RESEARCH Room 213, Blatt Building, P.O. Box 11867, Columbia, S.C. 29211, (803) 734-3230 __________________________________________________________________
CONTENTS
Week in Review House Committee Action Bills Introduced in the House
NOTE: Bill summaries included in this document are prepared by the staff of the South Carolina House of Representatives and are not the expression of the legislation's sponsor(s) or the House of Representatives.
The summaries are strictly for the internal use and benefit of members of the House of Representatives and are not to be construed by a court of law as an expression of legislative intent.
__________________________________________________________________
Legislative Update, March 11, 2003
HOUSE WEEK IN REVIEW
The House of Representatives amended, approved, and sent to the Senate H.3538, the "DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES REFORM ACT OF 2003."
This bill removes the Division of Motor Vehicles and the State Transport Police Division from the Department of Public Safety and establishes these divisions as an administrative agency of the state government, the Department of Motor Vehicles.
The bill provides:
* The Executive Director of the Department is appointed by the Governor and confirmed by the Senate to serve at the pleasure of the Governor.
* The Legislative Audit Council will review the Department every three years.
* The State Budget and Control Board will prescribe the manner in which the transfer of employees, funds, property, etc. will be accomplished.
The Department of Motor Vehicles is prohibited from hiring additional employees during the ninety-day period following the effective date of this legislation, except with the specific written approval of the State Budget and Control Board.
* The Department must enter into contracts with public and private entities to administer driver's license examinations.
The Department must supply the appropriate testing materials.
The legislation authorizes a private entity to charge a service fee in excess of the testing fee charged by the Department.
The Department must supervise these entities.
The department must randomly test driver's license applicants who successfully complete the driver's license examinations to ensure that the driver's license instructors are properly certifying that their students have successfully completed an examination.
If through testing or other review procedures, the department determines that a contractor is not conforming to the law and applicable regulations it may: suspend the authority under the contract to administer the tests, suspend the contract, or cancel the contract.
* The legislation revises procedures for the renewal of driver's licenses.
Under the new procedures, the license renewal period for drivers age sixty-five and older will continue to be five years.
For other driver's licenses, the renewal period is increased from five years to ten years.
During the fifth year of this ten-year renewal schedule, the licensee must either appear in person at a department office to complete a vision screening or submit by mail to the department a certificate from an optometrist or another person authorized by law in this State to screen eyes.
Failure to satisfy the vision-screening requirement incurs a $50 fine.
The fine is waived if the individual completes the requirement within ninety days.
* The legislation provides that if a person's license expires, the person may have his license renewed without taking the required road test or a written examination if the person applies for his license within nine months of the expiration of his license.
* The legislation contains provisions coordinating the department's activities regarding the issuance of driver's licenses and identification cards with registration for the United States Selective Service.
* The Department may enter into contracts with public and private entities to issue license plates and revalidation decals.
A private entity may charge a service fee in excess of the registration fee charged by the Department.
A public entity may charge a one-dollar service fee in excess of the registration fee charged by the Department.
The Department must supervise the public and private entities The House returned S.375 to the Senate with amendments.
This joint resolution authorizes the OPTION OF SCHOOL EMPLOYEE FURLOUGH PROGRAMS for the 2002-2003 fiscal year only, if state funds appropriated for a school district in this State are less than state funds appropriated for that school district in the preceding fiscal year, or if the General Assembly or the Budget and Control Board implements a midyear across-the-board budget reduction.
Before any employees may be furloughed under this legislation, the chairman of the governing body of the school district must certify that all fund flexibility provided by the General Assembly has been utilized by the district and that the furlough is necessary to avoid a year-end deficit and a reduction in force.
The certification must include a detailed report by the superintendent of the specific action taken by the district to avoid a year-end deficit.
The certification and report must be in writing and delivered to the State Superintendent of Education and a copy must be forwarded to the Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee and the Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee.
Once this certification has been made, local school boards of trustees shall have the authority to authorize furloughs of its employees in the manner in which it sees fit.
However, furloughs of instructional classroom and all other support staff may not exceed five days with no more than two of which may be instructional days and district and school administrators may be furloughed for a period up to ten days.
The local school district board of trustees shall take all reasonable action necessary to provide furlough days on in-service days and shall only provide for furlough days on instructional days if absolutely necessary.
During any furlough, affected employees shall be entitled to participate in the same benefits as otherwise available to them except for receiving their salaries.
The legislation establishes provisions regarding contributions to the South Carolina Retirement System and other benefits programs so as to ensure that breaks in coverage will not occur for affected employees.
Placement of an employee on furlough under this provision does not constitute a grievance or appeal under any employee grievance procedure.
The district may allocate the employee's reduction in pay over the balance of the fiscal year for payroll purposes regardless of the pay period within which the furlough occurs.
The legislation shall not abrogate the terms of any contract between any school district and its employees.
S.375 also grants FLEXIBILITY IN TRANSFERRING SCHOOL FUNDS.
For fiscal year 2002-2003, all school districts and special schools of this State may transfer revenue between programs to any instructional program with the same funding source and may make expenditures for direct classroom instructional programs and essential operating costs from any state source without regard to fund type with the exception of school building bond funds and lottery funds.
The House concurred in Senate amendments on H.3344 and ordered the bill enrolled for ratification.
This bill provides that BROADBAND SERVICE IS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION BY THE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION.
The legislation exempts from PSC regulation broadband service which is defined as any service that is used to provide access to the Internet and consists of the offering of: (a) a capability to transmit information at a rate that is generally not less than one hundred ninety kilobits per second in at least one direction; or (b) any service that combines computer processing, information storage, and protocol conversion to enable users to access Internet content and services.
The House approved and sent to the Senate H.3713, a bill that ASSIGNS HOMELAND SECURITY DUTIES TO THE SOUTH CAROLINA LAW ENFORCEMENT DIVISION.
The legislation revises the exclusive jurisdiction and statewide authority of the South Carolina Law Enforcement Division, so as to provide that the division's jurisdiction and authority includes: establishing and operating tactical response law enforcement units; coordinating counter terrorism efforts in or affecting this state; coordinating federal grants associated with homeland security; creating councils associated with its mission; and serving as the Governor's representative to the United States Department of Homeland Security.
The House approved and sent to the Senate H.3473, a bill pertaining to GRAVE ROBBERY/DESECRATION.
This bill revises provisions relating to the destruction or desecration of human remains or repositories of human remains, so as to provide that it is unlawful for a person to steal anything of value from cemeteries and other repositories of human remains.
The bill revises penalties so as to eliminate the misdemeanor offense and add community service to the penalties required for the felony offense.
The House amended, approved, and sent to the Senate H.3037, a bill providing that a CANDIDATE'S NAME MAY APPEAR ONLY ONCE ON A BALLOT.
The legislation provides that the authority charged by law with printing the ballot shall print the name of a candidate accompanied by whatever political parties nominate him and may not print his name more than once.
______________________________________________________________
HOUSE COMMITTEE ACTION
AGRICULTURE, NATURAL RESOURCES, AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS The Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Environmental Affairs Committee reported favorable with amendment on H.3555, regarding SWINE FEEDING OPERATIONS.
As reported by the Committee, this bill prohibits counties and municipalities from enacting an ordinance that supersedes or imposes a more stringent standard than standards established by the General Assembly relating to the production of livestock or poultry.
EDUCATION AND PUBLIC WORKS The Education and Public Works Committee reported favorable with amendment on H.3418, regarding CONSTRUCTION, IMPROVEMENT, OR RENOVATION OF PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY.
As reported by the Committee, this bill repeals the current School Building Code and provides that all construction, improvement, and renovation of public school buildings and property on or after the effective date of the bill must comply with the latest applicable standards and specifications set forth in the South Carolina School Facilities Planning and Construction Guide (the Guide) as published by the State Department of Education (the Department) and must be inspected by the Superintendent of Education (the Superintendent) or a designee for compliance.
The bill requires that the Guide be updated annually by a committee representing organizations and interests delineated in the bill and appointed by the Department.
The bill requires that a certificate of occupancy be obtained from the Superintendent or the Superintendent's designee before a building may be occupied.
The bill authorizes the Superintendent, under specified conditions, to grant waivers from school building regulations relating to minimum lot size requirements or building square foot requirements for construction of a new public school building or for the conversion of an existing commercial building into a public school facility.
The bill provides that the authority granted the Superintendent by these provisions supercedes state school building regulations and the authority of local building officials or entities to disapprove variances granted by the waiver.
The Committee reported favorable on H.3128, regarding PRIMARY ENFORCEMENT OF THE SEAT BELT LAW.
This bill strikes the current statutory language which provides that a law enforcement officer must not stop a driver for a seat belt or child restraint violation in the absence of another violation of the motor vehicle laws.
The Committee recommitted to subcommittee H.3333, a bill concerning WHEN A VEHICLE MUST STOP FOR A SCHOOL BUS and regarding SCHOOL BUS ROUTES THAT REQUIRE PASSENGERS TO BE OFFLOADED ALONG A MULTI-LANE HIGHWAY.
The Committee reported favorable on H.3410, a bill regarding the DEPARTMENT OF ARCHIVES AND HISTORY, WHICH ELIMINATES THE STATE BUDGET AND CONTROL BOARD FROM THE RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE APPROVAL PROCESS and which eliminates the requirement that the general schedules for records series common to agencies and subdivisions be developed as state regulations.
The Committee reported favorable on H.3050, a bill which ESTABLISHES SPECIAL CRITERIA FOR AWARDING PALMETTO FELLOWS SCHOLARSHIPS TO STUDENTS GRADUATING IN 2003 AND THEREAFTER WHO ATTEND "MAGNET" SCHOOLS, as those schools are defined in the bill.
The bill provides that students in magnet schools who meet all criteria for applying for the Palmetto Fellows Scholarship except for rank in class, may use the rank in class from the high school he or she would have attended had there been no magnet school, so long as the application does not cause the regular high school to exceed the five percent limitation from its sophomore or junior class for these scholarships.
The bill requires and provides for official documentation from the regular high school that the magnet school student is within the top five percent of either the sophomore or junior class.
The Committee recommended referring H.3607 to the Anderson delegation.
This joint resolution provides that CERTAIN SCHOOL DAYS MISSED BY STUDENTS IN SCHOOL DISTRICT 1 OF ANDERSON COUNTY WHEN THE SCHOOL WAS CLOSED DUE TO WEATHER CONDITIONS ARE EXEMPT FROM THE STATE MAKE-UP REQUIREMENT for days missed.
LABOR, COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY The full House Labor, Commerce and Industry Committee met on Tuesday, March 4, and gave a report of favorable with amendments on H.3616, the "SOUTH CAROLINA HIGH-COST AND CONSUMER HOME LOANS ACT."
This legislation addresses practices commonly referred to as predatory lending in which borrowers with few lending options or limited knowledge about personal finance are targeted to enter into agreements characterized by exorbitant fees and misleading practices.
The legislation:
* Defines "high-cost" loan (interest rate exceeds T-Bill + 8% on first mortgages or 10% on subordinate loans or points and fees equal to or greater than 5% total loan amount) and consumer loan.
* Prohibits certain provisions, such as, negative amortization, interest increase, balloon payments, and acceleration.
* Requires additional disclosure for the borrower and provides that the lender must reasonably believe the borrower can repay the debt.
* Prohibits financing of certain fees and charging fees on an existing loan being refinanced.
* Prohibits financing of points and fees exceeding 5% of total loan amount.
* Regulates payments from the proceeds to a contractor.
* Prohibits "flipping" a consumer home loan defined as the making of a consumer home loan that refinances an existing consumer home loan of the borrower when the new loan is made within less than twelve months of the previous loan and does not have a reasonable, tangible net benefit to the borrower, considering all the circumstances, including the terms of both the new and refinanced loans, the cost of the new loan, and the borrower's circumstances.
* Provides for remedies and penalties for violations.
The legislation allows one to elect to recover damages under the Unfair Trade Practice Act.
* Provides the lender a good faith safe harbor for correcting any errors within 30 days after closing or 90 days after discovery, in favor of the borrower.
* Loan Agreement may not identify a state other then South Carolina as choice of law, unless allowed by federal law.
* Prohibits counties and municipalities from enacting ordinances or laws regarding consumer or high-cost home loans.
* Prohibits prepayment penalties for loans less than $150,000.
* Provides a definition of a short-term vehicle secured loan, limitations on a title loan period, limits interest accruing after 11th renewal period and provides the borrower three equal installments to satisfy the loan, the lender must have a good faith belief of the borrower's ability to repay the loan, cannot make a loan more than the fair market value of the vehicle, and the sole remedy for the lender, except in the event of fraud, is repossession and the sale of the vehicle - surplus going to the borrower.
* Provides for additional disclosure for manufactured homes, at least 2 days prior to closing, on credit sales and purchase secured by real estate.
Additionally, prohibits class action and provides the lender a good faith safe harbor for correcting any errors within 60 days after discovery, in favor of the borrower.
MEDICAL, MILITARY, PUBLIC AND MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS The House Medical, Military, Public, and Municipal Affairs Committee adjourned debate on H.3191, the "ACCESS TO MEDICAL TREATMENT ACT." ______________________________________________________________
BILLS INTRODUCED IN THE HOUSE THIS WEEK
AGRICULTURE, NATURAL RESOURCES, AND ENVIRONMENTAL AFFAIRS H.3719 PROPERTY OF BELLE W. BARUCH FOUNDATION Rep. Miller This bill provides that it is unlawful for a person other than a trustee, employee, or agent of the Belle W. Baruch Foundation, or a person authorized by the foundation, to trap, hunt, molest, or attempt to molest any bird, wild fowl, or game within the refuge, or to trespass in any manner upon the foundation property for that purpose.
EDUCATION AND PUBLIC WORKS S.70 HIGH SCHOOL DIPLOMAS FOR CERTAIN VETERANS Sen. Moore This bill provides that a South Carolinian who enlisted in the U.S. military while enrolled as a South Carolina high school student between June 25, 1950 and July 27, 1953, must be issued a high school diploma upon presentation of documentation as provided in the bill, and a posthumous diploma must be awarded to such person upon the request of a family member.
S.420 PROMOTIONAL CARS AT NASCAR EVENTS Sen. Leatherman This joint resolution provides that cars provided by automobile manufacturers for promotional purposes in connection with a nationally sponsored NASCAR Race held in South Carolina in 2003 are exempt from certain motor vehicle titling, licensing, and registration requirements.
The bill limits the exemption to a maximum of thirty-five cars by a single manufacturer, for a maximum period of twenty-one days.
H.3714 "SOUTH CAROLINA EDUCATION AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT" Rep. Townsend This bill requires the Department of Education to develop a curriculum which provides elementary, middle, and high school students with individualized educational, academic, and career-oriented choices and greater exposure to career information and opportunities.
The provisions of the bill do not apply to private schools or home schools.
The bill requires that school districts provide career awareness activities to elementary students; provide programs which allow middle school students to identify career interests and abilities and align them with clusters of study for the development of individualized graduation plans; and provide high school students with guidance and curricula that will enable them to complete these individual graduation plans, preparing them for a successful transition to relevant employment, further training, or postsecondary study.
Individual graduation plans are student-specific educational plans detailing the courses necessary for the student to prepare for graduation and transition into the workforce or other post-secondary educational experiences.
The bill creates within the Department of Education (the Department), the Education and Economic Development Project Office to oversee implementation of the bill's provisions, a procedure which the bill requires to be complete by July 1, 2008, at which time the Office is abolished.
The bill provides for pilot projects to be conducted by the Department during school year 2003-2004, implementing the clusters of study system in selected school districts and schools, and implementing the Career Guidance Model of the Comprehensive Developmental Guidance and counseling Program Model in schools in which a pilot project for the clusters of study model is being conducted.
The bill requires that before July 1, 2004: the Department shall develop state models and prototypes for individual graduation plans and the curriculum framework for career clusters of study; and school districts shall organize high school curricula around clusters of study and cluster majors and shall promote increased awareness and career counseling by providing access to the South Carolina Occupational Information System for all schools or another occupational information system.
The bill requires and provides for the Department to implement, beginning with the 2003-2004 school year, a specified career development plan for educational professionals in career guidance that provides awareness, training, release time, and preparatory instruction.
The bill specifies relevant activities and programs regarding guidance models, counseling and programs on clusters of study, individual graduation plans, which must be implemented in schools and in districts on a phased-in basis.
The bill requires that by the 2006-2007 school year, the ratio of students to guidance personnel in middle and high schools must be three hundred to one, and the bill specifies certain counseling which must be provided during the 2006-2007 year to assist students in fulfilling their individual graduation plans.
The bill requires each high school to implement the "High Schools That Work" program by 2007-2008, and requires the Department to revise high school graduation requirements to fit the career cluster system by July 1, 2008.
The bill includes requirements which an individual graduation plan must provide and/or include.
The bill includes requirements for districts regarding students who are at risk for achieving the next level of study or for dropping out of school, and also provides for parental participation as an integral component of the clusters of study system.
The bill creates and provides for the Education and Economic Development Coordinating Council (the Council) to oversee and facilitate the provisions and requirements of the bill.
The bill requires the Council to designate regional education service centers to coordinate and facilitate the delivery of information, resources, and services to students educators, employers, and the community.
The bill delineates responsibilities and requirements for these center.
The bill provides requirements for the South Carolina Employment Security Commission, in collaboration with the State Board for Technical and Comprehensive Education and the Commission on Higher Education, to assist the Department in planning and promoting the career and employment programs provided for in the bill.
The bill provides items relevant to the purposes of the bill for colleges of education to include as degree requirements beginning with the 2004-2005 academic year, and the bill requires the Department to develop performance standards in these areas and include them as criteria for certification of teachers, counselors, and school administrators.
The bill requires and provides for school districts, two-year colleges, and four-year colleges and universities to enter into articulation agreements before July 1, 2004.
The bill provides additional traits which must be incorporated into character education programs and provides additional school reporting requirements under the provisions of the Education Accountability Act.
H.3733 PROHIBITION AGAINST MOVING BECK ACADEMY Rep. F.N. Smith This bill prohibits the Greenville School Board from moving the location of Beck Academy until approval by the General Assembly.
H.3738 TRANSFER OF CERTAIN TWO-YEAR HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS Rep. Stille Effective July 1, 2003, this bill establishes the State Board for Community Colleges and Technical and Comprehensive Education (the Board), currently known as the State Board for Technical and Comprehensive Education, and transfers to it the two-year campuses of USC-Lancaster, USC-Salkehatchie, USC-Union, and USC-Sumter.
The bill creates and provides for a nine member area commission for each of these two-year campuses, to be appointed by the Governor.
The bill requires the Board to file plans before June 30, 2003, broadening the curricula in these two-year campuses to include technical education as well as the current college parallel curricula.
The Board is also empowered to revise education program offerings by two-year institutions under its jurisdiction and located in the same community, to avoid duplication and excessive costs.
H.3739 REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVERS STOPPED BY A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER Rep. Ceips This bill requires the operator of a vehicle to activate the vehicle's interior lights when stopped by a law enforcement officer.
The bill provides that violation of this provision is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars.
The twenty-five dollar fines must be transferred to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer and must be used to purchase law enforcement equipment.
JUDICIARY H.3722 AUTHORITY TO VIEW AUTOPSY PHOTOGRAPHS AND VIDEOS FOR EDUCATIONAL AND SCIENTIFIC PURPOSES Rep. Jennings This bill revises restrictions on viewing photographs and videos of autopsies so as to provide that a medical examiner, coroner, or physician in lawful possession of a photograph, a video, or audio recording of an autopsy, or any other visual image of an autopsy, after redacting all information identifying the decedent to include his name, address, and social security number, and after anonymizing facial recognition, may use the visual image or recording for: (1) medical scientific teaching or training purposes; (2) teaching or training of law enforcement personnel; (3) teaching or training of attorneys or other individuals with a professional need to use or understand forensic science; (4) conferring with medical or scientific experts in the field of forensic science; or (5) publication in a scientific or medical journal or textbook.
H.3723 DEATH BY A VEHICLE ESTABLISHED AS A MISDEMEANOR OFFENSE Rep. Walker This bill establishes death by a vehicle as a misdemeanor offense and provides a penalty.
H.3726 INTERFERENCE WITH CHILD CUSTODY Rep. Harrison This bill revises provisions relating to interference with a child custody order, so as to provide circumstances in which a law enforcement officer may recover a child whom he believes has been taken or is being withheld from his legal custodian.
The bill provides a penalty for a person who knowingly gives false information to a law enforcement officer during the course of a dispute involving the custody of a child.
H.3727 NATIONAL GUARD AND STATE GUARD IN THE SOUTH CAROLINA TORT CLAIMS ACT Rep. J. E. Smith This bill revises definitions used in the South Carolina Tort Claims Act, so as to include the South Carolina National Guard and the South Carolina State Guard in certain definitions.
The bill further provides that an employee includes members of the South Carolina National Guard, members of the South Carolina State Guard, and persons acting on behalf or in service of a governmental unit without pay or compensation.
The bill revises exemptions to the waiver of immunity in the State Tort Claims Act, so as to include certain home security and counter-terrorist activities in the exemption relating to activities of the South Carolina National Guard and the South Carolina State Guard.
S.85 LEGISLATIVE ETHICS COMMITTEES Sen. Hayes This bill revises the powers and duties of the Senate and House of Representatives Ethics Committees, so as to include within them the power to ascertain whether a person has failed to comply fully and accurately with the disclosure requirements and notify the person to file the necessary notices and reports to satisfy the requirements of the Ethics Act.
Responsibilities of these committees is also expanded such that they would receive complaints filed by individuals and to file complaints when alleged violations are identified.
S.143 UNLAWFUL FOR MOTORISTS TO GIVE FALSE IDENTITY INFORMATION TO LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS Sen. Knotts This bill provides that it is unlawful for a person operating a motor vehicle to knowingly and willfully give false information to a law enforcement officer regarding his identity.
Penalties are established for violations.
H.3735 PROHIBITION ON GENERAL ASSEMBLY ELECTING FAMILY MEMBERS Rep. M. A. Pitts This bill prohibits a family member of a member of the General Assembly from being elected to a state board, commission, committee, or office filled by an election held by the General Assembly.
H.3737 NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSE PLATE CONFISCATION Rep. Loftis This bill provides that when a law enforcement officer confiscates a license plate, he shall leave notice at the location where the license plate was confiscated that contains his name and law enforcement agency, the date the license plate was confiscated, the reason it was confiscated, and the location where the license plate is stored.
H.3740 UNLAWFUL FOR SERVICE STATIONS TO SELL CHILLED OR INDIVIDUAL CONTAINERS OF BEER OR WINE Rep. Haskins This bill provides that it is unlawful for a business establishment selling gasoline or other motor fuels and which possesses a permit to sell beer and wine to sell refrigerated or chilled beer and wine.
The bill provides that it unlawful for such establishments to sell fewer than six separate containers of beer to one customer.
Penalties are provided for violations.
H.3744 "SOUTH CAROLINA ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, CITIZENS, AND SMALL BUSINESS PROTECTION ACT OF 2003" Rep. Sandifer This bill enacts the South Carolina Economic Development, Citizens, and Small Business Protection Act of 2003.
This comprehensive legislation includes such provisions as the South Carolina Noneconomic Damage Awards Act of 2003; limitations on the awarding of punitive damages; the Elimination of Double Recoveries Act; limitations on liability for licensed health care providers in certain situations; the "South Carolina Notice and Opportunity to Cure Construction Dwelling Defects Act"; Tort Claims Act revisions; revisions to certain statutes of limitations for bringing certain actions; provisions on several liability; and revisions to the South Carolina Frivolous Civil Proceedings Sanctions Act.
LABOR, COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY H.3720 TAXICAB COMPANIES Rep. Huggins This bill allows a taxi company to comply with certain self-insurer provisions, or deposit a bond instead of insurance in the amount of the minimum statutory limits of insurance required for a vehicle.
The bill provides that a taxicab company that leases a taxicab through an independent contractor agreement must obtain certain liability insurance.
The bill provides that a taxicab company is not required to provide workers' compensation coverage for a driver who leases the company's taxicab as an independent contractor.
H.3721 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY REQUIREMENTS OF SELF-INSURERS FOR MOTOR VEHICLES Rep. Huggins This bill provides that a self-insurer for motor vehicles may use an irrevocable letter of credit issued by certain banks to meet the eighty percent cash deposit requirement.
Compliance with this legislation provides the coverage equivalent to a minimum limits statutory policy for a vehicle as required by law.
H.3729 FEES FOR RESALE OF VACATION TIMESHARING UNITS Rep. Snow This bill revises the fees which may be charged for the resale of ownership interests in vacation timesharing units, so as to provide that an owner may be charged a commission upon the resale of the unit in addition to (rather than instead of) an up-front marketing fee.
MEDICAL, MILITARY, PUBLIC AND MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS H.3725 BARBER LICENSE REQUIREMENTS Rep. R. Brown This bill revises the license renewal requirement for master haircare specialists and other barber professionals from every year to every other year.
WAYS AND MEANS S.29 PROHIBITIONS APPLYING TO PERSONS WHO DO NOT COMPLY WITH FEDERAL MILITARY SELECTIVE SERVICE ACT Sen. Knotts This bill bars, except as specified in the bill, a male age eighteen or older who is not in compliance with the federal Military Selective Service Act from service or employment with the State or a political subdivision of the State.
The bill also provides that a person may not receive any higher education financial assistance funded by state revenue unless the person files a statement of selective service status with the entity granting such assistance.
S.131 IN-STATE TUITION FOR COAST GUARD DEPENDENTS Sen. Giese This bill provides that members of the Coast Guard and their dependents are considered eligible for in-state tuition rates during the period of their assignment to duty in South Carolina.
S.144 EMPLOYEES WHO ARE PHYSICALLY ATTACKED IN THE LINE OF DUTY Sen. Knotts This bill provides that State employees in FTE positions who are physically attacked while in the performance of official duties and suffer bodily harm as a result of the attack must be placed on administrative leave with pay rather than sick leave.
The bill strikes the current provision which provides that permanent full-time state employees who are temporarily disabled as a result of an assault by an inmate, patient, or client must be placed on administrative leave with pay rather than sick leave.
The bill also strikes the provision in this section which requires that, in order to be included in the definition of "immediate family," a grandchild must reside with the employee and the employee is the primary caretaker of the grandchild.
H.3734 AMENDMENT TO SOUTH CAROLINA MINING ACT Rep. Cooper This bill provides that any revenue attributable to increased or additional fees imposed after July 1, 2003 pursuant to the South Carolina Mining Act, must be appropriated by the General Assembly in the general appropriations act for the Department of Health and Environmental Control's mining and reclamation program.
The bill specifies that the funds must be used to provide additional staff for this program and to provide educational and training assistance to South Carolina's mining industry.
H.3736 DEFINITIONS IN MUNICIPAL IMPROVEMENTS ACT AND S.C.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE ACT Rep. Limehouse This bill includes public education facilities for grades K-12 in the definition of "improvements" under the Municipal Improvements Act and in the definition of "public facilities" under the South Carolina Development Impact Fee Act.
H.3741 EXEMPTIONS FROM STATE EMPLOYEES GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ACT Rep. W.D. Smith This bill exempts from the State Employees Grievance Procedure Act employees in a chief of staff or equivalent position, those employees within two managerial levels of the agency head or chief of staff or equivalent position, and any employees earning in excess of eighty thousand dollars a year, excluding academic employees as specified in the bill.
The bill also requires that in 2006 and every four years thereafter, the eighty thousand dollar salary figure must be adjusted to reflect increases in the consumer price index, as provided in the bill.
______________________________________________________________
The Legislative Update is on the Worldwide Web.
Visit the South Carolina General Assembly Home Page (http://www.scstatehouse.net) and click on "Publications," then click on "Legislative Update."
This will list all of the Legislative Updates by date.
Click on the date you need.
NOTE: THE LEGISLATIVE UPDATE IS AVAILABLE TO LEGISLATIVE TRACKING SUBSCRIBERS.
