Newsstand - TPW TPW News Media Contacts: Business Hours (512) 389-8046 news@tpwd.state.tx.us June 29, 1998 Canadians Train at Big Bend Ranch for Mid-East Trek PRESIDIO, Texas -- Three Canadian adventurers, including one who climbed Mount Everest in May 1997, will train in desert survival techniques at Big Bend Ranch State Park in West Texas this July in preparation for a grueling 800-mile expedition across the Empty Quarter in the Middle East in November.
From July 7-11, the group will train at Big Bend Ranch, where park naturalist David Alloway has been leading desert survival workshops for years.
These workshops are typically open to the public for any adventurous person in reasonable health, not strictly for experts or professional adventurers or guides.
However, in this case, Alloway has prepared a special program just for the three Canadians.
Before and after their training at Big Bend Ranch, the group will travel to nearby Uvalde, Texas, for camel riding training.
Decades ago, the U.S. Army tried to introduce camels for use in deserts of the Southwestern United States.
Vision Quest of Uvalde, which works with at-risk youth and also re-enacts the historical activities of the U.S. Army Camel Corps using real dromedaries, will provide the camels
.
Jamie Clarke, 29, is a professional speaker, author and adventurer, the 10th Canadian to reach the summit of Mount Everest on May 23, 1997, and a former national champion cross-country skier.
His book Power of Passion tells the story of his first two Everest experiences.
He trekked through the Wadi Rum desert in Jordan in 1990.
Leigh Clarke, 32, is a Calgary-based lawyer and experienced mountaineer and solo adventurer familiar with desert travel, an Everest expedition co-organizer and former guide in the Canadian Badlands desert.
Bruce Kirby, 30, is a full time wilderness guide and photographer who has led wilderness trips around the globe, including rafting on Canadian Arctic rivers, jungle explorations in Central America and sea kayaking in Caribbean cayes.
He coordinated communications for the 1997 Everest expedition, and has biked through Asia and done desert travel in the Southwestern U.S., New Zealand and India.
In November 1998, the three will attempt the first crossing of the Empty Quarter in modern times, a massive undertaking.
At about 250,000 square miles, the Empty Quarter is the world's largest sand desert.
Journeying with local Bedouins and their camel teams, the 40-day expedition will leave from Salala, Oman on the Arabian Sea and traverse the center of the Empty Quarter to the legendary oasis of Liwa, lying in the southern United Arab Emirates.
Alloway, who has been teaching U.S. Air Force pilots, Customs agents and others desert survival at Big Bend Ranch since 1994, became in 1996 the first non-Australian to complete the Pilbara Trek, a 10-day, 120-mile hike across one of the country's most forbidding regions to the Indian Ocean.
Alloway's students learn to locate water in arid environs, find natural shelter and identify edible plants, and view archeological sites to discover prehistoric peoples survived in a seemingly hostile environment.
Other subjects covered include psychological outlook, primitive fire making and cooking, shelter construction, aiding searchers and expedient tool and weapon making.
Alloway's survival philosophy emphasizes that one should not depend on dubious "survival tools" and tricks, but must learn to integrate oneself into the ecosystem.
The fragility of desert environments and the need to protect them are also incorporated into the instructional program.
Big Bend Ranch State Park desert survival workshops for the general public typically cost $350 for three days.
Reservations are still available for this year's remaining workshop dates: Oct. 23-25, Nov. 20-22 and Dec. 4-6.
To make a reservation or find out about other Big Bend Ranch programs, call (915) 229-3416.
TH 6/29/98
Home | Hunting | Fishing | Boating | Parks 
Please send comments, suggestions or questions to Texas Parks and Wildlife, 4200 Smith School Road, Austin, TX, US, 78744 or click on the address to send an e-mail.
tpwnews
