CHAPTER 3 STATE SEAL, FLAG, FLOWER, BIRD AND OTHER SYMBOLS 8-3-101.
Great seal of the state of Wyoming.
There shall be a great seal of the state of Wyoming, which shall be of the following design, viz: A circle one and one-half (1 1/2) inches in diameter, on the outer edge or rim of which shall be engraved the words "Great Seal of the State of Wyoming."
The design shall conform substantially to the following description: A pedestal, showing on the front thereof an eagle resting upon a shield, the shield to have engraved thereon a star and the figures, "44," being the number of Wyoming in the order of admission to statehood.
Standing upon the pedestal shall be a draped figure of a woman, modeled after the statue of the "Victory of the Louvre," from whose wrists shall hang links of a broken chain, and holding in her right hand a staff from the top of which shall float a banner with the words "Equal Rights" thereon, all suggesting the political position of woman in this state.
On either side of the pedestal and standing at the base thereof, shall be male figures typifying the livestock and mining industries of Wyoming.
Behind the pedestal, and in the background, shall be two (2) pillars, each supporting a lighted lamp, signifying the light of knowledge.
Around each pillar shall be a scroll with the following words thereon: On the right of the central figure the words "Livestock" and "Grain," and on the left the words "Mines" and "Oil."
At the base of the pedestal, and in front, shall appear the figures "1869-1890," the former date signifying the organization of the territory of Wyoming and the latter the date of its admission to statehood.
8-3-102.
Adoption, use and specifications of state flag; penalty for misuse.
(a) A state flag is adopted to be used on all occasions when the state is officially and publicly represented.
All citizens have the privilege of use of the flag upon any occasion they deem appropriate.
The width of the flag shall be seven-tenths (7/10) of its length; the outside border shall be in red, the width of which shall be one-twentieth (1/20) of the length of the flag; next to the border shall be a stripe of white on the four (4) sides of the field, which shall be in width one-fortieth (1/40) of the length of the flag.
The remainder of the flag shall be a blue field, in the center of which shall be a white silhouetted buffalo, the length of which shall be one-half (1/2) of the length of the blue field; the other measurements of the buffalo shall be in proportion to its length.
On the ribs of the buffalo shall be the great seal of the state of Wyoming in blue.
The seal shall be in diameter one-fifth (1/5) the length of the flag.
Attached to the flag shall be a cord of gold with gold tassels.
The same colors shall be used in the flag, red, white and blue, as are used in the flag of the United States of America.
(b) All penalties provided by the laws of this state for the misuse of the national flag are applicable to the state flag.
8-3-103.
State historian to purchase state flags; use.
It is the duty of the state historian to purchase not less than six (6) state flags.
The flags shall be kept at the office of the state historian to be loaned under rules and regulations he prescribes to any citizen, or group of citizens, of the state for use on such occasions when the state is officially and publicly represented, or when public assemblies or gatherings are held.
If any flag is borrowed from the office of the state historian, the citizen, or group of citizens, borrowing the flag shall deposit with the state historian a certified check in an amount sufficient to repair or replace the flag, if damaged or lost.
No deposit is required of any officer of the state government who may be called upon to represent the state at any official function.
8-3-104.
State flower.
The Castillija linariaefolia, commonly called "the Indian paint brush," is the state flower of Wyoming.
8-3-105.
State bird.
An American icteroid bird (genus Sturnella), the bird commonly known as the meadowlark, is the state bird of Wyoming.
8-3-106.
State tree.
The Populus Sargentii commonly called cottonwood tree, is the state tree of Wyoming.
8-3-107.
State motto.
The motto "Equal Rights," as it exists on the great seal of the state of Wyoming, is the official motto of Wyoming.
8-3-108.
State song.
The march song entitled "Wyoming," words by Charles E. Winter and music by George E. Knapp, is the official state song of Wyoming.
8-3-109.
State stone.
Jade is the official gemstone of Wyoming.
8-3-110.
Flag code for Wyoming.
(a) The Federal Flag Code, P.L. 94-344, as enacted by the United States Congress on July 7, 1976, is adopted as the flag code for the state of Wyoming.
(b)
In addition to specified dates for display of the flag, authorized by Section 2(d) of P.L. 94-344 [36 U.S.C. 174(d)], the United States flag may be displayed in this state on Wyoming Day, December 10, and on July 10, the day Wyoming was admitted to the Union
.
8-3-111.
State mammal.
The Bison bison, commonly called the American bison or buffalo, is the state mammal of Wyoming.
8-3-112.
State fossil.
The fossilized fish Knightia is the state fossil of Wyoming.
8-3-113.
State fish.
The Salmo clarki, commonly known as the cutthroat trout, is the state fish of Wyoming.
8-3-114.
State territorial flag.
(a) The state territorial flag shall be a flag with a field of blue, the name "WYOMING" printed across the top of the flag and the phrase, "CEDANT ARMA TOGAE" printed across the bottom of the flag.
In the center of the flag shall be a shield with a border of gold divided into three (3) parts:
(i) The top half of the shield shall have the numbers "1869" across the top and depict mountains and a train;
(ii) The lower left part of the shield shall depict a staff, shovel, plow and pick; and
(iii) The lower right part of the shield shall depict an arm and hand holding a sword.
(b) The provisions of W.S. 8-3-102(a) on the display and use of the state flag shall be applicable to the display and use of the state territorial flag.
8-3-115.
State reptile.
The eastern short-horned lizard (Phrynosoma douglassi brevirostre (Girad)) commonly known as the horned toad, is the state reptile of Wyoming.
8-3-116.
State dinosaur.
A state dinosaur shall be designated by election in accordance with law.
The results of the election naming the state dinosaur shall be filed with the secretary of state.
8-3-117.
"Bucking Horse and Rider" and related trademarks.
(a) The secretary of state shall promulgate rules regulating the licensing or other authorized use of the "Bucking Horse and Rider" and related trademarks.
(b) Any licensing fees, royalties or other revenues collected by the secretary of state under this section shall be deposited into an account within the enterprise fund.
The legislature shall by appropriation authorize expenditures from the account as necessary to defray administrative expenses associated with licensing of the trademark and expenditures required to protect, preserve and promote the "Bucking Horse and Rider" and related trademarks on behalf of the state.
8-3-118.
POW/MIA flags.
(a) The National League of Families POW/MIA flag, recognized by the United States Congress in P.L. 101-355 and other federal laws, is authorized and shall continue to be displayed directly beneath the national flag on state capitol grounds.
All other state leased or owned buildings and offices that fly the national flag may also fly the POW/MIA flag directly beneath the national flag on any day upon which the national flag is displayed.
Any state agency, board or commission having authority for the supervision, control or management of a state leased or owned building or office is authorized to adopt rules relating to the display of the POW/MIA flag at the state leased or owned building or office pursuant to this section.
(b) Any county, city, town or political subdivision of the state may display the POW/MIA flag directly beneath the national flag on any day upon which the national flag is displayed.
(c) All protocols used in displaying national flags shall be used in displaying the POW/MIA flag.
All penalties provided by the laws of this state for the misuse of the national flag are applicable to the POW/MIA flag.
(d) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the acquisition, erection and maintenance of a flagpole or the display of the POW/MIA flag where a pole or display of the national flag does not already exist.
8-3-119.
Rodeo as the state sport.
Rodeo is hereby designated the official state sport of Wyoming.
