[lmiclogofornewhomepage.gif] Labor Market Information Center South Dakota Department of Labor Service and quality you can count on.
LMIC Home South Dakota Home Department of Labor Home Search Feedback Contact Us
From inkwell to Internet: the history of the US Census
This article was published in the May 2002 South Dakota Labor Bulletin.
Taking the Census" after a sketch by Thomas Worth, Harpers Weekly, November 16, 1870.
The first US Census was conducted in 1790, shortly after George Washington became the first president.
Congressional members had decided that population would determine the number of seats each state was to have in the US House of Representatives, as well as the states' respective shares in paying for the Revolutionary War.
In order to ensure continued fair representation in the House, the census was to be conducted every ten years.
Through the years, the census has been utilized to gather more detailed information regarding the population, including income, employment and housing statistics.
Although the primary reason for the census continues to be the determination of the number of seats in the House, census data also provides the statistical basis for many other decision-making purposes, including appropriations of federal funding.
The Early Years
Congress assigned responsibility for the first census to the U.S. marshals, under an act that governed census taking through 1840.
Law required that the returns be made in a specified form, but the marshals had to furnish their own paper, and wrote in the headings themselves with ink quill pens.
The six inquiries in 1790 called for the name of the head of the family and the number of persons in each household of the following descriptions:
ü Free White males of 16 years and upward (to assess the country's industrial and military potential)
ü Free White males under 16 years
ü Free White females
ü All other free persons (by sex and color)
ü Slaves
Every household had to be visited, and completed census schedules were to be posted in public places "for the inspection of all concerned..."
The first census (which took 18 months to complete) counted 3.9 million inhabitants and raised membership in the US House of Representatives from an original of 65 to 105.
As time progressed, the nation's needs and interests became more complex.
Statistics were needed to understand what was happening in our nation and to provide a basis for planning.
The content of the census changed accordingly through the years as new needs arose.
In 1810, the census included the first inquiry on manufacturing and quantity and value of products.
The 1830 census was expanded to collect more detailed information regarding the population, and the 1840 census included inquiries regarding agriculture, mining and fisheries.
The censuses also spread geographically, to new states and territories added to the union, as well as to other areas under US sovereignty or jurisdiction.
During this time period, uniform printed census forms were introduced, making life a little easier for the marshals and their assistants.
The act that governed the censuses of 1850, 1860 and 1870 made several procedural changes.
Each marshal was now responsible for subdividing his district into "known civil divisions," such as counties, townships, or wards, and for checking to ensure that the assistants' returns were completed properly.
The number of population inquiries grew; every free person's name was to be listed, as were the items relating to each individual enumerated.
The marshals also collected additional "social statistics" -- information about taxes, schools, crime, wages and data on mortality.
Noteworthy features of the 1870 census included the introduction of a rudimentary tallying device to help the census clerks in their work and the publication of maps, charts, and diagrams to illustrate the most significant census results.
This was also the last census in which US Marshals supervised the enumeration.
Although Census Bureau work was only a small part of their regular duties, they could not give it adequate time and attention.
For the 1880 census, Congress established a census office in the US Department of the Interior, with census supervisors to be appointed by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
Each supervisor was to select the enumerators, who were forbidden to disclose any of the information they collected.
These changes improved public relations and the collection process.
However, the census office was not yet permanent.
The census organization still had to begin anew every ten years; a large staff had to be recruited, learn its duties, and was then disbanded when the census was completed.
In 1890, supplemental surveys were used to collect data on farm and home mortgages, and private corporations' and individuals' indebtedness.
The 1890 census also used, for the first time in history, a separate schedule for each family.
There were so many more inquiries of all kinds in the censuses of 1880 and 1890 that almost a full decade was needed to publish all the results.
Herman Hollerith, who had been a special agent for the 1880 census, developed punchcards and electric tabulating machines in time to process the 1890 census returns, reducing considerably the time needed to complete the clerical work.
Hollerith's venture became part of what is now the IBM Corporation.
Both the cards and the machines were used and improved progressively over the next 50 years.
A New Century
Although the census was furnishing large quantities of statistics, it was failing to provide information when it was most needed.
Therefore, Congress limited questions in the 1900 census to population, manufacturing, agriculture and mortality.
Many of the dropped topics did resurface in later censuses as advances in technology made it possible to process and publish data faster.
The 1900 census was also the last census that was conducted from a `recurring' office.
In 1902, Congress authorized the President to set up a permanent Census Office in the Interior Department.
The Bureau moved to the new Department of Commerce and Labor in 1903 and continued with the Commerce Department when the Labor Department was split off in 1913.
In 1920, a separate quinquennial (every 5 years) census of agriculture census was established.
This census collected information on farm machinery, farm facilities, land use and ownership, value of products sold and data about various kinds of expenses.
This special census was needed to gather information to keep pace with the advances in agriculture, such as changes in irrigation, pest control, the use of chemical fertilizers, and mechanized farming.
Technological changes in agriculture became more rapid during the 20th century, and conditions needed to be measured more often.
Provided by US Census Bureau "Photo Zone.
The 1930 population census added inquires regarding employment status.
The 1940 census also added inquiries to measure employment and unemployment, internal migration, and income--reflecting the concerns of the Depression years.
It was also the first to include a census of housing, which obtained a variety of facts on the general condition of the nation's housing and the need for public housing programs.
The Census Bureau began using statistical sampling techniques in the 1940's in order to gather data on most of the subjects without unduly burdening the respondents.
Further assistance came through the use of electronic computers in the 1950's and mail enumeration in the 1960's.
All of these advances made it possible to publish more data sooner and at a lower cost, with less burden on the public that had to provide the information.
In order to fully integrate the economic data being gathered in the population censuses, a separate economic census was established in the early 1950's.
An economic census is an enumeration of business establishments.
The economic census traces its beginnings to the 1810 census, which included questions regarding manufacturing.
The collection of demographic and economic data was actually split into different canvasses at the start of the century.
However, economic coverage was expanded in subsequent censuses, and the added inquiries stimulated the development of a separate economic census.
The 1954 Economic Census was the first census to be fully integrated; providing comparable census data across economic sectors using consistent time periods, concepts, definitions, classifications and reporting units.
The economic census was taken in 1954, 1958, 1963, and in five-year intervals since 1967.
A separate census of governments was also incorporated in 1957, collecting data regarding state and local governments.
(Legislation enacted in 1948 and later years specified that the various economic, agriculture, and government censuses would be taken at times that did not conflict with those in which the population and housing censuses occurred.)
Into the Present
The 1960 census was the first in which mailings were used extensively to collect population and housing data.
Subsequent censuses were taken principally by mail -- approximately 60 percent of the population in 1970, 90 percent in 1980, and 94 percent in 1990.
For the remainder of the population, most of which was located in rural areas or small towns, postal carriers left a census form containing the 100 percent questions at each residential housing unit on their routes.
An enumerator visited each of these households to collect the completed questionnaires and ask the additional questions for any household or housing unit in the sample.
These procedures were continued, with modifications, through the 1990 census.
The US Postal Service delivered 98 million Census 2000 questionnaires to about 83 percent of the nation's residences.
The questionnaire packages consist of about 83 million short forms (seven questions) and 15 million long forms (52 questions).
Census enumerators personally delivered about 22 million additional forms to homes that did not have street-name and house-number addresses, mostly in rural and remote areas.
These represent about 17 percent of the nation's housing units.
Overall, the response rate for Census 2000 was 67%, which exceeds the 65% response rate from the 1990 census.
How important are Census statistics?
Ever since 1790, the population census statistics have been the official figures used every 10 years to compute the number of congressional representatives allowed each state, and also in conformity with the Supreme Court's 1965 one-man-one-vote ruling, to align congressional district boundaries so that each member of Congress represents approximately the same number of people.
For the same reason, the census figures are used in redistricting state legislatures and other local governing bodies.
In recent years, many federal, state and local government plans and revenue sharing programs have been based by law on factors calculated from census statistics for population, per capita personal income and geographic distribution.
Likewise, census data of all types - population, housing, and transportation - are crucial for market analysis, for planning new services and facilities, for affirmative action programs, for studying environmental impact and for basic research in academic fields.
Thus, it is even more important now than it was in 1790 that every person and business establishment be counted and that the information be complete.
Local Sources of Data
The State Data Center (SDC) Program is one of the Census Bureau's longest and most successful partnerships.
It is a cooperative program between the states and the Census Bureau that was created in 1978 to make data available locally to the public through a network of state agencies, universities, libraries, and regional and local governments.
SDC lead organizations are appointed by the Governor of each state.
The SDC program's mission is to provide easy and efficient access to US Census Bureau data and information through a wide network of lead, coordinating and affiliate agencies in each state.
In South Dakota, the State Data Center is the Business Reserch Bureau located on the University of South Dakota (USD) campus in Vermillion.
The SDC is a repository of US Census Bureau publications and databases.
The objectives of the SDC are to expand the orientation and technical assistance in data access and its uses in research, administration, planning, and decision-making by state and local governments, the business community, educational institutions, and other users.
The SDC also prepares population estimates for South Dakota counties.
The Labor Market Information Center (LMIC) is designated as a coordinating agency.
As a coordinating agency, responsibilities include data dissemination, data analysis and customized product development.
Where data are available
Published census statistics are available to anyone that needs them.
Public and academic libraries across the country have access to the printed reports, and many of them have the reports on microfiche or computer tape.
Many data products are still available for the 1980 and 1990 censuses, with some of the data available on the Internet.
Current census data, including economic census data, can be accessed through the Census Bureau's homepage at http://www.census.gov/
Historical census data can be accessed through the US Historical Census Data Browser website.
It includes data for the United States, each state and county from 1790 to 1970.
You can access this data at: http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/census/
Condensed from Factfinder for the Nation, issued May 2000, US Census Bureau.
Photo Credits: Cover - "Taking the Census" after a sketch by Thomas Worth, Harper's Weekly, November 16, 1870.
Page 3 - "Provided by US Census Bureau "Photo Zone."
?
If you have questions or need more information, contact Bernie Moran of the Labor Market Information Center at (605) 626-2314 or e-mail her at bernie.moran@state.sd.us.
