7078-1:N:02/17/1998:JRC/sn LRS1998-2070 HB766 By Representatives Sanderford, McDaniel, Hall (A) and Rogers (J) RFD State Administration Rd 1 26-FEB-1998 SYNOPSIS: Existing law does not provide for the licensing and regulating of assisted living administrators.
This bill would provide for the licensing and regulating of assisted living administrators in a manner similar to nursing home administrators.
This bill would require assisted living administrators to be licensed and would establish a board of examiners for assisted living administrators.
This bill would provide for the appointment of members to the board and their functions and duties.
This bill would provide for the review of decisions made by the board of examiners and authorize the board to receive and spend funds.
This bill would create the Board of Examiners of Assisted Living Administrators Fund and make an appropriation for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1999.
This bill would provide for the governing body of the Alabama Association of Assisted Living Facilities to serve as an advisory council to the board of examiners.
This bill would also establish the procedures for examination and licensing of assisted living administrators and would provide for license reciprocity with other states.
This bill would require the board of examiners to establish continuing education requirements for licensees.
This bill would authorize the board of examiners to conduct disciplinary proceedings, to impose fines, and to revoke or suspend licenses.
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED AN ACT
Relating to assisted living administrators, to require the licensing of assisted living administrators; to establish a board of examiners for assisted living administrators and provide for the appointment of board members and their duties and functions; to provide for the review of board decisions and authorize the board to receive and expend funds; to create a board fund; to provide for the governing body of the Alabama Association of Assisted Living Facilities to serve as an advisory council to the board; to establish procedures for examination, licensing, and reciprocity of licenses for assisted living administrators; to require continuing education for assisted living administrators; to authorize the board to conduct disciplinary proceedings, impose fines, and revoke and suspend licenses; to provide for an appropriation for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1999; and to prescribe penalties for violations of this act.
BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF ALABAMA:
Section 1.
For purposes of this act, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
(1) ASSISTED LIVING ADMINISTRATOR.
Any individual who is charged with the general administration of an assisted living facility, whether or not the individual has an ownership interest in the facility, and whether or not his or her functions and duties are shared with one or more other individuals.
(2) ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY.
Any institution or facility defined as such for licensing purposes under state law.
(3) BOARD.
The board of examiners of assisted living administrators of the state of Alabama, created pursuant to Section 3.
(4) EXAMINER.
A member of the board.
(5) PRACTICE OF ASSISTED LIVING ADMINISTRATION.
The planning, organizing, directing, and control of the operation of an assisted living facility.
(6) PROVISIONAL ASSISTED LIVING ADMINISTRATOR.
An individual who has been issued a provisional license by the board.
(7) PROVISIONAL LICENSE.
A temporary license issued to a provisional assisted living administrator by the board.
(8) SECRETARY.
The secretary of the board.
Section 2.
On and after January 1, 2000, no assisted living facility in the state may operate unless it is under the supervision of an administrator who holds a currently valid assisted living administrator's license, or provisional license, issued by the board.
No person shall practice or offer to practice assisted living administration in this state or use any title, sign, card, or device to indicate that he or she is an assisted living administrator unless the person shall have been duly licensed as an assisted living administrator or as a provisional assisted living administrator.
In the event an assisted living administrator dies, unexpectedly resigns, becomes incapacitated, or has his or her license revoked, the person or persons then responsible for the management of the assisted living facility shall immediately notify the board and the agency issuing the assisted living facility license and shall be allowed a reasonable period of time in which to replace the administrator, in accordance with policies adopted by the board and established by the agency issuing the assisted living facility license, but not to exceed 180 days from the date of the death, unexpected resignation, incapacitation, or revocation of the license of the assisted living administrator.
During this reasonable period of time, the board may issue an emergency permit to a person performing the functions of administrator in the assisted living facility without being in violation of the provisions of this act.
Section 3.
(a) There is hereby created a board of examiners of assisted living administrators composed of 10 members, nine original members as set out in this subsection, and an additional consumer member as set out in subsection (b).
The membership of the board shall be inclusive and reflect the racial, gender, geographic, urban/rural, and economic diversity of the state.
The nine original members shall be composed as follows: Five members shall be assisted living administrators duly licensed and registered under this act; one member shall be a physician licensed under the laws of the state who is actively concerned in a practice with the care of chronically ill and infirm, aged patients; one member shall be a registered social worker with five years' experience in assisted living; one member shall be a registered nurse, licensed in Alabama, who has five years' experience as a geriatric nurse; and one shall be a licensed nursing home administrator, nominated by the Alabama Nursing Home Association, who in the same or contiguous facility manages assisted living beds.
Appointments to the board for those positions to be held by assisted living administrators shall be made by the Governor from a list of three nominees for each position to be submitted to the Governor by the Alabama Association of Assisted Living Facilities.
The appointment to the board of the member for the position to be held by a physician shall be made by the Governor from a list of three nominees to be submitted by the Medical Association of the State of Alabama.
The appointment to the board of the member for the position to be held by a registered social worker shall be made by the Governor from a list of three nominees to be submitted to him by the Alabama social work association.
The appointment to the board of the member for the position to be held by a licensed registered nurse shall be made by the Governor from a list of three nominees to be submitted to him by the Alabama State Nurses Association.
(b) Within 30 days of the effective date of this act, the Governor shall appoint a consumer member of the board.
The consumer member shall vote in all matters except licensure or discipline of licensees or applicants.
No consumer member, or a spouse or immediate family member of a consumer member, shall be a licensee of the board or be employed in the assisted living profession.
(c) All members of the board shall be citizens of the United States and shall be residents of the state.
There shall be at least one board member from each United States Congressional District in the state at all times.
(d) Each member shall serve a three-year term and no board member shall serve more than two consecutive full three-year terms.
All members shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed by the Governor.
(e) The Governor may remove any board member for misconduct, incapacity, incompetence, or neglect of duty after the board member so charged has been served with a written statement of charges and has been given an opportunity to be heard.
Absence from any three consecutive meetings of the board within a calendar year, without cause acceptable to the Governor and the board, shall be deemed cause for removal.
(f) Any vacancy created by the death, resignation, or removal of any board member shall be filled by the Governor for the unexpired term in the same manner as required by this act to make appointments.
(g) Each member of the board shall receive a per diem fee of not less than fifty dollars ($50) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100) to be determined by the board for the time spent in the performance of official duties.
Each member shall be reimbursed for all necessary and proper travel and incidental expenses incurred in implementing this act as is provided to state employees by the laws of the state and regulations of the State Personnel Director.
In setting the per diem fee, the board shall give due consideration to funds which are available for that purpose.
(h) The board shall hold four or more meetings a year.
A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting except as provided in Section 13.
A majority vote of the members present shall be sufficient to transact the business of the board except as provided in Section 13.
Meetings may be called by the chair or by a majority of the members of the board.
Members shall be given seven days' written notice of all meetings.
(i) The board shall annually elect from its members a chair and a vice-chair, at the first meeting of the board held after October 1 of each year, and each shall serve until the first meeting held after October 1 of the following year.
In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of the chair from the board, the vice-chair shall succeed as chair for the remainder of the unexpired term.
In the event of the death, resignation, removal, or succession to the office of chair of a vice-chair, a successor shall be elected by the board to fill the remainder of the unexpired term as vice-chair.
The chair, or in the absence of the chair, the vice-chair, shall preside at all meetings of the board.
The chair of the board may appoint a secretary to the board with the consent of the members of the board who shall serve at the pleasure of the board.
The secretary's salary shall be fixed by the board.
The secretary shall be the executive officer to the board but may not be a member of the board.
The secretary shall have those powers and shall perform those duties as are prescribed by law and the rules and regulations of the board.
A clerk and sufficient deputy clerks to adequately assist the board and secretary in the keeping of the records and in the performance of their duties may be appointed by the board subject to the merit system.
(j) The Alabama Board of Examiners of Assisted Living Administrators is subject to the provisions of the Alabama Sunset Law of 1981, and is classified as an enumerated agency pursuant to Section 41-20-3.
The board shall automatically terminate on October 1, 2002, and every four years thereafter, unless a bill is passed that the board be continued, modified, or reestablished.
Section 4.
(a) It shall be the function and duty of the board to perform the following:
(1) Develop, impose, and enforce standards which shall be met by individuals in order to receive a license as an assisted living administrator, which standards shall be designed to insure that assisted living administrators will be individuals who are of good character and are otherwise suitable and who, by training or experience in the field of institutional administration, are qualified to serve as assisted living administrators.
(2) Develop and apply appropriate techniques, including examinations and investigations, for determining whether an individual meets these standards.
(3) Issue licenses to individuals determined, after application of the techniques, to meet these standards, and revoke or suspend licenses previously issued by the board in any case where the individual holding any license is determined substantially to have failed to conform to the requirements of these standards.
(4) Receive, investigate, and take appropriate action with respect to any charge or complaint filed with the board to the effect that any individual licensed as an assisted living administrator has failed to comply with the requirements of these standards.
(5) Establish and carry out procedures designed to insure that individuals licensed as assisted living administrators will, during any period that they serve as such, comply with the requirements of these standards.
(6) Conduct a continuing study and investigation of assisted living facilities and administrators of assisted living facilities within the state with a view to the improvement of the standards imposed for the licensing of these administrators and of procedures and methods for the enforcement of these standards with respect to administrators of assisted living facilities who have been licensed as such.
(b) The board shall have the authority to perform the following:
(1) Make rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, as may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, and to take other actions as may be necessary for the proper performance of its duties, and to take other actions as may be necessary to enable the state to meet the requirements set forth in section 1908 of the Social Security Act, federal rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, and other pertinent federal authority.
(2) Establish, provide, or approve various education programs or courses for assisted living administrators, and to prescribe rules and regulations requiring applicants for licenses as assisted living administrators to attend certain programs or courses as a prerequisite to their being admitted to the examination or issued a license, and requiring licensed assisted living administrators to attend these programs or courses as a prerequisite to their being issued any license renewal.
Section 5.
Any party aggrieved by a final decision or order of the board suspending, revoking, or refusing to issue a license is entitled to a review of the decision or order by taking an appeal to the circuit court of the county in which the assisted living administrator or applicant resides.
In these cases, the appeal shall be taken by filing notice of appeal with the register or clerk of the circuit court within 30 days of the date of notice by the board of its decision.
Appeals from any order or judgment rendered thereon by the circuit court to the supreme court of Alabama shall be available as in other cases.
Section 6.
There is hereby established a separate special revenue trust fund in the State Treasury to be known as the Board of Examiners of Assisted Living Administrators Fund.
All receipts collected by the board under the provisions of this act shall be deposited into this fund and shall be used only to carry out the provisions of this act.
Receipts may be disbursed only by warrant of the State Comptroller upon the State Treasury, upon itemized vouchers approved by the chair of the board.
No funds may be withdrawn or expended except as budgeted and allotted according to Sections 41-4-80 to 41-4-98, inclusive, and Section 41-19-12, Code of Alabama 1975, and only in amounts as stipulated in the general appropriations bill or other appropriation bills.
An annual financial audit shall be conducted of all receipts and expenditures, and a written report of the audit shall be given to each board member.
Section 7.
The governing body of the Alabama Association of Assisted Living Facilities shall constitute an advisory council to the board, and the board shall be required to counsel with the advisory council in connection with the administration of the provisions of this act.
Section 8.
(a) The board shall admit to examination for licensure as an assisted living administrator any candidate who submits evidence of good moral character and suitability prescribed by the board and who submits evidence to the board that he or she is at least 19 years of age, a citizen of the United States, or that he or she has duly declared his or her intention of becoming a citizen of the United States, that he or she is a high school graduate or has completed an educational program equivalent thereto, and that he or she has completed any additional educational requirements prescribed by the board.
Each candidate shall also be required, prior to admission to the examination, to pay an examination fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority.
(b) The board may establish an application fee for the internship or administrator in training (AIT) program and a fee for preceptor, certification, and recertification of the administrator in training (AIT) program pursuant to its rule-making authority.
Section 9.
(a) The board shall determine the subjects of examinations for applicants for licensure as assisted living administrators, and the scope, content, and format of the examinations, which in any examination shall be the same for all candidates.
The examinations shall include examination of the applicant to demonstrate his or her proficiency in the rules and regulations of health and safety.
The examination may consist of written or oral questions, or both.
(b) Examinations shall be held at least four times each year, at times and places designated by the board.
Section 10.
(a) The board shall issue a license to an applicant, on a form provided for that purpose by the board, certifying that the applicant has met the requirements of the laws, rules, and regulations entitling him or her to serve, act, practice, and otherwise hold himself or herself out as a duly licensed assisted living administrator and has paid a fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority for original licensure, provided the applicant meets all of the following qualifications:
(1) Successfully complied with the educational and training requirements of this act and of the rules and regulations of the board promulgated under this act.
(2) Has paid an application fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority for all applicants.
(3) Qualified for and passed the examination provided for in this act.
(b) The board may collect a fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority for the issuance of a temporary emergency permit issued pursuant to Section 2.
Section 11.
The board may, subject to this act and the rules and regulations of the board prescribing the qualifications for an assisted living administrator license, issue a license to an assisted living administrator who has been issued a license by the proper authorities of any other state or issued a certificate of qualification by any national organization, upon complying with the provisions of licensure, payment of a fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority, and upon submission of evidence satisfactory to the board of the following:
(1) That the other state or national organization maintained a system and standards of qualification and examinations for an assisted living administrator license or certificate which were substantially equivalent to those required in this state at the time the other license or certificate was issued by the other state or national organization.
(2) That the other state gives similar recognition and endorsement to assisted living administrator licenses of this state.
The board may charge a fee for completion of a reciprocity questionnaire, pursuant to its rule-making authority.
Section 12.
(a) Every individual who holds a valid current license as an assisted living administrator issued by the board under this act shall immediately upon issuance have the right and privilege of acting and serving as an assisted living administrator and of using the abbreviation "A.L.A." after his or her name.
Thereafter, the individual shall annually be required to make application to the board for a renewal of license and to report any facts requested by the board on forms provided for that purpose.
(b) Upon making application for a renewal of a license, the individual shall pay an annual license fee established as determined by the board pursuant to the rule-making authority, and, at the same time, shall submit evidence satisfactory to the board that during the year immediately preceding application for renewal he or she has complied with the requirements of the board concerning the continuation of education of assisted living administrators.
(c) Upon receipt of the application for renewal of a license, the renewal fee, and the evidence with respect to continuing education, the board shall issue a license renewal to the assisted living administrator.
(d) (1) Failure to secure an annual renewal of a license, based on a failure to meet the continuing education requirements, shall result in the expiration of the license.
An expired license may not be "reactivated."
All persons holding an expired license shall be required to submit a new application and follow all procedures for licensure of a new applicant.
(2) A licensee who complies with the continuing education requirements but who does not renew within 90 days following its due date shall be deemed delinquent and may renew within the 90-day period by paying a late renewal fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority.
A license that is not renewed within the 90-day period shall be deemed expired, and is subject to reapplication as provided in subdivision (1).
(e) A licensee who holds a current license and who is not practicing as an assisted living administrator may place that license into an "inactive status" upon written application to the board.
Any licensee whose license has been placed on inactive status may not engage in the practice of assisted living administration.
(f) A licensee whose license is on an inactive status who wishes to "reactivate" that license may do so by making application to the board.
The applicant shall attach proof of having completed 24 hours of approved continuing education credits within one year of making application for license reactivation, and shall pay a reactivation fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority.
A licensee may not have his or her license in inactive status for more than five years.
After five years in inactive status, the license automatically becomes expired.
(g) The board shall maintain a file of all applications for licensure that includes the following information on each applicant: residence, name, age, the name and address of his or her employer or business connection, the date of application, educational and experience qualifications, action taken by the board, serial numbers of licenses issued to the applicant, and the date on which the board acted on or reviewed the application.
(h) The board shall maintain a list of current licensees of the board, and shall furnish the list on demand to any person who pays a fee established by the board pursuant to its rule-making authority.
(i) The board shall adopt a program for continuing education for its licensees by October 1, 1999.
After that date, successful completion of the continuing education program by board licensees shall be required in order to obtain a renewal license.
(j) Continuing education shall not result in a passing or failing grade.
Section 13.
(a) The board may discipline its licensees by the adoption and collection of administrative fines, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000) per violation and may institute any legal proceedings necessary to effect compliance with this act.
(b) The license of any person practicing or offering to practice assisted living administration may be revoked or suspended by the board, or the person may be reprimanded, censured, or otherwise disciplined in accordance with the provisions of this section upon decision and after due hearing in any of the following cases:
(1) Upon proof that the person has willfully or repeatedly violated any of the provisions of this act or the rules enacted in accordance with this act; or willfully or repeatedly acted in a manner inconsistent with the health and safety of the patients of the home in which he or she is administrator.
(2) Upon proof that the person's conduct is immoral, unprofessional, or dishonorable.
(3) Upon proof that the person is guilty of fraud or deceit in the practice of assisted living administration or in his or her admission to the practice.
(4) Upon proof that the person has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction, either within or without the state, of a crime involving moral turpitude.
(c) The board shall have the jurisdiction to hear all charges brought under the provisions of this section against any person having been issued a license as an assisted living administrator or having been issued a license as a provisional assisted living administrator; and upon a hearing shall determine the charges upon their merits.
If the board determines that disciplinary measures should be taken, the board may revoke his or her license, suspend him or her from practice or reprimand, censure, or otherwise discipline the person.
(d) All proceedings under this section shall be heard by the board with at least two thirds of its members present, and decisions to discipline any licensee shall require a vote of two thirds of the membership of the entire board; provided, that the board may designate three or more of its members to comprise a hearing committee for the purpose of determining whether charges brought justify a hearing by the board, and with the authority to dismiss frivolous or unfounded charges.
(e) At any hearing under this act, the person charged shall have the right to appear either personally or by counsel or both, to produce witnesses and evidence in his or her own behalf, and to cross-examine witnesses.
The board or hearing committee shall have the authority to issue subpoenas, compel the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, and take testimony concerning all matters within the jurisdiction of the board.
The circuit court of the county where the hearing is to take place shall have authority, on application of the board, to enforce obedience to subpoenas and orders of the board concerning testimony.
Section 14.
The board may, for good cause shown, upon such terms as the board may prescribe, reissue a license to any person whose license has been revoked.
Section 15.
(a) It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to commit any of the following:
(1) Sell or fraudulently obtain or furnish any license or aid or abet in selling or fraudulently obtaining or furnishing any license.
(2) Practice as an assisted living administrator under cover of any license illegally or fraudulently obtained or unlawfully issued.
(3) Practice as an assisted living administrator or use in connection with his or her name any designation tending to imply that he or she is an assisted living administrator unless duly licensed to so practice under the provisions of this act.
(4) Practice as an assisted living administrator or use in connection with his or her name any designation tending to imply that he or she is an assisted living administrator during the time his or her license issued under this act shall be expired, suspended, or revoked.
(5) Otherwise violate any of the provisions of this act.
(b) A violation of this act shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500) or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment.
Section 16.
Nothing in this act shall be construed so as to limit, conflict with, or diminish the authority granted to the State Board of Health to license and regulate assisted living facilities pursuant to Title 22, Chapter 21, Code of Alabama 1975.
The board may not establish any requirement, promulgate any rule, or take any action in conflict with the rules of the State Board of Health.
Section 17.
There is hereby appropriated from the Board of Examiners of Assisted Living Administrators Fund to the board for the fiscal year ending September 30, 1999, those amounts as deemed necessary by the board for the implementation of the provisions of this act.
Section 18.
This act shall become effective on the first day of the third month following its passage and approval by the Governor, or its otherwise becoming law.
Licenses and Licensing
Assisted Living Facility
Health
Nursing Home Administrators, Board of Examiners of
Nursing Homes
Health Care Facilities
