3602mainpg2.jpg (28920 bytes) For Release: Tuesday, November 25, 2003 Website: www.vaag.com Contact: Tim Murtaugh or Carrie Cantrell Phone: (804) 786-3518 or (804) 786-4596 E-Mail: tmurtaugh@oag.state.va.us or ccantrell@oag.state.va.us Kilgore Issues Holiday Shopping Season Consumer Alert -- Attorney General Warns Virginians of Growing Threat of Identity Theft -- RICHMOND - Attorney General Jerry Kilgore today warned Virginia consumers against the growing threat of identity theft as the 2003 holiday shopping season approaches.
Kilgore noted that last year 42-percent of reported cases of identity theft involved credit card fraud, involving either the theft of existing account information or the fraudulent creation of new accounts.
"Over the coming weeks, millions of Virginians will be going to shops and malls to buy holiday gifts for their friends and families," Kilgore said.
"While this time of year is joyous for many of us, it is important that consumers take care to avoid becoming victims of identity theft."
Affecting approximately one in five Americans, identity theft is the fastest growing crime in Virginia and America and is estimated to cost financial institutions, utilities and merchants more than $5 billion a year.
Victims of identity theft can spend hundreds of hours fixing damage to their credit ratings.
Kilgore has issued a list of tips for consumers to use to avoid becoming victims:
1.
Shred records that contain personal information or bank and credit account numbers 2.
Do not use Social Security numbers on checks 3.
Monitor bank statements for suspicious charges 4.
Be wary of promotional scams to avoid identity theft on the telephone or over the Internet 5.
Place passwords on your credit card and bank accounts 6.
Do not use obvious account passwords, such as mother's maiden name or Social Security numbers 7.
Get new checks delivered to a bank instead of residence 8.
To avoid theft of outgoing bill payments from residential mailboxes, send outgoing mail from the post office 9.
Review credit reports annually 10.
Compile a list of all accounts and contact numbers and store in a secure place.
During last year's session of the Virginia General Assembly, Kilgore proposed a sweeping legislative package that battles identity theft
The legislation provides for the "Identity Theft Passport Program" within the Office of Attorney General.
Victims who have become aware that their identities have been stolen will be able to submit expungement orders or police reports they have obtained, to the Office of the Attorney General, which may issue an Identity Theft Passport.
The Passport will serve as a shield to protect victims from arrest for crimes committed by someone else under a stolen identity.
Creditors may also recognize the Identity Theft Passports.
The Attorney General's identity theft legislation strengthens existing Virginia identity theft laws by: * Prohibiting the impersonation of a law enforcement officer or any other official of the Commonwealth of Virginia in order to carry out identity theft.
* Prohibiting the theft of the identity of a dead person.
* Requiring credit bureaus to block any information resulting from the crime of identity theft from appearing on a credit report when a victim of identity theft has filed a police report with the credit agency.
* Prohibiting the usage of Social Security Numbers on certain government-issued documents, such as state employee IDs or student IDs.
* Removing Social Security Numbers from the outside of state mailings, such as tax forms.
* Requiring the Library Board to develop regulations for destroying public documents that contain Social Security Numbers.
* Allowing clerks of circuit courts to refuse to accept documents for public recordation that include unnecessary Social Security Numbers.
* Creating ID Theft Passport.
Virginia law provides that identity theft violations are Class 1 Misdemeanors, punishable by up to a year in jail and a fine of $2,500.
Violations involving a financial amount exceeding $200 are considered Class 6 Felonies, punishable by up to five years in jail and a fine of up to $2,500.
-30-
