3602mainpg2.jpg (28920 bytes) For Release : July 1, 2003 Website: www.vaag.com Contact: Tim Murtaugh or Carrie Cantrell Phone: (804) 786-3518 or (804) 786-4596 E-Mail: tmurtaugh@oag.state.va.us or ccantrell@oag.state.va.us Virginia Identity Theft Protection Act Becomes Law -- Kilgore Hails New Law for Consumers, Issues First ID Theft Passports -- RICHMOND - Attorney General Jerry Kilgore today celebrated the effective date of the Identity Theft Protection Act by unveiling a handbook on the subject and presenting the first three Identity Theft Passports to Virginia consumers.
The ID Theft Passport is a document issued by the Office of Attorney General that citizens can use to prove to creditors and law enforcement officers that they are the victims -- and not the perpetrators -- of the crime.
Virginians who believe they are victims of Identity Theft can visit the Attorney General's website to apply for a Passport at http://www.oag.state.va.us/hot_topics.htm.
"The Identity Theft Passport is designed to serve as a shield to protect victims from unlawful detention or the arrest for crimes committed by someone else under a stolen identity," Kilgore said.
"The Identity Theft Passport will be a card that the identity theft victim can carry and present to law enforcement or other individuals who may challenge them about their identity in relation to a crime they did not commit - but rather was committed by the identity thief."
Kilgore presented the first three Identity Theft Passports to three victims of the crime.
Ambur Daley's identity was stolen in Southwest Virginia, which ultimately resulted in a mistaken arrest at the airport in Charlotte, North Carolina.
Angel Gonzales, from the Tidewater area, found himself a victim of identity theft because of a record created by someone in Las Vegas, Nevada.
As a result of his identity theft, he was arrested in front of his children.
Finally, Sharon Jones, a teacher from Charlottesville, had her personal information misappropriated by a person who worked at her insurance company.
As a result, she found herself having to pay for everything on a cash-only basis because of the malicious theft of her identity by someone to whom she entrusted it.
Affecting approximately one in five Americans, identity theft is the fastest growing crime in Virginia and America and is estimated to cost financial institutions, utilities and merchants more than $5 billion a year.
Victims often relate stories of mistaken arrest, severe credit problems and hundreds of hours of labor in repairing the financial difficulties associated with the crime.
One of the most common forms of identity theft occurs when a driver's license is lost or stolen.
If the license bears the owner's Social Security number, the thief can obtain fraudulent credit cards and wreak considerable financial havoc before the crime is discovered.
The legislation provides for the "Identity Theft Passport Program" within the Office of Attorney General.
Victims who have become aware that their identities have been stolen will be able to submit expungement orders or police reports they have obtained, to the Office of the Attorney General, which may issue an Identity Theft Passport.
The Passport will serve as a shield to protect victims from arrest for crimes committed by someone else under a stolen identity.
Creditors may also recognize the Identity Theft Passports.
The Attorney General's identity theft legislation strengthens existing Virginia identity theft laws by: * Prohibiting the impersonation of a law enforcement officer or any other official of the Commonwealth of Virginia in order to carry out identity theft.
* Prohibiting the theft of the identity of a dead person.
* Requiring credit bureaus to block any information resulting from the crime of identity theft from appearing on a credit report when a victim of identity theft has filed a police report with the credit agency.
* Prohibiting the usage of Social Security Numbers on certain government-issued documents, such as state employee IDs or student IDs.
* Removing Social Security Numbers from the outside of state mailings, such as tax forms.
* Requiring the Library Board to develop regulations for destroying public documents that contain Social Security Numbers.
* Allowing clerks of circuit courts to refuse to accept documents for public recordation that include unnecessary Social Security Numbers.
* Creating ID Theft Passport.
Virginia law provides that identity theft violations are Class 1 Misdemeanors, punishable by up to a year in jail and a fine of $2,500.
Violations involving a financial amount exceeding $200 are considered Class 6 Felonies, punishable by up to five years in jail and a fine of up to $2,500.
Leesburg Senator Bill Mims (SB979) and Albemarle Delegate Rob Bell (HB2175) sponsored the legislation in the General Assembly.
The legislation stems from a series of public hearings conducted by the Attorney General's Task Force on Identity Theft.
Rocky Mount Delegate Allen Dudley and Lynchburg Delegate Kathy Byron introduced additional legislation addressing identity theft.
In addition to handing out the first Passports, Kilgore also unveiled a handbook titled "How to Avoid Identity Theft - A Guide for Victims."
A printing of 25,000 copies of the book was made possible by the contributions of several corporations and organizations: American Management Systems, Dominion Resources, the Retail Merchants Association, Retail Alliance in Hampton Roads, Microsoft, Capital One, the Virginia Credit Union, the Virginia Credit Union League, America Online and the Virginia Association of Community Banks
"Without this support, we would not have been able to produce this booklet in such quantity and in such a time when identity theft is the fastest growing crime, not only in our country, but unfortunately, in our Commonwealth and costs businesses an estimated $5 billion nationally," Kilgore said.
"Virginia once again leads the way in combating this new crime, and helping Virginians protect their good names."
-30-
