Clearfield County Mine Reclamation Projects NewsClips Susquehanna River Basin Commission Tours Bark Camp . . . . . . . .
August 25, 2000
TWO RECLAMATION PROJECTS COMPLETED AT NO PUBLIC COST . . . . . . . .
July 30, 1999 Waroquier Coal Co. has completed two reclamation projects in Boggs and Decatur townships, Clearfield County, in lieu of a cash payment of $5,700.
The balance of the civil penalty, $3,500, was paid in cash.
The projects included filling anabandoned 65-foot vertical deep mine airshaft in an unmarked wooded area and removing a sedimentation pond on a forfeited mine site.
DEP Issues Mining Permit To Forcey Coal Inc . . . . . . . . .
July 9, 1999
BIOSOLIDS USED TO RECLAIM MINED LAND . . . . . . . .August 28, 1998 Biosolids are being used on 258 acres of a Morris Township, Clearfield County, mine site being reclaimed by Sky Haven Coal Inc. after a recently approved permit revision.
The use of such material enhances revegetation of poor quality soils found on mine sites.
The approved source of boisolids for the Lower Emigh No. 2 site is the City of Philadelphia.
DEP recieved no objections to this application or requests for a public hearing regarding the use of boisolids on the site.
NO COST RECLAMATION TO BENEFIT CLEARFIELD COUNTY . . . . . . .
August 14, 1998
RECLAMATION CONTINUES AT BARK CAMP, NEW SILT SOURCE TESTED . . . . . . .
August 7, 1998
THREE MINE RECLAMATION PROJECTS COMPLETED, EIGHT UNDERWAY . . . . . . . .
June 26, 1998
MINE RECLAMATION AT BARK CAMP UNDERWAY . . . . . . . .
June 5, 1998
NEXT PHASE OF RECLAMATION BEGINS AT BARK CAMP . . . . . . . .May 29, 1998
RECLAMATION PROJECTS UNDERWAY, SEVERAL COMPLETE . . . . . . . .May 29, 1998
BARK CAMP PREPARES FOR ARRIVAL OF DREDGED MATERIALS . . . . . . . .
May 15, 1998
APRIL BUSY MONTH FOR ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION . . . . . . . .
May 1, 1998
SKY HAVEN TACKLES MINE RECLAMATION IN CLEARFIELD COUNTY . . . . . . . .
April 10, 1998
RECLAMATION TO GET UNDERWAY IN CLEARFIELD, FAYETTE COUNTIES . . . . . . . .
April 3, 1998
ABANDONED MINE PROJECTS TO BE BID IN NORTHCENTRAL PA . . . . . . . .
February 20, 1998
DEP REJECTS E 
February 6, 1998
BIOSOLIDS TO BE USED IN CLEARFIELD COUNTY RECLAMATION . . . . . . . .
January 30, 1998
CAC RECEIVES BARK CAMP UPDATE, RELOCATES OFFICES . . . . . . . .
January 23, 1998
RECLAMATION WORK TO ELIMINATE SAFETY HAZARD . . . . . . . .
December 12, 1997
FISH COMMISSION RESEARCH SUPPORTS BENEFICIAL USE OF FLYASH . . . . . . . .
November 21, 1997
DEP TELLS OPERATOR TO FIX PROBLEMS AT BARK CAMP . . . . . . . .
November 14, 1997
CAC QUESTIONS ACTIVITIES AT BARK CAMP FIELD LABORATORY . . . . . . . .
October 24, 1997 The Citizens Advisory Council delivered a letter to Secretary Seif this week raising concerns about activities at the Bark Camp Mine Reclamation Demonstration Area and Field Laboratory.
Site-specific concerns at Bark Camp include questionable approval of components of the waste stream, questionable use of approved materials, water quality impacts, need for tighter contract conditions and administration, project management and interprogram coordination, field testing and peer review, road improvements and community concerns and involvement.
While progress has been made since council's initial involvement, most visibly in departmental oversight of the project, council has continuing concerns.
These site-specific concerns illustrate broader, long-term issues that require immediate attention to assure that the public interest is served.
The broader issues facing the department include:
&
&
&
&
&
&
Council commended the department for naming a project manager for the Bark Camp site.
However, if the project had been properly coordinated and administered from the beginning, conditions at the site would not have deteriorated to the point where a project manager and full-time inspector were necessary.
"We have invited the CAC's involvement in the projects at the Bark Camp mine reclamation laboratory and welcome council's suggestions," DEP Secretary James M. Seif said.
"The issues identified by the council are the result of a series of tours of Bark Camp and weekly conversations with council members and staff and representatives of the community.
We intend to take these recommendations to heart and act on them."
<
(Contributed by CAC Executive Director Sue Wilson)
DEP ISSUES PERMIT TO CLEARFIELD COUNTY MINING COMPANY . . . . . . . . .
October 17, 1997 DEP has issued a permit to K 
"This permit will allow K 
The K 
DEP AND BENDER COAL CO. REACH RECLAMATION AGREEMENT . . . . . . . .
August 29, 1997 DEP has reached an agreement with E.P. Bender Coal Co. Inc. of Carrolltown to reclaim a 600-foot highwall and open surface mine cut in Bigler Township, Clearfield County.
"This important reclamation work will be done by Bender in lieu of paying a $9,960 fine for mining violations at some of its other sites," District Mining Manager Michael Smith said.
"When completed, this dangerous highwall along a township road will be eliminated and the entire property will be regraded to its original contour."
The agreement requires Bender to complete all reclamation work by Sept. 1 and have the site planted with vegetation by Oct. 1.
"Because the reclamation work is estimated to cost nearly $16,000, the Commonwealth will save money through this agreement as compared to awarding a bid under state contract," Smith said.
"Bigler Township and its citizens are the direct beneficiaries of this agreement."
BARK CAMP MINE RECLAMATION LAB OPEN HOUSE SET FOR MAY 22 . . . . . . . .
May 16, 1997 DEP will host an Open House on Thursday, May 22 for residents of the Penfield area to learn more about several projects at the Bark Camp Mine Reclamation Laboratory.
The Open House, to be held at the Penfield Grange Hall, will begin at 4 p.m., and be followed by a site tour at approximately 5 p.m.
The Open House will then continue at the Grange Hall at 6:30 p.m., and arrangements will be made for additional site tours if necessary.
Representatives of DEP, scientists from Penn State University's Materials Research Laboratory and the state's mine reclamation contractors will discuss the projects and answer questions.
Abandoned Mine Reclamation Bureau Director Ernie Giovannitti noted that the site has been used for several years to test new reclamation technologies.
"Funding for abandoned mine reclamation will never meet all of Pennsylvania's needs, making the study of alternative reclamation techniques and materials important to the state's program to restore scarred land and reduce acid mine drainage," he said.
"The designation of the site as the state's mine reclamation laboratory will continue a process that has already shown success by significantly improving the pH of Bark Camp Run."
Some of the projects undertaken at Bark Camp have been conducted by DEP staff in cooperation with the Environmental Protection Agency and the former U.S. Bureau of Mines.
Others have been conducted by a contractor to the state, Beneficial Ash Management, in cooperation with Penn State's Materials Research Laboratory.
Two students have used facilities at Bark Camp for research in the completion of their masters degrees.
The mine reclamation techniques developed and monitored at the site include using man-made wetlands to treat acid mine drainage, testing anhydrous ammonia as a similar treatment agent, researching and testing fly ash mixed with lime-based activators as fill material for land reclamation, and developing and using artificial soil material from paper mill and tannery biosolids.
Penn State researchers, contractors and DEP staff who researched and implemented these reclamation projects and ongoing plans for future efforts will be among the experts on hand for the open house.
BENEFICIAL ASH HONORED FOR TECHNOLOGY INNOVATION . . . . . . . .
February 7, 1997 Staff from DEP's Northcentral Regional Office attended a special Governor's Environmental Award for Excellence recognition event Jan. 30 in Clearfield to honor Beneficial Ash Management Inc.
(BAM).
The company won its award in the technology innovation category for the formulation and use of cement-like materials from fly ash.
Developed by Pennsylvania State University professors Barry E. Scheetz and Michael R. Silsbee, BAM is using its grouting technology to remedy acid mine drainage problems in Pennsylvania.
The approach of using a grout to prevent water from contacting the minerals that cause this problem in coal overburdens is novel, controlling the chemical reactions and minimizing or eliminating the formation of acid mine drainage.
Under a "no-cost" contract with the Commonwealth, BAM is using boiler ash, causticizing byproducts (lime) and non-reclaimable clarifier sludge from International Paper Company's Erie Mill to restore the Bark Camp mine site on state land near Penfield in Clearfield County.
More than 10 million tons of fly ash grout will be used.
<
DEP TESTS RIVER SILT AT BARK CAMP MINE RECLAMATION CENTER . . . . . . . .
January 31, 1997 The Department of Environmental Protection this week announced it is developing a new research project using dredged river silt to reclaim abandoned mine land at its Bark Camp Mine Reclamation Laboratory in Clearfield County, according to DEP's Director of Abandoned Mine Reclamation Ernest F. Giovannitti.
"Pennsylvanians started mining coal in the mid-1700s.
In the 1800s, Pennsylvania coal fueled the industrial revolution, and, in the 1900s, it provided the energy to fight two world wars.
But this legacy of achievement carries an environmental price," Giovannitti said.
This legacy has left many scars on the Pennsylvania landscape.
There are more than 250,000 acres of abandoned surface mines with dangerous highwalls and water filled pits.
About 2,400 miles of streams do not meet water quality standards because of drainage from abandoned mines, Giovannitti said.
"There are uncounted households without an adequate water supply due to past mining practices.
Mine fires and mine subsidence plague many Pennsylvania communities," Giovannitti said.
"And the estimated cost to correct this situation is about $15 billion.
"At Bark Camp, we can test various methods to eliminate hazardous conditions and to help ease the environmental debt created by early mining practices," Giovannitti said.
The latest research project will test the use of a manufactured fill material to be placed in the abandoned surface mine in the Moshannon State Forest near Pennfield, allowing the area to be returned to original contour.
The manufactured fill material will be a mixture of municipal incinerator ash and dredged material from the Schuylkill, Delaware and Hudson rivers.
When properly mixed, the material will harden into a weak cement.
This manufactured material has previously been used as sub-base for a parking lot in Elizabeth, N.J.; an airport runway extension in Boston and a port terminal in Seattle.
The project will bring 500,000 cubic yards of material to Bark Camp.
The average height of the material to be placed in the abandoned mine will be about 20 feet, covering a research area of 15 acres.
The surface runoff and groundwater will be onitored to determine if there are any adverse impacts, and DEP staff will be on-site to ensure the operations are performed properly.
POWER REMOVES MORE THAN A MILLION YARDS OF COAL REFUSE . . . . . . . .
January 24, 1997 Power Operating Co. Inc. of Houtzdale has completed the removal of a refuse pile at the 18-acre Brookwood Shaft deep mine near the Village of Morann in Clearfield County.
The reclamation of the refuse pile is part of a larger wetland mitigation project developed by Power Operating Co. Inc. and US Environmental Research Service Inc. of Altoona in partnership with DEP and the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission.
"Through this project, Power Operating has removed a community eyesore and will restore four miles of Whiteside Run that will create many new acres of wildlife habitat," Hawk Run District Mining Manager Michael Smith said in the Jan. 13 announcement.
More than one million cubic yards of coal refuse accumulated from the Brookwood Shaft was piled directly onto Whiteside Run during the first half of this century.
Upstream of the pile, Whiteside Run supports a diverse community of fish and insect life.
When the stream exited the refuse pile, however, the water was as acidic as battery acid and devoid of life due to the drainage from the sulfur-bearing coal refuse.
Now, the stream quality has significantly improved.
The project began in April 1995 when Power Operating requested permission to surface mine through four acres of prime wooded wetlands as part of its Rosemary Operation, adjacent to the refuse pile.
Because DEP approval was contingent on compensation for the lost wildlife habitat, Power devised a plan that would use land covered by the old refuse pile to construct replacement wetlands.
By removing the refuse pile, Power could construct the replacement wetlands and restore Whiteside Run to its original quality.
Removal of this nearly 100-foot high eyesore would be an added benefit to local residents.
"The successful completion of this project is important because it will demonstrate that cooperative ventures between the mining industry and state agencies can be mutually beneficial and improve both the environmental quality and asthetic value of the area for local citizens," Power Operating owner Glyn Powell said.
Power has already constructed the four acres of replacement wetlands which have been revegetated and support a diverse wildlife community.
During the fall of 1996, Power excavated the major portion of the refuse pile and properly disposed of it by interlayering it with alkaline rock at a site across the highway.
When the project is completed in the spring of 1997, the 18-acre site will have been converted to prime wildlife habitat and Whiteside Run restored to its previous condition.
BARK CAMP - A MINE RECLAMATION LABORATORY . . . . . . . .
January 24, 1997 Coal mining began in Pennsylvania in the mid-1700s in support of the colonial iron industry.
In the 1800s, coal from Pennsylvania fueled the industrial growth of the country and Andrew Carnegie's steel mills.
In the early 1900s, it provided the energy to fight two world wars.
When the steel industry declined in the mid-1900s, coal became the major source of fuel for electric power generation.
Today, coal still supplies over 60 percent of the fuel for electric power generation in Pennsylvania.
This legacy has left many scars on the Pennsylvania landscape, however.
More than 250,000 abandoned surface mines have left dangerous highwalls and water-filled pits.
About 2,400 miles of streams do not meet water quality standards because of drainage from abandoned mines.
There are many households without adequate water supply due to past mining practices.
Mine subsidence plagues many Pennsylvania communities.
The estimated cost to reclaim these scars - at least $15 billion.
In the late 1980s, passive mine drainage treatment facilities were being promoted as a low cost solution to acid discharges from abandoned coal mines.
At that time, there was a dearth of design standards for passive treatment systems, so DEP established and EPA funded a research project to develop design criteria.
Bark Camp Run, a tributary to the Bennetts Branch of Sennemahoning Creek near Penfield, Clearfield County, was a natural for the project.
Extensive mining had occurred throughout this watershed in the Moshannon State Forest.
Some of the mines predated state or federal mining regulations; others, including the sources of acid mine drainage, were mined by an operator who had forfeited his bonds on the site.
The Bark Camp site was littered with abandoned equipment, coal refuse and a dilapidated coal preparation plant.
Cleanup of the site, which is all state-owned land, began in 1990 using state workers, coal operators under the reclamation-in-lieu-of-penalties program and some EPA grant money.
A wetlands treatment research project began in 1992 and was completed in 1995.
The plant continues to operate even though the research effort has been completed.
In the early 1990s, the department also became interested in the use of fly ash for mine reclamation because of its use as a structural fill.
The E
If the surface mine reclamation project were successful, E
The surface reclamation project began in 1995.
E
The soil has been used to provide cover for the backfilled surface mines and is performing better than natural soils.
Beneficial Ash Management received the 1996 Governor's Award for Environmental Excellence for this project.
In addition to these major research efforts, DEP is testing the use of anhydrous ammonia as a treatment chemical for acid mine drainage.
AMERIKOHL COMPLETES REMINING RECLAMATION PROJECT . . . . . . . .
December 20, 1996 Amerikohl Mining Inc. has completed its reclamation obligations on the former Benjamin Coal mine sites in Cambria, Clearfield, Indiana and Jefferson counties.
The reclamation agreement, bonded by Traveler's Insurance Company, included 69 individual mining permits and an estimated total of 250 different landowners whose properties were affected by the mining and reclamation operations.
"This is a good example of how remining can make money for a company while restoring abandoned mine sites that otherwise wouldn't be reclaimed," Deputy Secretary for Mineral Resources Management Robert C. Dolence said.
The project is part of DEP's effort to solve past mining problems.
In the 1960s, Pennsylvania's "Operation Scarlift" provided $125 million for mine reclamation, the first such state action in the country.
In 1977, the federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act established a trust fund financed by a fee on coal production to be used for mine reclamation.
To date, Pennsylvania has been awarded and has spent over $400 million from the trust fund and should receive another $800 million from the fund before the authorization for the fee collection expires in 2004.
To help make sure that the $800 million is used in the most effective manner, DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation has drafted a Comprehensive Plan for Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
The plan will help focus reclamation efforts and provide a system for decision making.
The bureau also is developing partnerships with watershed groups, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Natural Resources Conservation Service and private endowments to help address remining.
Along those lines, each of DEP's district mining offices recently held workshops to seek input from industry and environmental groups on future remining incentives.
TROUT ARE RUNNING IN THE LITTLE MUDDY . . . . .
April 5, 1996 The March issue of Pennsylvania Angler reports that trout fishing opportunities are now available on four miles of Little Muddy Run in Clearfield County: After an 11-year departure from cacheable trout management, recent water quality improvements have allowed the return of this water to the approved trout water list.
This improvement in water quality was due to work completed by DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation.
The bureau constructed a $1.5 million, 3/4-mile subsurface drain to intercept acid mine drainage pollution from the abandoned Westport Mining site.
This work was completed in December 1993.
Sampling results supported by the recent stocking show the project was highly successful.
<
DEP DESIGNS NEW WATER SYSTEM FOR CLEARFIELD COMMUNITY . . . . .
January 1995 Belsena Mills.
By Memorial Day, 14 homes in Belsena Mills will have potable drinking water flowing through their pipes again.
Their water supply was destroyed by mining in the area.
The $354,935 project is funded with coal operators' reclamation fees.
The federal Office of Surface Mining oversees the program; DEP's Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation does the design work.
State Rep. Camille "Bud" George (D-Clearfield) has worked for four years to secure funding from OSM for the project.
He credits DEP with never backing off on the project: "They kept right on driving forward with us," he said.
"They recognized the fact that water was needed and attributed it to previous mining."
<
(Source: The Clearfield Progress 12/23/95)
Site Navigation
