Minnesota Forest Resources Council Minutes of the Council's 11^th Meeting October 17, 1996 The Forest Inn, Itasca State Park 9:30 a.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Council Members Present Bob Dunn, Paul Ellefson, Steve Eubanks, Janet Green, Judy Hewes, Richard Knoll, Jack LaVoy, Norm Moody, Robert Oswold, Jerry Rose
Council Members Absent Alan Knaeble, Marcie McLaughlin, Joe Wood
Alternates Present Bruce Barker (Alternate for Alan Knaeble)
Staff Present Mike Kilgore, Sarah Risser
Call to Order
Paul Ellefson called the meeting to order at 9:30.
Motion: Jerry Rose moved to approve the September 19^th meeting minutes.
Motion passed.
Motion: Bob Oswold moved to approve the October 17^th meeting agenda.
Motion passed.
Chair's Remarks:
Paul Ellefson, along with some other Council members, presented the planning subcommittee's report, Review of Minnesota Strategic Forest Resource Planning Requirements, to Rod Sando, Commissioner of the DNR.
The Commissioner agreed with the recommendations outlined in the report and expressed interest in additional information on how DNR's planning requirements relate to other agency's planning requirements.
Sando suggested postponing legislative actions until 1998 because 1997 is a policy year and not a budget year.
Paul Ellefson's administrative activities include facilitating Mike Kilgore's review through the Personnel and Finance Subcommittee.
Judy Hewes has taken the lead on this effort.
Judy will send out review forms next week with the goal of completing Mike's review by the end of December.
The Interagency Information Cooperative will hold an organizational and planning meeting on November 7^th, 1996.
Paul Ellefson sent a letter to the IIC requesting the IIC make another presentation to the Council after this meeting.
Executive Director's Report
Mike Kilgore mentioned that all Council members collecting per diems need to complete annual plan forms.
Mike does not yet have access to budget data.
Mike distributed a draft budget template to be completed on a quarterly basis.
The format of this template follows the outline of the Governor's 1996-97 biennial budget request for implementation of the SFRA.
Mike will try to get the first quarterly report pulled together by the December meeting.
Hiring of the landscape coordinator will be facilitated by the Personnel and Finance Subcommittee.
As a joint position with the DNR, the Council will hire a forest resources modeler.
When the position description is completed it will be presented to the Council.
The goal is to have someone on board within the next four or five months.
Communications to the Minnesota Forest Resources Council
Minnesota Forest Resources Partnership * Terry Weber, the Partnership's new coordinator, expressed appreciation for being at the Council meeting and indicated that he is working very hard to establish strong working relationships between the Partnership and the Council.
* Jack Rajala's September 18^th letter - regarding the wildlife scoping document.
Paul suggested that this letter also be referred to Mike Phillips, who in turn will refer the letter to the wildlife technical teams.
* Jack Rajala's September 23^rd letter - clarifying: 1) that the Council will provide funding for the Partnership's new coordinator and 2) the role of the coordinator.
* Jack Rajala's October 2^nd letter - regarding the Partnership's role in the guideline development process.
Paul suggested deferring discussion of this letter until the related agenda item was up for discussion.
Other Interested Parties * Bonita Elliason - regarding funding for the Threatened and Endangered Species Booklet.
Because this is an action item it will be discussed as indicated on the agenda.
* Jerry Birchem, President of the associated contract loggers inc. - expressing support for the economic analysis of guideline implementation.
Staff will respond to Jerry with a letter of thanks and then turn the letter over to the guideline development coordinator for specific action.
Request for Financial Support: Data Development for Use in Threatened and Endangered Species Handbook
Paul Ellefson referred to Bonita Elliason's letter.
Mike Kilgore met with Bonita Eliason, Jim Sweeney, Mike Phillips, and Tim Webb.
The outcome of this meeting was a recommendation that funding from the Council be channeled toward data development and not toward publication costs.
Representatives from the guideline development process will work closely with Champion with a commitment to continued communication throughout the process.
Motion: Janet Green moved that the Council appropriate $20,000 for data development to prepare a booklet.
The Council discussed the details of this process.
Amended motion: Norm Moody moved that the Council appropriate $20,000 to the Natural Heritage Program for data development but that this process be overseen by the Council's Wildlife Technical Team.
Amended motion passed.
Tim Webb, facilitator of the Wildlife Technical Team, clarified that the wildlife technical team will not be addressing specific species.
Tim also clarified that team members want to review the materials but may not have the time or resources to oversee the process.
Modifications: Comprehensive Timber Harvesting/Forest Management Guideline Development Procedures and Time Schedule document
Paul Ellefson referred to Jack Rajala's October 2^nd letter.
Mike Kilgore outlined the history of the Council/Partnership relationship regarding the Guideline Development Procedures.
At the last meeting it was suggested that Terry Weber, the Partnership's new coordinator, be appointed to the Guideline Development's Integration Team.
The Council discussed the Partnership's review process.
Jack LaVoy distributed suggested modifications to the Council's Timber Harvesting and Forest Management Guideline Procedures and Time Schedule Document.
Mike Phillips commented that technical teams expect to work with the Partnership throughout the review process.
The teams would like the Partnership to provide direct input into the process.
If the current process works the Partnership will have tremendous input.
Terry Weber commented that although there are partnership members on the technical teams they do not necessarily represent the views of the Partnership in total.
Terry also mentioned that the Partnership will ultimately be responsible for implementing the guidelines and should have a significant voice in their development.
Motion: Jack LaVoy moved to table the discussion of the Partnership review process.
Motion passed.
Steve Eubanks and Jerry Rose dissented.
Overview: Riparian Zone Management Technical Team Draft Scoping Document
Dave Parent of the Riparian Zone Management Technical Team distributed the Riparian Zone Scoping Document and presented this information to the Council.
Overview: Forest Soil Productivity Technical Team Draft Scoping Document
Dick Rossman of the Forest Soil Productivity Technical Team distributed the Forest Soil Productivity Scoping Document and presented this information to the Council.
Update: Timber Harvesting and Forest Management Guideline Development
Mike Phillips provided an update on the Timber Harvesting and Forest Management Guideline Development Process.
Notices for public review of the Riparian Management Zone and the Forest Soil Productivity scoping documents will be posted in the EQB monitor on October 21, 1996 necessitating that public comments be in by December 2, 1996.
The Cultural/Historic team will present their information to the Council at the November meeting in St. Cloud.
Mike distributed integration team minutes.
Due to another commitment, Tom Levar will no longer be able to serve on the Forest Soil Productivity technical team.
Dick Knoll was asked to recommend a replacement for Tom.
Don MacKay is compiling an economic impact analysis of implementing the Timber Harvesting and Forest Management Guidelines.
He is reviewing the work that other states have completed in this area in addition to looking at different methodologies.
Discussion: MFRC Biennial Report
Sarah Risser discussed the detailed Biennial Report outline with the Council.
The Council agreed that the report would best be divided into five sections: 1) Status of Minnesota's Forest Resources, 2) Strategic Directions for the Management of Minnesota's Forests, 3) Forest Resource Management Programs in Minnesota, 4) Council directed activities, and 5) Council related activities.
Sarah will consult with Council members as she compiles the draft biennial report.
The draft will be presented to the Council at their November meeting.
Presentation: Non-Industrial Private Forest Land Management in Minnesota
Tom Kroll of the Department of Natural Resources presented an overview of Non-Industrial Private Forest Land Management in Minnesota.
Council Member Comments
Janet Green - Passed out information and discussed Forestry Initiatives in Maine.
Steve Eubanks - Discussed the work of a planning team coordinating responsibilities common to both state and federal agencies.
Jerry Rose - Reviewed the National Association of State Forests discussion on divestiture.
He mentioned that there is some feeling that it would be advantageous if the Forest Service managed according to state law.
Bob Dunn - Mentioned the December 11^th conference on Global Warming being sponsored by the Humphrey Institute.
Dick Knoll - Expressed appreciation to Dave Parent and Tom Kroll for carrying the ball on the LCMR proposal originated by Tom Kroll.
Judy Hewes - Mentioned that it is the 50^th anniversary of the Resort Association and that Campgrounds have merged with the Resort Association.
Public Comments
Bridget Hust - Thanked Tom Kroll for helping out with an intern for MCEA and mentioned that she is impressed with Tom's Land Stewardship Program.
Betsy Daub - Thanked Tom Kroll for his presentation and expressed gratitude to Mel Baumann who led an Audubon field trip on Oak Management in Lanesboro, MN.
Dave Parent - Encouraged support of an economic analysis of Timber Harvesting and Forest Management Guidelines from a landowner's perspective.
Terry Weber - Mentioned that the Minnesota Forest Resources Partnership will be meeting on October 20^th at Rutgers and encouraged everyone to attend.
Dave Zumeta - Mentioned the Pinchot Institute in regard to Sustainable Forestry in Minnesota.
Minnesota and Washington are two states that have been selected to compile information on sustainable forestry.
Rick Weyerhaeuser is the contractor on this project.
Next Meeting: The next meeting of the Forest Resources Council will be from 9:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Thursday November 21, 1996 at the Radisson Inn in St. Cloud.
Motion: Dick Knoll moved that the October Council meeting adjourn.
The Council adjourned at 4:00 p.m.
Respectfully Submitted:
Sarah M. Risser
