Clarion County Mine Reclamation Projects NewsClips DEP Holds Public Meeting on Reed-Strattanville Reclamation Project . . . . . . . .
August 11, 2000
DEP Nears Completion of Design Work for Reed-Strattanville Project . . . . . . . .
July 28, 2000
Preliminary Work Moves Forward on Reed-Strattanville Project . . . . . . . .
June 9, 2000
Design Work Underway for Reed-Strattanville Reclamation Project . . . . . . . .
May 19, 2000
Drilling Underway on Reed-Strattanville Mine Reclamation Project . . . . . . . .
May 5, 2000
Mine Land to be Reclaimed in Westmoreland, Clarion Counties . . . . . . . .
May 5, 2000
DEP Proposes Project to Reclaim Reed, Strattanville Abandoned Mine Sites . . . . . . . .
April 21, 2000
Mine Reclamation Contract Awarded in Clarion County . . . . . . . .
April 14, 2000
Mine Reclamation Project Funded Through Growing Greener . . . . . . . .
April 7, 2000
RECLAMATION PROJECT GOES OUT FOR BID . . . . . . . .
January 21, 2000 Bid packages will be issued on Jan. 21 for an abandoned mine land reclamation project in Clarion County, with a bid opening date of Feb. 24.
The project, located in Porter and Limestone townships, involves reclaiming 27 acres of abandoned mine land to pre-mining conditions.
The project addresses the remainder of a 73-acre site left unclaimed and abandoned by Robert L. Fagley, who forfeited bond in 1981.
The earlier portion of the reclamation was completed by DEP in August 1986 using funds from the forfeited bond.
Funding for the second phase of the project is being provided through an Abandoned Mine Land Grant from the federal government.
COOPERATION LEADS TO MINE RECLAMATION PROJECT . . . . . . . .
Nov. 12, 1999 With technical assistance from the Hawk Run District Mining office staff and Watershed Coordinator Gary Byron, the Beech Creek Watershed Association in Clinton County recently applied for a $1.5 million grant from the Transportation Enhancement Act program.
The grant money would be used to mitigate acid mine drainage pollution to Jonathan Run, a headwaters tributary to Beech Creek.
The acid mine drainage pollution comes from large highway fill areas near Snow Shoe in Centre County which were created during the construction of Interstate 80 about 30 years ago.
The rock that was placed in the fill areas contains high amounts of iron and acid-bearing material, producing acid mine drainage.
The Beech Creek Watershed Association is partnering with DEP, county conservation districts, the Fish 
Contractors Tour Clarion Mine Reclamation Site . . . . . . . .
October 22, 1999
DEP RECEIVES 26 INQUIRIES FOR CLARION COUNTY RECLAMATION . . . . . . . .
August 27, 1999
DEP REQUESTING PROPOSALS FOR CLARION COUNTY ABANDONED MINE SITES . . . . . . . .
July 30, 1999
ALTERNATIVE PLAN PRESENTED FOR CLARION COUNTY CLEAN-UP . . . . . . . .
August 7, 1998
FIRST RECLAMATION BOND CREDITS APPROVED . . . . . . .
August 7, 1998
THREE MINE RECLAMATION PROJECTS COMPLETED, EIGHT UNDERWAY . . . . . . . .
June 26, 1998
APRIL BUSY MONTH FOR ABANDONED MINE RECLAMATION . . . . . . . .
May 1, 1998
UNDERGROUND LANDFILL FIRE REPORTEDLY OUT . . . . . . . .
January 9, 1998 DEP's Northwest Region was notified last week that an underground fire at a property owned by County Landfill, Inc. in Farmington Township, Clarion County, was extinguished after burning for an unknown period.
The area where the fire was burning was reportedly the site of a coal tipple for a strip mine located there many years ago.
It is suspected that waste coal, also known as bony, was the source of the fire.
To extinguish the fire, landfill officials dug the bony out and re-filled the area.
The fire site was several hundred yards away from areas currently used for waste disposal, so the fire posed no threat to current waste disposal operations.
OFFICIALS DISCUSS CLARION CO. MINE RECLAMATION PROJECT . . . . . . . .
December 19, 1997
DEP, CLARION OFFICIALS MEET WITH POTENTIAL PROJECT DEVELOPERS . . . . . . . .
December 12, 1997
DEP NAMES SCHUECK CLARION COUNTY RECLAMATION LIAISON . . . . . . . .
November 21, 1997
DEP TO ACCEPT PROPOSALS FOR CLARION CO. MINE RECLAMATION . . . . . . . .
October 3, 1997 State Sen. Mary Jo White, state Rep. Fred McIlhattan and the Department of Environmental Protection this week announced that DEP will accept alternate proposals for reclamation work at two Clarion County abandoned mine reclamation sites as long as the proposals meet enforceable environmental standards.
The department has proposed using flyash in a cementlike cap to be installed to stabilize the flow of acid mine drainage at those sites, known as the Reed and Strattanville mines.
With this week's announcement, a local government or other responsible entity, working with citizens in the area, can work on an alternative plan for reclamation of the sites.
The sites are about one mile from Strattanville and cover 208 acres of mined land abandoned by the Glacial Minerals Co.
"Often there is more than one way to solve a problem," Sen. White said.
"I appreciate the willingness of DEP to listen to me and to Rep. McIlhattan when we urged them to consider alternatives other than the flyash cap to remediate this continuing acid mine drainage into the Clarion River."
Rep. McIlhattan added, "I am pleased that we were able to provide an opportunity for our county and township officials to discuss and interact with DEP officials from Harrisburg about the Strattanville and Reed sites in Clarion Township.
I am also pleased that the Department of Environmental Protection is open to the consideration of proposals and reclamation plans other than the proposed flyash cap."
"Our number one priority is to have these sites reclaimed," Robert Dolence, DEP deputy secretary for Mineral Resources, said.
"With this approach, we want to work as partners with Clarion County officials and citizens to come up with a plan that will allow reclamation to take place.
If that plan can meet the same standards for protecting the environment and public health and safety that we have for other plans, we will work with community leaders."
Sen. White, Rep. McIlhattan, Dolence and DEP Executive Deputy Secretary David E. Hess briefed Clarion County commissioners and Clarion Township supervisors about this new approach last night.
PEACE, a local citizens group, was invited to attend the meeting but specifically declined.
Dolence also said the department's decision resulted from meetings last month involving a dispute resolution firm, Winsor Associates of Ardmore, Delaware County, and local interested parties.
Dolence said the department's proposal includes five major elements:
&
&
The major elements of that agreement include the local government submitting a comprehensive plan for reclamation/abatement and treatment, including treatment designs that specify the technology involved, provide a design life of at least 25 years and be certified by a professional engineer.
The effluent from the treatment system must meet specified criteria.
In addition, a performance bond equal to the amount of the construction cost must be posted, and the department must review and approve the plans prior to any construction, similar to the guarantees offered by the surety company.
&
&
In addition, DEP has announced that it will name a special mine reclamation liaison to work with Clarion County local officials and citizens on the Strattanville/Reed project as well as other mine reclamation sites in the county and portions of Jefferson County near Clarion.
Dolence said the new mine reclamation liaison will provide Clarion County officials and citizens with a direct link to the department.
The reclamation projects are part of an overall settlement of abandoned mine reclamation obligations left after the 1994 bankruptcy of Glacial Minerals.
The CIGNA and Utica surety companies, who held the reclamation bonds for Glacial Minerals, agreed to the settlement in January 1995 and are funding local contractors to do the reclamation with proceeds from the bonds.
About 85 million gallons of acidic mine water and more than 1.8 million pounds of pollutants are discharged each year from the abandoned mine lands into a tributary leading to Whites Run and the Clarion River.
The acidic mine water is produced when rain comes in contact with acidic mine spoil.
The mine water has not been treated since Glacial Minerals' 1994 bankruptcy.
DEP ISSUES REMINING PERMIT . . . . . . . .
August 22, 1997 DEP has issued a surface mining permit to M.S.M.
Coal Company Inc. which includes the reclamation of eight acres of abandoned mine lands.
M.S.M. will complete reclamation on this area while remining an Upper Freeport deep mine in Redbank Township, Clarion County, located two miles west of Summerville.
The reclamation work will eliminate 1,950 feet of existing highwall and will restore the area to forestland.
Alkaline material will be incorporated on the pit floor and into the backfill to neutralize the acidic material that currently exists.
The reclamation will occur within the Pine Run watershed and should contribute to the overall water quality improvement as well as eliminate the dangerous highwalls on the site.
DEP SEEKS MEDIATION FOR MINE RECLAMATION PROJECTS . . . . . . . .
August 1, 1997 DEP has agreed to a proposal by Rep. Fred McIlhattan (R-Clarion) that a formal mediation process be undertaken to resolve concerns at two Clarion Township abandoned mine reclamation sites, DEP Director of District Mining Operations Jeffrey Jarrett announced this week.
The two sites, known as the Reed and Strattanville mines, are approximately one mile from Strattanville, Clarion County, and cover 208 acres abandoned by the Glacial Minerals Co.
At issue is the use of flyash as an ingredient in a cementlike cap to be installed to stabilize the flow of acid mine drainage.
"Rep. McIlhattan has offered a reasoned plan that could lead to an amicable solution to this very difficult situation," Jarrett said.
"This offers an opportunity to chart a course for more exchange of information and to create a dialogue between the department and the local community."
DEP has agreed to have a dispute resolution consulting firm, Winsor Associates of Ardmore, Delaware County, meet with local interested parties and evaluate the potential for successful mediation on this project.
"If Winsor Associates determines that the affected parties are willing to work through the process of reaching a mutually acceptable resolution, we will hire a trained facilitator to establish and assist a mediation committee," Jarrett said.
DEP has suggested that, at a minimum, the local committee consist of one representative from each of the following groups: a landowner living next to the adjacent property, the Clarion County Commissioners, the Clarion County Conservation District, the Clarion Township Supervisors, DEP, the Millcreek Coalition, P.E.A.C.E., the Pennsylvania American Water Company, and Strattanville Borough officials.
The mediation committee would be involved in determining the specific parameters of the projects.
The committee would serve as a conduit for the exchange of information with DEP and help guide the projects' progress.
The reclamation projects are part of an overall settlement of abandoned mine reclamation obligations left after the 1994 bankruptcy of Glacial Minerals.
The CIGNA and Utica surety companies, who held the reclamation bonds for Glacial Minerals, agreed to the settlement in January 1995 and are funding local contractors to do the reclamation with proceeds from the bonds.
About 85 million gallons of acidic mine water and more than 1.8 million pounds of pollutants are discharged each year from the abandoned mine lands into a tributary leading to Whites Run and the Clarion River.
The acidic mine water is produced when rain comes in contact with acidic mine spoil.
The mine water has not been treated since Glacial Minerals' 1994 bankruptcy.
"DEP's goal for these projects is to stabilize the flow of water through the acidic mine spoil so that remaining pollutants can be removed with a passive treatment system," Jarrett said.
"A passive treatment system, such as a wetland, cannot handle the pollution load with the current mine water flow that fluctuates between 30 and 1,000 gallons per minute."
DEP ANNOUNCES MINE RECLAMATION PROJECT . . . . . . . .
May 16, 1997 DEP has accepted a proposal to reclaim two of Glacial Minerals Inc.'s abandoned mine sites in Clarion County, Deputy Secretary for Mineral Resources Management Robert C. Dolence announced this week.
The two sites, known as the Reed and Strattanville mines, are located approximately one mile from Strattanville.
"The settlement DEP has accepted will provide the best long-term environmental resolution for these abandoned mine sites, rather than the most expedient fix," Dolence said.
"This environmentally positive solution was made possible by Glacial's surety companies' willingness to work with the department and hard work on the part of DEP's Knox District Mining Office."
Submission and approval of the proposal resulted from a Consent Order and Adjudication between DEP, Glacial Minerals and its surety companies settling several bond forfeitures.
The order and adjudication was approved by the Environmental Hearing Board on Jan. 5, 1995.
The reclamation proposal was designed and submitted by Copple-Rizzo 
Phase I of the project will reduce the flow of acid mine drainage discharging to an unnamed tributary to the Clarion River and Whites Run.
This will be accomplished by capping each discharge site with an impermeable barrier of alkaline coal ash blended with mine spoil to reduce water infiltration.
This process has proven effective in similar situations elsewhere in the state.
The ash, a waste material generated by burning coal, must meet DEP's criteria for beneficial use.
Its use does not harm or threaten public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
The ash will be applied according to the procedures and limits established by DEP's regulations for the use of coal ash at abandoned mine sites.
Francis J. Palo, Inc. of Clarion and Beneficial Ash Management of Morrisdale will implement the procedure in 10- to 20-acre parcels.
"The first step will be removing and stockpiling the top 6-12 inches of soil, which currently supports only sparse vegetation," Dolence said.
"The area will then be regraded to promote better surface water drainage across the sites and eliminate the ponded water that frequently occurs in low spots and leads to acid mine drainage production."
Afterwards, the alkaline coal ash will be spread in a two- to three-foot layer, forming a cementlike barrier, further reducing water infiltration, minimizing the volume of surface water coming in contact with the toxic spoil and coal refuse and, in turn, decreasing the production of acid mine drainage.
"The stockpiled soil will be augmented as needed to improve and sustain plant growth and redistributed across the sites," Dolence said.
"The area will then be planted using vegetation suitable for wildlife habitat as recommended by the Pennsylvania Game Commission."
Following the completion and evaluation of Phase I, acid mine drainage abatement of the remaining discharges will be undertaken in Phase II.
According to Dolence, the settlement calls for installing passive treatment systems "using the best available technology at that time.
The ultimate result should be a substantial improvement to the water quality of Whites Run and the Clarion River tributary," Dolence said.
Site Navigation
