[smbannertop.gif] [smNYSpictures.jpg]
Time for weighing out.
Back to Top 4228.4.
Jockey penalized for excess weight.
Back to Top 4225.2.
Equipment weighed with jockey.
If a horse runs in muzzle, martingale, breastplate or clothing, it must be put on the scale and included in the jockey's weight.
Back to Top 4225.3.
Equipment not weighed
No whip or substitute for a whip, blinkers or number cloth shall be allowed on the scales nor shall any bridle, safety vest or safety helmet approved by the stewards be weighed.
A safety vest shall weigh no more than two pounds and shall be designed to provide shock absorbing protection to the upper body, as evidenced by a label with at least a rating of five, by the British Equestrian Trade Association
(BETA).
Back to Top
4225.4.
Declaration of overweight.
If a jockey intends to carry overweight, he must declare the amount thereof at the time of weighing out, or if in doubt as to his proper weight, he may declare the weight he intends to carry.
Back to Top 4225.5.
Time for declaration of overweight.
If a jockey intends to carry overweight exceeding by more than two pounds the weight which his horse is to carry, the owner or trainer consenting, he must declare the amount of overweight to the clerk of the scales at least 45 minutes before the time appointed for the race, and the clerk shall cause the overweight to be stated on the notice board immediately.
For failure on the part of a jockey to comply with this section, he may be punished.
Back to Top 4225.6.
Five pounds overweight limit.
No horse shall carry more than five pounds overweight except in races confined exclusively to amateurs or to riders who are officers of the United States Army or Navy or of the National Guard.
Back to Top
4225.7.
Owner responsible for weight.
The owner is responsible for the weight carried by his horse.
Back to Top
4225.8.
Equipment regulated.
Only equipment specifically approved by the steward shall be worn or carried by a jockey or a horse in a race.
Back to Top
4226.1.
Duties of starter.
(a) The starter shall give all orders necessary for securing a fair start.
(b) He shall report to the judges, by whom and by what cause any delay was occasioned and any cases of misconduct by assistant starters or by jockeys when under his orders.
Back to Top
4226.2.
Failure of horse to start.
If a horse whose number has been exhibited or whose starting is obligatory does not start and run in the race, the steward or judges may suspend any person or persons responsible therefor.
Back to Top
4226.3.
Persons excluded from course.
After the horses are ordered to the starting post and until the judges direct the gates to be reopened, all persons except the racing officials shall be excluded from the course to be run over.
Back to Top
4226.4.
Time signals.
An announcer shall announce the time to saddle and the time to go to the post.
Back to Top
4226.5.
Parade to the post.
All horses shall parade and, under penalty of disqualification, shall carry their weight from the paddock to the starting post, such parade to pass the finish line.
Back to Top
4226.6.
Horse led to the post.
When, by permission of the paddock judge and upon payment to the association of $ 10, a horse is led to the post, he is excused from parading with the other horses, but nevertheless he must, on his way to the post, pass the judges' stand.
Back to Top
4226.7.
Determination of starting position.
The position of horses when starting shall be determined by lot, i.e., a numbered ball shall be drawn from a bottle by the clerk of the scales.
4226.8.
Starting vicious horse.
The starter may place vicious and unruly horses on the outside and behind the line.
Back to Top
4226.9.
Accident at the post.
A horse in the hands of the starter shall receive no further care from anyone at the starting post except the assistant starters, provided that if any accident happens to a jockey, his horse or his equipment, the starter may permit any jockey or jockeys to dismount and the horse to be cared for during the delay; otherwise no jockey shall dismount.
Back to Top
4226.10.
Starting gate.
(a) Except in cases provided for in subdivision (b) of this section, all races shall be started in a starting gate selected by the association conducting the meeting if approved by the commission.
A standby starting gate shall be available for use.
(b) By permission of the steward or judges a race may be started without a gate.
Back to Top
4226.11.
Starting in front of the post.
A start in front of the post is void, and the horses must be started again.
Back to Top
4226.12.
Horse to be schooled before starting.
All horses shall be schooled properly before starting and, upon the report of the starter, the judges may suspend any trainer who, after being notified shall start an unruly horse.
Back to Top
4226.13.
Position at starting post.
The horses shall be started as far as possible in a line, but may be started at such reasonable distance behind the starting post as the starter thinks necessary.
Back to Top
4226.14.
Matters to be referred to judges.
For disobedience of his orders at the starting post or for attempting any unfair advantage, the starter may refer the matter to the judges for action; but any penalty shall not take effect until after the last race of the day.
Back to Top
4226.15.
Statements by starter conclusive.
The concurrent statements of the starter and his assistant as to incidents of the start are conclusive.
Back to Top
4227.1.
[Repealed]
4227.2.
Foul riding penalized.
(a) When clear, a horse may be taken to any part of the course provided that crossing or weaving in front of contenders may constitute interference or intimidation for which the offender may be disciplined.
(b) A horse crossing another so as actually to impede him is disqualified, unless the impeded horse was partly in fault or the crossing was wholly caused by the fault of some other horse or jockey.
(c) If a horse or jockey jostles another horse, the aggressor may be disqualified, unless the impeding horse or his jockey was partly in fault or the jostle was wholly caused by the fault of some other horse or jockey.
(d) If a jockey willfully strikes another horse or jockey, or rides willfully or carelessly so as to injure another horse, which is no way in fault, or so as to cause other horses to do so, his horse is disqualified.
(e) If two or more horses are coupled in the betting as an entry, and one or more of them shall be disqualified for violation of the rules of racing, the balance of the entry shall also be disqualified if in the judgment of the stewards such violation prevented any other horse or horses from finishing ahead of the other part of the entry.
If said violation is without such effect upon the finish of the race, penalty therefor may be applied against the offender and the balance of the entry may go unpunished.
(f) Complaints under this section can only be received from the owner, trainer or jockey of the horse alleged to be aggrieved, and must be made to the clerk of the scales or to the judges before or immediately after his jockey has passed the scales.
But nothing in this section shall prevent the judges taking cognizance of foul riding.
(g) Any jockey against whom a foul is claimed shall be given the opportunity to appear before the judges before any decision is made by them.
(h) A jockey whose horse has been disqualified or who unnecessarily causes his horse to shorten his stride with a view to complaint, or an owner, trainer or jockey who complains frivolously that his horse was crossed or jostled, may be punished.
(i) The extent of disqualification shall be determined by the judges.
Back to Top
4227.3.
Results of intentional foul.
If the judges at any time are satisfied that the riding of any race was intentionally foul or that any jockey was instructed or induced so to ride, all persons guilty of complicity shall be suspended and the case shall be reported to the commission for such additional action as it may consider necessary.
Back to Top
4227.4.
Instructions to jockeys.
All horses are expected to give their best efforts in races in which they run, and any instructions or advice to jockeys to ride or handle their mounts otherwise than for the purpose of winning are forbidden, and will subject all persons giving or following such instructions or advice to disciplinary action by the judges and the commission.
Back to Top
4227.5.
Judges may declare race void, order refund.
The judges shall have the authority to declare a race void and to order all wagers made thereon refunded if they shall determine that any occurrence before or during the running of such race calls for such action by them.
Back to Top
4227.6.
Horse must return to course
If a horse leaves the course he must turn back and run the course from the point at which he left it.
Back to Top
4227.7.
Judge may dispense with walkover.
In a sweepstakes, if only one horse remains to start, the judge may dispense with a walkover.
Back to Top
4228.1.
Time, manner of weighing in.
Every jockey must immediately after pulling up ride his horse to the place of weighing, dismount only after obtaining permission from the official in charge and present himself to be weighed by the clerk of the scales; provided that if a jockey be prevented from riding to the place of weighing by reason of accident or illness by which he or his horse is disabled he may walk or be carried to the scales.
Back to Top 4228.2.
No one to touch horse equipment before weighing in.
Except by special permission of the official in charge, every jockey must upon pulling up unsaddle his own horse, and no attendant shall touch the horse, except by his bridle.
Upon the returning of a jockey to the winner's circle to dismount after a race has been run, no one may touch the equipment of the jockey until he has been weighed in, except upon the approval of the official in charge.
Back to Top 4228.3.
Jockey penalized for misconduct.,
If a jockey shall not present himself to weigh in or if he be more than one pound short of his weight or if he be guilty of any fraudulent practice with respect to weight or weighing or, except as provided in section 4228.1, if he dismount before reaching the scales or dismount without permission or if he touch (except accidentally) before weighing in any person or thing other than his own equipment, his horse may be disqualified and he himself may be punished as provided by this Subchapter.
Back to Top 4228.4.
Jockey penalized for excess weight.
If a horse carry more than two pounds over his proper or declared weight, his jockey shall be punished unless the judges are satisfied that such excess of weight has been caused by rain or mud.
Back to Top 4229.1.
Dead heat not run off.
When a race results in a dead heat, the dead heat shall not be run off; owners shall divide except where division would conflict with the conditions of the race.
Back to Top
4229.2.
Dead heat for first place.
When two horses run a dead heat for first place, all prizes to which first and second horses would have been entitled shall be divided equally between them; and this applies in dividing prizes whatever the number of horses running a dead heat and whatever places for which the dead heat is run.
Each horse shall be deemed a winner and liable to penalty for the amount he shall receive.
Back to Top
4229.3.
Objection made to winner.
When a dead heat is run for second place and an objection is made to the winner of the race and sustained, the horses which ran the dead heat shall be deemed to have run a dead heat for first place.
Back to Top
4229.4.
Judges to settle disputes.
If the dividing owners cannot agree as to which of them is to have a cup or other prize which cannot be divided, the question shall be determined by lot by the judges.
Back to Top
4229.5.
Dead heat for a match.
On a dead heat for a match, the match is off.
Back to Top
New York State Racing and Wagering Board 1 Watervliet Avenue Extension, Suite 2 Albany, NY 12206 Phone: (518) 453-8460 Last Updated: Tuesday, April 01, 2003 11:16 AM Send Questions or Comments to: mailto:info@racing.state.ny.us Please note: All emails are scanned for viruses.
Those found to be infected will be deleted without being viewed.
Disclaimer Statement
[ecommercelogo.gif]
