State of Wisconsin TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Red Government Actions Critical Facilities Protective Actions Anticipated Public Response Definition: A terrorist attack has occurred or credible and corroborated intelligence indicates that one is imminent.
"This threat condition is typically declared for a specific location or critical facility."
S E V E R E
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition SEVERE to employees and to the public and explain anticipated actions that should be taken.
Continue to assess the vulnerability of key assets and facilities.
Take appropriate action to protect.
Deny unauthorized access to critical facilities and infrastructure.
Continue inspections of personnel, vehicles and packages as appropriate.
Cancel or delay unnecessary employee travel and leave.
Activate the Emergency Operations Center as appropriate.
Establish a joint information center to disseminate information to the public and news media.
Deploy and secure equipment assets as needed.
Implement Mutual Aid Agreements as required.
Identify events where large attendance is anticipated and consider cancellation if warranted.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition SEVERE and explain expected actions.
Maintain close contact with local law enforcement.
Report suspicious activity immediately to local law enforcement Deploy security personnel based on threat assessments.
Provide security in parking lots and company areas.
Close or restrict entry to the facility and restrict parking areas close to critical buildings.
Maintain staffing as appropriate.
Restrict or suspend all deliveries and mail to the facility.
Activate Operations Center and send a liaison to the county or state EOC if requested.
Implement mutual aid agreements with government and with other critical facilities as required.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to: Closely monitor news reports and Emergency Alert System (EAS) radio/TV stations.
Report suspicious activities and call 9-1-1 for immediate response.
Be suspicious of persons taking photographs of critical facilities, asking detailed questions about physical security or dressed inappropriately for weather conditions (suicide bomber).
Report these incidents immediately to law enforcement.
Expect delays, searches of purses and bags and restricted access to public buildings.
Expect traffic delays and restrictions.
Avoid crowded public areas and gatherings.
Do not travel into areas affected by the attack or an expected terrorist target.
Keep emergency supplies accessible and automobile fuel tank full.
Be prepared to evacuate your home or shelter in place on order of local authorities.
Assist neighbors who may need help.
State of Wisconsin TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Orange Critical Facilities Protective Actions
Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Credible intelligence indicates that there is a high risk of a local terrorist attack but a specific target has not been identified.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition HIGH to employees and public and explain expected actions to be taken.
Closely monitor available security and intelligence data from state and local law enforcement agencies.
Instruct employees to be especially watchful for suspicious or unattended packages and articles received through the mail service or deliveries.
Inspect buildings and parking areas for suspicious packages.
Control access to government buildings, critical facilities and infrastructure as appropriate.
Remove trash containers, dumpsters and mailboxes located near government buildings and facilities.
Restrict parking areas located close to buildings or critical facilities as appropriate.
Secure and regularly inspect all buildings, vehicles, parking and storage areas for intrusion.
Test communication plans.
Officials will provide public information and rumor control as needed.
Identify events where large attendance is anticipated and plan accordingly.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition HIGH to all employees and discuss actions.
Monitor world and local events.
Relay credible threat intelligence to key personnel.
Ensure appropriate security measures are in place and functioning properly.
Instruct employees to report suspicious activities, packages and people.
Inspect all deliveries and consider accepting shipments only at offsite locations.
Restrict vehicle parking close to buildings as appropriate.
Inspect intrusion detection systems and lighting, security fencing and locking systems.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to: Continue normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to local law enforcement agencies.
Avoid leaving unattended packages or brief cases in public areas.
Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your children.
Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
H I G H
State of Wisconsin TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Yellow Critical Facilities Protective Actions but a specific region of the USA Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees.
Review vulnerability and threat assessments and revise as needed.
Identify and monitor governmental information sharing sources for warnings and alerts.
Update and test call down list for emergency response teams and key employees.
Establish and monitor active and passive security measures.
Review employee training on security precautions (bomb threat procedures, reporting suspicious packages, activities and people).
Review, coordinate, and update mutual aid agreements with other critical facilities and government agencies.
Conduct communications checks to ensure radio contact can be established.
Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response or target has not been identified.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to: Continue normal activities, but report suspicious activities to the local law enforcement agencies.
Learn what critical facilities are located in your community and report suspicious activities at or near these sites.
Network with your family, neighbors and community for mutual support during a disaster or terrorist attack.
Review your family emergency response plan and check emergency supplies of food and water.
Definition: Elevated risk of terrorist attack Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees and to the public.
Closely monitor current news events and state and federal terrorist advisories.
Keep the public informed on current threat conditions and advisories.
Review physical security plans for critical facilities.
Ensure all buildings are secured to prevent theft or tampering.
Conduct physical inspection of buildings for suspicious unattended packages.
Review existing physical security measures employed and install intrusion detection and passive systems as funding permits.
Coordinate with adjacent municipalities for mutual aid support in the event of a disaster or terrorist threat.
Conduct radio communication checks.
Conduct tabletop and functional exercises to ensure that response plans are understood and current.
E L
E V
A T
E
D
State of Wisconsin TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Blue Government Actions Critical Facilities Protective Actions Anticipated Public Response
Definition: General Risk with no credible threats to specific targets.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Ensure that key leaders are familiar with the emergency response and business resumption plans.
Review, update and routinely exercise emergency response plans.
Review and update the call down list for emergency response teams Develop or review Mutual Aid agreements with other facilities and/or with local government for use during emergencies.
Review physical security precautions.
Provide employee picture ID badges.
Control access and lock high security areas at all times.
Mark all security keys with "Do not Duplicate".
Install surveillance cameras, backup power, and alarm systems as appropriate.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Estimate the threat vulnerability of each critical facility and the countermeasures required to protect them.
Ensure that each department is familiar with their assigned responsibilities during a disaster.
Review communications plans and ensure the call-down procedures are current and accurate.
Conduct emergency management training and exercise emergency response plans.
Ensure all emergency management and response functions are adequately staffed.
Support the Neighborhood Watch, Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) and Amateur Radio Emergency Service programs.
Remind citizen and employees to be alert for suspicious packages, activities, vehicles and to report these occurrences to the proper authority.
Secure buildings, unused rooms, storage areas, equipment and vehicles.
Evaluate information available on public websites that could compromise security.
Encourage all citizens and employees to have necessary immunizations.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to: Continue normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to local law enforcement agencies.
Avoid leaving unattended packages or brief cases in public areas.
Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your children.
Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
G U A R D E D
State of Wisconsin TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Green Government Actions Critical Facilities Protective Actions Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Low risk of terrorism.
Routine security is implemented to preclude routine criminal threats.
Citizens are advised to: Develop emergency response and business resumption plans.
Develop a communications plan for emergency response and key personnel Conduct training for employees on physical security precautions.
Plan and budget for physical security measures.
Encourage and assist employees to be prepared for personal, natural and technological emergencies.
Identify critical facilities that may need protection.
Review Emergency Response Plans.
Conduct training, seminars, workshops and exercises using emergency response plans.
Conduct emergency preparedness training for citizens and employees.
Encourage response agencies (fire fighters, law enforcement, EMS, public works and elected officials) to take emergency management, American Red Cross first aid, CPR training and ICS training.
Conduct routine inventories of emergency supplies and medical aid kits.
Plan and budget for physical security measures.
Continue to enjoy individual freedom.
Participate freely in travel, work and recreational activities.
Develop a family emergency plan.
(See DESHS and American Red Cross brochures.)
Know how to turn off your power, gas and water service to your house.
Support the efforts of your local emergency responders (fire fighters, law enforcement and emergency medical service).
Volunteer to assist and support the community emergency response agencies.
Participate in volunteer organizations such as Citizen Corps or a Local Emergency Planning Committee.
L O w
