[smbannertop.gif] [smNYSpictures.jpg]
Powers reserved.
All powers of the commission not specifically defined in this Subchapter are reserved to the commission under the law creating the commission and specifying its powers and duties.
The commission may issue such orders and directives as may be deemed by it to be in the public interest and in the interest of quarter horse racing consistent with the provisions of chapter 1023 of the Laws of 1970, as amended.
Back to Top
4200.2.
Obligations of licensee.
Every license to hold a race meeting is granted by the commission upon the condition that the licensee shall enforce the laws of the State of New York and shall accept and enforce all rules and regulations and commission orders and directives.
It shall be the duty of every licensee and the officers, directors, employed officials and employees of the licensee to enforce the law, rules and regulations and orders and directives of the commission.
Failure to enforce, or comply with such rules and regulations, orders or directives may constitute sufficient cause for revocation of a license by the commission or result in a fine, suspension or other disciplinary action by the commission.
Back to Top
4200.3.
Amendments.
This Subchapter may be changed or amended by a majority of the commission at a regular or a special meeting.
An order or directive issued by the commission may likewise be changed or amended or overruled at a regular or special meeting of the commission.
The commission may adopt new rules and regulations, make exceptions or waive any rule or regulation in individual instances if in the judgment of the commission it may be deemed advisable.
However, such action shall not be deemed a precedent nor a waiver by the commission of any rule or regulation involving the same or a similar situation which may occur in the future.
Back to Top
4200.4.
[Repealed]
4200.5.
Modification of a decision.
The commission may rescind or modify any penalty or decision imposed or made by racing officials at any quarter horse racing meeting.
Back to Top
4201.1.
Definitions.
(a) Age of a horse.
The age of a horse shall be computed on the basis of a calendar year starting on January 1st of the year foaled.
It is a weanling during the calendar year in which foaled and a yearling during the first calendar year following its foaling date regardless of the time of year foaled.
(b) Allowance race.
Shall mean a race in which contestants carry weight allowance based on performance and/or winnings as stipulated in the conditions thereof.
(c) Appeal.
A request for the commission to consider and review any decision or ruling of a steward or judges of a meeting which shall include interpretations, conduct, penalties or any other questions relating to racing or the conduct of racing.
(d) Association or racing association.
Shall be deemed to mean any corporation authorized by chapter 1023 of the Laws of 1970, as amended, whether or not duly licensed by the commission.
(e) Authorized agent.
Shall mean an agent appointed by a notarized document signed by the owner and filed with the secretary of the racing meeting.
(f) Breeder.
Means the owner of its dam at the time of foaling.
A horse is bred at the place of his birth.
(g) Bookmaking or making book.
Shall be deemed to mean the acceptance or solicitation of a wager upon any result in a horse race, as defined by section 986 of the Penal Law, except through the duly licensed pari-mutuel system.
(h) Claiming race.
One in which any horse starting therein may be claimed for a designated amount in conformance with the rules.
(i) Classified race.
A race regardless of the money winnings, eligibility of horses, entries being selected by a race secretary on the basis of ability or performance.
(j) Commission or board shall be deemed to be the New York State Racing and Wagering Board.
(k) Conditioned race.
An overnight event to which eligibility is determined according to specified qualifications.
Such qualifications may only be based
upon:
(1) money winnings in a specified number of previous races or during a specified previous time;
(2) finishing positions in a specified number of previous races or during a specified period of time;
(3) age;
(4) sex;
(5) number of starts during a specified period of time;
(6) purses raced for;
(7) claiming price in past races
(8) any one or more combinations of the qualifications herein listed;
(9) other qualifications for which permission has been granted by the commission in writing.
(l) Coupled entry.
The combination of two or more starters in the same race as a unit for wagering and disqualification.
(m) Declaration.
A declaration is the withdrawal of a specific horse from a race before the closing of overnight entries.
(n) Disqualification.
A decision that a horse shall not start or shall not be allowed to maintain its finishing position for betting or purse purpose or both, if it shall have started.
(o) [Repealed]
(p) Entry.
Means according to the requirement of the text: (1) a horse eligible to run in a race; (2) two or more horses which are entered to run in a race by the same owner or trained by the same trainer.
(q) Field.
Means that when the individual horses competing in a race exceed the numbering capacity of the tote board, the highest numbered horse within the capacity of the tote board and all horses of a higher number shall be classified together in wagering and called the field.
(r) Futurity.
A stake in which the animal to compete is nominated either in utero or during the year of foaling.
(s) Graded quarter race.
Means a quarter horse race for which horses are arbitrarily classified by the race secretary on the basis of past performance.
(t) Handicap race.
Means a race in which weights to be carried by the entered horses are adjusted by the race secretary for the purpose of equalizing their respective changes of winning.
(u) Interference.
Whenever used, this term shall mean any act, which by design or otherwise, and regardless of actual contact, hampers or obstructs any competing horse or horses.
(v) Maiden.
Is a horse which at the time of starting has never won a race on a quarter horse race track whose results are recorded by the American Quarter Horse Chart Book.
For the purposes of this subdivision, the winner is that horse which has been declared the winner by the judges for the "official" pari-mutuel placing.
A maiden which has been disqualified after finishing first, but before the race is declared official, is still to be considered a maiden.
Races or purses awarded to a horse or denied to a horse after the "official" sign has been posted shall not affect its status as a maiden.
(w) Nomination.
The naming of a horse or its foal in utero to compete in a specific race or a series of races, eligibility for which may be conditioned upon the payment of a fee at the time of the naming, the payment of subsequent sustaining fees and/or a starting fee.
(x) Owner of stable.
Shall be deemed to include a part owner and a lessee and may comprise one or more natural persons in a partnership or any other form of collective ownership or control.
(y) Overnight event.
A race for which entries close not more than four days (omitting Sundays) before such race is to be contested.
All races other than stakes and early closing events shall be considered overnight events.
(z) Paddock.
An enclosure in which horses scheduled to compete in a race program are confined prior to racing.
(aa) Post position.
The position assigned to the horses at the starting line of the race.
(bb) Protest.
An objection properly sworn to charging that a horse is ineligible to race, alleging improper declaration or citing any act of an owner, trainer, or jockey or official prohibited by the rules, and which if true, should exclude the horse or jockey from the race.
(cc) Public trainer.
One who trains as an independent contractor rather than as an employee.
(dd) Purse race.
A race for money or a prize to which the owners of the horses do not contribute an entry fee of more than $ 50.
(ee) Quarter horse racing.
The term quarter horse racing as used in this Subchapter shall be construed to mean only horse racing in which the horses participating are mounted by a jockey and registered by the American Quarter Horse Association.
(ff) Race track or track.
Shall be deemed to mean any and all parts of the plant of a racing association including, but not limited to, the racing strip, the approaches and entrances, the stands and all other accommodations and facilities provided for the public, the stables, barns, paddocks, quarters of jockeys and others employed in or about the track, judges' and stewards' boxes, photo- finish and film plants, pari-mutuel offices, facilities and equipment, totalizator and public announcement systems.
(gg) Rules and regulations.
Shall be deemed to include the rules and regulations adopted by the commission and orders or directives of the commission applicable to administration and racing unless another meaning is clearly indicated.
(hh) Scratched.
Means withdrawal of a horse entered in a race after the closing of overnight entries.
(ii) Stakes.
A race in which the money given by the track conducting the same is added to the money contributed by the nominators, all of which, except deductions for the cost of nominators or other awards, belong to the winner or winners.
In any event, all of the money contributed by the nominators, must be paid to the winner or winners.
Where definite purse is offered, same shall be known as a "guaranteed stakes."
(jj) Starter.
(1) Official who dispatches the horses from the starting gate.
(2) A horse is a starter when the stall doors of the starting gate open in front of it at the time the official starter dispatches the horses.
(kk) Suspension.
Whenever the term suspension is referred to, unless otherwise specifically limited, it shall be construed to mean the unconditional exclusion and disqualification from every phase of quarter horse racing, either directly or indirectly, on or off the track or admission to the track as a patron or otherwise.
(ll) Gender.
Words of the masculine gender include the feminine and the neuter and may refer to a partnership or other form of ownership or control, and words in the singular include the plural and words in the plural include the singular.
(mm) Association veterinarian.
A veterinarian licensed by the board and employed by a racing association or corporation.
(nn) Attending veterinarian.
A veterinarian licensed by the board and hired by the owner or trainer.
Back to Top
4202.1.
General policy.
General policy on all racing matters is to be declared by the board at their meetings or by unanimous consent in writing.
The administration thereof shall be the duty of the chairman acting through the staff of the board.
Back to Top
4202.2.
Meetings.
Regular meetings of the board shall be held monthly at an office of the board.
Special meetings may be had at any time on the call of the chairman or of any two members.
Back to Top
4202.3.
[Repealed]
4202.4.
Track office.
The commission shall establish and maintain an office for its use at each track.
4202.5.
Racing program.
The commission may require that the names of the commissioners, and specified employees and other information appear on daily racing programs.
Back to Top
4202.6.
American Quarter Horse Association.
The commission shall inform the American Quarter Horse Association of its rules and regulations and any changes therein and all penalties imposed which shall be of interest to it.
Back to Top
4202.7.
Form of commission orders.
Whenever the commission has adopted a rule or regulation or has rendered a decision, whether on appeal or otherwise, or made an order or directive, the signature of any of the commissioners or the chairman shall be sufficient, however, such signature shall not be required if the secretary of the commission shall certify to the decision, order or directive and his signature on such written order or any form of determination, or on any promulgation thereof, shall be valid and effective as evidencing the official action taken by the commission.
Back to Top
4202.8.
Betting by minors.
No licensed association or corporation shall permit any person who is actually and apparently under 18 years of age to bet at a race meeting conducted by it.
Back to Top
4202.9.
Issuance of subpoenas.
Each member of the commission and such officers, employees or agents of the commission, as may be designated by the commission for such purpose, shall have the power to administer oaths and examine witnesses and may issue subpoenas to compel attendance of witnesses and the production of all relevant materials and reports, books, papers, documents, correspondence and any other evidence.
Back to Top
4202.10.
Hearing officers.
Each commissioner or any employee of the commission so designated by the commission, may act as a hearing officer in reference to any matter pending before the commission.
Such hearing officer, after taking all evidence, oral or written, and receiving all material exhibits, shall report his findings to the commission and the commission shall determine such matter as if the evidence had been presented to the full commission.
The legal rules as to the admissibility of evidence shall not be applicable to any hearing held before the commission, a commissioner or hearing officer.
Back to Top
4202.11.
Punishment by commission.
The commission may punish independently any misconduct of any person connected with racing.
Back to Top
4202.12.
Punishment of violations.
Violation of any rule or regulation or order or directive of the commission, whether or not a penalty is fixed in the rules and regulations, or in such order or directive is punishable in the discretion of the commission by revocation or suspension of a license and exclusion from all racing enclosures under the jurisdiction of the commission.
A violation by the holder of a track license in conducting a racing meeting may be punishable by revocation, suspension or denial of a future license or by fine.
Back to Top
4202.13.
Credentials or stickers.
Credentials issued by the commission to its members, employees and appointees shall be honored by racing associations for admission at all gates and entrances and to all places within the enclosure of any race track, and automobiles carrying official windshield stickers of the commission or other identification issued by the commission shall be permitted and ingress and egress at any point.
Back to Top
4202.14.
Decisions of racing judges.
Every person participating in and every patron at a licensed meeting shall abide by the laws and the rules and regulations, and accept a steward or judge's decision on any and all questions to which their authority extends, subject to the right of appeal to the commission.
Back to Top
4203.1.
[Repealed]
4203.2.
Temporary employees.
The chairman may arrange for the employment of such temporary employees for such period as he may deem necessary, within the lawful appropriation therefor, upon approval by the commission.
Back to Top
4203.3.
Compensation
The staff of the commission, both permanent and temporary, shall receive such compensation for their services as may be determined annually by the commission within the lawful appropriation therefor; and no increase or decrease in such compensation shall be made except with the consent of the commission.
Back to Top
4203.4.
Race meeting official.
No member of the staff of the commission shall at any time or place, either in the State of New York or elsewhere, act as an official at any race meeting, whether for compensation in any form or otherwise, without the formal consent of the commission, in writing.
Back to Top
4203.5.
Termination of employment.
The chairman is authorized to terminate the employment of any member of the staff of the commission at any time after such termination has been approved at a meeting of the commission.
Back to Top
4203.6.
Retirement.
Each member of the commission upon retirement shall have the title of honorary steward in recognition of his services, with such duties, rights and privileges as may be specified by the commission.
Back to Top
4204.1.
Race meeting license.
All quarter horse racing corporations or associations formed pursuant to the Quarter Horse Racing Law of the State of New York desiring to conduct a race meeting with pari-mutuel wagering thereon must obtain a license annually from the commission.
All licenses shall be deemed conditioned upon compliance with the laws of the State of New York, the rules and regulations of the commission, payment of salaries, fees and taxes required by statute, payment of charges for the operation of the commission laboratory for chemical analysis of samples, and the proper installation, operation and maintenance of equipment and devices for the conduct, timing and monitoring of races which the commission shall prescribe as necessary or desirable in the public interest.
Back to Top
4204.2.
Temporary licenses
The commission may, in considering either an initial track license or pending final determination of any question with respect to the granting of an annual license, issue a temporary license upon such terms and conditions as it may deem necessary, desirable or proper to effectuate the purposes of the Quarter Horse Racing Law and the rules and regulations of the commission.
Such temporary license may be issued subject to the written acceptance of the terms and conditions therein prescribed and in the event that such written acceptance is not received by the commission within the time prescribed, the commission may refuse to issue such temporary license.
Back to Top
4204.3.
Application form.
Application for a license to conduct a quarter horse racing meeting with pari-mutuel wagering shall be submitted to the commission in such form as may be approved by the commission and the commission may require that such form shall contain a provision for an oath of a duly authorized officer of the applicant corporation or association or by the applicant desiring a track license.
The commission may call for further data and information or it may require the applicant or any officer or employee to appear in person before it.
Back to Top
4204.4.
License./P
Upon receipt of an application satisfactory in form and content to the commission, the commission may grant an initial license or a temporary license for a term of days during the current racing year during which the applicant may conduct quarter horse racing with pari-mutuel wagering.
Such license shall specify the place where and the hours of the day or night during which racing and pari-mutuel wagering shall be held.
Back to Top
4204.5.
Duty of licensee.
A licensee conducting quarter horse racing with pari-mutuel wagering, their officers, directors, officials, and employees, shall be responsible for the conduct of such racing meetings and each shall observe and enforce this Subchapter, the orders and directions of the commission, the Pari- Mutuel Revenue Law and the Quarter Horse Racing Law.
Back to Top
4204.6.
Denial of license.
The commission may refuse to issue a license to conduct a race meeting with pari-mutuel wagering when, in its judgement, such refusal shall appear to be in the best interest of racing and of the public.
Back to Top
4204.7.
Transfer of license.
No license or any part thereof shall be transferable or assignable in any manner or in any particular.
Back to Top
4204.8.
Financial reports
Each racing association shall furnish to the commission within 60 days after the close of its fiscal year, four copies of its balance sheet and of its operating statement for such fiscal year with comparison to the prior year, the same to be duly sworn to before a notary public by the treasurer or an authorized officer of such racing association and certified by a duly licensed certified public accountant and be in such form as may be prescribed from time to time by order of the commission.
Back to Top
4204.9.
Policing of grounds.
Each licensee shall police its grounds at all times and preclude admission of any authorized persons in and around the stables, paddocks or other security areas.
Back to Top
4204.10.
Financial reports of concessionaires.
Any person, firm, association or corporation, who holds, any concessions, right or privilege, to perform any service or sell any article at any quarter horse race track at which pari-mutuel meets are conducted must submit to the commission a copy of each report, advice or other document which that person, firm, association or corporation furnishes or is required to furnish to the licensed quarter horse racing association or corporation pursuant to any agreement written or oral, with such racing association or any other arrangement between such parties.
At the end of each racing meeting, such person, firm, association or corporation shall prepare and send to the commission a record of its operations at the track in the form of a profit and loss statement.
Such report shall contain detailed statement of revenues and expenses paid or accrued during the period and shall be sworn to by at least two of the principal officers of such firm.
Such report must be filed with the commission within 30 days after the end of each racing meeting.
Such firm, person, association or corporation shall also submit to the commission a verified financial statement including a balance sheet, supporting schedules, and such other details as may fully acquaint the commission with all of the facts pertaining to its operation during the year.
These reports shall be filed within 75 days after the end of the calendar or fiscal year of such person, firm, association or corporation.
Back to Top
4204.11.
Information to be furnished by concessionaires.
Any persons, firm, association or corporation which holds any concession, right or privilege to perform any services or sell any article at any track at which pari-mutuel quarter horse racing meets are conducted must submit to the commission the names of all personnel employed at the track including such information that the commission shall require concerning each employee, copies of all written contracts and agreements and a summary of all verbal contracts and agreements, list of stockholders annually, list of officers and directors and annual compensation paid to each and upon the sale or transfer of any stock of any concessionaire, evidence of such sale or transfer must be submitted to the commission by affidavit verifying that said transfer or sale is in compliance with section 63 of article 3 of the Pari-Mutuel Revenue Law, as amended.
Back to Top
4204.12.
Badge identification system.
(a) Each quarter horse racing association or corporation shall implement and maintain an identification system for all persons entering the stable area of the track.
The stable area includes the backstretch and paddock areas.
(b) All persons present in the stable area shall wear in plain view the identification badge issued by the quarter horse racing association or corporation except that in the case of board employees, each shall conspicuously wear his board identification credentials.
(c) No identification badge may be issued unless the recipient has a current board license and is duly listed on a trainer's stable registration or badge list or is listed on a race track approved list maintained by the association.
Such a list may include, but need not be limited to track officials, track employees, vendors and concessionaires.
(d) All other persons must obtain a guest identification badge before entering the stable area.
Guest identification badges shall clearly identify the recipient and may be issued only upon the request of and after identification by a licensed trainer or owner.
A log of all persons to whom a guest identification badge has been issued and their sponsors shall be maintained by the quarter horse racing association or corporation.
Guests must be logged in and out.
(e) The quarter horse racing association or corporation shall also maintain a list of the individuals to whom identification badges have been issued, together with the date of issue and position of each recipient.
(f) The identification badge issued by the quarter horse racing association or corporation must contain a color photograph of the individual to whom issued, his name, address, occupation or position, date of birth and the signature of the person to whom it will be issued.
The badge shall be laminated both front and back and contain a clasp so that the identification badge may be worn in plain view.
(g) The identification badges issued by the quarter horse racing association or corporation shall be color coded by category as follows: horsemen, green; grooms and other backstretch employees, yellow; track officials and employees, red; vendors and concessionaires, blue; guests, brown.
(h) Persons failing to wear photographic identification badges or failing to obtain a visitor's pass before entering the stable area are subject to ejection from the grounds, and/or fine and/or license suspension and/or license revocation.
Back to Top
4204.13.
Disputes.
Disputes between a regional corporation and a track with respect to the purposes or objectives set forth in section 518 of the Racing, Pari-Mutuel Wagering and Breeding Law shall be submitted in writing to the board for determination.
The board may make its determination based on the submissions or may hold a hearing on the matter.
The board's determination shall be final.
Failure to comply with the board's determination by any party shall subject the person or persons responsible therefor to disciplinary action.
Back to Top
4204.14.
Internet posting to assist compulsive gamblers.
Each racing association, which maintains a website on the Internet, shall post on its home page a message designed to assist compulsive gamblers.
Such posting shall include, but not be limited to a notice of the availability of one or more organizations approved by the Commissioner of Mental Health, pursuant to the provisions of section 7.09(g) of the Mental Hygiene Law, which offer assistance in dealing with problem of compulsive gambling.
Back to Top
New York State Racing and Wagering Board 1 Watervliet Avenue Extension, Suite 2 Albany, NY 12206 Phone: (518) 453-8460 Last Updated: Tuesday, April 01, 2003 11:16 AM Send Questions or Comments to: mailto:info@racing.state.ny.us Please note: All emails are scanned for viruses.
Those found to be infected will be deleted without being viewed.
Disclaimer Statement
[ecommercelogo.gif]
