The Human Touch www.dhs.state.ut.us November 1999 TOGETHER WE MAKE A DIFFERENCE Issues of coordination surfaced also with the Department of Corrections both from DHS and from the law enforcement meetings held on the tour.
Some of the concerns related to mental health services for state inmates in county jails, colocation issues, and substance abuse services for offenders.
Since the trip, a report from the Substance Abuse and Corrections Coordinating Group has been created, recommending to the Governor that a portion of the state proceeds from the tobacco settlement be used to fund services in this area.
Corrections leadership and we at DHS hope the issues addressed in the report will be implemented during the next couple of years.
Youth Corrections' involvement in the law enforcement meetings instigated an effort to bring a receiving center on line in the Kanab area.
We will also ask the legislature for funds to add 26 beds to the Washington County Youth Center.
On a very positive side, staff in the Cedar City and St. George areas were very complimentary regarding the early success they have seen with the new Foster Care Foundation.
This is the private foundation Governor Leavitt spearheaded to provide recruitment, training, and retention efforts with foster parents.
On the trip we learned that 95 families had been recruited and started training ­ if even half of these complete training and licensing, that will double the number of available foster homes in this area of the state.
I heard many DHS staff voice concerns regarding state vehicles.
While we are still working on several motor pool issues, I can report progress in a couple of areas.
It seems we have been issued vehicles that are not conducive to the work we do ­ for instance, cars at DCFS offices without safety locks on the doors and windows, cars too small to transport kids, natural gas cars in rural areas with no source of fuel.
continue on page 4
From Robin's Pen ANSWERS FROM THE BUS ast month I reflected on the first "Taking the Capitol to the People" bus tour.
In that article I committed to respond to a few of the questions and concerns we heard from staff, providers, and constituents.
We are still working on some of the issues, but I'd like to answer some of them in this column.
Throughout the tour, I heard several concerns for families that will be hitting their 36month time limit for receiving TANF this coming January.
In many cases these are families served by the Department of Workforce Services and by Human Services.
I have encouraged all DHS local leaders to sit down with DWS and make sure we are doing all that is possible to prevent these families from falling through the cracks.
Since returning from the bus trip, I met with my counterpart from DWS, Bob Gross, to discuss these issues.
He is equally committed to work with us in helping these families.
I am receiving a weekly report from DWS that details the status of all families reaching their 36-month limit including an accounting for those who will be eligible for an extension and those that will likely have their case closed.
The 25 October report shows 170 cases that will likely close at the end of this year.
I continue to challenge all DHS agencies to work with DWS for the benefit of our mutual clients
L
ALL ABOARD! TRAX HITS THE TRACKS by Lauri McCreary Office of Administrative Support I think I can...I think I can...I know I can.
This little ditty from The Little Engine That Could reminds us that TRAX (Transit Express) will begin service by offering free rides on Saturday, 4 December.
These complimentary rides will be available from 11:00 am to 9:00 pm. TRAX will inaugurate full fare service on Monday, December 6, 1999.
At this writing, the schedule has not been finalized, though UTA plans to run the trains Monday through Saturday from 5:30 am to midnight.
Fare will be $1.00.
DHS will pay for 90% of a monthly pass if you ride TRAX or a bus at least ten days per month.
Watch for more details of TRAX schedules in the December issue of The Human Touch.
Davis County.
In order to get signatures (which is usually several times per week) they often have to drive to Ogden to get them.
This kind of thing happens not only here in my situation but as you can imagine throughout the other parts of the state.
I believe the excess driving can be remedied.
I remember not to long ago the Governor signing into law a statute that allowed electronic signatures to be utilized for purposes like the one I've just described...
It is my belief that utilizing this technology can and will save thousands of dollars, [labor] hours, and address environmental concerns like air pollution and natural resource utilization."
Gary Dalton, Director of the Division of Youth Corrections, praised Ted's idea to apply the electronic signature technology, saying, "electronic signatures should be considered not only for the case manager reports he is talking about but for 100's of other applications in my division alone."
Congratulations to Ted Groves, winner of this month's $100 Dollars 
Each month the Department of Human Services solicits money-saving ideas from employees.
The suggestions are judged on the basis of 1) Demonstrated savings, 2) Department-wide application, and 3) Original thinking.
Each month the Human Touch newsletter will publish one of the best ideas received.
The employee submitting the suggestion will receive a $100 cash incentive.
Email your efficiency or money-saving ideas to Randy Ripplinger, or by fax to 801-538-4016.
E-SIGNATURES COULD SAVE MONEY A Dollars 
Here's the idea, in the words of Youth Corrections Supervisor Ted Groves: "My Office is in Ogden and most of the people who need my signatures are spread across
HOW TO SAVE 30% OF YOUR MEDICAL AND CHILD CARE COSTS So, you hear that it's open enrollment for the FLEX Program.
Again, you ask yourself..
what is the FLEX Program and how would it benefit me? Some of us have health care, day care, and dependant care expenses which are not covered by medical or dental insurance.
FLEX$ is a program designed to save you money by allowing you to pay for approved out-of-pocket health and dependant care expenses with money that is not taxed.
How does FLEX$ accomplish this? The
amount you choose is deducted automatically from your paycheck every pay period before Federal, State, and Social Security taxes.
This tax free money is then stored in an account; and is reimbursed to you, tax free, when you submit a FLEX$ claim with documentation for the expenses that have been acquired.
For example, if you spend $2,600 per year in child care expenses, you would have $100 saved in FLEX from each check.
Since you pay no taxes on that money, about $70 (depending on your tax bracket) would be deducted from your check, but your FLEX account is credited with $100 for you to spend on child care.
Your annual savings would be about $780! Before enrolling in FLEX$, take some time to review your family's medical, dental, and vision care expenses from the previous year.
Dependent care may not be as predictable, but try to estimate the amount that you anticipate to pay over the next year.
If your estimated amount totals $260 or more and you would like to see what you could save in the next year, arrange to meet with your payroll tech.
With a computer program called Pay-Breeze, they can give you a general idea of your possible savings.
Here are some FLEX$ BASICS: · FLEX$ is a program with two accounts -- one for Health Care and one for Dependant Care.
· You can enroll in one or both programs.
· The minimum contribution to participate is $10.00 per pay day, per account.
· The maximum is $5,000.00 a year for the Health Care account.
· The maximum for Dependent Care depends on marital and tax filing status, but does not exceed $5,000.00.
Keep in mind that you must re-enroll in FLEX$ every year that you wish to participate.
The deadline for year 2000 enrollment is December 3, 1999.
For further information regarding FLEX or to enroll contact your Payroll Tech or access DHRM's web site at www.dhrm.state.ut.us/Comp/PEHP/98flex~1.htm
YOUTH CORRECTIONS "GENISIS" KIDS SCORE POINTS WITH HIGHLAND GAMES Ten residents from the Genesis Unit of Youth Corrections got a perfect score from officials of the Utah Scottish Highland Games recently.
These youthful offenders weren't competitors, but according to the chairman of the games, "the kids were an incredible asset to the viability of our festival."
Last June, 10 residents from the Genesis Youth Center (GYC) at the Murray Park worked for the Scottish Highland Games.
Staff and residents began at 8:00 a.m. setting up everything from tents to booths, to stages and fences.
The residents worked until 5:30 pm on Saturday and until 9:30 Sunday night.
When the festival was completed, GYC dismantled and put away all of the equipment used for the festival.
Youth Corrections officials say the staff and residents worked extremely hard and did much more than was expected of them.
Kevin Nixon, Chris Lopez and Bob White were the staff responsible for the high level of work produced by the GYC staff.
A letter from Utah Scottish Highland Games Chairman, Jeffrey Mann, lavished the GYC with praise and thanks.
"The work furnished by your group for our event was far more effective in helping us than any other scout or volunteer group that we had lined up," he wrote.
"When your group showed up we had our whole layout and setup finished in record time.
I was extremely impressed...
They proved to be in my opinion very professional in manner."
Mann added, "I cannot even begin to explain the feelings of gratitude we had when we heard that your group was willing to help us unload the trucks [after the Games]."
GYC residents and staff also work for the Greek Festival and Hispanic Festival each year.
PRESIDENT AWARDS DCFS FOR ADOPTION SERVICES The President and First Lady awarded Utah in September for the state's efforts in finding adoptive homes for hundreds of abused and
neglected children.
The Clinton's invited Utah Human Services officials to the White House Friday, 24 September to receive the commendation, which included a grant to help find homes for other children in state custody.
Department of Human Services Executive Director Robin Arnold-Williams and Ken Patterson, Director of the Division of Child and Family Services, represented Utah.
The commendations were granted to those states which met or exceeded their adoption goals when compared with prior years.
Utah ranks highly among the 34 successful states.
During the base years measured by the federal government, 1995-1997, Utah found adoptive families for an average of 225 children per year.
In 1998, the number of state custody children who were adopted climbed to 328, a 46% increase.
"While we're proud of the fact that our child welfare system has responded so well," said Ken Patterson, " But I'm primarily pleased that these kids have a permanent place they can call home.
The families who adopted the children are the real heroes."
Utah Child and Family Services currently has 268 children being cared for in foster homes until more adoptive families come forward.
September's ceremonies attracted national news attention as well as interviews of Robin Arnold Williams and Ken Patterson by Charles Sherrill, Washington D.C. correspondent for KSL Television.
The final issue I will cover this month is a question raised in St. George.
That was whether additional flexibility in the classification of social work positions is possible to allow for recruitment based on all levels (SSW, HSW, CSW) and then selection based on the most qualified applicants.
I will shortly be sending out a memo Department wide to answer this in detail.
For now, the short answer is that DHRM has granted permission to underfill a Licensed Clinical Therapist position with a Certified Social Worker or Social Service Worker.
However, underfill at the Human Service Worker level cannot be granted as individuals in those positions are not licensed and granting underfill at that level would violate the State Mental Health Professional Practice Act.
Even as I finish writing this article, we are in the process of getting ready for "Taking the Capitol to the People II ­ The Sequel! The Governor and Cabinet are packing up and hitting the road again on 4-5 November.
We will be visiting Price, Moab, and Monticello.
On this trip, most of the DHS Executive Leadership Team will be joining me for the DHS meetings so they also can hear your views first hand.
We look forward to seeing you soon.
Creating a New Folder in Word 97 Tech Tip by Janice DeVore Have you wondered how to create a new folder in Word 97? The trick is that you need to be in either a new document and click on File Save or for an existing document click on File Save As in order to see the new folder icon in the Save as dialog box.
Use the following steps to create a new folder.
You can also create new folders by using "My Computer" or "Windows Explorer".
1.
Create a new document and click on the File option on the Menu bar and then click on Save or
cont. - Answers From the Bus From what I am told, the placement of Compressed Natural Gas cars in rural areas is a function of the percentage of fleet purchases mandated by the National Energy Act.
I am further told that the State Fleet Office is continuing to research options for the best mix and assignment of these cars.
I am equally concerned about the lack of safety features on the cars you use to transport kids, as well as the issue of unmarked cars where your safety, and the safety of those you serve, may be compromised.
Because of the broad concerns regarding these vehicles, the DHS Office of Administrative Support will be conducting a statewide survey during the second week in November to solicit feedback which will then be used to advocate your needs in our discussions with State Fleet Operations.
Open an existing document and click on the File option on the Menu bar and then click Save As.
2.
Open the folder that you want to create the new folder in.
3.
Click on the third button on the toolbar in the Save As dialog box.
(It looks like a plain manila folder with a starburst in the upper right-hand corner; i.e., "New Folder") 4.
Type in the new folder name.
5.
Click OK.
6.
Open the new folder that you just created.
Click Save.
The Human Touch Published by the Utah Department of Human Services
Robin Arnold-Williams Executive Director Edited by Randy Ripplinger, 120 North 200 West, #319, Salt Lake City, Utah 84103.
Articles or ideas welcome.
Send e-mail, FAX 801/538-4016 or call 801/538-3991.
Deadline is the 10th of the month.
All articles subject to editing.
WWW.DHS.STATE.UT.US
NOVEMBER 1999 CALENDAR 1 New Employee Orientation, 8:00 ­ 4:30, DHS Admin Bldg. #129, SLC, call or email Shannon Pruett, 801-538-4353 4-5 Forensic Mental Health Conference, Utah State Hospital, Danette Farett-Brady at (801) 3444217 9-10 DHS Supervisory Training Performance Management 3 
