NW S FORM E-5 (11-88) (PRES.
BY W SOM E-41) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE HYDROLOGIC SERVICE AREA (HSA) NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION NATIONAL W EATHER SERVICE Ne w Or l e a ns / Ba t on Rouge , LA REPORT FOR: MONTHLY REPORT OF RIVER AND FLOOD CONDITIONS MONTH: JUNE SIGNATURE YEAR : 2003 TO: Hyd r o m e te o r o lo g ic a l In f o r m a tio n Ce n te r , W /OH2 N O A A / National W eather Service 1325 East W est Highway, Room 7230 Silver Spring, MD 20910-3283 P a u l S .
T ro tt e r, M IC In Charge of HSA DATE August 5, 2003 When no flooding occurs, include miscellaneous river conditions, such as significant rises, record low stages, ice conditions, snow cover, droughts, and hydrologic products issued (WSOM E-41). ...Corrections/Additions in Italics... ...Wet weather developed throughout June before copious rainfall arrived with Tropical Storm Bill on June 30...
Heavy rainfall during early May over the Ohio River Valley eventually reached both the Mississippi River and the Atchafalaya River.
Minor flooding developed in Louisiana at Morgan City on the Atchafalaya River on May 17.
On June 6, the river crested at 6.0 feet, which was 2.0 feet above its flood stage.
However, flooding continued through the entire month and into July due to frequent afternoon and evening convection over the region and upstream.
The Mississippi River flooded at Red River Landing from May 23 until June 8.
The river crested at 3.4 feet above the flood stage of 48.0 feet on June 1.
No major damage occurred at either location.
Showers and thunderstorms developed almost every day of June over southeastern Louisiana, southern Mississippi and the coastal counties of Mississippi.
During the first two weeks, several strong frontal boundaries interacted with diurnal heating and the abundant moisture over the Lower Mississippi River Valley to produce heavy rainfall.
Supported by significant upper-level low pressure systems, several of these boundaries lingered over the region and/or became near-stationary at times.
Cumulative amounts of more than six inches occurred during the first week, mainly over southeastern Louisiana.
Rainfall totals for the second week averaged between one inch and four inches over the region.
During the second half of June, weak high pressure developed over the central United States about June 19 and basically dominated the weather through the end of the month.
Still, several strong systems and weak impulses focused showers and thunderstorms over the Lower Mississippi River Valley.
Areal rain totals generally averaged from around 1.25 inches to more than 3.0 inches from June 15 through June 21.
Totals from June 22 through June 28 averaged from around 1.5 inches to more than 4.0 inches.
The frequent heavy rainfall over the area and upstream caused the Lower Pearl River to flood at Bogalusa, Louisiana.
The river crested at 18.3 feet on June 22, which was 0.3 feet above the flood stage.
No major damage occurred.
Through June 28, rainfall totals were well above average for the month, with cumulative amounts ranging from near ten inches to around fifteen inches at many locations.
Copious rainfall occurred June 29 through June 30, as Tropical Storm Bill approached the region and made landfall.
Two-day rain totals over six inches were measured in Jefferson, St. Tammany, Livingston, St. Bernard, Plaquemines, Washington, Tangipahoa, and Orleans Parishes of Louisiana, as well as in Pearl River, Jackson, and Hancock Counties of Mississippi.
The greatest measured two-day rainfall occurred at Folsom in St. Tammany Parish, where 10.16 inches fell.
From 6:00 P.M. CDT on June 29 through 6:00 P.M. CDT on June 30, radar estimated that ten to twelve inches fell over Jackson County in Mississippi.
Flash floods, along with widespread urban and small stream flooding, occurred over the southeastern Louisiana parishes, along with Pearl River County and the coastal counties of Mississippi.
The tropical system produced storm surge flooding along the coastal areas of southeast Louisiana and over areas immediately bordering Lake Pontchartrain.
Aside from streets and major roadways being obstructed, homes and businesses flooded in St. Tammany Parish at Mandeville and at Slidell.
Structures were flooded in parts of St. Bernard Parish.
The most significant storm surge flooding occurred over southern Terrebonne Parish, when a local levee was breached and/or overtopped in the Montegut area.
Several structures were flooded as a result.
Major river flooding developed in St. Tammany Parish when both the Bogue Falaya River and the Tchefuncte River flooded at Covington on June 30.
By midnight CDT July1, the Bogue Falaya River was near 13.0 feet in downtown Covington (Boston Street); flood stage is 6.0 feet.
The Bogue Falaya River was near 56.2 feet at Camp Covington by midnight CDT July 1; flood stage is 45.0 feet.
On the Tchefuncte River, the stage at U.S. Highway 190 in Covington was near 24.4 feet by midnight CDT July 1; the flood stage is 20 feet.
Water entered several businesses and homes, resulting in considerable damages.
Flooding continued on the Bogue Falaya River and Tchefuncte River into July.
Additional river flooding developed in Louisiana on June 30 at Robert on the Tangipahoa River and at Folsom on the Tchefuncte River.
At Robert, the river rose to near 16.2 feet by midnight July 1, which is 1.2 feet above the flood stage.
At Folsom, the Tchefuncte River rose to near 18.7 feet by midnight, which is 2.7 feet above the flood stage.
Additional Harrison C In Harrison The Biloxi river flooding developed in Pearl River County at McNeil, Mississippi and along the Mississippi Gulf coast in ounty.
At McNeil, the West Hobolochitto Creek rose to near 18.4 feet, which is 3.4 feet above the flood stage.
County, the Tchoutacabouffa River rose to around 10.4 feet at D'Iberville, which is 2.4 feet above its flood stage.
River rose to around 13.0 feet near Lyman; flood stage is 12.0 feet.
Flooding continued into July.
