THE AMES NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION January 15, 1999 Astrogram and evolution of life in the universe," said Salama.
"It is a key issue for astrobiology and could demonstrate that life's essential, pre-biotic, carbon-based building blocks are abundant in the ISM."
Without carbon, life as we know it would not exist.
The element plays key roles in the evolution of stars, planets and human bodies because carbon is abundant and can form complex structures.
PAH research may also help to solve a problem that scientists have struggled with for most of the century.
They have detected more than 100 mysterious interstellar "holes" in the spectra of starlight.
Scientists now believe that a form of PAHs might be the unknown matter producing these interstellar holes (or bands in the spectra).
PAHs, thought to be formed in a star's atmosphere, are stable carbon molecules formed at high temperatures.
They can
AMES RESEARCH CENTER, MOFFETT FIELD on-line@http://ccf.arc.nasa.gov/dx/
Ames astrobiologist seeks clues to origin of life An Ames scientist has shown that organic chemistry is abundant in the universe, implying that carbon-based life is possible beyond Earth's boundaries.
In a paper published in the December 18 issue of Science titled "Carbon in the Universe," Ames researcher Farid Salama, collaborating with Thomas Henning of the Astrophysikalisches Institut in Jena, Germany, reports finding the unique signatures of an exotic form of carbon in deep space.
Known as PAHs (short for polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons), these carbonbased molecules, shaped like fragments of chicken wire, are thought to be ubiquitous in space.
The existence of PAHs in the interstellar medium (ISM) may explain the mysterious spectral signatures that are common throughout interstellar space.
"Understanding the makeup of the ISM will help us better understand the origin withstand the intense radiation and harsh environment of interstellar space.
On Earth, PAHs cause pollution and cancer.
PAHs are found in diesel exhaust, burned pots and pans, charred hamburgers and cigarette smoke.
Simulating the conditions of space, Ames scientists measured the spectra of large, carbon-bearing molecules in the ultraviolet and visible light bands and compared the spectra to astronomical data from Kitt Peak and other observatories.
The scientists simulated the space environment using extreme cold, a nearvacuum and artificial starlight.
During the next phases, scientists will continue research using a more sensitive gas-based measuring technique that almost precisely approximates interstellar conditions, Salama said.
The Astrophysikalisches Institut explored the same problem tackled by Ames' scientists by studying larger, grain-sized carbon, another type of carbon material produced by stars.
"I'm a big fan of science collaboration," said Salama.
"It helps push the boundaries of science, generates new ideas and speeds the research process."
The paper explored key astrobiology issues such as how the study of cosmic carbon provides clues to the solar system's origins, how life may have been introduced to Earth and the very structure of the universe.
Stars create carbon in their interiors and release it into space, making carbon an ideal probe and tracer of the birth and death of stars and planetary systems.
Carbon could also help unlock the mysterious processes in deep interstellar space.
BY KATHLEEN BURTON
Lunar Prospector gathering data closer to the Moon's sur face resolutions and gaining further insights On December 19, mission controllers in about our closest celestial neighbor."
building 244 at Ames, successfully comThe extended mission is expected to manded the Lunar Prospector spacecraft continue through June , during which time into a 40-kilometer (approximately 25-mile) the five instruments onboard will gather lunar polar orbit, down from its year-long additional science data at sig100-kilometer (63-mile) nificantly higher resolutions.
mapping orbit, beginning These data will enable scienthe transition to the tists to continue to refine their spacecraft's extended misestimates concerning the consion. centration and form of hydroThe spacecraft will regen detected at the north and main in the new 40-kilomesouth lunar poles.
Mission ter orbit until January 15 scientists interpret hydrogen when Lunar Prospector will detected at the poles as debe commanded to an even posits of water ice.
Mapping lower 30-kilometer (apof the Moon's magnetic and proximately 19-mile) orbital gravity fields will also benefit path.
These actions will offigreatly from the lower orbit.
cially complete the end of Additionally, initial global the very successful primary maps of the Moon's elements mission that began a year will be confirmed with the ago in January 1998.
close-up data.
"Lunar Prospector's inMore information about struments have gathered Lunar Prospector, its science such superior data that we Lunar Prospector data return and related charts have far exceeded our priand graphics can be found on the project mary mission objectives," said Sylvia Cox, NASA's mission manager for Lunar Proswebsite at: http://lunar.arc.nasa.gov pector.
"This success raises our expectaBY BETSY CARTER tions about getting an even closer look at the lunar surface, collecting data at higher
see related story on page 4
4 Months to Certification Ames ISO Web-site address: http://dqa.arc.nasa.gov/iso9000
January 15, 1999
Communication for the information technology age Astrogram -- 1 The Ames
Ames Scientists Recognized
Two Ames employees elected Fellows of the AIAA looking forward to helping Ames continue mates, and the computational estimation Dr. Dallas Denery, deputy chief of the this tradition in the future," he added.
of linear systems."
aviation systems research, technology and During his career, Reda has made "Dr. Reda is currently recognized nasimulation division, Code AF, and Dr. Daniel notable and valuable contributions toward tionally and internationally for his pioneerReda, senior research scientist in the experiadvancing the state-of-the-art in fluid meing research on the use of liquid crystal mental physics branch, Code AIP, have chanics, aerothermodynamics and aerodycoatings for the visualization and measurebeen elected Fellows of the American Instinamic measurement technologies.
He is ment of continuous surface shear-stress tute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA). the world's leading authority on the use of vector distributions," McDonald noted.
"AIAA Fellows are persons of distinction liquid crystal coat"No such capability exwho have made notable and valuable conings for the visualisted prior to this work, tributions to the arts, sciences, or technolization and meaand the impact of his ogy of aeronautics or astronautics," noted surement of connew, patented methodAIAA President Sam Iacobellis in announctinuous surface ologies on NASA, indusing their selection for this prestigious award.
shear stress vector try and university proOnly one Fellow is elected each year for distributions, holdgrams is substantial."
every one thousand members of the instiing patents on both During his career, tute. methodologies.
Denery devised a method Denery and Reda, who are a part of 34 He is also a nato retrofit an automated Honorary Fellows and Fellows elected for tionally and intertwo-segment approach 1999, will be confirmed as AIAA Fellows at nationally recogto the current jet transthe Global Air and Space `99 International nized authority in port fleet to provide reBusiness Forum and Exhibition, May 3-5 at the field of boundlief of the national probthe Hyatt Regency Crystal City Hotel in ary layer transition lem of aircraft noise.
He Arlington, VA.
Both men will be honored at to turbulence in sualso developed and led a the AIAA's annual Fellows Dinner and Repersonic and hyperprogram which flightception on May 4 and at the AIAA's Honors sonic flows.
Reda is demonstrated the first Night Banquet on May 5.
widely published, fully integrated digital Denery and Reda were nominated for photo by Tom Trower having authored 73 avionics system for genthe award by Ames Center Director Dr. Dr. Dallas Denery publications so far, eral aviation.
Henry McDonald.
Reda was nominated for 60 of these as the In recent years, his development of the shear-sensitive liqlead or sole author.
He holds four patents Denery developed an uid crystal coating on aerodynamic measurement techniques, agency program in aircraft method for meatwo as the sole inventor.
automation that led to surement of shear Reda's primary research focus in the three new programs: austress vector distri1990s involved the development of a coattomation for air traffic conbutions, and for ing and imaging technique for the fulltrol, automated nap-ofpioneering resurface visualization and measurement of the-earth and differential search on boundcontinuous shear stress vector distributions, global positioning systems ary layer transition a previously non-existent capability.
He (GPS).
One program, the in supersonic and invented methodologies that allow scienCenter TRACON Automahypersonic flight.
tists to more thoroughly and precisely valition System (CTAS) has Denery's research date CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) been adopted by the Fedwas credited with codes and also enable aerodynamicists to eral Aviation Administraproviding daily clearly define cause-and-effect relationships tion (FAA) and the airline benefits to the between flowfield and/or configurational industry as the cornerstone country's air transvariations and resultant aerodynamic-perfor future automation in portation system.
formance consequences.
the terminal area and as "Dr. Denery's "To have your technical contributions the major component of personal research in recognized by your peers is the most gratinear-term capacity enguidance and confying aspect of this award," Reda said.
"In hancements planned in trol theory, comorder to stay in science, I've had to change support of free-flight.
bined with his brillaboratories and areas of study several times, Denery also developed the liant technical and and I can honestly say that my NASA Ames technical plan for NASA's managerial leaderexperience has been the most rewarding Advanced Air Transportaship of research photo by Roger Brimmer and productive tenure of my entire career.
tion Technologies (AATT) programs, have A special thank you to Sandy Davis, Paul program, a $400 million yielded critical adDr.
Daniel Reda Kutler and Charles Smith for creating and program that is one of the vances and numerfostering the required research environagency's most important ous innovations in ment and to Mike Wilder of the MCAT initiatives in aeronautics.
the guidance and operation of aircraft and Institute for helping me to validate the "I am very pleased and proud to have air traffic control systems," McDonald noted.
liquid crystal methodologies."
been selected as a Fellow of the AIAA," "Dr. Denery is widely recognized internaDenery said.
"To be included among this tionally for numerous personal research conAIAA is the world's pre-eminent aerogroup of outstanding individuals is very tributions during his early career to the space information resource and the largest special.
I am thankful to NASA and the theory and methodology of systems identiprofessional society for aeronautics and aspeople I have worked with for the opportufication and flight dynamics, which led to tronautics professionals.
nity to pursue the interesting and relevant significant improvements in the ability to BY MICHAEL MEWHINNEY research that led to this honor, and I am identify and converge on parameter esti-
2 -- The Ames Astrogram
January 15, 1999
Center Briefs/Miscellaneous
Center Briefs NASA technology detects natural marine oil seeps NASA is partnering with industry to identify natural marine oil seeps in the Gulf of Mexico, offering clues about oil deposits.
Through the commercial remote sensing program at NASA's Stennis Space Center, Stennis, MS, NASA is demonstrating practical applications of space technologies in America's marketplace.
Using remote sensors mounted on aircraft and satellites to look at the Earth's surface, scientists gather information for many uses, including roadway planning, disaster assessment, or in this case, to help identify marine oil seeps.
They occur naturally as oil migrates through cracks from deposits deep below the ocean floor and then rises to the surface, becoming oil slicks.
The seeps offer a clue to the location of underwater oil deposits.
Ames receives Outstanding Competition Advocacy Installation award NASA Headquarters acting associate administrator for procurement, Tom Luedtke, announced recently that Ames has been selected for NASA's "Outstanding CompetitionAdvocacy-Installation" award for the second year in a row.
This is a high honor that will be publicized throughout the agency as well as within the professional procurement community.
Ames has one of the most successful competition advocacy programs in the Agency.
For fiscal photo by Roger Brimmer years `95, `96, `97 and the first ten Charles W. Duff II, Chief, acquistion division, is shown months of `98, Ames competed its receiving the Headquarters "Certificate of Appreciation" obligation amounts at a percentfrom Dr. Henry McDonald, Center Director.
age rate averaging 92.4% and for numbers of actions at a percentage averaging 82.3%.
All people involved in the acquisition process, includgram for both industry and internal cusing acquisition division personnel, COTR's tomers.
Also, the acquisition division conand technical managers, can take pride in tinually updates tools for market research their contributions to enhancing competiused by its staff.
These effective methods tion. will continue to provide the largest possible In order to maintain its accomplishnumber of firms with opportunities to comments, Ames has an active outreach propete for business at Ames.
Stardust mission set Set for launch from Cape Canaveral Air Station, FL, on Feb. 6, Stardust will be the first U.S. mission dedicated solely to a comet, and the first return of extraterrestrial material from outside the orbit of the Moon.
The primary goal of this Discovery program mission is to collect comet dust and related measurements during a planned close encounter with comet Wild 2 (pronounced "Vilt-2") in January 2004.
The Stardust spacecraft will also bring back samples of interstellar dust particles, recently discovered material streaming into the Solar System.
Ground-based analysis of these samples after their return in January 2006 should yield important insights into the evolution of the Sun and planets, and possibly into the origin of life.
Diversity training--a collaboration of the EOP and MLC Interested in diversity issues at Ames? Want to learn more about partnership collaboration? The Equal Opportunity Programs office and the Ames Multicultural Leadership Council invite you to attend a workshop entitled "Collaboration for the New Millennium" on Wednesday, January 20 from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. in the Ballroom of the Moffett training and conference center (Building 3).
One goal of the workshop is to develop a plan for collaboration between groups actively dealing with diversity issues at Ames.
The groups include advisory groups, the Equal Opportunity Programs office and the EO Board.
Another goal is to develop a "next step" to increase awareness of diversity issues at Ames.
All interested members of the Ames community are welcome, but space is limited to the first 60 people.
Please contact Marilyn Jackson at email: mjackson@mail.arc.nasa.gov to reserve a place.
NASA selects investigations for Japanese Solar-B mission NASA announced in December selection of three investigations to be flown on Japan's Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS) Solar-B mission planned for launch in 2004; namely, a 19.7-inch (50cm) optical telescope with sophisticated focal-plane instrumentation; an X-ray telescope for imaging the high-temperature corona and an extreme-ultraviolet imaging spectrometer for diagnosing events observed.
The Solar-B program will be a multilateral international collaboration including Japan, the United States and the United Kingdom.
The objective of Solar-B is to study the origin of the Sun's outer atmosphere; the corona; and the coupling between the fine magnetic structure at the Sun's surface, the photosphere and the dynamic processes occurring in the corona.
January 15, 1999
The Ames Astrogram -- 3
ISO 9001/Astrobiology
Is Ames ready for ISO 9001 certification? --another perspective might help Mel Brooks movie fans will recall Igor greeting young Dr. Frankenstein at the train station with "walk this way."
To pass our ISO 9001 certification audit in April, it might help to "think this way" -- like an auditor! To auditors, just remember that they are all from Missouri--the Show Me State.
Ames personnel are already working on the center's audit preparation checklist--a carefully selected sample from the 160 "shalls" in the ISO 9001 international standard.
Thinking like auditors will help us get the most benefit from that audit preparation checklist.
More importantly, thinking like auditors will help us understand our own quality system.
The most fundamental thing on an auditor's mind is "objective evidence."
ISO auditors all have the same coffee mug with Say It!, Do It!, Prove It! in big red letters.
Auditors need to see tangible evidence that the quality system is more than just warm words on paper.
Auditors collect objective evidence by analyzing documented procedures, observing practices, interviewing personnel at every level and reviewing data and records.
Objective evidence is what allows an auditor to verify our conformance to each one of those 160 requirements in the ISO standard.
An inability to show evidence that our quality system is both implemented and effective will result in a finding of nonconformance.
Most auditors have technical degrees and take a very systematic approach that Ames engineers and scientists may find familiar.
Each of us can duplicate an auditor's approach.
First, look at the Ames web site at http://dqa.arc.nasa.gov/iso9000 to find the latest revision of each center, directorate, division and branch procedure that applies to your position.
If you are unsure which procedures apply, discuss them with your supervisor.
Next, an auditor would highlight the word "shall" every time it appears in a procedure.
This might produce a number of requirements like, "The project engineer shall define test requirements for each configuration."
Or, "Each researcher shall initial and date their entries in the lab log book."
An auditor will look for tangible evidence that each of these requirements has been implemented.
At this point, you can duplicate the third step an auditor would take by asking, "Can I show an example of how I have implemented this requirement?" The researcher involved with that procedure might ask, "Is the lab log book readily available, and do my entries have initials and dates?" Or if you are that project engineer, "Are my test methods documented and easily retrieved, and do they clearly identify the test requirements for every configuration?" If asked by an auditor, will you be able to show an example and describe how you implement each of the applicable "shalls" that you highlighted? This three-step approach might be called procedure-based auditing.
It is one way auditors verify that procedures comply with the standard, and that we comply with our own procedures.
This model is also good for individuals who want to better understand our quality system and get ready for the ISO certification audit by thinking like an auditor.
Another common approach that auditors use is more process oriented.
They "walk" through a process from start to finish to see how we address the common sense operating practices that have been captured as requirements in the ISO 9001 standard.
This is one way auditors can go beyond just auditing for compliance, and assess whether our processes will effectively produce quality products and services.
Managers and supervisors that have overall responsibility for individual processes may find this end-to-end process approach the best way to think like an auditor.
One way to do this is MBWA - Management By Walking Around.
Start at the start.
Walk through the process in the same way that work flows.
Talk to personnel who take in new work.
Are the requirements for new work documented and unambiguous? How well documented are changes to those requirements? How are these requirements reviewed and accepted? Once the requirements are clear, does the work just commence or is it planned first? Is the work broken down into tasks and communicated to work groups in a logical and documented manner? Once requirements are communicated, are the methods used to produce the product or service logical and appropriate? Are requirements for purchased goods sufficiently specific to ensure that you'll get what you need in order to meet final product requirements? Should the supplier be pre-qualified? What quality controls should the supplier implement? How will you verify that purchases fully meet your own requirements? When producing the product, would it be easy to use the wrong procedure, tool, measuring device, software or specification? How is the right processing sequence and method communicated? If the process doesn't operate as intended, will appropriate metrics warn you--before customer complaints are received? How easily can errors be made that might go undetected? Is it important that personnel demonstrate proficiency at a pre-determined level before being assigned? Is it reasonable to wait until the product is complete before verifying conformance to requirements, or are there logical intermediate verification points? Are all specified product requirements being verified? Are verification methods logical and documented--when, who, how, acceptance criteria? Is product integrity protected throughout all processing, verification and delivery? How are these product protection requirements defined? When complete, do your products and services rank with the best in the world-how do you know? Do your customers agree that their requirements have been met? Ultimately, for Ames to achieve certification, auditors must assess whether our quality system effectively implements the Ames quality policy.
We can maximize our success by thinking in the same way.
BY
BARRY GRIMM
Turtle nebula under observation Planetary Nebula NGC 6210, (the "Turtle" nebula), taken with the Hubble Space Telescope in August 1997.
Shrouds of gas comprise the nebula; material is flung off by a dying, sunlike star, and streams out in opposite directions.
Ames scientists and collaborators from other institutions are concentrating on this object, currently studying its spectra using the Infrared Space Observatory (ISO) to determine the star's temperature, density and chemical composition.
The analysis of the biogenic elements present--hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen--has important implications for astrobiology (the study of the origin and evolution of life in the universe).
NGC 6210 is about 6,600 light years from Earth in the constellation Hercules.
The nebula measures 1.6 light years from the top of the turtle shape to the tip of the bottom.
This image is available at: http:// oposite.stsci.edu/pubinfo/1998/36 Photo Credits: R. Rubin and C. Ortiz, Ames Research Center; P. Harrington and N. Lame, Univ. of Maryland, R. Dufour, Rice Univ.
4 -- The Ames Astrogram
January 15, 1999
Science and Outreach
Ames' researchers support Mars robotic exploration NASA Ames researchers are playing a key role in supporting two Mars robotic exploration missions.
The Mars Polar Lander, which launched on January 3, has two Mars microprobes with advanced thermal protection systems designed, tested and manufactured at Ames.
(The Mars Microprobe mission is also called Deep Space-2, the second New Millennium deep space technology-validation mission, which is managed by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA.)
The Mars Polar Lander is part of NASA's long-term program to explore Mars using robots.
The lander will touch down on a frigid, barren steppe near the edge of Mars' south polar cap and dig for traces of water ice beneath the surface.
Equipped with a robotic arm, the lander will also carry two tiny microprobes with penetrators that will smash into the surface and test new space exploration technologies.
According to Huy Tran (Code ASM) who heads Ames' thermal protection team, the Ames-developed heat shields will protect the two probes from the very high temperatures (approaching 3200 degrees F) expected during the Mars entry with minimal recession.
The probes will impact the Martian surface with a terminal velocity of 200 millimeters per second.
As the probes smash into the Martian surface, the heat shields will shatter and allow a clean penetration into the rust-colored Martian soil.
The two probes will collect samples and do spectral analyses for water signatures.
To meet the reentry technology challenge, the Ames team developed a new heat-resistant material that can withstand high temperatures and is also thin and light.
The new material is about 1/5th the thickness of the space shuttle heat shield.
The new material is called SIRCA/SPLIT (short for "Silicone Impregnated Reusable Ceramic Ablator/Secondary Polymer Layer Infiltrated Tile.")
The heat-shield technology was developed at Ames about 1-1/2 years ago.
"The entire Ames TPS team, including project manager Dan Rasky, and the technical staff of Christine Johnson, Ming-Ta Hsu, Timothy Chen, Harry Dill and Bill Mars Vujevich, worked very hard; we took it all the way -- from concept to flight," said Tran.
The entire heat shield weighs only 368 grams, compared to older technology heat shields that typically weigh triple that amount.
Future uses of the Ames-developed material might include space commercialization, Tran said.
The Mars Microprobes will touch down on the red planet in December 1999.
"We won't know if the heat shield is successful until a signal (from the probe) comes back," said Tran.
Past work by the Ames team includes developing heat shields for the Stardust and Mars Pathfinder missions.
A science team from Ames (comprised of Drs. David Catling, Aaron Zent, Julio Magalhaes and Jeff Moersch) also will play an important role in the mission.
They will analyze the data from four water detection,
microprobe heat shield developed at Ames
soil analysis and atmospheric structure analysis experiments aboard the probes.
In addition, Dr. Zent is also a team member for a thermal evolved gas experiment on board the Mars Lander.
Ames researchers are also supporting the Mars Climate Orbiter mission, which launched on December 10, 1998.
The Orbiter will achieve a stable orbit around Mars, and then use atmospheric instruments and cameras to provide detailed information about the surface and climate of the Red Planet.
Dr. Robert Haberle is coinvestigator for an experiment that will characterize Mars' atmosphere.
BY KATHLEEN BURTON
Helicopter lands in East Palo Alto school yard A group of young East Palo Alto students got the chance to climb aboard a U.S. Army helicopter on Monday, Dec. 14, when one based at Ames landed in their school yard.
The helicopter landed at 10 a.m. at the school yard of the Edison McNair Academy, 2033 Pulgas Ave, East Palo Alto.
The helicopter was flown by Lt. Col. Chris Sullivan and NASA pilot NASA pilot Munro Dearing (left) shows Munro Dearing and carried Miguel Mendoza, 13, crew chiefs Ron Gardner an eighth grader at and Fernando Matulac.
In Edison McNair addition, several engineers School in East Palo and scientists from the Alto, the controls in Army/NASA Rotorcraft Dithe OH-58C light vision gave presentations observation about helicopters and other helicopter.
related topics to the school's seventh and eighth grade students.
Nicknamed the Kiowa, the OH-58C light observation helicopter is powered photo by Roger by a gas turbine T-63-ABrimmer 720 engine and can travel at 139 mph.
The helicopter's rotor is 35 feet 4 inches in diameter, and the aircraft has a maximum takeoff weight of more than 3,000 pounds.
The visit was sponsored by the American Helicopter Society's San Francisco Bay Area Chapter Community Outreach Program.
For more information, contact Community Resource Director Davina Katz at the Edison McNair Academy, (650) 329-2888, ext. 135, or Megan McCluer at Ames at ext. 4-0010.
BY
MICHAEL M
EWHINNEY
January 15, 1999
The Ames Astrogram -- 5
Center Activities
Celebration--Black History Month As Ames prepares to celebrate Black History Month, it is important to remember that a full appreciation of the celebration requires an understanding of the social and academic climate that prevailed in the Western world, particularly in North America, before 1926 when Black History Month was established.
It is important to recall that between 1619 and 1926, African Americans and other peoples of African descent were classified as a race that had not made any contribution to human civilization.
Within the public and private sector, African Americans and other peoples of African descent were relegated to the position of non-citizens and often defined as fractions of humans.
In fact, African Americans were so dehumanized and their history so distorted in academia that "slavery, peonage, segregation and lynching" were considered justifiable conditions.
It was this kind of climate and the sensational, racist scholarship that inspired the talented and brilliant African American scholar Dr. Carter Godwin Woodson to lead the struggle and search for the truth and institutionalize what was referred to as "Negro History Week."
Under Woodson's direction and contributions from other African American and white scholars, the "Negro History Week" was launched as a serious platform in 1926 to neutralize the apparent ignorance and deliberate distortion of black history.
Meetings, exhibitions, lectures and symposia were organized to climax the scientific study of the African experience throughout the year in order to give a more objective and scholarly balance in American and World History.
Today, this national and international observance has been expanded annually to encompass the entire month of February.
For those wishing to learn more about African history, it is suggested that you read works by distinguished African historians, such as: Cheikh Anta Diop, Chancellor Williams, Walter Rodney, Adu Boahen, John Jackson, Yosef Ben-Jochannan, John Hope Franklin, Leronne Bennett Jr., John Henrik Clarke, J. F. Ade Ajayi and many more.
BY
M
ARY
B
UFORD
HOWARD
Correction to Fall 1998 Ames Telephone Directory--the correct phone number for the Locksmith is ext.4-3843 and the mail stop is 76-1.
Mediator training NASA Minority Contractor of the program at Ames Year -- Symtech Corporation Recently, mediators and trainers at Ames participated in an Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) class.
The purpose of ADR is to provide a productive environment and process for resolving differences in a direct and simple manner.
Further information about ADR and training opportunities in this area can be obtained from Debbie Wilson of the Equal Opportunity Programs Office, at ext. 46507.
photo by Roger Brimmer
photo by Roger Brimmer
From the center and counterclockwise: Dr. Henry McDonald, Center Director; Seymour Metters, III, President of Symtech Corporation; Marion Legg; Connie Cunningham, Deputy Chief, acquisition division; Steve Howard; Roy Austin; Rob Christensen; Sarah West; Peter Mariani; Ken Moller; Yvonne Chen; Dawn McIntosh and Kang Chen, site manager.
Other Symtech employees at Ames who were not present at the photo session include Robert Hogan, Neil Heather and Eric Vacin.
From left to right: Jim Lambright, Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute (DEOMI); Lupe Velasquez, acquisition branch for information systems; Ruben Ramos, space projects division; and Thomas Edel, protective services office.
Symtech Corporation was presented with the 1998 NASA Minority Contractor of the Year award on Sept, 23 of last year at NASA Headquarters.
The purpose of the award is to nationally recognize successful minority contractors who have made outstanding contributions to NASA's mission in the technical arena.
The award cer-
emony is the highlight activity of the annual Minority Enterprises Development (MED) week.
Symtech Corporation, Alexandria, VA, is an 8(a) firm that provides scientific and technical services in support of the Earth Sciences and Space Science Divisions in the Ames Space Directorate.
6 -- The Ames Astrogram
January 15, 1999
Events 
179.
Guests welcome.
POC: Jenny Kahn at ext. 4-6987 or Karen Matsuoka at ext. 4-6184.
Model HO/HOn3 Railroad Train Club at Moffett Field invites train buffs to visit and join the club in Bldg. 126, across from the south end of Hanger One.
The club is in particular need of low voltage electricians and scenery builders 
Work nights are usually on Friday nights from 7:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m.
Play time is Sunday from 2 p.m. to 4 p.m.
For more info, call John Donovan at (408) 735-4954 (work) or (408) 281-2899 (home).
Ames Bowling League meets at Palo Alto Bowl every Tuesday at 6 p.m.
The league is in need of substitute bowlers.
POC: Mina Cappuccio at ext. 4-1313.
Ames Ballroom Dance Club, Beginning and Intermediate East Coast Swing, Tuesdays from 5:15 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. Moffet Training and Conference Center, Bldg. 3 in the Showroom.
POC: Deb Narasaki at email: dnarasaki@mail.arc.nasa.gov.
New ABDC website: http:// arcapps.arc.nasa.gov/Info/BallroomDance/Welcome.Htm Ames Child Care Center Board of Directors Meeting, Wednesdays, 12 noon to 1 p.m., N-213/Rm.
204.
POC: Debbie Wood at ext. 4-0256.
Ames Multicultural Leadership Council Workshop, Jan 20, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., all day training on diversity issues and building consensus.
Moffett Training and Conference Center.
POC: David Morse at ext. 4-4724 or Sheila Johnson at ext. 4-5054.
NFFE Local 997 Union General Meeting, Jan 20, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., Bldg. 19/Rm.
2017.
Guests welcome.
POC: Marianne Mosher at ext. 4-4055.
Ames Asian American Pacific Islander Advisory Group Meeting, Jan 21, 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m., N-241/Rm.
B2.
POC: Daryl Wong at ext. 4-6889 or Brett Vu at ext. 4-0911.
Native American Advisory Committee Meeting, Jan 26, 12 noon to 1 p.m., Ames Café. POC: Mike Liu at ext. 4-1132.
Ames Contractor Council Meeting, Feb 3, 11 a.m., N-200/Comm.
Rm. POC: Greg Marshall at ext. 4-4673.
Hispanic Advisory Committee for Employees, Feb 4, 11:45 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., N-239/Rm.
177.
POC: Carlos Torrez at ext. 4-5797.
Environmental, Health 
1078.
POC: Linda Vrabel at ext. 4-0924.
Ames African American Advisory Group Meeting, Feb 4, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., N-241/Rm.
237.
POC: Mary Buford Howard at ext. 4-5095.
Nat'l Association of Retired Federal Employees, S.J. Chapter #50, Meeting, Feb 5, at the Elk's Club, 44 W. Alma Avenue, San Jose.
Social hour: 10:30 a.m.
Prog. 
POCs: Mr. Rod Peery, Pres., (650) 967-9418 or NARFE 1-800-627-3394.
Southbay FEW Chapter Meeting, Feb 9, 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m., Bldg. 241, Rm B2.
POC: Christine Munroe at ext. 4-4695.
Java Users Group, Feb. 10, 1:30 p.m. to 2:30 p.m., Bldg. 258, Rm. 127.
POC: Sharon Marcacci, ext. 4-1059; http://jug.arc.nasa.gov Professional Administrative Council (PAC) Meeting, Feb 11, 10:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m., Location TBD. POC: Janette Rocha, ext. 4-3371.
Ames Sailing Club Meeting, Feb 11, 11:30 a.m. to 1 p.m., N-262/Rm.
100.
POC: Greg Sherwood, ext 4-0429.
Web site: http://sail.arc.nasa.gov Ames Amateur Radio Club, Feb 18, 12 noon, N-260/Conf.
Rm. POC: Mike Herrick, K6EAA at ext. 4-5477.
Ames Classifieds Ads for the next issue should be sent to astrogram@mail.arc.nasa.gov by the Monday following publication of the present issue and must be resubmitted for each issue.
Ads must involve personal needs or items; no commercial/third-party ads and will run on space-available basis only.
First-time ads are given priority.
Ads must include home phone numbers; however, Ames extensions will be accepted for carpool and lost and found ads only.
Transportation '76 Ford Granada 4-door, 62K orig mls, V-8, AT, normal equipment, interior in good shape,everything works, starts/runs strong, needs valve job on #7 cylinder to run perfect.
$500 or B/O.
Call (408) 395-6477.
`81 Ford F100 pickup.
6cyl, 4 speed manual, Ranger XLT pkg, camper shell, dual tank.
78K mls.
Have papers.
Good condition.
$3,500.
Jon (408) 732-8833 after 6 p.m. '82 GS550MZ motorcycle (Classic-First Katana), runs great, new tires, low mls, $650.
Call (408) 734-9838.
'84 Honda Accord sedan, 5 spd, orig. owner, 140K mls, runs great, minor body damage, $1,600.
Call (408) 225-7864.
`86 Nissan 300ZX coupe 2door, silver, 5 speed, Tbar roof.
Taken care of.
Have papers (Nissan dealer and Scotts Performance).
Orig owner.
130K mls. $4,000.
Jon (408) 732-8833 after 6 p.m. '86 Lance 20 foot 5th wheel, great for camping and complete home on wheels w/two queen beds, nice kitchen w/frig, bath w/shower, space and water heaters.
Everything works well.
$3,500.
Call (415) 902-5791.
`87 Park Ave, all maint. receipts, new paint, 166K mls, loaded, mint cond. $2,850 or B/O.
Call (510) 4712570.
`88 Mercury Sable GS, p/windows, locks and mirrors, cruise control, AM/FM/cassette, A/C, 100,800 mls. $3,200 or B/O.
Richard or Charly (650) 573-5188.
'92 Ford Aerostar XL, extended body, A/C, Great family van. $6,200.
Call (510) 581-9820 or email angelabw@jps.net.
'92 Lincoln Town car 4-door Executive Series, 120K mls, 4.6L V-8, AT, power everything, security system, tow package, interior good, new air springs, great ride, only 85K mls on engine.
$8,800 or B/O.
Call (408) 3956477.
'94 Escort LX Wagon, automatic, alloy wheels, A/C, power windows, mirrors 
Call (408) 425-7705.
'95 Chrysler LeBaron convertible, amethyst w/white top, V6, auto, AC, power everything.
AM/FM Stereo, CD player.
54K mls, runs great, exc cond, $8,000.
Rose (510) 659-6338 '95 Chevy Blazer ,4.3 Vortec eng., fully loaded, 4x4,leather int..70K mls , $17,500 or B/O.
Bob (408) 736-4039.
Miscellaneous Childcare: Sign up for waiting list at the Menlo Survey Daycare Ctr, aka GeoKids, a parent cooperative federal childcare center located in Menlo Park.
NAEYC accredited.
For more info visit GeoKids' website: http:// geokids.wr.usgs.gov, or call (650) 329-4236.
Bed frame (queen head, foot, and side rails), can be four poster or canopy, Ethan Allen (Georgian Line)/Queen Anne, dark solid wood and very nice, $350.
Call (650) 941-2784.
Washer and drier in good working condition.
$10 each.
Call (650) 813-0563.
Sofa-sleeper, queen size, dark blue, exc. cond, $120.
Call (408) 446-4896 Coffee table books-(2) Norman Rockwell-Little Orphan Annie, unused.
$15 ea. Five Time-Life cookbooks.
Unused. $25 all.
Call (650) 968-8650.
Audio System,480 watt Kenwood receiver, 5CD changer and equalizer.
3-way spkrs (2) w/ 12" woofers + 60 watt powered subwoofer.
$700.
Mike (408) 257-3175.
Two dressers (one tall, one long) and full length standing mirror matching set.
Light colored wood, new handles.
Perfect for a girl's bedroom.
$400 we deliver or $350 you pick up.
Call (650) 938-8657.
Tri-color (Blk, wht, tan), red and white cocker spaniel puppies for sale.
Show quality AKC, OFA, championship bloodline, exc. health history, $450.
Call (408) 729-1443.
Rowing machine, converts for squats, bench press, curls, situps, more.
Folds for storage, instruction, $25.
New spare pneumatic donut tire from Toyota Tercel. $10.
Like-new radial tire Yokohama 195/60R15.
Less than 5K miles.
$10.
Call (510) 471-9384.
Wanted: Patches, stickers with old Ames logo design.
Gloria (707) 995-3431.
Lv msg. Currier spinet piano, small upright in dark walnut, exc. cond., price negotiable.
Christina (408) 295-3651.
DVD movie of "Goodfellas", $15.
Call (408) 2952160.
Peppermint patty candy dispensing machines.
$100 each.
Call (831) 338-3264.
Lv msg. 28.8 PC fax/modem, w/manuals 
$15.
Tape backup drive 
$25.
Call (408) 295-2160.
AT
Two tickets for all days at all three courses.
Total $180.
Ralph (408) 730-4630.
Housing Room for rent - avail now.
Furnished room w/phn.
Open space w/creek on east, large lawn on west, park on north, wilderness on south, walking distance from Castro Street.
Share ba/kitchen/garden/laundry.
Easy transport: bus/train/El Camino/H101/237/85/Cent Expy. $560/ mo. Call (650) 969-3932 or email at: solemate@best.com Temporary space available or for part time use.
Ideal for Interns.
Bed + closet in a home in rustic 
Weekly: $100 (+ one month dep.)
Call (650) 969-3932 Lv msg., or email at: solemate@best.com Wanted: Shared housing for grad student/Ames intern from 2/20 - 5/16/99 near pub. trans. $545 limit.
Email: Grisward@isu.isunet.edu for more info.
For rent: Mountain View/Sunnyvale house, 3bd/ 1 ba, avail.
now, $1,795 mo. Nina (650) 843-5568.
MV twnhse for lease.
2bd/2.5 ba., 1250 sq.ft., yard, very close to Ames. $1,445/mo + dep.
Avail Feb. 1.
Call (650) 964-1900.
Santa Clara 2-story townhouse, 2bd/1.5ba, spa/ pool, patio, carport, completely remodeled.
$1,400.
Call (408) 248-1516.
Respons. adult(s), max of 3 to share large 4bd/ 2.5ba Milpitas home.
Choices: master bd/priv bath for sgl ($725) or couple ($1,000) + part of utils or two other rooms avail from a choice of 3 ($650, $600, $500) + 1/3 utils.
Amenities: cable, W/D, fireplace, pool 
Access to H680/237/880.
N/S.
No alcohol/pets/kids.
First/last/$400 dep.
Avail Feb.
Carina (408) 262-5269.
Lv msg. Part-time or full-time roommate needed to share expenses.
2bd/1ba apartment in S'vale off Mary Ave. near El Camino.
Rent negotiable for part-time rentee.
Available 1/1/99.
Barrie/Anne (408) 736-8961.
House for rent in center of Cupertino, 4bd/2ba, swimming pool, washer/dryer, easy access to Lawrence Expressway, H280, 85, $2,000/mo. plus deposit.
Available now.
James (408) 741-4922.
Visiting scientist from Europe needs to rent a small studio apartment from 4/26-6/18 near Ames.
Contact Hanwant B. Singh at ext. 4-6769 or Robert Chatfield at ext. 4-5490 for additional information.
Vacation rental Lake Tahoe-Squaw Valley Townhse, 3bd/2ba, View of slopes, close to lifts.
Wkend $400, midwk $150 night.
Includes linens, firewd, cleaning service.
Call (650) 9684155,or email: DBMcKellar@aol.com
January 15, 1999
The Ames Astrogram -- 7
Ames to Dryden Transfer
Ames transfers control of X-36 to Dryden During the original X-36 flight research On December 9, Ames transferred conprogram at Dryden, 31 flights were made trol of the NASA/Boeing X-36 Tailless Fighter in only 25 weeks.
The first flight occurred Agility Research Aircraft to NASA Dryden on May 17, 1997; the final flight took place Flight Research Center, Edwards, CA, for on Nov. 12, 1997 and lasted 34 minutes.
future flight tests.
The X-36 flew a total of 15 hours and 38 NASA completed its X-36 flight research minutes and used four different versions of program last November, successfully demonstrating the feasibility of future tailless fighters to achieve agility levels superior to today's best military fighter aircraft.
The Air Force Research Laboratory at Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton OH, was scheduled to begin its Reconfigurable Control for Tailless Fighter Aircraft (RESTORE) flight tests on the X-36 at Dryden on Dec. 12.
The RESTORE program will use advanced flight control software to respond to a variety of battle damage and hardware failures.
The program will provide demonstrated technology that increases aircraft From right to left: Ames Center Director Dr. Henry survivability and significantly reMcDonald and Kevin Petersen (Acting) Director, Dryden duces life cycle costs of military and Flight Research Center, signed an agreement last month commercial aircraft.
The RESTORE to transfer control of the NASA/Boeing X-36 Tailless flight tests are a joint effort funded Fighter Agility Research Aircraft to NASA Dryden Flight by the Air Force Research LaboraResearch Center for future flight tests.
tory, Dayton, OH; NASA Dryden Flight Research Center, Edwards, flight control software.
The aircraft reached CA; and the Naval Air Systems Command an altitude of 20,200 feet and a maximum (NAVAIR), Patuxent River, MD. angle of attack of 40 degrees.
The Boeing Company owns the X-36 The 28-percent-scale X-36, built by the aircraft, and the company's Phantom Works Boeing Company Phantom Works in St. division is developing the RESTORE techLouis, MO, is designed to fly without the nology.
During the RESTORE program, the traditional tail surfaces common on most Air Force will fly the remotely piloted X-36 aircraft.
The X-36 is 18 feet long with a 10aircraft using neural network software to foot wingspan; the airplane is three feet provide flight control reconfiguration during simulated damage in flight.
high and weighs 1,270 pounds.
It is powered by a Williams International Corp., Inc., Walled Lake, MI, F112 turbofan engine that provides 700 pounds of thrust.
The aircraft is remotely controlled by a pilot in a groundstation cockpit, complete with a head-up display.
Ames and The Boeing Company Phantom Works developed the technologies required for a tailless fighter beginning in 1989.
In 1993, the Phantom Works proposed the remotely piloted aircraft technology demonstration to validate the technologies in a real-flight environment.
In 1994, Phantom Works began fabrication of the two aircraft in its rapid prototyping facility in St. Louis.
The aircraft was designed and built in only 28 months.
NASA and Boeing were full partners in the $21 million program that was jointly funded under a roughly 50/50 cost-sharing arrangement.
During NASA's X-36 flight tests, Ames led the program; Boeing conducted the flight test operation; and Dryden provided range and technical support.
BY
M
ICHAEL
M
EWHINNEY
THE AMES
Astrogram
The Ames ASTROGRAM is an official publication of the Ames Research Center, National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
Managing Editor.........David Morse Editor..........................Astrid Terlep
THE AMES
Astrogram
National Aeronautics and Space Administration Ames Research Center Moffett Field, California 94035-1000 Official Business Penalty for Private Use, $300
FIRST CLASS MAIL POSTAGE 
G-27
PLEASE RECYCLE Printed on recycled and recyclable paper with vegetable-based ink.
8 -- The Ames Astrogram
January 15, 1999
