DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION U. S. COAST GUARD
STATEMENT OF
CAPTAIN ANTHONY S. TANGEMAN
ON
COAST GUARD MIGRANT INTERDICTION OPERATIONS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON IMMIGRATION AND CLAIMS
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
U. S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
MAY 18, 1999
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
It is a pleasure to appear before you today on behalf of the Commandant to discuss Coast Guard migrant interdiction operations.
As Chief of the Coast Guard's Office of Law Enforcement, I can report that this is an extremely challenging and important Coast Guard mission, which serves both humanitarian and national security functions for the United States.
The United States Coast Guard has the lead responsibility for at-sea enforcement of U.S. immigration law and related international agreements.
The underlying authority for the Coast Guard to enforce applicable U.S. laws, including U.S. immigration laws, is found in sections 2 and 89 of 14 U.S.C.
Coast Guard migrant interdiction operations are directed by national security goals under Executive Order 12807 (E.O. 12807) and Presidential Decision Directive 9 (PDD-9).
President Bush issued E.O. 12807 in 1992, directing the Secretary of Transportation to issue appropriate instructions to the Coast Guard to enforce the suspension of the entry of undocumented aliens into the U.S. by sea and to interdict the vessels carrying them.
President Clinton issued PDD-9 in June 1993, directing the Coast Guard and other Federal law enforcement agencies to cooperate in the suppression of alien smuggling.
This includes interdicting illegal migrants at sea and responding to new illegal migration threats.
In carrying out its responsibilities, the Coast Guard complies with international law requirements, including the enforcement of sovereign control over persons and vessels who enter the nation illegally, and gaining flag state authority for certain actions involving vessels not flagged under the United States.
The Coast Guard enforces U.S. immigration law principally by interdicting illegal migrants at sea before they reach U.S. shores.
Once the Coast Guard interdicts illegal migrants at sea, disposition of the migrants is determined through the Presidential Directive 27 (PD-27) process that includes the National Security Council, Department of State, Department of Justice, Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), Department of Defense, and other agencies.
These PD-27 deliberations also determine the disposition of any suspected migrant smugglers.
U.S. Coast Guard migrant interdiction operations are as much humanitarian as they are law enforcement missions.
Migrants typically take great risks and endure significant hardships in their attempts to flee their countries and travel to the U.S.
In many cases, migrant vessels interdicted at sea are overloaded, unseaworthy, lack basic safety equipment, and are operated by inexperienced sailors.
These realities place the migrants at great risk.
A significant number of migrant cases handled by the Coast Guard actually begin as search and rescue cases.
Given the extremely unsafe conditions, it is the Coast Guard's duty under international law to first render assistance, leaving the issue of status and disposition to be resolved once the immediate safety concerns are addressed.
The Coast Guard's goal for migrant interdiction operations is to eliminate most of the potential flow of undocumented migrants entering the U.S. via maritime routes.
This is accomplished through interdiction and deterrence.
For the last two decades, there has been a steady-state flow of several migrant nationalities.
Primarily, these have been Haitian, Cuban, and Dominican migrants seeking to reach the Southeast U.S. via the Caribbean, and People's Republic of China (PRC) migrants who have sought entry via numerous maritime regions, including the east and west coasts of the United States, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Hawaii, and, most recently, Guam.
Starting with the Mariel Boat Lift in 1980, which brought over 124,000 Cubans to the U.S., migrant interdiction operations have demanded a substantial commitment of Coast Guard assets.
Since that time, the Coast Guard has had to periodically shift its multimission cutters and aircraft from other law enforcement mission areas, such as drug and fisheries patrols, and non-law enforcement missions, such as aids to navigation, to counter mass migration flows.
There have been several mass migrations from Cuba and Haiti over the past 20 years.
The first exodus of Haitians followed the collapse of the Duvalier regime in the early 1980s and a second exodus followed a military coup in 1991.
During the 6-month period following this coup, the Coast Guard interdicted over 34,000 Haitians.
A third exodus of Haitian migrants occurred in 1993-1994.
The Coast Guard responded with Operation ABLE MANNER, involving a large number of Coast Guard units from both the Atlantic and Pacific Areas.
Operation ABLE VIGIL, which addressed the exodus of Cubans in 1994, resulted in the interdiction of 38,560 Cubans.
The Coast Guard surge response to these two mass migrations in 1994 resulted in the rescue and/or interdiction over 64,000 migrants.
The below table summarizes Coast Guard migrant interdictions for fiscal years 1994 - 1998.
FY 1994
FY 1995
FY 1996
FY 1997
FY 1998
Total Migrants Interdicted
64,382 *
5,320
9,045
2,149
3,561
* Mostly due to Cuban and Haitian mass migrations (Operations ABLE VIGIL and ABLE MANNER)
Coast Guard surge operations in 1994 were effective in countering the mass Haitian and Cuban migrations.
In 1995, with Cuban and Haitian migration threats low, the Coast Guard addressed migration issues in the Mona Passage (between the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico), where interdictions went from 232 in fiscal year 1994 to 3,388 in 1995, an increase of 1,500 percent.
As a result of this surge effort under Operation ABLE RESPONSE, the interdiction of Dominican migrants in fiscal year 1996 was 6,273, nearly double that of fiscal year 1995.
Statistics and intelligence reports for 1997 indicate that we created a deterrent effect not only in the Mona Passage, but in other areas of illegal maritime migration as well.
There were increases in Cuban and Haitian interdictions in 1998.
The increase in Cuban interdictions was mainly due to an increase in flow that was primarily driven by more aggressive professional smuggling.
Haitian interdictions can vary greatly depending upon the size of the vessel used in transportation.
For example, it is not uncommon for the Coast Guard to interdict 60-foot, wooden Haitian freighters with up to 500 migrants onboard.
Over the last several years, a large portion of Haitian migrant vessels have shifted their routes from landing directly on U.S. shores to island-hopping through the Bahamas.
Once in the Bahamas, the Haitians are professionally smuggled the short distance to Florida in small groups, on a variety of pleasure craft that are difficult to detect as they mix in with the legitimate boating public.
As stated earlier, most migrants interdicted by the Coast Guard are not brought into the U.S. and are repatriated to the country from which they originally departed.
There is a U.S.-Cuban Repatriation Accord (of May 2, 1995) which allows the Coast Guard to repatriate most interdicted Cubans directly to Cuba.
Although the U.S. currently has no formal repatriation agreement with the Dominican Republic, in all cases the Government of the Dominican Republic has allowed repatriation of migrants.
We currently have no migration agreement with Haiti and Haitian repatriations are conducted on a case-by-case, no objection basis.
At this time, Haiti has not objected to these repatriations.
Since the focus of today's hearing is on the PRC smuggling problem into Guam, I have saved this most challenging maritime migrant threat for last.
Through most of the 1990s, China has been the greatest source of human trafficking by sea, and intelligence sources currently estimate that between 15,000 and 20,000 illegal Chinese aliens enter the Western Hemisphere by sea each year, most ultimately destined for the United States.
PRC migrants pay about $35,000 for their perilous voyage to the United States.
At this price, one average boatload of PRC aliens is worth over $5 million in gross revenues to the smugglers.
The PRC smuggling problem is widespread, encompassing all coastal areas of the continental United States, and territories such as Guam, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
PRC smuggling vessels transit to the these U.S. locations, offloading their migrant cargo to smaller pick-up vessels (often hired fishing vessels or small pleasure craft), at distances ranging from one mile to hundreds of miles offshore.
Sometimes these motherships land in the U.S. or intentionally ground along U.S. shores, requiring the migrants and crew to make, in some cases, a very dangerous swim to shore.
Since 1991, the Coast Guard has interdicted over 5,000 PRC migrants and the vast majority of these have been repatriated to China.
While there are small groups of PRC migrants island-hopping through the Caribbean into Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, the vast majority of the PRC maritime flow has typically been on coastal freighter-type vessels or retired fishing vessels interdicted by the Coast Guard far offshore.
As long as these cases do not become search and rescue, the Coast Guard complies with the national policy of keeping interdicted PRC migrants outside the reach of U.S. shores.
Once these migrants are interdicted, it can often take weeks to finalize disposition as the U.S. government negotiates direct repatriation or the assistance of a third government.
PRC smuggling ventures are planned and crewed by violent, highly organized criminal operations.
For every five to ten migrants, there is at least one professional "enforcer" or "snakehead" that intimidates and physically abuses the migrants to maintain control and ensure future payment of smuggling fees.
These "snakeheads" have often instigated the migrants to riot, set fires, and even attempted to create flooding /explosions to protest Coast Guard presence onboard the smuggling vessels.
This creates a dangerous situation for Coast Guard boarding teams.
These operations also have logistical problems and can involve scarce Coast Guard assets and personnel for many weeks.
The PRC smuggling vessels are typically in very poor condition, are in many cases unseaworthy, and typically exhibit cramped, unsanitary, and dangerous conditions.
These realities exacerbate the problems Coast Guard law enforcement personnel face.
Over the past 10 years we have seen changes in the PRC smuggling threat.
The number of PRC smuggling interdictions off the immediate U.S. shore tapered off significantly in the mid-1990s as the smugglers shifted their routes to Mexico and Central America in response to Coast Guard interdiction efforts.
While there are still two to three large PRC migrant interdictions off U.S. shores each year, a new trend has developed in the Guam region over the past year.
PRC smugglers found that Guam offers a gateway to the continental U.S., since U.S. immigration laws apply there and the distance is only 1,700 miles from China, vice 8,000 miles required to reach the continental U.S.
After arriving in Guam undetected, some migrants use fraudulent documents to get on flights bound for the U.S.
For those migrants interdicted by the Coast Guard or INS, some have been transported to the US, where there are more processing and detention facilities.
After the initial processing by INS and while awaiting a hearing by an immigration judge, many disappear into society.
Due to the dramatic increase in smuggling to Guam, INS and local detention facilities on the island are currently beyond their capacity, with over 600 detainees.
Cooperative efforts between the Coast Guard and INS have resulted in many successful interdictions, but the Coast Guard is challenged in responding to these smuggling events.
Coast Guard organic assets in Guam are a 180-foot, 55-year-old buoy tender and a 110-foot patrol boat.
Initially, the INS and the U.S. Marshals Service have been cooperative in accepting custody of the PRC migrants and the smuggling vessels directly into Guam within hours of the Coast Guard interdictions.
This procedure was required due to the limited endurance of these Coast Guard assets, combined with their small crews and other duties, such as maintaining critical aids to navigation and protecting the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone from foreign fishing, in a vast area of responsibility.
Since April 1998, Coast Guard units have interdicted 720 migrants and 50 smugglers/crew members from 11 PRC smuggling vessels.
Seven of these Coast Guard interdictions have taken place in the past 3 months.
The Coast Guard has escorted/towed the last four interdicted vessels and 486 migrants to Tinian, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI), where the INS has set up tent cities for processing.
All of these vessels have exhibited the poor material and sanitary conditions commonly found on past cases.
Most have been retired fishing vessels with no name, flag, or registry papers.
These cases remain very volatile.
In some cases, the migrants have threatened to jump overboard if they sensed that they were not going to Guam.
In accordance with national policy, the Coast Guard will continue its aggressive interdiction of suspected PRC smuggling vessels off Guam.
Coast Guard C-130 aircraft, deployed from Hawaii, with assistance from Department of Defense aircraft are conducting surveillance patrols designed to locate these vessels as early as possible.
To supplement the buoy tender and patrol boat stationed in Guam, the Coast Guard is altering the current missions of several major assets.
We are diverting to the Guam area a high endurance cutter with an embarked helicopter, an additional buoy tender, and a patrol boat.
All of these assets will be in theater by the end of May.
The transfer of the surface assets alone is a major effort, as it involves a total of 12,000 ocean transit miles.
The Coast Guard will maintain this heightened presence around Guam as long as needed.
The United States Coast Guard is proud of its humanitarian and law enforcement efforts in combating illegal maritime migration.
The Coast Guard is the lead agency for at-sea enforcement and is responsible for this nation's response to mass maritime migrations, the steady day-to-day flow of illegal migrants, and the increasing threat of professional smuggling.
The current PRC situation around Guam is extremely challenging and requires a strong interdiction presence.
We look forward to continued interagency cooperation on this challenging problem.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important issue with you today.
I will be happy to answer any questions you might have.
