AIRCRAFT SABOTAGE: PREVIOUS CASES PROVIDE POSSIBLE SCENARIOS Brian Michael Jenkins Deputy Chairman Kroll Associates September 1996 __________________________________________________________________ We are still not sure whether a terrorist bomb or some as yet undiscovered mechanical failure brought down TWA Flight 800.
And it may be months, even years before we know the full story of the flight's tragic end.
Flight 800 apart, we still have a disturbing history
of more than 70 known attempts since 1969 to plant bombs on board airliners.
These have caused at least 15 crashes killing 1,732 persons.
There are several more crashes where sabotage is strongly suspected but not confirmed.
What does the record tell us?
First, these incidents would conform to a disturbing terrorist trend, toward large-scale indiscriminate violence.
Truck bombs--massive quantities of crude explosives on wheels, and sabotage of aircraft--small sophisticated bombs designed to elude security systems account for the bloodiest terrorist incidents: the 1985 sabotage of an Air India flight (329 dead), the 1993 car bombing in Bombay's financial district (more than 300 killed), the 1988 sabotage of PanAm 103 (270 dead), the 1983 truck bomb attack on the U.S. Marines in Beirut (244 dead), the 1989 sabotage of a French UTA airliner (171 dead), the 1995 Oklahoma City bombing (168 dead), and the 1987 sabotage of a Korean airliner (115 dead).
The incidents also conform to a terrorist tendency to target public transportation which offers terrorists concentrations of people--mostly strangers--in enclosed environments, generally poses little security challenge and allows easy escape.
In the last 18 months, terrorists have detonated bombs aboard buses in Israel, the Paris metro, trolleys in Moscow, and dispersed nerve gas in Tokyo's subways.
Commercial aviation historically also has been a favorite target of terrorists who have viewed airlines as nationally-labelled containers of hostages in the case of hijackings, or victims in the case of sabotage.
This set off a deadly contest between bomb makers and airline security which has continued for the past quarter century with security gradually gaining.
In the early 1970's, more than 30 percent of international terrorist attacks were targeted against commercial aviation; it is less than 10 percent today.
The 1970's saw at least 18 attempts to sabotage aircraft with eight crashes.
The 1980's saw 13 attempts with six crashes.
There have been far fewer attempts in the 1990s with only one crash.
The absence of a claim of responsibility for the downing of TWA 800 has puzzled some, but in fact only about half of all incidents of international terrorism are credibly claimed.
In another quarter of the incidents, the likely perpetrators are easily identified, but the remaining quarter requires sleuthing.
The lack of claims may reflect the changing motives and organizational patterns of terrorism.
When terrorists pursued political goals on behalf of identifiable, if imaginary, constituencies, a claim of responsibility was seen as contributing to the achievement of the terrorists' objectives.
Terrorists working on behalf of state sponsors, determined solely to
punish their perceived enemies, or inspired by religious fanaticism with God or his self-appointed spokesperson as their sole constituent have no need to claim responsibility.
Unclaimed attacks may also simply be more terrifying as they give us no enemy to identify.
The absence of a claim seems to correspond with the scale of death.
Five of the seven deadliest terrorist incidents listed above went unclaimed.
Of the 15 airline crashes caused by bombs, only six were claimed.
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC), which introduced the altitude-detonated bomb, claimed credit for the 1970 crash of a Swiss flight to Tel Aviv which killed 47 people.
Croatian separatists claimed responsibility for the 1972 crash of a Stockholm-to-Belgrade airline that crashed, killing 26.
Although another Arab group claimed responsibility for the 1974 crash of a TWA airliner flying from Athens to Tel Aviv which killed 88 persons, investigators later determined that the bomb was planted by the PFLP-GC. Sikh separatists calling themselves the Dashmesh Regiment claimed responsibility for the 1985 crash of an Air India flight, and the "Extraditables," Colombian terrorists backed by drug traffickers, claimed responsibility for the crash of an Avianca jetliner in 1989.
A Lebanon-based group using the name Partisans of God claimed responsibility for the crash of a Panamanian commuter plane in 1994.
Including all attempts to sabotage aircraft shows the perpetrators to be a diverse lot that includes criminal extortionists; Eritrean, Croatian and Sikh separatists; Colombian drug lords; anti-Castro Cubans; Palestinians; Shi'ite fanatics; agents of Iran, Iraq, Libya, Syria, and North Korea.
Middle Eastern groups collectively account for more than half of the known attempts.
They have built the most sophisticated devices and have been the most successful.
They are believed responsible for two-thirds of the cases where bombs brought planes down or at least exploded while the plane was in the air.
Terrorists want to ensure that their bombs go off while the plane is in flight.
Most bombs also were intended to detonate while the plane was over water thus making evidence difficult to recover.
Terrorists initially used timing devices, but timing devices alone are unreliable since flight delays may result in the bomb going off while the plane is still on the ground.
Altimeter-detonated bombs worked better but meant the bomb would go off on the next leg of the flight.
By the late 1980's, terrorists had developed a combination timer and altimeter detonation system to provide greater control when the explosion would occur.
In 24 of the known attempts, terrorists succeeded in detonating a bomb on board while the plane was in the air; 15 planes went down but 9 of the damaged aircraft still managed to
land safely.
In 13 more cases, delays saved lives as the bombs detonated before departure.
In the remaining cases, the bomb failed to detonate or was discovered and disarmed.
The discovery of sabotage in the TWA case would mean that the perpetrators are still at large raising the specter of a second attack.
Some of the past bombings have been part of a campaign.
The Eritrean Liberation Front planted bombs aboard Ethiopian Airlines jets in March 1969 and again a year later.
Firebombs were planted aboard four Iberian Airlines flights on the same day in May 1970.
Anti-Castro extremists planted bombs aboard airliners in November 1975 and again in October 1976.
Palestinian terrorists planted bombs aboard two PanAm flights in August 1982.
Sikh separatists tried to bring down three flights in June 1985.
There were attempts to smuggle bombs on to El Al flights in April and in June 1986.
The Islamic militant Ramzi Yousef was recently convicted of plotting to blow up 12 U.S. airliners in the Pacific region in 1995.
How were the bombs smuggled on board? In more than two thirds of the cases where we have information, the bombs were hidden in checked luggage, sent as mail, or placed in the cargo.
In another quarter of the cases, bombs were carried on board in hand luggage and concealed in the lavatories (the most popular hiding spot in the passenger compartment), or under the seats.
In several cases, terrorists bombers hid the bomb in the cockpit, and in one case, in the landing gear well (where illegal aliens have sometimes attempted to hide).
As security measures increased over the years, bombs were skillfully disguised to appear as other objects--tape cassette players or the suitcase itself.
Terrorists put bombs in bags then missed their flights.
(Ensuring that there is a passenger on board for each checked piece of luggage should prevent this.)
Or they carried bombs on board, concealed them in the cabin, then left the aircraft at the next stop.
Some terrorists have been willing to carry out suicide missions; in other cases, unwitting passengers were duped into carrying bombs on board, which is why travelers are now asked if anyone has given them any gifts or asked them to carry parcels.
In at least one case, an official at the airport was coerced into planting a bomb on a plane by terrorists who threatened to kill his family.
A missile has been mentioned as a possible cause in the TWA crash.
Although this is a more remote possibility, it is not unprecedented.
Shoulder-fired, heat-seeking surface-to-air missiles have become more available to guerrillas and terrorists in recent years and have been used to bring down civilian airliners in Africa and Asia.
Thus far, we have not seen their use outside of conflict zones, but it remains a potential future scenario.
While a finding that a missile brought down TWA 800 would create a new set of difficult-to-solve security problems, it would at the same time mean that existing security measures had not failed.
It is more likely, however, that if TWA 800 was sabotaged, we will find that the persistent problems in screening luggage and cargo, inspecting planes before they
are turned around to fly, protecting aircraft against unauthorized access, and maintaining the efficiency and fidelity of employees remain the principal vulnerabilities.
