International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2003* August Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
Friend, Not Foe; Unions Step Up Campaign To Strengthen Workplace Rights for Illegal Immigrants By Shawn Neidorf, Chicago Tribune, August 31, 2003 The AFL-CIO (American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations -- a voluntary federation of 65 national and international labor unions) has changed its stance on illegal immigrant workers, according to this report.
Neidorf writes: "As recently as 1985, the AFL-CIO supported employer sanctions for hiring illegal immigrants.
But in 2000, it called for a repeal of the sanctions, noting that too many employers skirt the law and use it as a weapon against immigrants who seek to unionize....
"Supporters of unionizing illegal immigrants," Neidorf writes, "say that bringing undocumented workers into the union helps the immigrants by raising their wages and giving them protection -- and that helps the rest of the workforce by taking away employers' incentive for favoring undocumented immigrants.
And, of course, it adds to organized labor's dwindling ranks."
Crackdown Targets Immigration Fraud By Akilah Johnson, Los Angeles Times, August 29, 2003 Authorities in California are cracking down on scam immigration "experts" who promise to help illegal immigrants legalize their status but just steal their money instead.
State Attorney General Bill Lockyer set up the Office of Immigrant Assistance two years ago and so far has filed charges against 14 unlawful immigration businesses.
Legitimate immigration consultants are required to be licensed by the state and post a $50,000 bond.
There are about 700 bona fide immigration consultants in California.
Immigrants make up 25 percent of California's population and are attractive targets to criminals.
In January this year, Lockyer intervened on behalf of some 300 Korean immigrants in the San Francisco Bay area who were facing deportation.
They had paid up to $30,000 each to unscrupulous immigration "advisers" who gave them illegal green cards.
Johnson writes: "According to the Federal Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services, fraud cases of all types have jumped 27 percent nationwide this year."
PRC, Taiwan Red Cross To Increase Cooperation on Repatriation of Illegal Immigrants NTIS, U.S. Department of Commerce, World News Connection, Dateline Beijing, August 29, 2003 (XINHUA) The Red Cross Society of China will increase cooperation with the Taiwan branch to ease repatriation of illegal immigrants.
According to this report, the mainland Red Cross organiziation received 1,231 illegal mainland immigrants repatriated from Taiwan in the first eight months of this year.
Taiwan To Interview Mainland Brides to Stop Fake Marriages Deutsche Presse-Agentur, August 29, 2003 On September 1, Taiwan officials will start interviewing mainland brides.
The goal is to stop mainland women from using fake marriages to come to Taiwan to work.
According to this article, since the late 1980s some 168,651 mainland women have married Taiwanese men and applied to enter Taiwan.
Many of the marriages, it is believed, were scams and arranged by criminal groups.
Ontario To Investigate 500 Colleges: Move To Ensure Schools Not Aiding Illegal Immigration By Troy Reeb, National Post, Dateline Brockville, August 28, 2003 Ontario's Minister of Public Security Bob Runciman is ordering an investigation of the Ontario province's 500 career colleges.
The goal is to ensure that schools are not aiding illegal immigration.
The investigations were announced August 27, just a day following revelations that 19 men linked to a suspected terrorist sleeper cell in Toronto entered Canada on fraudulent student visas.
The suspects had gotten their visas by enrolling in the defunct Ottawa Business College based in Scarborough.
The school, investigations found, was little more than a shell and charged $400 to $500 for acceptance letters that could be used by foreign students.
Runciman wants college operators in Ontario to assume the costs of running security checks on their students.
Smuggling Raid The Times, August 28, 2003 British police arrested thirteen people smugglers accused of having brought hundreds of illegal immigrants into the United Kingdom disguised as singers and dancers.
The illegal immigrants had paid their smugglers up to GBP 8,000 (U.S. $12,609)each for fraudulent papers.
Britain Says Asylum Seeker Numbers Down a Third Reuters News, Dateline London, August 28, 2003 Britain's tougher immigration measures seem to be working.
The number of people claiming asylum fell by a third in the second quarter of this year -- 10,585 compared to 16,000 in the first quarter.
Applications for asylum were halved.
Claimants in June numbered 3,610 compared to 8,770 in October last year.
Home Secretary and Interior Minister David Blunkett is quoted as saying: "These figures show that the tough measures the government has put in place to prevent illegal immigration and tackle abuse of the asylum system are working."
Straits Deaths Condemned By Xing Zhigang, Mei Dong and Ruo Lan, China Daily, August 28, 2003 Beijing authorities strongly condemned the "barbarous" killing of six mainland women who drowned when their human smugglers pushed them into the sea when the ship they were in was spotted by Taiwanese patrol boats.
According to this report, 17 other women were rescued; 3 are still missing.
They had paid smugglers U.S. $5,700 each to reach Taiwan in search of jobs.
Ukraine Deports 46 Chinese Clandestine Immigrants Agence France-Presse, August 27, 2003 Ukrainian border authorities have deported 46 Chinese illegal immigrants back to Beijing at their families' expense.
The Chinese, who had been trying to reach western Europe, had been detained in Ukraine for six months.
The Chinese embassy in Kiev had contacted their families and arranged for them to pay the airline fares for their kin to return home.
Another group of 43 Chinese illegal immigrants will be repatriated next week.
Boris Marchenko, deputy head of the Ukrainian border service, is quoted as saying more than 400 illegal immigrants are being held in temporary detention centers.
In 2002, Ukraine authorities apprehended more than 5,000 illegal immigrants, mostly from China, India and Pakistan.
Ukraine -- along with Hungary, Poland and Slovakia -- has become a major transit country for Asian illegal immigrants trying to reach the west.
Gangs from China, Russia, Japan, Korea Flock to the Pacific Agence France-Presse, Dateline Saipan, Northern Mariana Islands, August 27, 2003 Criminal groups from China, Russia, Japan and South Korea are increasing their activities in the Mariana Islands and Guam, according to a U.S. government report.
The report was prepared by R.G. Meissner, a regional security specialist for the U.S. Attorney's Office, Eastern District of Virginia.
In the report, Meissner urged the U.S. Department of Justice to extend federal immigration law to the Northern Marianas, adding that lack of federal jurisdiction over immigration, customs and financial matters there helped fuel crime and corruption.
According to Meissner, Chinese Triads, Japanese Yakuza, Russian Mafia, and Korean Mafia organizations are involved in people-smuggling, drug trafficking, money laundering, gambling and prostitution in both locales.
The Northern Marianas is a commonwealth in political union with the United States.
U.S. federal funds to the commonwealth of Guam are administered by the U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Insular Affairs.
Guam is an organized, unincorporated territory of the United States.
Policy relations between Guam and the United States are under the jurisdiction of the Office of Insular Affairs, U.S. Department of the Interior.
4 Nabbed for Allegedly Dumping Chinese Women Into Sea Kyodo News, August 27, 2003 and Taiwanese Smugglers Face Murder Charges after Chinese Immigrants Drowned Agence France-Presse, Dateline Taipei, August 27, 2003 and Taiwan Blames Beijing for Drownings of Six Chinese Women Dow Jones International News, Dateline Taipei, August 27, 2003 Taiwan police arrested four people smugglers near Penghu Island for allegedly throwing a group of Chinese women overboard in an effort to escape a Taiwanese coast guard interdiction.
Six women drowned; 20 were rescued, some slightly injured.
They are being kept at a shelter until they can be returned to the mainland.
The young women had paid their smugglers NT$200,000 (U.S. $5,848) to get to Taiwan in order to find jobs.
The four accused people smugglers -- identified as Yeh Tien-sheng, Ko Ching-sung, Tseng Tseung-ming, and Wang Chung-hsiung -- are being detained on murder charges, according to prosecutor Lu Tseng-ta. Taiwanese authorities have arrested 1,239 Chinese mainlanders since January for attempting to enter Taiwan illegally.
Taiwan's President Chen Shui-bian is quoted as saying: "The people smugglers bear a big responsibility, but the authorities in Beijing cannot escape bearing an even larger responsibility.
These women voted with their feet to express their dissatisfaction with their homeland, with the Beijing authorities, and risked their lives to come to Taiwan."
Six Chinese Drown as People Smugglers Flee Patrol Reuters News, Dateline Taipei, Taiwan, August 26, 2003 and Chinese Women Dumped into the Sea by People Smuggler, 6 Dead Kyodo News, August 26, 2003 Six Chinese women drowned when their smugglers pushed them overboard to escape Taiwan's coast guard.
Four others are still missing; 12 were rescued.
Most of the women were from the Chinese provinces of Zhejiang, Sichuan, Fujian and Jiangsu.
Each had paid their smugglers T$200,000 (U.S. $5,800) to carry them via two speedboats to Taiwan in the hope of finding jobs.
One of the rescued women is quoted as saying: "We were on board for three days and not allowed to eat or drink.
They pulled my hair and dragged and kicked me out of the boat."
Joint Crime Fighting Due with ASEAN China Daily, August 26, 2003 China's Ministry of Public Security and its counterparts at the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are planning medium- and long-term programs to enhance cooperation against transnational crime, including illegal immigration, drug trafficking, piracy, terrorism, weapons smuggling, money laundering and Internet crime.
At a workshop held in Beijing this week, representatives will discuss mechanisms for cooperative law enforcement, exchange of intelligence information, and strengthened personnel training.
ASEAN members include: Brunei, Cambodia, Laos, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
Mexican ID Card Is Gaining Acceptance in Some U.S. Cities By Rachel L. Swarns, The New York Times and International Herald Tribune, Dateline Indianapolis, Indiana, August 26, 2003 The matricula consular -- an identification card issued by the Mexican government to its citizens -- is increasing being accepted by local authorities in the United States.
Swarns writes: "In March 2002, only a handful of cities and banks recognized the matricula consular, Mexican officials say.
Today, more than 100 cities, 900 police departments, 100 financial institutions and 13 states, including Indiana, New Mexico and Utah, accept the cards, which carry the bearer's photo, name and address and are issued by Mexican consulates....
"Illegal immigrants who carry the matricula consular still risk deportation and are still barred from working, by federal law.
They cannot use the card to register to vote, change their immigration status or to obtain Social Security numbers or work permits," Swarns notes.
But in places where the cards are recognized, they ease the way for the illegal immigrant to obtain a driver's license, permits and various city services.
Germany To Oversee Future EU Land Border Police Force Agence France-Presse, August 25, 2003 Germany will supervise a European Union border police force under a European Union plan to patrol the bloc's land frontiers and halt the influx of illegal immigrants.
Under "Project Neptune" -- as the immigration surveillance plan has been dubbed -- Italy would be in charge of immigration through the EU's airports; Spain and Greece would coordinate two checkpoints at sea.
Border Death Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Columbus, New Mexico, August 25, 2003 Sara Lena Montoya of Columbus and Juan Carlos Maldonado-Torres of Camargo, Mexico were indicted on 26 counts connected with smuggling eight illegal immigrants and the death of one.
Marisol Lopez Echeverria died July 10 in 104-degree heat when she was abandoned in a desert area near the U.S.-Mexico border.
Montoya could face the death penalty if convicted.
Giovanni Gaudioso, the El Paso immigration-customs agent-in-charge, is quoted as saying: "We will aggressively investigate and pursue criminal charges against the individuals and organizations responsible for ruthlessly placing people at deadly risk for financial gain.
The message is that we are going to go after these people with all our resources."
BIS Warns of Mafia Tactics Within Foreigner Communities CTK (Ceska Tiskova Kancelar) Business News, Dateline Prague, August 25, 2003 Organized crime and problems with illegal immigrants are moving from the border areas to the interior of the Czech Republic, according to an annual report released by BIS, the Czech Republic's counter-intelligence agency.
Ukrainian criminal groups generate huge revenues by demanding protection money from their fellow Ukrainians in the Czech Republic; Chinese and Vietnamese crime groups are active in extortion, racketeering, illegal immigration, customs and tax crimes.
Solntsevsky, one of the strongest Russian criminal organizations, is also active in the Czech Republic.
According to this report, the number of illegal border crossings has dropped by one-third in 2002 compared to 2001; but crimes by foreigners rose by seven percent.
Spain Detains Nearly 200 Illegal Immigrants Agence France-Presse, August 24, 2003 Spanish police apprehended 179 illegal immigrants, most from sub-Saharan Africa, at the port city of Cadiz on August 24.
Since August 15, more than 1,000 illegal immigrants were caught trying to reach Spain by crossing the Strait of Gibraltar; more than 70 have drowned attempting the sea crossing this year.
Mexico Links Immigrants' Deaths in U.S.
The Washington Post, August 24, 2003 The Mexican attorney general's office says the May 2003 deaths of 19 illegal immigrants inside a tractor-trailer near Victoria, Texas are related to the deaths of 11 immigrants trapped inside a rail car in Iowa last year.
Heriberto Flores-Rebollar has been linked to the Iowa deaths; Karla Patricia Chavez is believed to have directed the Victoria operation.
Both used the same safehouse to hide illegal immigrants before moving them on to their final destinations.
Chavez was Flores-Rebollar's common-law wife.
Elizabeth Jaurez, spokeswoman for the Mexican attorney general's office, is quoted as saying: "We don't have any doubt that both cases are related."
Mexican authorities have issued 347 arrest warrants in the Victoria case and have arrested 12, who will face trail in Mexico.
Tucson Man Convicted of Harboring Illegal Immigrants Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, August 23, 2003 Jesus Felix Lugo, of Tucson, was convicted of harboring 19 illegal immigrants in his home.
Authorities found the illegal border crossers in his home in April 2002.
Lugo faces a maximum penalty of five years in prison and a fine of up to $250,000.
Two Chinese "Snakehead" Gang Members Convicted in Human Trafficking Case Associated Press Newswires, Dateline London, August 22, 2003 The alleged head of a Chinese human smuggling gang operating in the United Kingdom was convicted of trafficking, assault and false imprisonment.
Yong Hui Zhang, also known in London as E Ba Di, or "local young tyrant," was arrested for severely beating with a baseball one of the clients he had smuggled into the country.
The client, Li En Kai had to be hospitalized for a collapsed lung; his brother contacted police.
Yong originally entered Britain claiming political asylum and had built a lucrative business by smuggling into the country some 20 to 30 illegal immigrants each month.
Japan Plans Use of Biometrics in Immigration Control System Kyodo News, August 22, 2003 Japan's Justice Ministry is planning to introduce biometrics technology in its immigration control system.
The hope is that "electronic passports" holding integrated circuit chips containing the holder's fingerprints and possibly other biological characteristics, will better detect criminals and control illegal immigration.
To this end, the ministry has requested 48 million yen (U.S. $407,713) for the next fiscal year to do the research and experiment jointly with the private sector.
Crime Gangs "Threaten Everyone in UK" By Pat Hurst, The Press Association Limited, August 21, 2003 Crime gangs in Britain are targeting the lucrative trade in illegal immigrants and fueling the demand for crack cocaine, according to the fourth annual United Kingdom Threat Assessment of Serious and Organized Crime 2003, released August 21 by the National Criminal Intelligence Service (NCIS), which targets major criminals.
See the section "Organised Immigration Crime".
Illegal Immigration on the Rise in Finland Agence France-Presse, August 21, 2003 Police report that illegal immigration to Finland has doubled in the first half of 2003 -- 434 illegal immigrants have been apprehended to date compared to 250 in the same period last year.
Most of the illegal immigrants are coming from the former Yugoslavia.
Others have come from Iraq, Turkey, Bulgaria and Somalia.
Amnesty Programs Have No Impact on Illegal Immigration, Study Says U.S. Newswire, Dateline Dallas, Texas, August 21, 2003 The 1986 passage of the U.S. Immigration Reform and Control Act (IRCA), which granted amnesty to 2.7 million undocumented immigrants but increased penalties and tightened border controls, was only temporarily effective in reducing illegal immigration, according to a study conducted by economists Pia Orrenius and Madeline Zavodny.
IRCA did not lead to a surge in illegal immigration, as some critics have charged, the authors say.
But Orrenius is quoted as saying: "Apprehensions were similar before passage of the amnesty and post-IRCA, even though some 2 million Mexicans were legalized.
This evidence is consistent with a rise in illegal immigration in the years after the amnesty."
The study appeared in the August issue of Demography, a peer-reviewed journal published by the Population Association of America.
See the full article "Do Amnesty Programs Reduce Undocumented Immigration? Evidence from IRCA."
Polish Border Guards Detain Illegal Migrants from Vietnam, China Polish News Agency PAP, Dateline Lublin, August 20, 2003 Polish border guards apprehended 14 illegal immigrants attempting to swim through the River Bug near Hrubieszow in eastern Poland.
The group -- comprised of seven Vietnamese, five Chinese and two Afghans -- were attempting to reach western Europe via Poland in search of jobs.
So far this year, some 300 illegal immigrants were caught in the Bug river region.
Most were from China, Vietnam, Afghanistan, India and Sri Lanka.
Top Interpol Official Visits on Digitalized Network ROK Yonhap, Dateline Seoul, August 20, 2003 Stanley Morris, director of Interpol's communication bureau, was in Seoul to discuss the establishment of a global Internet-based clearinghouse on criminals.
The $9.8 million project will link 181 Interpol member countries, allowing them to share information on criminals, such as photographs, fingerprints, and DNA samples.
South Korean police set up the system in July.
Interpol -- International Criminal Police Organization -- is the world's largest international police organization.
I Bought a New Identity for 1,300 (GBP) By Sue Reid, Daily Mail, August 19, 2003 Posing as an illegal immigrant, Sue Reid, a reporter for the Daily Mail, discovered firsthand "the shocking ease with which illegal immigrants and terrorists can obtain a false identity" in London.
Reid doesn't explain how she tracked down "Marco," the Algerian who came to Britain 10 years ago as "a grateful asylum seeker" and who now works as the middleman for the people who got her the documents she needed.
But she does explain in detail how GBP 1,300 (U.S. $2,065) in cash got her a European Community passport, a French identity card, a driving licence, and a British National Insurance card in just 48 hours.
She even got a genuine National Insurance number that allowed her to work in Britain immediately.
Reid writes: "Identity fraud is now more prevalent than drug trafficking among international crime syndicates operating in Britain, according to Scotland Yard.
The crime carries far fewer penalties if the perpetrator is caught and, with a high quality counterfeit British passport worth 5,000 (U.S. $7,941) on the black market, this is a very lucrative trade.
"Identity fakers cost Britain more than 1.3 billion (U.S. $2,064,530,000) a year, including the loss from unpaid taxes and welfare fraud....
There is a burgeoning demand for false papers from bogus asylum seekers and even lethally dangerous Islamic militants....
"I was told," Reid continues, "some immigrants buy multiple illegal identities as an investment for their future life here; seven or eight different names with all the supporting documents to give them a new persona.
Then they can claim multiple benefits, have multiple jobs if they choose to work and become impossible to catch because of the plethora of identities....
"Perhaps it is not surprising that the economic migrants...throw away their own personal documents linking them to their homeland," Reid says.
"It means the truth about their past can never be discovered by immigration officials.
And, of course, it is much harder for their dubious stories of persecution to be checked."
Homeland Security Officials Thwart Airborne Human Smuggling Attempt Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Corpus Christi, Texas, August 19, 2003 U.S. Border Patrol agents in Corpus Christi apprehended a small Cessna 310 airplane carrying four illegal immigrants from Mexico and a U.S. citizen pilot.
Border Patrol got the tip that the plane might be carrying illegals from the Air and Marine Operations Center in Riverside, California, a component of the former U.S. Customs Service.
The illegal immigrants had recently arrived in California from Mexico and were being transported inland.
Customs and Border Patrol Spokesman Jaime Salazar is quoted as saying: "One of the things this tell us is how effective our immigration checkpoints are being."
Hispanic Newcomers Skew Wages -- Study Calls for More Rules in Workplace and Amnesty for Illegal Immigrants By Eduardo Porter, The Wall Street Journal, August 19, 2003 Occupations in which Hispanic immigrants account for a quarter of the work force pay as much as 11 percent less than those where there are no new Latino immigrant men, according to a new study done by Lisa Catanzarite, a sociologist at the University of California, Los Angeles.
The new immigrants cluster in "brown collar" jobs -- such as construction, gardening or dish washing -- in metropolitan areas such as Los Angeles, New York and Chicago.
Their influx into certain jobs depresses the wages for earlier immigrants as well as for native white workers, Catanzarite found.
Noting that immigrant workers are willing to work for less money and less likely to defend their workplace rights, Catanzarite urges that minimum wage standards be enforced
.
She also recommends amnesty for illegal immigrants and strengthening their workplace protections.
Catanzarite is quoted as saying: "Policies aimed at raising the social status of immigrants would protect native workers from both immigrant competition and brown-collar wage penalties."
Porter, the author of this Wall Street Journal article, writes that there are more than 10 million Hispanic immigrants working in the United States.
About an additional 400,000, most of them poor and low-skilled, arrive each year.
Cross-Border Traffic Ravages Desert Park; Drug Runners, Migrants Blamed By Hugh Dellios, Chicago Tribune, Dateline Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, Arizona, August 19, 2003 The 300,000-acre Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument in Arizona has become the most dangerous and among the most trash-strewn of U.S. national parks, thanks to drug runners and illegal immigrants, this article says.
Tougher border controls in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks make national parks like Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument -- along with Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, The Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge and the Coronado National Memorial -- more attractive to illegal border crossers.
The result: beautiful and environmentally sensitive wildlife preserves are being destroyed by vehicles and human refuse.
In the desolate areas of the parks, many illegals die from the severe desert heat, and armed bandits are a constant threat.
Last year, Organ Pipe park ranger Kris Eggle was shot and killed by a suspected drug trafficker fleeing Mexican police investigating a quadruple murder in Mexico.
Hundreds of Acehnese Asylum Seekers Arrested in Malaysia Kyodo News, August 19, 2003 Anywhere from 240 to 400 Acehnese asylum seekers were arrested by Malaysian police when they tried to enter the Kuala Lumpur office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
The Acehnese arrived at the UNHCR office by taxis and private vehicles.
But Malaysian police apprehended them before they could reach the UNHCR building and sent them to a detention camp to await deportation.
The Malaysian government generally treats Acehnese as illegal immigrants and deports them to Indonesia's Sumatra Island.
The Acehnese, however, say they are seeking political asylum, saying they might be tortured by the Indonesian army because of their ties to the separatist Free Aceh Movement.
Mexican Judge Orders 10 Suspected Immigrant Traffickers To Stand Trial Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Mexico City, August 19, 2003 A Mexican federal judge has ordered that ten members of a ring blamed for the deaths of 19 illegal immigrants who were abandoned at a Texas truck stop will stand trial in Mexico on organized crime and immigrant smuggling charges.
The ring allegedly was headed by Karla Patricia Chavez, a Honduran woman awaiting trial in the United States.
More than 70 illegal immigrants were being transported from the Texas city of Harlingen to Houston on May 13.
Seventeen died in the airless trailer, which was abandoned in Victoria, Texas.
Another two died later after being hospitalized for dehydration and hyperthermia.
Gangs Preying on Smugglers, Immigrants Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Phoenix, August 17, 2003 Violent gangs who prey on both illegal immigrants and their smugglers are becoming more prevalent, according to this report.
Known in Mexico as "bajadores" (Spanish for "downloaders") or as "rip-off crews" in the United States, the gangs kidnap illegal immigrants from their smugglers and threaten beatings or death if a ransom isn't paid.
They also kidnap the smugglers themselves and demand even higher ransoms from their ring leaders.
Authorities say the smugglers are responding to the rip-off gangs with more weapons and violence.
Thomas DeRouchey, interim agent in charge of the Phoenix Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, is quoted as saying: "In the past, alien smuggling has been viewed as a victimless crime.
But that's changed."
Illegal Immigrants Turn Desert Into Trash Dump By Luke Turf, Associated Press Newswires, August 17, 2003 A congressional report estimates that at least $20 million is needed to remove the trash left by illegal immigrants crossing the deserts in southeastern Arizona.
At the Tohono O'odham reservation alone, some 1,500 illegal immigrants sneak through daily.
Environmental specialist Ken Cronin estimates the illegal border crossers each leave about eight pounds -- six tons total -- of trash each day.
The human waste endangers the ecosystem, experts say.
And wildfires started by the campfires of illegal immigrants are a constant threat.
Isles Are Gateway to Aliens By Craig McGill, The Sunday Mirror, August 17, 2003 Illegal immigrants seeking to enter Britain are finding an easy route through Scotland, according to this report.
Orkney and the Shetlands have just two security officers working their airports.
Once on the Shetland Isles, the illegal are transported south by lorry or train.
Hospitals Facing Cash Crisis from Bill for Illegal Migrants By Jenny Hope, Daily Mail, August 16, 2003 Increasing numbers of illegal immigrants are straining the financial resources of England's hospitals.
At Swansea's Singleton Hospital, asylum seekers with HIV yearly cost nearly GBP 200,000 (U.S. $319,400) to treat.
Managers at Newham General Hospital in East London estimate that annual losses resulting from free care to illegal immigrants run about GBP 772,000 (U.S. $1,232,884).
Some asylum seekers arrive with advanced states of HIV and are difficult to treat.
It is estimated that one in six immigrants is infected with tuberculosis and have of the TB cases in Great Britain occur in the foreign-born.
Nick Barlay Exposes the Seedy Side of G for...
By Nick Barlay, The Times (London), August 16, 2003 Although this article primarily explores the history of gang activity in Britain, Barlay notes that modern Britain's ethnically diverse society has produced ethnically diverse gangs that specialize in certain crimes.
"In the past 18 months," he writes, "the police have targeted Yardies in Operation Trident, immigration gangs in Operation Maxim, and have cracked down on Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi and Sri Lankan gangs, as well as Turkish and Kurdish drug barons....
"Albanian gangs," Barlay writes, "are increasingly in control of London's sex trade.
And then there are the Chinese, Japanese, Maltese, Mexicans and Brazilians, all of whom have an organised criminal presence in the capital."
"Four hundred gangs, netting an estimated Pounds 25 billion (U.S. $39.7 billion) a year, operate in London and the South East, according to a police report at the end of 2001," Barlay writes.
Rise in Number of Women, Juvenile Illegal Immigrants Reported By Michelle Rushlo, Associated Press Newswires, August 15, 2003 More women and children are illegally crossing the U.S.-Mexico border, according to this report.
In the U.S. Border Patrol's Tucson sector along the border of Arizona and Mexico, 38,000 women were caught in the first eight months of this fiscal year, compared to 32,000 during the same time period the year before.
For children, the figure jumped to 8,000 from 7,000.
In the Yuma sector, which covers the southwestern corner of Arizona, 6,500 women were caught from October through July, compared to 5,362 in the entire previous fiscal year in that sector.
Some 4,000 children were caught, compared to 947 in the last fiscal year.
It is assumed that most of the women are trying to reunite with husbands who earlier entered the United States.
Tougher border security make it difficult for men who are illegal immigrants to travel back and forth to visit wives and family outside the United States.
Aliens Pose as Monks To Live in Thailand By Penchan Charoensuthipan, Bangkok Post, August 15, 2003 and Abbots Warned on Illegals The Nation (Thailand), August 15, 2003 An estimated 400 illegal immigrants posing as monks have been found to have entered up to 189 Buddhist temples in Thailand.
The illegal aliens paid up to 7,000 baht (U.S. $167) each for a certificate of their ordination as monks in their home countries.
The certificate allowed them to stay in Thailand's temples after they illegally entered the country.
Once at the temples, they earned donations for the temples or performed manual labor to make money, especially at temples where construction work was being done.
Chaipak Siriwat, Thailand's chairman of a government sub-committee for suppressing illegal alien workers, is quoted as saying: "Officials from the Immigration Police, the Illegal Alien Worker Control Centre and the Religion Department will revisit these 189 temples in seven days.
If illegal aliens are still there, the abbots will face legal action."
Buddhist abbots found to have been involved in the scheme face being defrocked and charged with sheltering illegal workers, which carries a maximum jail term of five years.
Man Wanted in Child's Death Added to FBI Most Wanted List By Colin Fly, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Nashville, Tennessee, August 14, 2003 Genero Espinosa Dorantes has been added to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's (FBI) "Ten Most Wanted Fugitive" list for killing the four-year-old son of his girlfriend Martha L. Cano Patlan, who is also charged with criminal homicide.
The child's body, which had been dumped in a Nashville park, showed signs of battered child syndrome, scalding, and burns.
Nashville detective Brad Corcoran is quoted as saying: "We feel they were heading to North Carolina because they had family and they had prior business arrangements there.
Dorantes was also possibly smuggling illegal immigrants into the country and through his network was able to stay hidden."
U.S.
Still Working on Mexico Migration Deal -- Powell Reuters News, Dateline Washington, August 13, 2003 The Bush Administration is still working on proposals for an immigration agreement with Mexico, says U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell.
Powell is quoted as saying in his August 13 interview with Spanish-language network Univision that issues such as border transit and migrant documentation are: "(V)ery, very difficult issues, especially in the post-9/11 atmosphere.
We have to make sure that we are securing our borders and that we are doing it in a way that protects our society."
See the full transcript, as provided by the U.S. State Department.
Gangster Made Millions Sneaking 12,000 Migrants Into "Easy Option" Britain By Allan Hall, Daily Mail (London), August 13, 2003 and People Trafficker Jailed for Eight Years; Belgian Judge Hits Out at UK Immigration Law for Drawing Illegal Aliens By Andrew Osborn, The Guardian (London), August 13, 2003 A Belgian court sentenced an Albanian gangster to eight years in prison for smuggling thousands of illegal immigrants through Belgium and into Britain.
Mhill Sokoli and his gang smuggled up to 12,000 people from Albania, Africa and the former Soviet union between 2001 and February 2003.
It is estimated that Sokoli personally made GBP 12 million (U.S. $19,231,000) in the two years his operation was up and running.
Sokoli was fined GBP 85,000 (U.S. $136,221) on top of his jail sentence.
Most of his money was invested in Albania.
The gang itself is estimated to have cleared about GBP 35 million (U.S. $56,091,000).
Twenty-three of Sokoli's Albanian and Turkish cohorts received jail sentences of between three and eight years.
Prosecutor Anne-Marie D'Hondt is quoted as telling the court: "Every night we watched, they tried to bring at least 20 illegals across the Channel.
It was brilliantly run, with a sliding scale of tariffs.
The top rate of over GBP 2,000 (U.S. $3,205) was for a guaranteed successful passage on a lorry with a bribed driver."
Fees were lower for clients who agreed to sneak onto lorries parked near Zeebrugge as their drivers slept.
The illegal immigrants travelled from Albania to Italy by speedboat.
They then went to Belgium via train or road and were kept in safehouses until they could be smuggled into Britain.
Freddy Troch, the judge presiding over this case, said that Britain's lack of a national identification system and "poor (immigration) laws" makes it especially attractive to illegal immigrants.
The Sokoli people-smuggling operation is the biggest to be uncovered to date.
But Judge Troch is quoted as saying that without a coordinated European approach to human smuggling, fighting this crime "is like mopping the floor while the tap is running."
Illegal Immigrants Face One-Way Ticket Out of EU By Jitendra Joshi, Agence France-Presse, August 8, 2003 and New EU Plan To Toughen Asylum Rules By Richard Norton-Taylor, The Guardian, August 8, 2003 Illegal immigrants and failed asylum seekers would be deported from European Union countries within 36 hours, under a plan proposed by Italy, which currently holds the presidency of the European Union.
The proposal calls for third-country nationals who are subject to removal orders to be escorted by guards across members states and delivered to either their country of origin or to the last "safe" non-European Union country they had passed through.
The proposal will be presented to the rest of the European Union within a few months.
Bosnia, Italy To Sign Deal on Readmission of Illegal Immigrants Agence France-Presse, August 7, 2003 Bosnia and Italy are set to sign an agreement which would simplify procedures for sending back to Bosnia its nationals and those from third countries found to be illegally residing in Italy.
It is the first such agreement between an European Union country and post-war Bosnia.
Italian Ambassador Saba D'Elia is quoted as saying the agreement "would contribute to Bosnia's efforts to join European integration."
After its 1992-1995 war, Bosnia's porous borders made it a major transit country for illegal immigrants trying to reach the European union from Turkey, Iran, China and other Asian Countries.
But last year Bosnia tightened its border controls and reduced the number of illegal immigrants from 35,000 in 2000 to less than 600 in 2002, according to this report.
Cocklebed Gangs Held in New Mass Raid By Andrew Norfolk, The Times, August 7, 2003 British police and government officials are cracking down on unlicensed cockle-pickers and nabbing "benefit cheats" along with illegal immigrants in the process.
Thirty-seven suspected Chinese illegal immigrants were detained and 14 of them have been given deportation papers.
Recently 200 British law enforcement raided River Dee's estuary at Thurstaston on The Wirral, a coastal site in northwest England, where unlicensed teams of up to 800 pickers work the beaches.
Hundreds of people attempted to flee, but most were detained for identity checks.
Harvesting the shellfish can earn up to 1,200 British pounds (U.S. $1,935) per day.
Roy Paul, regional fraud operations manager for the Department of Work and Pension, is quoted as saying: "This activity is a scourge on genuine cockle-pickers who have licences, and it costs taxpayers thousands of pounds in illegally claimed benefits."
Australia Gives Five New Patrol Boats to Indonesian Police Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Canberra, Australia, August 6, 2003 In an effort to better fight transnational crime such as terrorism, drug and people smuggling, Australia gave Indonesia five custom-built patrol boats worth 1.5 million Australian dollars (U.S. $975,000).
Australia's Justice and Customs Minister Chris Ellison is quoted as saying that transnational crime is "not something that Australia can deal with on its own.
We work in partnership with nations from the region and this is a tangible example of the partnership we have with Indonesia."
Malaysian Pleads Guilty To Smuggling Chinese Workers By Henry Pierson Curtis, Orlando Sentinel (Florida), August 5, 2003 A Malaysian woman has pled guilty in a Florida court to smuggling illegal Chinese immigrants into the United States through Orlando, Florida.
Choo Kek Ang worked for a smuggling ring that routed Chinese illegal immigrants through Africa to Northern Europe, where they took U.S.-bound flights.
They traveled on false Malaysian passports because Malaysian citizens are allowed to enter the United States without a visa.
The smuggling ring charged $50,000 to $60,000 for each client.
Ang could face up to three years in prison.
Tokyo Bay Security To Be Boosted Kyodo News, August 3, 2003 Tokyo metropolitan government officials are strengthening coordination with various authorities along Tokyo Bay in an increased effort to prevent the smuggling of people and goods.
A council has been set up which includes police forces from Tokyo, Kanagawa and Chiba prefectures, port authorities from the Kanagawa Prefecture cities of Yokohama and Kawasaki, the Chiba prefectural government, the Japan Coast Guard, Tokyo and Yokohama customs, and the Tokyo Immigration Bureau.
The council's first meeting is set for later this month.
The Tokyo metropolitan government has also decided to increase the number of surveillance cameras along the piers of Tokyo Bay to spot suspicious-looking boats.
21 Africans Die in Algerian Desert Reuters News, Dateline Algiers, August 3, 2003 The bodies of 21 Africans were found in Algeria's Sahara desert, about 750 miles south of the capital of Algiers.
They are believed to have died from dehydration.
Each year, police arrest hundreds of illegal immigrants trying to cross Algerian territory in an attempt to reach Europe.
Chinese Police Officers Face Lengthy Jail Terms for Helping People Smuggler Agence France-Press, August 2, 2003 A Chinese court in Lishui city, Zhejiang province, has turned down the appeals of six policemen sentenced to serve terms of up to ten years for people smuggling.
The officers were found guilty of helping a local people smugger by accepting thousands of dollars in return for issuing 118 passports to would-be illegal emigrants.
Gang Ways - Down on the Farm, a Tough Life The Economist (London), August 2, 2003 Gangmasters - the people who supply English farmers and food processors with workers - are getting a worse reputation than that they already had, according to this article.
The estimated 850 to 1,100 gangmasters who ply their trade supply half the 72,000 casual workers in British horticulture; and they are now being accused of "flouting the law, dodging taxes, hiring illegal immigrants and treating their workers abominably," this article says.
But as the demand for unskilled workers increases, more gangmasters are setting themselves up as "employment agencies" which depend on "subcontractors" to provide the actual bodies.
It is these subcontractors, this article says, who are "the biggest worry.
Difficult to trace, let alone prosecute, they are the most likely to be breaking the law and employing illegal immigrants.
It is the small operators, too, that are most commonly mentioned in tales of worker abuse."
The West Discovers that It Profits from Human Trafficking By Patrick Rahir, Agence France-Presse, August 1, 2003 Trafficking people isn't all about supplying the world's sex industry, this article says.
Human trafficking is increasingly moving people into slave-like conditions in non-competitive industries such as agriculture and textile production.
The International Labour Organisation (ILO) says that the demand for cheap labor and curbs on legal immigration have created "a fertile breeding ground for illegal immigration and black-market labour, which often turned into forced labour," Rahir writes.
The Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe has called on its 55 member countries to make human trafficking a criminal offense and to set up special units to combat it.
_________________________________________________________________
*See: IN THE NEWS - most recent articles for 2003 _________________________________________________________________
Journal Articles and Book Excerpts _________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
