DOJ Seal Making a Federal Case Of Identity Theft The Department of Justice's Role in Identity Theft Enforcement and Prevention by Jonathan J. Rusch
[Note: This is an expanded version of an article scheduled for publication in the Fall 2001 issue of the Federal Trade Commission publication Fraudbusters.]
Identity theft is one of the most insidious forms of white-collar crime.
In a traditional fraud scheme, prospective victims are contacted directly by criminals who use lies and deception to persuade the victims to part with their money.
Identity theft, however, requires no direct communication between criminal and victim.
Simply doing things that are part of everyday routine -- charging dinner at a restaurant or books at an e-commerce Website, submitting required personal information to employers or government agencies, throwing away catalogs received in the mail, or just having casual contact with people - may give identity thieves enough of an opportunity to get unauthorized access to personal data and commit identity theft.
Moreover, identity theft is not a crime committed for its own sake.
Criminals engage in identity theft to further and facilitate many other types of criminal offenses, including fraud.
The following examples -- taken from recent federal prosecutions that successfully used a powerful criminal statute, the identity theft offense (18 U.S.C. § 1028(a)(7)), and other federal criminal offenses - show some of the many ways in which people can commit identity theft:
o Several people obtained names and Social Security numbers of several hundred high-ranking active-duty and retired U.S. military officers from a public Internet Website.
They used the officers' names and numbers to apply for credit cards and bank and corporate credit in the officers' names.
o A man stole the identities of more than 100 people by working with a woman who had worked in the payroll department of a cellular telephone company.
In that position, the woman had access to confidential employee information such as Social Security numbers and home addresses.
Using the employees' names and Social Security numbers, the man was able to access their stock trading accounts at an online brokerage and transfer money to another account that he had set up.
One victim had more than $287,000 taken from his brokerage account without his knowledge.
o A man stole private bank account information about an insurance company's policyholders.
He used that information to deposit approximately 4,300 counterfeit bank drafts, totaling more than $764,000, and to withdraw funds from the accounts of the policyholders.
o When various people who picked up their mail at a U.S. post office threw away merchandise catalogs, which contained identifying information such as their names and account numbers, a woman went through the trash, removed the catalogs, and used the identifying information to order merchandise in other people's names.
o Using the name and Social Security number of an innocent person, a criminal telemarketer, who had just finished serving a state prison sentence for telemarketing fraud, obtained a cellular telephone and used it to contact elderly people throughout the United States with false promises of large cash awards.
Cases such as these, which resulted in the identity thieves being sent to prison, are precisely the types of cases for which the federal identity theft offense was designed.
Section 1028(a)(7), which was enacted as part of the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998, prohibits anyone from knowingly transferring or using, without lawful authority, someone else's "means of identification" with the intent to commit, aid, or abet any unlawful activity that constitutes a violation of federal law or that constitutes a felony under state or local law.
[18 U.S.C. § 1028(a)(7)]
Under this section, a "means of identification" includes a wide range of identifying information: a person's name, date of birth, Social Security number, driver's license number, passport number, bank account number, and credit-card data, to cite just some examples.
Even biometric data - digitized data uniquely linked to physical characteristics such as fingerprints, voiceprints, and retinal images - can be a "means of identification" covered by the Act.
Since its enactment in 1998, federal prosecutors have been making increasing use of section 1028(a)(7) to bring more than 100 federal criminal prosecutions.
Sentences under section 1028(a)(7) can range as high as 15 years imprisonment and a substantial fine for any person committing the offense who, as a result of the offense, obtains anything of value aggregating $1,000 or more during any 1-year period.
[18 U.S.C. § 1028(b)(1)]
In addition, to ensure that persons convicted under the federal identity theft convictions receive appropriately severe sentences, the United States Sentencing Commission, with the Department's strong support, issued specific Sentencing Guidelines for identity theft.
The new Guidelines establish a two-level enhancement, in addition to the offense level dictated by the amount of loss, where the identity thief has used so-called "breeder documents" such as Social Security cards.
Even if there is no loss, the Guidelines will set a "floor" - that is, a minimum offense level - which would ensure that even a person with no prior criminal convictions could get a prison sentence as high as 10-16 months.
The Guidelines also invite upward "departures" from the Guidelines for more severe sentences, where egregious conduct seriously affects individuals (for example, where the criminal "takes over" an innocent victim's identity).
The Department of Justice recognizes that identity theft - while it may seem comparatively minor in any one case - is a crime problem of significant proportions, and one that calls out for a comprehensive approach that involves prosecution for identity theft and other offenses as appropriate, civil enforcement, and public education and prevention efforts.
This approach requires genuine and sustained cooperation among federal, state, and local law enforcement.
The Department has actively fostered closer interagency cooperation on identity theft in three significant ways.
First, federal prosecutors in a number of states are making use of multiagency task forces and working groups that can share resources to investigate identity theft and related white-collar crimes.
Second, the Department has been encouraging federal prosecutors to make greater use of existing information resources on identity theft.
The FTC's Consumer Sentinel database, for example, is an invaluable resource for federal agents and prosecutors, as it provides immediate access to thousands of complaints that people have filed about possible instances of identity theft.
In addition, the Internet Fraud Complaint Center - a joint project of the FBI and the National White Collar Crime Center - can provide investigators with information about Internet fraud schemes where identity theft may be a part of the scheme.
Third, to ensure improved coordination at the national level, since 1999 the Department has chaired the Identity Theft Subcommittee of the Attorney General's Council on White-Collar Crime.
The Identity Theft Subcommittee brings together representatives of federal, state, and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies on a monthly basis, to share information about identity theft developments and to encourage interagency cooperation and coordination on identity theft enforcement and prevention projects.
Its list of accomplishments includes guidance memoranda about the identity theft offense that it has prepared and distributed to U.S. Attorneys' offices, federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies, and numerous government agencies such as the Social Security Administration's Office of Inspector General, the FTC, the Securities and Exchange Commission, federal bank regulatory agencies, and the Treasury Department.
The Subcommittee also has assisted the FTC and other agencies in preparing and distributing educational and other materials directly to consumers and identity theft victims, to prevent or ameliorate the effects of the crime.
The Department's educational efforts also include a set of Webpages on identity theft, which are posted on the Department's Website at http://www.usdoj.gov:80/criminal/fraud/idtheft.html.
These Webpages include information about the nature of identity theft, what the Department is doing about it, and how consumers can better protect themselves from identity theft.
These Web pages are linked to the FTC Identity Theft Website, and other law enforcement Websites, so that consumers can immediately contact agencies that can help them in addressing their personal problems resulting from identity theft.
These measures demonstrate that the Department regards identity theft as a serious crime problem that requires a comprehensive and coordinated approach.
Because anyone - even people who handle their personal data with great care - can become a victim of identity theft, federal prosecutors throughout the country will continue to make use of the identity theft offense and other criminal statutes, and to work closely with the FTC and other agencies, to combat it effectively.
* * *
Jonathan J. Rusch is Special Counsel for Fraud Prevention, Fraud Section, Criminal Division, U.S. Department of Justice.
For more information about the Justice Department's identity theft enforcement efforts, please contact Mr. Rusch at Jonathan.Rusch2@usdoj.gov or 202-514-0631, or Senior Litigation Counsel Barry Goldman at Barry.Goldman2@usdoj.gov or 202-514-0819.
__________________________________________________________________
Return to...
Fraud Homepage || Identity Theft and Identity Fraud || Criminal Division Homepage
