Sunflower is one of the four most important annual oilseed crops grown for edible oil.
It is also the second largest hybrid crop grown in the world.
U.S. production in 1999 was estimated at 3.6 million acres with an estimated total economic impact of $2.6 billion.
The ultimate goal of the entire sunflower germplasm effort is the enhancement and development of superior germplasm for the producer to insure a continued and viable industry.
Present Germplasm Activities
The North Central Regional Plant Introduction Station, Ames, Iowa has the responsibility for the maintenance and distribution of the sunflower germplasm collection.
Evaluation of the collection is being conducted by the Plant Introduction Station, the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), State Universities/Experiment Stations, and various cooperators around the world depending on the expertise and environments needed to evaluate for various characteristics.
Status of Crop Vulnerability
Sunflower hybrids grown in the U.S. are based on a single male-sterile cytoplasm derived from wild Helianthus petiolaris which makes them extremely vulnerable.
Hybrids are also vulnerable to many insect and disease pests.
Germplasm Needs: Collection
Sunflower is unique in that it is one of the four crop species which has its progenitor species native to the U.S.
The genus Helianthus contains 50 species and 15 subspecies which offer genetic diversity for many agronomic characteristics for the improvement and expansion of cultivated sunflower.
The present germplasm collection is representative of all extant species and subspecies, but does not come close to adequately representing the potentially available genetic diversity that needs to be conserved.
Continued efforts are needed to strive toward collecting as many populations of all species as are feasible.
Since Mexico has not been systematically collected, this area represents a wealth of genetic variation and should be collected as soon as possible.
Due to the persistent Sclerotinia disease complex, emphasis will be put on collecting selected perennial species in the U.S.
In the future, collections will be based on species specific needs, instead of collecting all species from a general area.
Germplasm Needs: Maintenance
The seed multiplication program is the most valuable link of the Helianthus germplasm program.
There is a critical need to regenerate and replenish wild Helianthus seed stocks.
The number of accessions waiting to be regenerated is large.
Until accessions are regenerated, this produces a bottleneck in the evaluation process.
Due to the large number of wild perennial accessions waiting to be regenerated, and the difficulty in obtaining an adequate number of plants for regeneration, in situ conservation should be considered as a maintenance option.
Germplasm Needs: Evaluation
An evaluation plan for disease and insect pests listing priorities for evaluation is in place.
Evaluation information obtained to date has been a valuable addition to the GRIN system in characterizing the value of germplasm accessions.
There is a continued need to evaluate more accessions as pest races change and the continuing need to evaluate additional species populations and accessions.
Priority descriptors of the accessions of the wild species continue to be collected in an effort to make the information available in the GRIN system.
There is a particular need for additional funds to evaluate the wild perennial species for Sclerotinia stem and stalk rots, and screening of wild species for Rhizopus head rot resistance, a persistent and increasing problem in the High Plains.
Germplasm Needs: Enhancement
Increasing genetic variability of cultivated sunflower is critical for ensuring survival of the crop.
An enhancement plan is in place for the inclusion of wild Helianthus species into a domesticated background utilizing embryo rescue and other techniques.
The plan includes interspecific gene transfer, germplasm pool development, and development of cytoplasmic male-sterility and fertility restoration programs.
Based on current needs, crossing wild perennial species into the cultivated background is necessary since many of the perennial species have shown promise as potential sources of genes for resistance to some of the persistent pests.
There is critical need to utilize the molecular characterization techniques available to facilitate the difficult task of transferring genes from the wild perennial species into cultivated sunflower.
Recommendations
The priority needs and actions for the Helianthus germplasm collection are as follows: 1.
Fund an exploration to explore the wealth of genetic variability in the wild species of Mexico.
2.
Provide funding to the Plant Introduction Station to build a greenhouse complex to increase the number of accession regenerations that require special conditions.
3.
Provide $50,000 for evaluation of wild perennial species for resistance to the Sclerotinia disease complex and wild species for Rhizopus head rot resistance.
4.
Provide funding for a Category I scientist to facilitate the use of molecular technology in the gene transfer from wild perennial species into cultivated sunflower.
5.
The Committee strongly supports the activities of the NPGS site at Parlier, CA as an alternate grow-out site and encourages exploring the opportunities to utilize it as an alternate site for difficult to regenerate sunflower accessions.
