Underwater Photography and Video Galapagos Islands, Ecuador OPPORTUNITY: The U.S. Department of the Interior's (DOI) International Technical Assistance Program (ITAP) is seeking qualified DOI underwater photography experts to provide approximately 2-3 weeks of technical assistance in the Galapagos National Park and surrounding Marine Reserve.
BACKGROUND: DOI ITAP provides assistance to developing countries on subjects of Departmental expertise, on a reimbursable basis.
The program is currently operating in seventeen countries with support from organizations such as the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), the World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank.
Since 1995, DOI has partnered with USAID/Ecuador to provide technical assistance to selected protected areas in Ecuador, including Galapagos National Park.
Through press, radio, television, and internet material, as well as cooperative projects, the Galapagos National Park Service (GNPS) collects data on the terrestrial ecosystem of the archipelago to monitor conservation and sustainable development practices.
However, due to the lack of technical capacity for underwater photography, GNPS is unable to fully analyze and monitor the marine ecosystem of the Galapagos Marine Reserve.
A better understanding of its underwater resources will not only aid management of the reserve, but also contribute to public education and conservation outreach efforts.
ASSIGNMENT: A DOI underwater photography and videography expert will provide training to several GNPS staff on the operation and maintenance of underwater photographic and video equipment and software, specialized diving techniques, and related data collection and analysis for scientific and conservation monitoring.
SCHEDULE: This assignment is expected to cover a 2-3 week period in fall 2003.
The technical assistance will be provided in the Galapagos National Park and surrounding Marine Reserve.
PRE- AND POST-TRIP DUTIES: All travel and in-country logistics will be handled by DOI.
Background material will be provided to the selected individuals prior to departure.
The selected individuals will be expected to work in collaboration with the DOI ITAP manager and USAID/Ecuador on the preparation and follow-up for the technical assistance over phone and email.
Within 3 weeks of the completion of the trip, the team will provide the DOI ITAP manager a brief draft trip report of the trip events, evaluations made, and recommendations for future related training and technical assistance in the Galapagos.
COSTS: The International Technical Assistance Program will cover all travel costs associated with this assignment (round-trip airfare, lodging, meals, immunizations, etc.).
The salaries of the team members, however, will be paid by their employing DOI agency for the duration of the international assignment, including pre- and post-trip obligations.
APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
Persons wishing to be considered for this assignment:
· Must be a current employee of DOI;
· Must be a certified dive instructor, experience in island ecosystems desirable;
· Must have demonstrated experience in underwater photography and videography, including operation and maintenance of necessary equipment and software;
· Must have demonstrated knowledge of using underwater photographs and video for data collection and analysis, especially for scientific and conservation monitoring;
· Must have demonstrated ability to work with and adapt to the needs and abilities of agencies and professionals of different ethnic or cultural groups;
· Spanish language proficiency preferred, but not required;
· Previous international experience is desirable.
Candidates that reach the interview stage of the selection process must obtain supervisory approval for their participation in this program.
Upon selection, candidates must submit a current physician-signed letter or medical review form indicating fitness for duty, as well as dive instructor certification.
HOW TO APPLY
Persons interested in being considered for this international assignment should send a resume or letter summarizing relevant work experience.
A form SF 171 is acceptable.
Please submit applications (electronically is preferred) to:
Barbara Pitkin
Office of International Affairs
U.S. Department of the Interior
1849 C Street, NW MS 4426
Washington, DC 20240
Tel: (202) 208-5221
Fax: (202) 501-6381
e-mail: bpitkin@ios.doi.gov
All applications should be submitted no later than COB, Friday, August 1, 2003.
All USFWS applicants should also copy their applications to Jean Schlegel in the USFWS Office of International Conservation: email jean_schlegel@fws.gov or fax 703-358-2849.
All NPS applicants should also copy their applications to Rudy D'Alessandro in the NPS Office of International Affairs: email rudy_dalessandro@nps.gov or fax 202-371-1446.
Any questions regarding the details of this assignment can be directed to Barbara Pitkin using the above contact information or Marc Weitzel: email marc_weitzel@fws.gov or call 805-644-5185.
APPLICATION PROCESS
A short list of candidates will be interviewed by telephone.
The entire selection process may take several weeks.
All candidates will be notified of the results of the selection process by telephone, email or letter.
This announcement has been developed in collaboration with NPS/OIA and USFWS/OIA.
The position is open to all applicants that meet the stated requirements.
