[doimenu.gif] [address.gif]
Says Steve Zachary, Education Specialist at Lassen Volcanic National Park of his work in Shey Phoksundo National Park, Nepal: It is incredibly rewarding and challenging.
Not only have I benefited enormously from this experience, but so has my Park.
I returned from Nepal energized and motivated and filled with new ideas to strengthen our education program.
I have been impressed with the work accomplished by DOI in Tanzania as well as Guatemala.
I was so impressed with DOI by their work in Tanzania, I am also using them to assist our program in Guatemala.
All our partners are extremely pleased with their work....If you have the funds, it's a great option to achieve results.
--- Cisco Ruybal of USAID/Guatemala
Says Clay Alderson, former Park Superintendent of Klondike National Park, of his experience in Lake Hovsgol National Park, Mongolia: This assignment kept me on my toes.
There was always an unexpected obstacle on the road to progress...but it was also a highlight of my career.
"The work experience and personal growth gained from sharing knowledge and skills between countries, cultures, and the National Park Service was incredible for me." --- Debra Lusk, Signpainter, NPS, Pt. Reyes National Seashore, CA. Assignment in Galapagos National Park, July/August 2001 to train Park personnel in the design, construction, and installation of interpretive and destination signs.
"Debra has done a very nice and well done job.
Those signs will be the best ones within Galapagos National Park."
--- Rocio Cedeno, USAID/Ecuador, August 2001, regarding Debra Lusk's assignment.
"I have been to the Galapagos Island twice on assignment and have thoroughly enjoyed both visits.
The island and their wildlife are spectacular.
I have also found the Park staff eager to learn and appreciative of our efforts."
--- Manny Medina, Special Agent, FWS, Kansas.
Assignments in Galapagos National Park, July 2000 and September/October 2001, to provide basic law enforcement training to Park guards.
"Under International Technical Assistance Program (ITAP) activities in Ecuador, Department of Interior employees function as high profile global partners in helping to protect some of the world's most endangered resources.
Department employees provide high caliber technical assistance and in turn they acquire a deeper understanding of the vital link between international conservation issues and their work in the US." --- Marc Weitzel, FWS, Project Leader, Hopper Mt. National Wildlife Refuge Complex, CA and Program Manager, ITAP activities in Ecuador.
Mongolia "It was so gratifying to be able to use my expertise to teach and help others with such extraordinarily important resource management work."
--- Diane Osborne, BLM, Geographic Information Specialist, National Applied Resource Center, Denver.
Assignment in Quito, Ecuador, May 2001, assisting the non-governmental organizations of Jatun Sacha and Ecociencia in refining remote sensing technology relative to a community-based forestry project.
"I am very happy we accomplished the goal of GIS specialists doing image processing, and I think the most important accomplishment is that GIS specialists and foresters understand the necessity of working together.
Because of this I know we will continue to have success."
--- Comment by Lead Forester for the Sacha/Ecociencia community-based forestry project regarding one of the positive impacts of Diane Osborne's assignment.
