TESTIMONY U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE
The American Worker at a Crossroads Project
William F. Goodling Chairman, Education and the Workforce Committee
March 31, 1998
Last week, as you know, Mr. Chairman, I had the opportunity to visit several sweatshops in New York City's "Chinatown."
I also had the opportunity to personally meet and talk with a number of Chinese immigrant laborers whose stories - frankly - pulled at my heart.
Before I go into the deplorable conditions under which these men and women have to work and live, I would like to remind this subcommittee of my background on the issue of Chinese aliens in this country.
On June 6 1993, the freighter Golden Venture ran aground off the coast of New York.
The freighter was smuggling 298 Chinese nationals into the United States.
Ten of the Chinese nationals were drowned or died of hypothermia when they were forced overboard and ordered to swim ashore.
The grounding of the Golden Venture forced national attention on the plight of smuggled human cargo into America, but unfortunately only for a too-short period of time.
It should also be noted that the conditions on the Golden Venture were similar to those on 18^th and 19^th century ships when they brought their human cargo to America.
Ultimately, dozens of these immigrants were detained in the prison in my home county of York, in Pennsylvania.
It was during that time that I became intimately acquainted with many of the detainees and the issues about which we will speak today.
It was in August of that year that I began writing and calling the Justice Department about ensuring a speedy and fair adjudication of the Golden Venture voyagers.
Many of these penniless immigrants were petitioning the United States government for asylum because of forced abortion and sterilization.
My personal efforts continued for the subsequent four years, sometimes on behalf of individual cases or urging the resolution of this senseless holding of innocent humans.
I corresponded and met with various members of the administration, members of Congress and on several occasions I went to the White House and met with President Clinton, in an effort to resolve the Golden Venture matter.
One young man gave up on the United States and returned to China.
He was delivered to his home, in China, where he said that he would not be running away again in the near future with all his broken bones.
Then on February 14, 1997, almost four years after the freighter grounded off the coast of New York, President Clinton called me to announce his decision to release the remaining detainees from prison on parole.
During this time I educated myself on the collateral issue of the dealings of snakeheads and the enormously profitable business of smuggling human cargo into this country.
Snakeheads heads are the Chinese mafioso who deal in the ever-increasing Chinese slave trade.
In these cases, illegal aliens had obligated themselves and their families to a $30,000 indenture.
That insurmountable bounty must be paid to the snakeheads or violent and deadly consequences would follow if this obligation were not met.
To sit here to relay this story is one thing.
But, just imagine what a life must be like to live this nightmare.
When Congressman Hoekstra and I visited the Chinatown district of New York last week, I know that he will agree with me that we saw working and living conditions that everyone in this room and across the country would think unimaginable today in this country.
The several apparel plants, more appropriately, "sweatshops", that we visited were staffed by middle aged to elderly men and women, though primarily women.
The dilapidated and dirty shops were for the most part located on upper floors of dilapidated and dirty high rise buildings with only one "entrance and exit" door.
There were security metal cages that surrounded the inside of each door.
There were bars at the windows, little ventilation, and any observer would immediately be moved to ask the obvious question, "what happens in case of fire"?
The majority of workers on the floor sat in rows hunched over their sewing machines, surrounded by piles of fabric, paper and trash, rocking and pushing pockets and collars through the machines, -- assembling the clothes that will be worn by Americans all across this country with little regard for their origins.
Some of the workers wore facemasks to protect themselves from airborne lint and chemicals - most did not.
Older workers with scissors removed the tiny pieces of thread left on the shirts and pants before they were sent to the pressers because they are considered too slow for the piecework done by younger workers.
Pressers tended to be male.
Again, older ladies affixed labels and tags and hung the apparel on plastic hangers in plastic bags, ready for shipment to Richmond, Memphis or Seattle.
That was the way the room physically looked.
But beneath the noise of the sewing
machines were men and women of all ages whose spirits have been broken, whose rights have been violated by our countrymen and to whom the American dream is an unfulfilled promise made on a foreign shore by dishonest people.
These are people who have been systematically and consciously abused and neglected by all the traditional institutions that were set up to avoid this kind of thing.
I saw no evidence of Department of Labor safeguards, OSHA compliance, wage and hour enforcement, workers comp or UNITE, needletrades union stewardship.
This is a human tragedy that is not isolated to a few people.
It is slavery and it is every bit a hate crime to a minority as has been seen in America.
Who is to blame?
Mr. Chairman, how could this happen in the United States of America? How could the American dream that has fed the imagination of freedom loving people the world over become such a nightmare for these people in what is estimated to be 500 to 600 illegal workplaces in New York City alone? Where were the regulations that Congress put in place over the last 60 years to prevent this kind of thing? Where are the safety nets? Where is the American compassion and sense of moral outrage? Where is the Department of Labor? Where is the union whose signs heralding protections we saw on the sweatshop walls? Where is the industry? Who allowed this to this happen?
When I met with a small group of Chinese workers, they were quick to point out the sweatshop habit of forcing workers to "buy their checks".
-- "Buying checks" occurs when sweatshop owners force employees to hand over cash in return for their paychecks.
The forced cash payment equals the difference between minimum wage and what the employees are actually paid and never appear on any ledger.
One Chinese worker told us that last year she worked everyday - everyday -- except Chinese New Year.
I saw their timecards where one elderly gentleman who worked 12 hours straight was paid a total of $14.00 (Fourteen dollars).
Another worker told of the physical ailment that workers typically get due to the repetition of motion at the sewing machines.
It is not uncommon for one of these workers to only have a few years of real productivity before physical infirmities set in and prevent them from working at all.
The health care is expensive and only a few can afford American doctors.
The men and women in these sweatshops did not make this happen.
The powerless and vulnerable foreign speaking men and women with whom we met and spoke did not make this happen.
The people from whom you will hear this afternoon are not responsible.
The Washington Post on Monday carried a major story of abuse of garment workers on U.S. Territorial islands in the Pacific.
I promise you, as bad as that report details such abuse, what we saw just 350 miles up the eastern seaboard from here is just as troubling.
The difference is we do have minimum wage and OSHA regulation already in place in New York.
The difference is we spend millions on government regulations and compliance, yet our own Department of labor can't seem to even locate, yet alone control, these most egregious abuses of our labor laws.
The difference is here union members pay month-in and month-out to a union that looks the other way or worse.
Mr. Chairman, I think that a federal government, asleep at the switch, is partly responsible.
I also think that a self-aggrandizing union leadership, set on self-promotion and self-preservation, having turned away from its rank and file in pursuit of money, is partly responsible.
And, I think that an industry, concerned about the bottom line and that extra dollar of profit, is also partly responsible.
Mr. Chairman, you have a big task here, I thank you for these hearings and for bringing attention to a plight I have been personally involved with and will continue to work to correct in the days ahead.
Thank you.
