PROPOSITIONS ON THE MARCH 1996 BALLOT PROPOSITION 198 OPEN PRIMARY INITIATIVES This initiative statute would change the method by which the candidates of political parties are chosen at primary elections.
It would eliminate the restriction that only members of a particular party may vote for that partys candidates for an elective office in the primary -- thus allowing any registered voter to cast his or her vote for any one of any partys candidates for each elective position.
Background In California and elsewhere, there is a spectrum of opinions about the quality of the political process that produces candidates for office.
At one end of the spectrum are those who contend that there are no real differences between candidates of each party -- it is a problem of the proverbial Tweedledee and Tweedledum.
At the other end of the spectrum are those who complain that Too often ... the choice boils down to a Leon Trotsky-type Democrat versus an Attila the Hun-type Republican.
The impetus for Proposition 198 stems, at least to a major extent, from this second complaint.
Primary elections were established to reduce the domination of political party affairs and elections by a few influential individuals, to make the political system more democratic.
Primaries are held for the purpose of selecting one or more persons from each
officially recognized political party to act as the representative(s) of that party in individual contests for elected office at a general election.
The primary reduces the overall number of candidates, helps voters identify preferred candidates, and allows the representatives of each party to face each other and the voters for a determination as to who will hold the particular office (or offices) in question.
The procedures for conducting these primary elections, however, vary widely by state.
Report of Registration -- February 1995 California Secretary of State
Number of Registered Voters Percen t of the Total
Democratic Party 6,886,792 49.09
Republican Party 5,232,607 37.30
American Independent Party
227,221
1.62
Green Party 78,597 .56
Libertarian Party 65,577 .47
Peace and Freedom Party
62,119
.44
Miscellaneous 49,669 .35
Decline to State 1,426,826 10.17
California operates under what is commonly known as a closed primary system.
In this state, those who desire to vote for political party candidates at a primary election must state their political party preference at the time they register to vote.
At primary election time, members of a particular party may vote only for the candidates running for office under that party label.
Members of a different party may not vote for those same candidates.
In addition, people who decline to state a political party affiliation at the time they register to vote may not participate in the selection of the political party candidates.
Many other states operate their primary elections under different procedures.
A number of states have what may be called completely open or partially open primaries.
Under these systems, voters may or may not have to state their party preference in advance -- when registering or on election day -- but when they actually vote they must choose the ballot of one political party or another.
They may then vote only for the candidates running under that political partys banner.
The states of Alaska and Washington have yet another system -- what is known by political scientists as the blanket primary system.
In these primary elections voters may vote a straight ticket (voting for candidates of one party only) or they may vote for the candidates of any political party for each office.
It is this system that is contemplated by Proposition 198.
The primary election systems used by all 50 states are depicted in a table beginning on page 53.
California has not always had exactly the primary system it has today.
California used to allow cross-filing, in which the candidates for office could file to run in their own party and also in another partys primary.
In a recent article, California Journal notes with respect to this previous system that:
The notion was that people had the right to vote for the best person in a primary regardless of party.
Since a cross- filers party affiliation was not listed on the ballot when they entered the other partys primary, voters often did not realize they were voting for a person of the other party.
They simply voted for the familiar name; usually the incumbent.
Candidates winning both parties primaries -- sometimes as high as 70 percent to 80 percent of legislative races -- were listed on the general election ballot as hyphenated Republican-Democratic or Democratic-Republican.
. .they had no major party opponent.
As the California Journal notes, the objectives of the cross-filing system and the blanket system are similar in some respects but the procedures are different.
The blanket system should ensure that each major party has its own candidate in the general election.
The blanket primary has been proposed before in California.
The state Legislature has entertained the idea in the past, and in 1984 proponents filed to place the measure on the ballot as an initiative but were unable to obtain the necessary signatures.
The idea has gained new momentum in the last two years, apparently chiefly due to disenchantment within the major parties over what some within each party see as excessive influence of those whose views represent the fringes of party ideology.
Summary of Provisions The changes that the Open Primary Act, Proposition 198, would make to elections procedures are few, but significant.
The initiative would provide that:
All properly registered voters may vote at any primary election for any candidate for each office regardless of political affiliation and without a declaration of political faith and allegiance.
[Thus, any person would have one vote for each open office, but could cast that vote for a Democrat, or a Republican, or the candidate of another party.
Voters will not be able to vote for a candidate from among Democrats (or another party) and then choose another candidate for the same office from among Republican (or other party) candidates.]
Each county election clerk must prepare a single official sample ballot and a single primary ballot on which the names of all candidates and their party affiliations would be arranged randomly and not grouped by political party.
The names of candidates for partisan and nonpartisan offices shall be on the single official sample and primary ballot.
Only in two cases may there be separate ballots:
1.
In the case of elections for political party central or district committee member positions, there shall be a separate ballot for the sole use of persons registered with that party.
2.
In situations where the county clerk determines that due to the number of candidates and measures that must be placed on the ballot the ballot will be larger than can be conveniently handled, the clerk may provide for a separate ballot for nonpartisan offices and measures that will be given to each voter along with the official primary ballot that has the names of candidates for partisan offices.
The Legislature would be required to amend or delete provisions of state law that conflict with the Open Primary Act.
Analysis of Policy Impact Following primary elections, candidates are subject to significant conflicting pressures in their general election campaigns.
While candidates usually feel the need to remain loyal and accountable to the political party that nominated them (and to whatever ideology that party reflects), they also recognize that a wise election strategy calls for making greater efforts to broaden their appeal to the wider constituency of all voters, the voters of other parties.
Proposition 198 would provide incentives to appeal to broader constituencies at an earlier stage in the process, in the primary.
Certainly some pressure to appeal to a broad constituency exists in primaries as they operate in California today.
(Who has not heard or made the statement, Id really like to vote for him/her but he/she is not electable?) But Proposition 198 would encourage candidates to begin earlier to seek the support of the members of the other party.
Their ability to win a primary would depend on the extent to which they were able to maintain support among their base, or core, constituencies and their outside potential constituencies.
Defections could be a problem if candidates go too far in seeking to accommodate the other party.
Nevertheless, there would be new pressure under the Open Primary Act for candidates to find a central ground in the range of political and ideological beliefs of the voters.
Would this be a positive development? Perhaps not for those who are convinced that a central problem of our political system is that it produces candidates with no real differences in views --Tweedledees and Tweedledums -- to face each other in general elections.
Proposition 198 may significantly reduce the incentive for membership in any particular political party.
Political parties and other organizations are usually characterized by at least three basic features:
A particular focus or set of goals,
A procedure for making choices about how to implement the organizational vision, and
A means of selecting official organizational representatives.
Under the Open Primary Act, any registered voter could vote for any candidate of any party.
Any political party would have difficulty defining itself in these circumstances, and the greater difficulty of definition would undercut strategies to appeal to new members and to build and strengthen the organization.
The passage of Proposition 198 probably would increase the likelihood that political party officials and party members would endorse candidates in the primary more consistently.
This is not often done now, but party activists may see this as a means of maintaining party identity.
Fiscal Impact According to the legislative analyst and the state Department of Finance, Proposition 198 would have the following fiscal impact:
No direct fiscal impact on state government costs.
Local governments should realize some savings from changes attributable to ballot preparation, though net savings would not be significant.
Arguments in Support Proponents of the Open Primary Act believe the new procedures would increase voter participation, primarily because those who now are decline to state would be able to vote in the primary.
They state also that voters would have broader choices, since they would not be limited to voting on the candidates of one party only.
Passage of the proposition also would force the political parties to put up candidates who do not represent extreme views, supporters claim.
Once there are a greater number of moderates in legislative bodies, say proponents, legislative in- fighting would decrease and legislatures would become more productive and effective.
Arguments in Opposition Opponents argue that Proposition 198 is basically an attack on political parties and is designed to weaken them.
Political parties, they claim, reflect the long- established tendency of Americans to join organizations and to frame ideas about social goals.
The ability of parties to develop and propose a vision for both primary and general elections should not be diluted, they assert.
The measure would make it more difficult for parties to organize to get people to go to the polls, thus reducing voter turnout, they add.
Opponents believe primaries as they are currently organized usually give voters a clear choice.
They claim that the Open Primary Act would be an invitation for members of one party to manipulate the affairs of other parties, perhaps by voting in blocs for the weakest of the other parties candidates.
Partial List of Proponents Republicans for Choice California Republican League State Senator Tom Campbell State Senator Steve Peace State Senator Ruben Ayala State Senator Lucy Killea Becky Morgan Richard Ferrari Houston Flournoy Dan Stanford David Packard William Hewlett Eugene C. Lee
Partial List of Opponents John Herrington Bob Mulholland Congressman Xavier Becerra Congressman Anthony Beilenson Congressman Howard Berman Congressman George Brown, Jr. Senate President Pro Tempore Bill Lockyer Senator Alfred Alquist Senator Ralph Dills Senator Teresa Hughes Senator Patrick Johnston Senator Milton Marks Senator Henry Mello Senator Nicholas Petris Senator Herschel Rosenthal Senator Hilda Solis Senator Diane Watson Assemblymember Richard Katz Assemblymember Marguerite Archie-Hudson Assemblymember Tom Bates Assemblymember Phil Isenberg Assemblyman Bernie Richter John Van de Kamp Bruce Herschensohn
Sources National Conference of State Legislatures Legislative Analysts Office Director of Finance California Journal Text of the Open Primary Act
Prepared by Rodger Dillon
State Legislatures: Open, Closed and Blanket Primaries
------------------------ Open ---------------------- -- ------------------------ Closed --------- ---------------
Blanket Nonpartisan Completely Partially Partially Completely
Voter may vote straight ticket or vote for candidates in different parties for each office.
All parties participate in a single primary.
Voter not required to state party preference.
Usually voter is given two ballots -- voter must choose one party once in the polling booth.
The choice is private.
Voter required to choose party or ballot at the polls.
Voter must pre- register but voter may change party registratio n on election day.
Voter must register with a party in advance of primary.
Party switches must be made a certain period of time before the primary.
Alabama
X
Alaska Voters may vote for candidates from all parties that qualify for the ballot.
Republicans are on one ballot, all other parties on another ballot.
Arizona
X
Arkansas
X
California
X
Colorado
If unaffiliate d, voters shall openly declare the name of the party with which they wish to affiliate and complete a declaration .
Connecticut
Parties may determine by party rule whether unaffiliate d voters can participate in a party primary.
Delaware
X
Florida
X
Georgia
Voter must declare a preference at the polls which is binding only for that primary and runoff (if any).
Hawaii
Voter is given a packet containing all of the primary ballots and may select and vote on the ballot of choice in the voting booth.
Idaho
Single primary election ballot on which the complete ticket of each political party shall be printed.
Within secrecy of voting booth elector restricts voting to one party.
Idaho does not have party registratio n.
Illinois
Voter need not register party affiliation in advance.
At the polls, voter must state name, residence and party affiliation to the primary judges, who shall announce the same loudly enough to be heard by all persons in the polling place.
Indiana
X
Iowa
X
Kansas
X
Kentucky
X
Louisiana
All candidates run regardless of political party.
If a candidate receives a majority in the primary, he or she is elected.
Maine
X
Maryland
X
Massachuset ts
If party affiliation of voter is not on voting list, voter will be asked which partys primary voter wishes to vote in.
The choice will be announced and the voter will remain a member of that party until a change is requested in writing.
Michigan
Voters choose party primary in which they wish to participate in the secrecy of the voting booth; party registratio n is not required.
Minnesota
X
Mississippi
X
Missouri
X
Montana
No party registratio n. Voter chooses which partys ballot to vote in the polling booth.
Nebraska
X
Nevada
X
New Hampshire
X
New Jersey
A newly registered voter at the first primary at which (s)he is eligible to vote may choose a political party on election day.
New Mexico
X
New York
X
North Carolina
X
North Dakota
Voter is given a ballot with all parties candidates listed.
The voter may vote for candidates of only one party.
A voter does not need to declare party preference to receive a ballot.
Ohio
A voter may change party affiliation by signing a statement to that effect when (s)he votes.
Oklahoma
X
Oregon
X
Pennsylvani a
X
South Carolina
Voters do not register by party.
Voter may vote in either Democratic or Republican primary, but not both.
South Dakota
X
Tennessee
X
Texas
Voter must sign a pledge, stating party membership on the ballot above the candidates names.
Utah
X
Vermont
Voter is given a ballot with all parties candidates listed.
The voter may vote for candidates of only one party.
A voter does not need to declare party preference to receive a ballot.
Currently a non-binding primary.
Virginia
X
Washington Any voter can vote for any candidate.
West Virginia
X
Wisconsin
Voter is given ballots for all parties and may choose in the voting booth which party to vote.
No crossover voting.
Wyoming
A voter may register or change his party affiliation before voting, but votes two ballots, a non- partisan ballot and the ballot for the party of his/her choice.
Source: National Conference of State Legislatures, June 1995
Price Charles, California Journal, November 1995, quoting Richard Ferrari, page 35 Ibid., page 36
