Chairman Tauzin Prepared Witness Testimony The House Committee on Energy and Commerce W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin, Chairman Link to Committee Tip Line: Fight Waste, Fraud and Abuse
Help
How do I find...?
Contact Us
About The Committee
Search
Menu
Home
Action
Schedule
Members
News
Subcommittees
Issues
Letters
Legislation
Publications
On-line Fraud and Crime: Are Consumers Safe?"
Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection May 23, 2001 10:00 AM 2123 Rayburn House Office Buidlig
[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Ms. Eileen Harrington Associate Director of Marketing Practices Bureau of Competition Federal Trade Commission 600 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC, 20580
Mr. Chairman, I am Eileen Harrington, Associate Director of the Division of Marketing Practices in the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Consumer Protection.(1) At the Committee's request, my remarks will focus primarily on the FTC's efforts to combat fraud on the Internet.
I will also touch on two other specific areas of concern both to the Committee and the Commission, namely, identity theft and "pretexting."
Fraud - whether on the Internet or in the "brick and mortar" world - probably needs little explanation, but it may be useful to clarify what the terms "identity theft" and "pretexting" signify.
Identity theft is use by a thief, unbeknownst to his victim, of the victim's name, social security number or other personal identifying information, to open accounts and rack up huge debts for goods and services.
Identity theft certainly predates the Internet, and although identity thieves are finding ways to exploit this new tool, often this pernicious practice utilizes rather primitive low-tech means, such as intercepting a victim's mail, or scavenging personal information from a victim's trash.
"Pretexting" is a term coined by the private investigation industry, and refers to the practice of obtaining personal information under false pretenses.
For example, an investigator who obtains a bank account balance by posing as the account holder would be engaged in pretexting.
This tactic is perhaps as old as the private investigation industry itself.
But it appears to be gaining in popularity -- especially in the burgeoning Internet marketplace -- because of the booming market for comprehensive personal information.
I. Introduction and Background
A.
The FTC and its Law Enforcement Authority
The FTC is the federal government's primary consumer protection agency.
While most federal agencies have jurisdiction over a specific market sector, the Commission's jurisdiction extends over nearly the entire economy, including business and consumer transactions on the Internet.(2)
Under the Federal Trade Commission Act,(3) the agency's mandate is to take action against "unfair or deceptive acts or practices" and to promote vigorous competition in the marketplace.
The FTC Act authorizes the Commission to halt deception through civil actions filed by its own attorneys in federal district court, as well as through administrative cease and desist actions.(4) Typically these civil actions seek preliminary and permanent injunctions to halt the targeted illegal activity, as well as redress for injured consumers.
Where redress is impracticable, Commission actions generally seek disgorgement to the U.S. Treasury of defendants' ill-gotten gains.
As discussed below, these tools have proven to be effective in fighting a broad array of fraudulent schemes on the Internet, in spite of the sheer size and reach of the Internet.
In addition, the FTC has specific statutory authority with respect to identity theft and pretexting.
Under the Identity Theft Assumption and Deterrence Act of 1998 the agency is charged, among other things, with responsibility to create and maintain a central clearinghouse for identity theft complaints.
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act charges the FTC and other agencies with responsibility to ensure that financial institutions protect the privacy of consumers' personal financial information.(5)
B.
The Growth of Ecommerce and Internet Fraud.
The growth of the Internet and ecommerce has been explosive.
The number of American adults with Internet access grew from about 88 million in mid-2000 to more than 104 million at the end of the year.(6) The Census Bureau of the Department of Commerce estimated that in the fourth quarter of 2000, not adjusted for seasonal, holiday, and trading-day differences, online retail sales were $8.686 billion, an increase of 67.1 percent from the 4th quarter of 1999.(7) Total ecommerce sales for 2000 were an estimated $25.8 billion, .8 percent of all sales.(8)
Unfortunately, but not surprisingly, the boom in ecommerce has created fertile ground for fraud.
The Commission's experience is that fraud operators are always among the first to appreciate the potential of a new technology to exploit and deceive consumers.
Long-distance telemarketing attracted con artists when it was introduced in the 1970's.
They swarmed to pay-per-call technology when it became available in the late 1980's.
Internet technology is the latest draw for opportunistic predators who specialize in fraud.
The rapid rise in the number of consumer complaints related to online fraud and deception bears this out: in 1997, the Commission received fewer than 1,000 Internet fraud complaints; a year later, the number had increased eight-fold.
In 2000, over 25,000 complaints - roughly 26 percent of all fraud complaints logged into the FTC's complaint database, "Consumer Sentinel," by various organizations that year - related to online fraud and deception.
The need - and challenge - is to act quickly to stem this trend while the online marketplace is still young.
C.
The FTC's Response to Protecting Consumers in the Online Marketplace
Stretching its available resources to combat the growing problem of Internet fraud and deception, the Commission has targeted a wide array of online consumer protection problems.
This effort has produced significant results.
Since 1994 , the Commission has brought 182 Internet-related cases against over 593 defendants.
It obtained injunctions stopping the illegal schemes, and ordering more than $180 million in redress or disgorgement,(9) and obtained orders freezing millions more in cases that are still in litigation.
Its federal district court actions alone have stopped consumer injury from Internet schemes with estimated annual sales of over $250 million.(10)
II.
Challenges Posed by Internet Fraud
The Commission faces a host of novel challenges in its efforts to combat fraud and deception online.
Traditional scams - such as pyramid schemes and false product claims - thrive on the Internet.
Moreover, the architecture of the Internet itself has given rise to new high-tech scams that were not possible before development of the Internet.
Both traditional scams and and the innovative ones exploit the global reach and instantaneous speed of the Internet.
In addition, the Internet enables con artists to cloak themselves in anonymity, which makes it necessary for law enforcement authorities to act much more quickly to stop newly-emerging deceptive schemes before the perpetrators disappear.
And because the Internet transcends national boundaries, law enforcement authorities must be more creative and cooperative to successfully combat online fraud.
These novel challenges are discussed in greater detail below.
A. Combating Internet Fraud Requires New
Methods of Collecting and Analyzing Information.
The Commission is developing new methods of collecting and analyzing information about both the offline and online marketplace, drawing upon the power of new technology itself.
A central part of this effort is Consumer Sentinel, a web-based consumer complaint database and law enforcement investigative tool.(11) Consumer Sentinel receives complaints about all sorts of transactions, whether on the Internet or in the "brick and mortar" world.
The complaints come into Consumer Sentinel from the FTC's Consumer Response Center ("CRC"), which processes both telephone and mail inquiries and complaints.(12) For those consumers who prefer the online environment, an electronic complaint form at www.ftc.gov,, first available in May of 1998, permits consumers to channel information about potential scams directly to the CRC and the fraud database.
Consumer Sentinel also benefits from the contributions of many public and private partners.
It receives data from other public and private consumer organizations, including 64 local offices of the Better Business Bureaus across the nation, the National Consumers League's National Fraud Information Center, and Project Phonebusters in Canada.
Additionally, a U.S. Postal Inspector has served for the past year as the program manager, and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service just signed an agreement to begin sharing consumer complaint data from its central fraud database with Consumer Sentinel.
The Commission provides secure access to this data over the Internet, free of charge, to over 300 U.S.,
Canadian, and Australian law enforcement organizations - including the Department of Justice, U.S. Attorneys' offices, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Secret Service, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the Internal Revenue Service, the offices of all 50 state Attorneys General, local sheriffs and prosecutors, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission.
Consumer Sentinel is a dynamic online law enforcement tool to use against all types of fraud, especially online fraud.(13)
The central role that Consumer Sentinel plays in the Commission's law enforcement is exemplified by "Operation Top Ten Dot Cons," the Commission's latest broad "sweep" of fraudulent and deceptive Internet scams.
In a year-long law enforcement effort, the FTC and four other U.S. federal agencies,(14) consumer protection organizations from 9 countries,(15) and 23 states(16) announced 251 law enforcement actions against online scammers.
The FTC brought 54 of the cases.(17) The top 10 Internet or online scams, identified through analysis of complaint data in the Consumer Sentinel database, were: * Internet Auction Fraud
* Internet Service Provider Scams
* Internet Web Site Design/Promotions ("Web Cramming")(18)
* Internet Information and Adult Services (unauthorized credit card charges)
* Pyramid Scams
* Business Opportunities and Work-At-Home Scams
* Investment Schemes and Get-Rich-Quick Scams
* Travel/Vacation Fraud
* Telephone/Pay-Per-Call Solicitation Frauds (including modem dialers and videotext) (19)
* Health Care Frauds
The Consumer Sentinel data enabled the FTC and the other enforcement agencies that joined us in this project both in the U.S. and abroad to identify not only the top ten types of scams, but also the specific companies generating the highest levels of complaints about each of those types of scams.
These companies became the targets for the law enforcement actions that comprised Operation Top Ten Dot Con.
Finally, Consumer Sentinel data enabled the Commission and its partners to obtain and develop evidence against these targets from individual consumers whose complaints had been included in the database.
Consumer Sentinel first went online in late 1997.
Since then, the Commission has upgraded the capacity of the Consumer Sentinel database and enhanced the agency's complaint-handling systems by creating and staffing a new toll-free consumer helpline at 1-877-FTC-HELP, and adding several new functions to Consumer Sentinel.
The first of these new functions, the "Top Violators" report function, allows a law enforcement officer to pull up the most common suspects and schemes by state, region or subject area.
The second new function, "Auto Query," enables an investigator to create an automatic search request.
This automatic search can be set to run daily, weekly, or monthly, and if new complaints come into Consumer Sentinel that match the search criteria, Consumer Sentinel will automatically alert the investigator via email.
Third, the "Alert" function enables law enforcers to communicate with each other and minimize duplication of their efforts, and a fourth new function performs a search of Commission court orders online.
In 2000, Consumer Sentinel received over 100,000 consumer complaints.
Currently the database holds over 300,000 consumer complaints.(20)
Consumer Sentinel has particular relevance to identity theft, because the Commission has expanded Consumer Sentinel to encompass the Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse.
Victims of identity theft can call the FTC's toll-free telephone number, 1-877-ID THEFT (438-4338), to report the crime and receive advice on what to do.
CRC counselors enter the victims' information about their experience into the Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse, which immediately makes the information available, through the Consumer Sentinel web site, to174 participating domestic law enforcement agencies.
The Clearinghouse data is used to spot patterns of illegal activity.
For example, the Clearinghouse database may facilitate identification of organized or large-scale identity theft rings.
The Clearinghouse is a tool that has begun to enable the many agencies involved in combating identity theft to share data, and to work more effectively to track down identity thieves and assist consumers.(21) In this regard, starting this month, the U.S. Secret Service has detailed an agent to the Commission's Identity Theft Clearinghouse program to help develop and refer case leads from the Clearinghouse to law enforcers throughout the nation to facilitate investigation and prosecution of identity theft.
The Commission's efforts to improve consumer complaint collection and analysis through the Consumer Response Center and Consumer Sentinel are complemented by a proactive program to uncover fraud and deception in broad sectors of the online marketplace through "Surf Days."
Surf Days use new technology to detect and analyze emerging Internet problems.
While Consumer Sentinel provides data on broad trends and the volume of complaints prompted by particular Internet schemes, Surf Days allow the Commission to take a "snap shot" of a market segment at any given time.
The Commission also uses Surf Days to reach new entrepreneurs and alert those who unwittingly may be violating the law.
On a typical Surf Day, Commission staff and personnel from our law enforcement partners - often state attorneys general, sister federal agencies or private organizations like the Better Business Bureau - widely "surf" the Internet for a specific type of claim or solicitation that is likely to violate the law.
When a suspect site is identified, the page is downloaded and saved as potential evidence, and the operator of the site is sent an email warning that explains the law and provides a link to educational information available at www.ftc.gov.
Shortly thereafter, a law enforcement team revisits the previously warned sites to determine whether they have remedied their questionable claims or solicitations.
The results vary, depending on the targeted practice of the particular Surf Day.
Between 20 and 70 percent of the Web site operators who received a warning come into compliance with the law, either by taking down their sites or modifying their claims or solicitations.
Sites that continue to make unlawful claims are targeted for possible law enforcement action.
To date, the Commission has conducted 27 different Surf Days targeting problems ranging from "cure-all" health claims to fraudulent business opportunities and credit repair scams.(22)
More than 250 law enforcement agencies or consumer organizations around the world have joined the Commission in these activities; collectively, they have identified over 6,000 Internet sites making dubious claims.
The law enforcement Surf Day has proven so effective that it is now widely used by other government agencies, consumer groups and other private organizations.
B.
Traditional Scams Use the Internet to Expand in Size and Scope.
Out of the 170 cases brought by the Commission against Internet fraud and deception, over half have targeted old-fashioned scams that have been retooled for the new medium.
For example, the Commission has brought 28 actions against online credit repair schemes, 25 cases against deceptive business opportunities and work-at-home schemes, and 11 cases against pyramid schemes.
It is no surprise that the Internet versions of traditional frauds can be much larger in size and scope than
their offline predecessors.
A colorful, well-designed Web site imparts a sleek new veneer to an otherwise stale fraud; and the reach of the Internet allows an old-time con artist to think - and act - globally, as well.
Pyramid schemes are the most notable example of a fraud whose size and scope are magnified by the Internet.(23) By definition, these schemes require a steady supply of new recruits.
The Internet provides an efficient way to reach countless new prospects around the world, and to funnel funds more efficiently and quickly from the victims to the scammers at the top of the pyramid.
As a result, the victims are more numerous, the fraud operator's financial "take" is much greater, and the defense is typically well-funded and fierce when the FTC brings suit to stop a pyramid scheme operating online.
Despite the extensive resources required to pursue an online pyramid case, the Commission has asserted a strong enforcement presence, obtaining orders for more than $70 million in redress for victims,(24) and pursuing millions more in ongoing litigation.
In one case, FTC v. Fortuna Alliance, the Commission spent two years in litigation and negotiations and finally obtained a court order finding the defendants in contempt, and a stipulated final order enjoining the defendants from further pyramid activities and requiring them to pay $5.5 million in refunds to over 15,000 victims in the U.S. and 70 foreign countries.(25) More recently, in FTC v. Five Star Auto Club, Inc.,(26) the Commission prevailed at trial against another pyramid scheme that lured online consumers to buy in by claiming that an annual fee and $100 monthly payments would give investors the opportunity to lease their "dream vehicle" for "free" while earning up to $80,000 a month by recruiting others to join the scheme.
The court issued a permanent injunction shutting down the scheme, barring for life the scheme's principals from any multi-level marketing business, and ordering them to pay $2.9 million in consumer redress.
C. Scams Are Increasingly High-Tech.
Although most Internet fraud stems from traditional scams, the number of schemes uniquely and ingeniously exploiting new technology is multiplying.
These are the most insidious schemes because they feed on the public's fascination with - and suspicion of - new technology.
Their ultimate effect can only be to undermine consumer confidence in the online marketplace.
To combat this type of high-tech fraud, the Commission has supported staff training and given its staff the tools to be effective cyber-sleuths.
Recognizing that most of its attorneys and investigators need to be Internet savvy, the Commission has hosted beginner and advanced Internet training seminars and held sessions on new technology, investigative techniques, and Internet case law.
The Commission also makes this training available to personnel of other law enforcement agencies.
In the past year, the Commission has presented Internet training seminars in seven U.S. cities and in Toronto, Canada, and Paris, France.
In addition to FTC staff, these sessions trained approximately 800 individual participants from other law enforcement agencies.
These participants represented twenty different countries including the U.S., twenty-six states, twenty-two federal agencies, and fourteen Canadian law enforcement agencies.
Among those who have participated are representatives from the offices of state Attorneys General, the Department of Justice and U.S. Attorneys, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the FBI, and the Postal Inspection Service.
In addition to providing regular Internet training, the Commission also provides its staff with the tools they need to investigate high-tech fraud.
The FTC's Internet Lab is an important example.
With high speed computers that are separate from the agency's network and equipped with current hardware and software, the Lab allows staff to investigate fraud and deception in a secure environment and to preserve evidence for litigation.
1.
Modem Hijacking
The Commission has used its training and tools to stop some of the most egregious and technically sophisticated schemes seen on the Internet.
For example, the FTC's lawsuit against Verity International, Ltd.,(27) was prompted by the influx of hundreds of complaints in the last week of September 2000 through the CRC and logged in Consumer Sentinel.
Investigation showed that high charges on consumers' phone lines were being initiated by "dialer" software downloaded from teaser adult web sites.
Many line subscribers had no idea why they received bills for these charges.
Others discovered that a minor in their household -- or another person who did not have the line subscriber's authorization -- accessed the Web sites and downloaded the dialer software.
The dialer program allowed users to access the "videotext" adult content without any means of verifying that the user was the line subscriber, or was authorized by the line subscriber to incur charges on the line for such service.
Once downloaded and executed, however, the program actually hijacked the consumer's computer modem by surreptitiously disconnecting the modem from the consumer's local Internet Service Provider, dialing a high-priced international long distance call to Madagascar, and reconnecting the consumer's modem to the Internet from some overseas location, opening at an adult web site.
The line subscriber -- the consumer responsible for paying phone charges on the line -- then began incurring charges on his or her phone lines for the remote connection to the Internet at the rate of $3.99 per minute.
The court has ordered a preliminary injunction in this matter, and litigation continues.(28)
2.
"Pagejacking" and "Mousetrapping"
Earlier, in FTC v. Carlos Pereira d/b/a atariz.com,(29) the Commission attacked a world-wide, high-tech scheme that allegedly "pagejacked" consumers and then "mousetrapped" them at adult pornography sites.
"Pagejacking" is making exact copies of someone else's Web page, including the imbedded text that informs search engines about the subject matter of the site.
The defendants allegedly made unauthorized copies of 25 million pages from other Web sites, including those of Paine Webber and the Harvard Law Review.
The defendants made one change on each copied page that was hidden from view: they inserted a command to "redirect" any surfer coming to the site to another Web site that contained sexually-explicit, adult-oriented material.
Internet surfers searching for subjects as innocuous as "Oklahoma tornadoes" or "child car seats" would type those terms into a search engine and the search results would list a variety of related sites, including the bogus, copycat site of the defendants.
Surfers assumed from the listings that the defendants' sites contained the information they were seeking and clicked on the listing.
The "redirect" command imbedded in the copycat site immediately rerouted the consumer to an adult site hosted by the defendants.
Once there, defendants "mousetrapped" consumers by incapacitating their Internet browser's "back" and "close" buttons, so that while they were trying to exit the defendants' site, they were sent to additional adult sites in an unavoidable, seemingly endless loop.
Using the new tools available in the Internet Lab, the Commission was able to capture and evaluate evidence of this "pagejacking" and "mousetrapping."
In September 1999, the Commission filed suit in federal court and obtained a preliminary order stopping these activities and suspending the Internet domain names of the defendants.
Since then, the Court has entered default judgments against two defendants and a stipulated permanent injunction against a third, baring them from future law violations.
A fourth defendant, Carlos Pereira, has evaded law enforcement authorities in Portugal.
3.
Internet-based Facilitation of ID Theft
The Commission has brought one law enforcement action that directly confronted identity theft, FTC v. Jeremy Martinez d/b/a Info World.(31) Jeremy Martinez allegedly facilitated identity theft by offering over the Internet fake ID templates for which there was absolutely no legitimate use.
The FTC complaint alleged that Jeremy Martinez, doing business as Info World, maintained Web sites, including one located at a site called "newid" that sold 45 days of access to fake ID templates for $29.99.
The site contained "high quality" templates to use in creating fake drivers licenses from ten states.(32) It also offered a birth certificate template, programs to generate bar codes -- required in some states to authenticate drivers licenses -- and a program to falsify Social Security numbers.
The complaint alleged that Martinez was deliberately marketing his site to consumers who were surfing the net to find fake ID documents.
Web sites use Meta-tags - hidden words that help search engines identify and index Web site content.
Martinez's Meta-tags included "illegal id," "fake id fraud," and "forging documents" according to the FTC complaint.
The Commission charged that selling the fake ID templates violated Section 5 of the FTC Act and that by providing false identification templates to others, Martinez provided the "means and instrumentalities" for others to break the law - a separate violation of Section 5.
Immediately upon the Commission's filing of the complaint, the Court issued a Temporary Restraining Order (TRO) halting the alleged illegal activity, and soon thereafter a stipulated preliminary injunction continuing the relief granted in the TRO.
On May 17, 2001 the Court approved Martinez' stipulated settlement with the FTC that permanently bans him from selling false identification documents or identification templates, or assisting others in doing so.
The settlement also permanently bars Martinez from providing others with the means and instrumentalities with which to make any false or misleading representations that conceal or alter a person's identity, or that falsely signify that a fake document is real.
The stipulation also requires Martinez to disgorge illegal earnings from the scheme in the amount of $20,000.
The settlement provides an "avalanche" clause making Martinez liable for more than $105,000 in the event that he misrepresented his financial condition to the Commission.
4.
Pretexting by Internet-based Information Brokers.
Last month, the Commission filed lawsuits against three Internet-based information brokers who used false pretenses, fraudulent statements or impersonation to obtain consumers' confidential financial information.(33) The practice - known as "pretexting"- is illegal under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.(34) The three complaints, filed in federal courts in Maryland, New York and Texas, alleged that defendants represented on their Web sites that they could obtain customer financial information and used pretexting to obtain bank account balances.
The Commission staff first identified the defendants as possible pretexters when it conducted a "surf" of information broker Web sites.
As part of "Operation Detect Pretext," the staff screened more than 1,000 Web sites and reviewed more than 500 print media advertisements to identify approximately 200 firms that offered to obtain and sell asset or bank account information to third parties.
The Commission staff sent notices to most of these firms advising them that their practices must comply with the anti-pretexting provisions of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
At the same time, the staff set up a sting operation to confirm that the three defendants were actually providing the illegal pretexting services they advertised on their Web sites.
Based primarily upon evidence uncovered by the sting, the FTC filed complaints alleging that the defendants -- for fees ranging from $100 to $600 -- would obtain bank account balances by calling a bank and pretending to be the customer.
The courts in all three cases immediately entered TROs to halt the illegal activity, freeze certain of the defendants' assets, and require the defendants to produce their financial and business records to the Commission.
Shortly thereafter, all three defendants stipulated to preliminary injunctions continuing the relief granted in the TROs.
The Commission's goal is an order permanently barring defendants' illegal pretexting practices and disgorging the money defendants earned from them.
E. Online Scams Spread Quickly and Disappear Quickly.
One hallmark of Internet fraud is the ability of perpetrators to cover their tracks and mask their locations and identities.
Using anonymous emails, short-lived Web sites, and falsified domain name registrations, many fraud operators are able to strike quickly, victimize thousands of consumers in a short period of time, and disappear nearly without a trace.
To stop these swift and elusive con artists, law enforcement must move just as fast.
The FTC's Internet Rapid Response Team was created for this very purpose.
It draws heavily upon complaints collected by the FTC's Consumer Response Center and the Consumer Sentinel system.
The team constantly reviews complaint data to spot emerging problems, conduct quick but thorough investigations, and prepare cases for filing in federal courts.
Based on such data review, FTC staff had completed its investigation and was in court successfully arguing for an ex parte temporary restraining order and asset freeze in FTC v. Verity International, Ltd. within a little more than a week after the first complaints began coming in to the Consumer Response Center.
In another exemplary effort, FTC v. Benoit,(35) the Rapid Response Team quickly moved against defendants who allegedly used deceptive emails or "spam" to dupe consumers into placing expensive international audiotext calls.(36) The defendants allegedly sent thousands of consumers an email stating that each recipient's "order" had been received and that his or her credit card would be billed $250 to $899.
The email instructed consumers to call a telephone number in the 767 area code if they had any questions.
Most consumers did not realize that 767 was the area code for Dominica, West Indies.
When consumers called the number expecting to reach a customer representative, they were connected to an audiotext entertainment service with sexual content and charged expensive international rates.
Even though a string of telephone carriers could not identify who operated the audiotext number in question, the Internet Rapid Response Team constructed a compelling case in about three weeks.
The Commission quickly obtained a federal court order to stop the scheme and freeze any proceeds of the fraud still in the telephone billing system.
F. Effective Remedies Are More Difficult to Achieve in the Global Online Market.
The globalization of the marketplace poses new and difficult challenges for consumer protection law enforcement.
Anticipating this development, the Commission held public hearings in the fall of 1995 to explore business and consumer issues arising from technological innovation and increasing globalization.
Over 200 company executives, business representatives, legal scholars, consumer advocates, and state and federal officials presented testimony, and the Commission published a two-volume report summarizing the testimony and the role of antitrust and consumer protection law in the changing marketplace.
As reported in, "Anticipating the 21st Century: Consumer Protection in the New High-Tech, Global Marketplace," there was a broad consensus that meaningful consumer protection takes: (1) coordinated law enforcement against fraud and deception; (2) private initiatives and public/private partnerships; and (3) consumer education through the combined efforts of government, business, and consumer groups.(37) These principles have guided FTC policy regarding the Internet ever since.
In addition to gathering information through hearings and workshops, the FTC has gained practical knowledge about the effects of globalization and ecommerce through its litigation.
In this respect, the Commission has found that pursuing Internet fraud often involves a difficult and costly search for money that has been moved off-shore.
For example, in FTC v. J.K. Publications,(38) the defendants, who had made unauthorized charges of $19.95 per month on consumers' credit or debit cards for purported Internet services, moved much of their ill-gotten gains off-shore.
The Commission ultimately won a $37.5 million verdict in this matter, but in the course of litigation, the receiver appointed in this case reported that the defendants had moved millions of dollars to the Cayman Islands, Liechtenstein, and Vanuatu in the South Pacific.
However, to date, despite substantial litigation costs, the monies have not been fully repatriated.(39)
In addition to fraud proceeds moving off-shore quickly, fraudulent online operators may be beyond the reach of the Commission and U.S. courts, practically if not legally.
There is now limited recognition of civil judgments from country to country.
Even if the Commission were to bring an action and obtain a judgment against a foreign firm that has defrauded U.S. consumers, the judgment might be challenged in the firm's home country, and the ability to collect any consumer redress might be frustrated.
In light of this possibility, U.S. law enforcement must look for more effective cross-border legal remedies, and must work more cooperatively with law enforcement and consumer protection officials in other countries.
To meet this challenge, the Commission is increasingly cooperating with international counterparts in a number of venues.
One is the International Marketing Supervision Network (IMSN), a group of consumer protection agencies from the 30 countries that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
The FTC has also executed cooperation memoranda with agencies in Canada, the United Kingdom, and Australia.
The FTC has also taken a stride forward in cross-border cooperation with a project called econsumer.gov.
The FTC, agencies from twelve other countries, and the OECD unveiled this new international joint effort to gather and share cross-border e-commerce complaints at last month's IMSN meeting in New York.
The project has two parts: a public Web site at www.econsumer.gov, and a restricted access law enforcement site.
The public site provides - in English, French, German, and Spanish - an online consumer complaint form and various other consumer protection information.
The law enforcement site, using the FTC's existing Consumer Sentinel network, will provide the econsumer.gov complaints and other investigative information to participating enforcers.
The Commission's actions in FTC v. Pereira represent significant strides in the right direction.
In that case, the Commission realized that the defendants' "pagejacking" and "mousetrapping" scheme had operated through Web sites registered with a U.S.-based company.
Thus, in its request for a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction, the Commission asked that the registrations for these Web sites be suspended, thereby effectively removing the defendants and their deceptive Web sites from the Internet, pending a full trial.
At the same time, the Commission reached out to its international colleagues in Portugal and Australia.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) proved especially helpful in providing information about the defendants and their business operations in Australia.
The ACCC also began its own investigation, executed a number of search warrants, and began pursuing potential legal action against the defendants in that country.
III.
Consumer and Business Education
Law enforcement alone cannot stop the tide of fraudulent activity on the Internet.
Meaningful consumer protection depends on education as well.
Consumers must be given the tools they need to spot potentially fraudulent promotions, and businesses must be advised about how to comply with the law.
The FTC's consumer and business education program uses the Internet to communicate anti-fraud and educational messages to reach vast numbers of people in creative and novel ways quickly, simply and at low cost.
As more consumers and businesses come online, use of the Internet to disseminate information will grow.
A. Fraud Prevention Information for Consumers
More than 200 of the consumer and business publications produced by the FTC's Bureau of Consumer Protection are available on the agency's Website in both text and .pdf format.
Indeed, the growth in the number of our publications viewed online between 1996 and 1999 (140,000 vs. 2.5 million) tells the story of the Internet's coming of age as a mainstream medium and highlights its importance to any large-scale dissemination effort.
Those 2.5 million page views are in addition to the 6 million print publications the FTC distributes each year to organizations that disseminate them on the FTC's behalf.(40)
B. Link Program
In addition to placing publications on its own Web site, the FTC actively encourages partners - government agencies, associations, organizations, and corporations with an interest in a particular subject - to link to its information from their sites and to place banner public service announcements provided by the FTC on their sites.
Links from the banners allow visitors to click through to the FTC site quickly to get the information they're looking for exactly when they want it.
Examples of the varied organizations that have helped drive traffic to the valuable consumer information on www.ftc.gov are Yahoo!, American Express, Circuit City, AARP, North American Securities Administrators Association, the Alliance for Investor Education, the Better Business Bureau, CBS, motleyfool.com, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Shape Up America!, the National Institutes of Health, and the Arthritis Foundation.
C. "Teaser" Pages
Too often, warning information about frauds reaches consumers after they've been scammed.
For the FTC, the challenge is reaching consumers before they fall victim to a fraudulent scheme.
Knowing that many consumers use the Internet to shop for information, agency staff have developed teaser sites that mimic the characteristics that make a site fraudulent and then warn the reader about the fraud.
Metatags embedded in the FTC teaser sites make them instantly accessible to consumers who are using major search engines and indexing services as they look for products, services and business opportunities online.
The teaser pages link back to the FTC's page, where consumers can find practical, plain English information.
The agency has developed more than a dozen such teaser sites on topics ranging from fraudulent business opportunities and wealth-building scams to weight loss products, vacation deals and investments.(41) Feedback from the public has been overwhelmingly positive: visitors express appreciation - not only for the information, but for the novel, hassle-free and anonymous way it is offered.
D. Consumer.gov.
Following its vision of the Internet as a powerful tool for consumer education and empowerment, the FTC organized a group of five small federal agencies in 1997 to develop and launch a Web site that would offer one-stop access to the incredible array of federal consumer information.
On the theory that consumers may not know one federal agency from another, the information is arranged by topic area.
Federal agencies have responded well to consumer.gov.
The site now includes contributions from 170 federal agencies.
Consumers also find it useful, with over 182,500 visits to the site recorded in the first half of FY 2001.
Visitors to consumer.gov find special initiatives, too: The President's Council on Y2K Conversion asked the FTC to establish a Y2K consumer information site; the Quality Interagency Coordination Task Force requested a special site on health care quality; and the U.S. Postal Inspection Service asked that consumer.gov house the site to support the kNOw Fraud initiative, an ongoing public-private campaign initiated with the sending of postcards about telemarketing fraud to 115 million American households in the fall of 1999.(42) The FTC continues to maintain the site.
E. Business Education for Online Marketers
As part of its mission, the FTC provides guidance to online marketers on how to assure that basic consumer protection principles apply online.
Many of these entrepreneurs are small, start-up companies that are new to the Internet and to marketing in general and are unfamiliar with consumer protection laws.
The Commission's publication, Advertising and Marketing on the Internet: Rules of the Road, is designed to give practical, plain-English guidance to them.(43) FTC also has used a variety of other approaches to get its messages out to the business community, from posting compliance guides, staff advisory letters and banner public service announcements on the Web to speaking at industry and academic meetings and conferences, using the trade press to promote the availability of information on the agency site, and holding workshops on online issues and posting the transcripts.
Most recently, on January 30 of this year, the Commission, in cooperation with the Electronic Retailing Association, presented "Etail Details," a case-driven Internet marketing seminar for Internet retailers, marketers, and suppliers on applying offline rules and regulations online.
The seminar was designed to ensure etailers understand and comply with FTC rules regarding etailing.
IV.
Conclusion
The Commission has been involved in policing the electronic marketplace for more than six years - before the World Wide Web was widely used by consumers and businesses.
The Commission has strived to keep pace with the unprecedented growth of the electronic marketplace by targeting our efforts, making innovative use of the technology, and leveraging our resources to combat fraud on the Internet.
In addition, the Commission has taken the necessary steps to fulfill its responsibilities under both the Identity Theft Assumption and Deterrence Act of 1998 and, with respect to pretexting, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act to promote protection of consumers' personal financial information by financial institutions.
We have done this within the framework of limited resources, and without retreating from our important consumer protection work in traditional markets.
The Commission greatly appreciates the opportunity to describe its efforts to combat fraud on the Internet, and its activities against identity theft and pretexting.
1.
The views expressed in this statement represent the views of the Commission.
My responses to any questions you may have are my own and are not necessarily those of the Commission or any Commissioner.
2.
The FTC has limited or no jurisdiction over specified types of entities and activities.
These include banks, savings associations, and federal credit unions; regulated common carriers; air carriers; non-retail sales of livestock and meat products under the Packers and Stockyards Act; certain activities of nonprofit corporations; and the business of insurance.
See, e.g., 15 U.S.C. §§ 44, 45, 46 (FTC Act); 15 U.S.C. § 21 (Clayton Act); 7 U.S.C. § 227 (Packers and Stockyards Act); 15 U.S.C. § 1011 et seq. (McCarran-Ferguson Act).
3.
15 U.S.C. § 45(a).
The Commission also has responsibilities under more than 45 additional statutes, e.g., the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., which establishes important privacy protections for consumers' sensitive financial information; the Truth in Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1601 et seq., which mandates disclosures of credit terms; and the Fair Credit Billing Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1666 et. seq., which provides for the correction of billing errors on credit accounts.
The Commission also enforces over 35 rules governing specific industries and practices, e.g., the Used Car Rule, 16 C.F.R. Part 455, which requires used car dealers to disclose warranty terms via a window sticker; the Franchise Rule, 16 C.F.R. Part 436, which requires the provision of information to prospective franchisees; and the Telemarketing Sales Rule, 16 C.F.R. Part 310, which defines and prohibits deceptive telemarketing practices and other abusive telemarketing practices.
4.
15 U.S.C. §§ 45(a) and 53(b).
5.
15 U.S.C. §§ 6801-6809.
In addition to the FTC, the Federal banking agencies, the National Credit Union Administration, the Treasury Department, and the Securities and Exchange Commission have responsibilities under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
6.
Pew Internet and American Life Project, More Online, Doing More (reported at http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=30) (comparison of tracking survey data in May and June with data from Thanksgiving and Christmas indicates that the number of American adults with Internet access grew from about 88 million to more than 104 million in the second half of 2000).
7.
Reported at www.census.gov/mrts/www/current.html).
8.
Id.
9.
To date the Commission has collected more than $55 million in redress for victims of Internet fraud and deception.
10.
These figures are based on estimated annual fraudulent sales by defendants in the twelve months prior to filing the complaint.
Fraudulent sales figures are based on, among other things, financial statements, company records, receiver reports, and deposition testimony of company officials.
11.
See www.consumer.gov/sentinel.
12.
The CRC now receives over 12,000 inquiries and complaints per week.
They cover a broad spectrum - everything from complaints about get-rich-quick telemarketing scams and online auction fraud, to questions about consumer rights under various credit statutes and requests for educational materials.
Counselors record complaint data, provide information to assist consumers in resolving their complaints, and answer their inquiries.
13.
In 1998, the Interagency Resources Management Conference Award recognized Consumer Sentinel as an exceptional initiative to improve government service.
14.
U.S. agencies participating included the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Department of Justice, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States Postal Inspection Service.
15.
Participants in "Operation Top Ten Dot Cons" included consumer protection agencies from Australia, Canada, Finland, Germany, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, the United Kingdom and the United States.
16.
Cases were brought by the Attorneys General of Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Illinois, Iowa, Indiana, Louisiana, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, Nevada, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, Texas, and Washington.
Consumer protection offices in West Virginia, and Wisconsin also took action, as did the Louisiana Department of Justice, the Oklahoma Department of Securities, and the Washington State Securities Division.
17.
The SEC's contribution to this project consisted of 77 cases.
18.
"Web cramming" is a type of unauthorized billing scam.
Web crammers call their victims-often small businesses-and offer a "free" Web page; then they start billing the victims, typically on their monthly telephone statements, without authorization.
In many cases the small business victims are not even aware that they have a web site or are paying for one.
19.
Telephone/Pay-Per-Call Solicitation Frauds are schemes that exploit the telephone billing and collection system to charge consumers for telephone-based entertainment programs ("audiotext" in industry parlance) or other so-called "enhanced services" that are not telecommunications transmission but are often billed on consumers' telephone bills.
Modem dialers and videotext schemes, like the operation attacked in FTC v. Verity International, No.00 Civ. 7422(LAK) (S.D.N.Y. 2000), described infra, are ones that, unbeknownst to a consumer, cause his or her computer modem to disconnect from his or her usual Internet service provider, dial an expensive international telephone number, and reconnect to the Internet at a remote location overseas, charging the consumer as much as $5.00 or more per minute for as long as the consumer remains online.
20.
The FTC recently signed an agreement with the Department of Defense to collect consumer complaints from men and women serving in the military through a project called "Soldier Sentinel."
21.
The Commission has been working closely with other agencies to establish a coordinated effort to identify the factors that lead to identity theft, to minimize those opportunities, to enhance law enforcement efforts and help consumers resolve identity theft problems.
The first such event was the Commission's April 1999 meeting with representatives of approximately a dozen federal agencies as well as the National Association of Attorneys General to discuss the implementation of the consumer assistance provisions of the Identity Theft Act.
FTC staff works with the Identity Theft Subcommittee of the Attorney General's Council on White Collar Crime to coordinate law enforcement strategies and initiatives.
FTC staff also coordinates with staff from the Social Security Administration's Inspector General's Office on the handling of social security number misuse complaints, a leading source of identity theft problems.
22.
The FTC has coordinated or co-sponsored the following Surf Days, listed by date of their announcements: Pyramid Surf Day (Dec. 1996), Credit Repair Surf (April 1997), Business Opportunity Surf Day (April 1997), Coupon Fraud Surf Day (Aug. 1997), North American Health Claims Surf (Oct. 1997), HUD Tracer Surf Day (Nov. 1997), International Surf Day (Oct. 1997), Kids Privacy Surf Day (Dec. 1997), Junk E-mail Harvest (Dec. 1997), Privacy Surf (March 1998), Textile and Wool Labeling Surf (Aug. 1998), Y2K Surf (Sept. 1998), International Health Claims Surf (Nov. 1998), Investment Surf Day (Dec. 1998), Jewelry Guides Surf (Jan. 1999), Pyramid Surf Day II (March 1999), Green Guide Surf (April 1999), Coupon Fraud II Surf Day (June 1999), Jewelry Guides Surf II (January 2000), Scholarship Services Surf (January 2000), GetRichQuick.con Surf (March 2000), False or Unsubstantiated Lice Treatment Claims Surf (April 2000), Credit Repair Surf II (Aug. 2000), Childrens' Online Privacy Protection Act Compliance Surf (Aug. 2000), False Claims of Authenticity for American Indian Arts and Crafts Surf Day (Oct. 2000), TooLate.Com [Surf of Online Retailers' Compliance with the Mail or Telephone Order Merchandise Rule] (Nov. 2000), and Operation Detect Pretext [Surf of more than 1,000 web sites (coupled with a review of more than 500 advertisements in the print media) for firms offering to conduct financial searches, in order to identify potential violators of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which specifically prohibits obtaining, or attempting to obtain, another person's financial information by making false, fictitious or fraudulent statements to financial institutions]
23.
Pyramid operators typically promise enormous earnings or investment returns, not based on commissions for retail sales to consumers, but based on commissions for recruiting new pyramid members.
Recruitment commissions, of course, are premised on an endless supply of new members.
Inevitably, when no more new recruits can be found, these schemes collapse and a vast majority of participants lose the money they invested.
24.
To date, the Commission has collected about $42.6 million in these cases.
25.
FTC v. Fortuna Alliance, L.L.C.,, No. C96-799M (W.D. Wash. 1996).
See also, FTC v. JewelWay International, Inc., No. CV97-383 TUC JMR (D. Ariz. 1997) ($5 million in redress for approximately 150,000 investors); FTC v. Nia Cano, No. 97-7947-CAS-(AJWx) (C.D. Cal. 1997) (approximately $2 million in redress); FTC v. FutureNet, No. 98-1113GHK (AIJx) (C.D. Cal. 1998) ($1 million in consumer redress).
FTC v. Five Star Auto Club, Inc., 97 F. Supp. 2d 502 (S.D.N.Y. 2000).
($2.9 million in consumer redress); FTC v. Equinox International Corp., No CV-S-990969-JBR-RLH (D.Nev. 1999) (pyramid promoted through many devices, including some use of the Internet; $50 million in consumer redress).
26.
FTC v. Five Star Auto Club, Inc., 97 F. Supp. 2d 502 (S.D.N.Y. 2000).
27.
FTC v. Verity International, Ltd., No. 00 Civ. 7422 (LAK)(S.D.N.Y. 2000).
28.
Other modem hijacking cases include FTC v. Audiotex Connection, Inc., No.
CV-97-0726 (DRH) (E.D.N.Y. 1997) (final stipulated injunction halting the unlawful practice and ordering that 27,000 victims receive full redress totaling $2.14 million); FTC v. RJB Telcom, Inc., No.CV 00-2017 PHX SRB (D. Az. 2000); FTC v. Ty Anderson, No.
C 00-1843P (W.D. Wa. 2000).
29.
FTC v. Carlos Pereira d/b/a atariz.com(30)
30.
Civil Action No. 99-1367-A)
31.
FTC v. Jeremy Martinez d/b/a Info World, No. 00 Civ 12701 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 5, 2000).
See, also, FTC v. J.K. Publications, Inc., et al, 99 F. Supp.2d.
1176 (C.D. Cal. Apr. 10, 2000)(granting summary judgment for the FTC in case alleging that defendants obtained consumers' credit card numbers without their knowledge and billed consumers' accounts for unordered or fictitious Internet services), later proceedings at FTC v. J.K. Publications, Inc., et al, 99 Civ 00044 (C.D. Cal. Aug. 30, 2000)(final order awarding $37.5 million in redress); FTC v. Rapp, No. 99-WM-783 (D. Colo. filed Apr. 21, 1999) (alleging that defendants obtained private financial information under false pretenses)(Stipulated Consent Agreement and Final Order entered June 23, 2000).
32.
Info World offered templates for California, Georgia, Florida, Maine, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, Utah, Wisconsin and New York drivers licenses.
33.
FTC v. Information Search, Inc. and David Kacala, Civil Action No.
AMD-01-1121 (D. Md. April 17, 2001); FTC. v. Victor L. Guzzetta d/b/a Smart Data Systems, Civil Action No.
CV 01 2335 (E.D.N.Y.
April 17, 2001); FTC v. Paula L. Garrett d/b/a Discreet Data Systems, Civil Action No.
H 01-1225 (S.D. Tex.
April 17, 2001).
The Commission determined to file the complaints by a vote of 3-2, with Chairman Pitofsky, Commissioner Anthony, and Commissioner Thompson voting in the affirmative and Commissioner Swindle and Commissioner Leary voting in the negative.
34.
Subtitle B of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act provides for both civil and criminal penalties for pretexting or for soliciting others to pretext.
15 U.S.C. §§ 6821.
et seq.
The Commission only has civil enforcement authority.
Subtitle B also directs the Commission to report annually to Congress on the disposition of all enforcement actions.
The Commission issued its first annual report on January 12, 2001, before the three complaints were filed.
35.
FTC v. Benoit (previously FTC v. One or More Unknown Parties), No. 3:99 CV 181 (W.D.N.C. 1999).
In the course of the litigation, Commission attorneys were able to identify the operators of the scheme.
36.
"Audiotext" services are telephone-based entertainment or information services.
37.
See Bureau of Consumer Protection, Federal Trade Commission, Anticipating the 21st Century: Consumer Protection in the New High-Tech, Global Marketplace, iii (May 1996); See also, Looking Ahead: Consumer Protection in the Global Electronic Marketplace (September 2000).
38.
FTC v. J.K. Publications, No. 99-000-44ABC (AJWx)(C.D. Cal. 1999).
39.
Similarly, in FTC v. Fortuna Alliance, the Commission found that the defendants had transferred $2.8 million to Antigua, West Indies.
With the assistance of the U.S. Department of Justice's Office of Foreign Litigation, the Commission obtained an order from an Antiguan court freezing those funds and a stipulated final judgment in U.S. court that required the defendants to repatriate that money for consumer redress.
In the process, however, it cost $280,000 in fees alone to litigate the case in foreign court.
In this case, the Department of Justice's Office of Foreign Litigation paid $50,000 up front, and the U.S. court ordered the defendants to pay the remaining $230,000 in fees.
In other cases, the Commission may have to bear all or most of the cost of litigating in foreign court.
40.
With respect to identify theft, the Commission also conducts an extensive multi-media education campaign including print materials, media mailings and interviews and a website, located at www.consumer.gov/idtheft.
The FTC's consumer education booklet, Identity Theft: When Bad Things Happen to Your Good Name, covers a wide range of topics, including how identity theft occurs, how one can protect one's personal information and minimize their risk, what steps to take immediately upon finding out one is a victim, and how to correct credit-related and other problems that may result from identity theft.
It also describes federal and state resources that are available to consumers who have particular problems as a result of identity theft.
The FTC has distributed directly more than 230,000 copies of the booklet through April 2001.
Another 425,000 copies have been printed and are being distributed by the Social Security Administration.
The identity theft website includes the booklet, descriptions of common identity theft scams, and links to testimony, reports, press releases, identity theft-related state laws, and other resources.
The site also has a link to a web-based complaint form, allowing consumers to send complaints directly to the Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse.
The website had received almost 350,000 hits by the end of April 2001 and more than 7,300 complaints had been submitted electronically.
As part of "Operation Detect Pretext," in January the Commission published a Consumer Alert entitled "Pretexting: Your Personal Information Revealed" that offers practical tips on how consumers can protect their personal information.
41.
The titles of the teaser sites are: Looking for Financial Freedom?; The Ultimate Prosperity Page; Nordicalite Weight Loss Product; A+ Fast Ca$h for College; EZTravel: Be an Independent agent; EZTravel: Certificate of Notification; EZToyz Investment Opportunity; HUD Tracer Association; CreditMenders Credit Repair; NetOpportunities: Internet is a Gold Mine; National Business Trainers Seminars; VirilityPlus: Natural Alternative to Viagra; ArthritiCure: Be Pain-Free Forever.
42.
The original consumer.gov team received the Hammer Award, presented by the Vice President to teams of federal employees who have made significant contributions to reinventing government.
43.
There has been an astonishing growth in page views of this publication in the past year: from 33,448 views in FY 1999 to 110,473 in FY 2000 .
[corner.gif] [spacer.gif]
Related Documents
H.R.____, the International Consumer Protection Act of 2003 Hearing by the Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection Wednesday, September 17, 2003 10:00 AM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
News Release Tauzin Issues Statement On Alcohol Ads Report September 9, 2003
Fairness to Contact Lens Consumers Act Hearing by the Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection Tuesday, September 09, 2003 1:00 PM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
The Regulatory Status of Broadband Services: Information Services, Common Carriage, or Something in Between? Hearing by the Subcommittee on Telecommunications and the Internet Monday, July 21, 2003 3:00 PM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
News Release FTC, AOL, Others to Testify At Hearing on SPAM Proposals July 7, 2003
News Release Tauzin Applauds Timely Do-Not-Call List Launch June 27, 2003
The Reauthorization of the Federal Trade Commission: Positioning the Commission for the Twenty-First Century.
Hearing by the Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection Wednesday, June 11, 2003 10:00 AM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
More On Internet
More On Consumer Protection
Home | Action | Schedule | Members | News | Subcommittees | Issues | Letters | Legislation | Contact
Committee on Energy and Commerce Seal
The Committee on Energy and Commerce 2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 (202) 225-2927 Contact Us
Printer Friendly
Comment On This Page
Related Documents
Document Menu
Hearing Webcast
Invited Witnesses
Member Statements
Printed Hearing Record (transcript)
