HUD Homes and Communities Photo [space.gif] [space.gif]
CUOMO AWARDS $10.7 MILLION IN GRANTS TO FIGHT DRUGS AND CRIME IN PUBLIC AND ASSISTED HOUSING IN MASSACHUSETTS
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo today awarded $10,744,665 in grants to fight drug abuse and other crimes in public housing and HUD-assisted housing in Massachusetts.
Massachusetts' grants will be distributed to housing authorities and owners of HUD-subsidized housing for low-income families in the following cities:
* Boston.......$3,639,340 * Brockton...$558,368 * Brookline..$217,900 * Cambridge$659,395 * Chelsea..$105,000 * Chicopee$113,982 * Fall River..$568,820 * Framingham.$70,500 * Gloucester.$50,000 * Holyoke.
$1,083,605 * Lawrence$316,800 * Lowell.$427,440 * Lynn$261,783 * Marlborough..$56,721 * New Bedford..$670,280 * Revere.$97,000 * Somerville...$126,300 * Springfield..$965,460 * Taunton..$97,800 * Westfield.$97,611 * Worcester....$560,560
(PLEASE SEE ATTACHMENT FOR MORE DETAILED DESCRIPTIONS OF GRANTS IN EACH CITY).
"These grants are good news for some of the poorest families in Massachusetts and bad news for drug dealers who terrorize them," Cuomo said.
"We will fight drug abuse with prevention and treatment programs and with a crackdown on drug dealers and other criminals.
We are telling drug dealers in HUD housing to find another line of work or be sent to another type of subsidized housing - a prison cell."
Cuomo said the recent Congressional approval of the Department's $24.5 billion budget for the 1999 fiscal year, which he called "the best HUD budget in 10 years," will speed the transformation of public and assisted housing.
"HUD is transforming public housing from isolated ghettos of poverty, drugs, despair and crime into safe and economically integrated communities of opportunity," Cuomo said.
Nationwide, HUD is awarding $305.2 million in Drug Elimination Grants this year - more than in any previous year.
The grants will be distributed in the next several weeks in this way: $280.6 million to 749 public housing authorities; $8 million to 39 Indian Tribes; and $16.6 million to 143 privately owned housing developments that receive HUD assistance.
Another 53 privately owned HUD-subsidized low-income housing developments will receive a total of $11.7 million from a similar program called the New Approach Anti-Drug Program.
Vice President Al Gore, Cuomo and Attorney General Janet Reno announced a four-part enforcement and prevention strategy to fight crime and drugs in public housing in June 1997.
The grants announced today are one element of that strategy.
The Drug Elimination Grants are awarded on a competitive basis, based on the seriousness of the drug and crime problem facing a housing authority or assisted housing development, and the strength of local plans to address the problem.
About 900 housing authorities, 60 Indian tribes and 500 privately owned housing developments applied for the grants being awarded this year.
HUD has awarded more than $1.6 billion in Drug Elimination Grants since 1989, including the grants being awarded this year.
In public housing, the Drug Elimination Grants are used for: drug prevention, intervention and treatment programs; reimbursing law enforcement agencies for providing additional security; hiring security guards and investigators; resident anti-crime patrols; and physical improvements to housing developments to enhance security - such as fencing, lighting and improved locks.
In assisted housing, the Drug Elimination Grants are used for: drug prevention and education programs; referrals to drug treatment and counseling; and physical improvements to developments to enhance security.
Individual grants for assisted housing developments are limited to a maximum of $125,000.
The New Approach Anti-Drug Program (formerly known as the Safe Neighborhoods Grant Program) provides funds for improving security at HUD-assisted developments and in surrounding neighborhoods by: hiring security guards, paying for extra police patrols, assisting in the investigation and prosecution of drug-related criminal activity, and implementing security-related physical improvements.
HUD's budget for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1 increases funding for HUD's key programs and renewals of Section 8 rental assistance by a total of more than $2 billion in the budget over 1998 levels.
Spending was increased on most HUD programs and wasn't cut in any programs.
Legislation passed in the same bill as HUD's budget will:
* Transform public housing by reducing segregation by race and income, encouraging and rewarding work, bringing more working families into public housing, and increasing the availability of subsidized housing for very poor families.
In addition, the bill improves living conditions in public housing, gives the poorest families neighbors who will be role models of working families, and reduces crime.
The bill also allows HUD to continue to tear down the largest failed public housing projects and replace them with new townhouse-style developments.
* Expand the supply of affordable housing by enabling 90,000 more families to get Section 8 rental assistance vouchers that will subsidize their rents in privately owned apartments - the first increase in vouchers in four years.
* Increase homeownership by raising the limit on home mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration from the current range of $86,317 in low-cost housing areas to $170,362 in high-cost areas.
The bill increases the loan limits to a range of $109,032 in low-cost areas to $197,621 in high-cost areas.
The higher ceiling on FHA-insured home mortgages opens the door of homeownership to thousands of families needing FHA insurance to get mortgages, but locked out now because the current loan limits have not kept pace with rising home prices.
.
HUD ANTI-DRUG ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITIES IN MASSACHUSETTS
BOSTON
* $3,014,440 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Boston Housing Authority to continue its programs to combat drug-related criminal activity.
Enhanced law enforcement and criminal investigations, drug intervention, and youth programs all play a strong role in the Housing Authority's overall strategy.
Combined, these activities will have a positive impact on the families living in the Housing Authority's developments.
The effect of this grant will be enhanced by the leveraged resources obtained by the Boston Housing Authority.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to John B. Cruz, III, President, Cruz Management Company, Inc. for Wayne Apartments to install lighting improvements, child safety guards for 300 windows and install nine mobile security camera systems.
The grant will also be used to hire a Residence Services Coordinator and youth assistants, to assist residents in resisting drugs and provide treatment, to contract with a substance abuse specialist to provide residents with weekly workshops in the project's Computer Learning Center and to provide 30 youths with summer camp opportunities.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Jeanne Dubois, Dorchester Bay Economic Development Corporation for Ceylon Field Apartments to install a computer learning center with computer literacy and job training programs for both project youths and adults.
Drug prevention programs for children and parenting skills classes for adults will be conducted.
A youth enrichment program for teens will feature educational and recreational alternatives to drug use and criminal activities.
On-line cable and Internet video security cameras will be installed on and around buildings for additional security.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Ruby Jaundoo, Administrator, Harbor Point Community Task Force for Harbor Point Apartments to provide youth services, economic/educational opportunities for residents, drug education opportunities for residents and family and other support services.
The program is consistent with HUD's goals of effectively coordinating federal, state and local agencies to increase employment and training opportunities for residents and thereby reduce or eliminate drug-related crime.
* A $124,900 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Patricia Thompson, President, Warren Gardens Residents Assoc. for Warren Gardens to employ 15 youth workers for eight weeks over the summer to work in the development and its neighborhood while receiving work skills and training.
The grant will also be used to organize six field trips to educational and recreational facilities to enrich teenager's and younger project children's experiences and to establish a computer learning center and after-school program to provide technical skills to both youths and adult residents.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Evelyn Friedman-Vargas, Nuestra Comunidad Development Corp. for La Concha/Nuestra Comimidad to enhance security and discourage drug-related activities at the project, prevent and/or reduce the incentives and opportunities for drug-related criminal activities and develop a comprehensive drug-abuse prevention program.
The grant will also be used to improve building security by installing cameras in hallways and common areas and by embarking upon a three-tier (individual, family and community) approach to drug prevention.
BROCKTON
* $326,040 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Brockton Housing Authority to provide a wide array of activities that will counteract a recent upsurge in drug-related crime at its developments.
The HA will proactively attack criminal elements by increasing police presence, and through the employment of investigators.
Physical improvements will be made at subject developments, such as speed bumps and surveillance cameras, that will also counteract criminal behavior.
The HA also has a comprehensive drug prevention program that includes education, and recreation activities for youth.
* A $44,430 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Domenica Cuscina, Manager, Beacon Chatham West Associates, II, for the Chatham West II development to purchase an additional security vehicle to help deter drug activities at both Chathams, to conduct drug awareness training programs for project youths in order to encourage positive choices and build self-esteem and self-respect and to organize two summer camp excursions for 25 project youths and establish more stringent tenant screening criteria.
* A $68,171 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Domenica Cuscina, Manager, Beacon Chatham West Associates I for Chatham West I to purchase an additional security vehicle to help deter drug activities at both Chathams, to conduct drug awareness training programs for project youths in order to encourage positive choices and build self-esteem and self-respect and to organize two (2) summer camp excursions for twenty-five 25) project youths and establish more stringent tenant screening criteria.
* A $63,465 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Denise O'Brien, Manager, Beacon Pine Grove Associates I for Pine Estates I to enhance security by installation of and upgrading to the communication system and with additional lighting.
A variety of educational programs will also be provided for residents focusing on drug abuse, treatment and prevention.
An on-site Computer Learning Center will also be established.
* A $56,262 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Denise O'Brien, Manager, Beacon Pine Grove Associates II for Pine Estates II to enhance security by installation of and upgrading to the communication system and with additional lighting.
A variety of educational programs will also be provided for residents focusing on drug abuse, treatment and prevention.
An on-site Computer Learning Center will also be established.
BROOKLINE
* $217,900 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Brookline Housing Authority to fund a comprehensive program to attack drug-related crime.
Activities include enhanced community policing, physical improvements, and drug prevention programs.
Drug prevention actions include youth training and the establishment of a family learning center.
The Housing Authority's program, by increasing law enforcement and empowering residents, will have a significant positive impact on the problem of drugs.
CAMBRIDGE
* $659,395 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Cambridge Housing Authority to fund a proactive program to attack the growing problem of drug related crime in its developments.
One aspect of its plan is increased law enforcement to weed out criminal elements and provide a peaceful and civil environment for its families.
In addition, various prevention programs such as employment training, and sports activities for youth, will provide individuals with a choice beyond joining the drug culture.
CHELSEA
* $105,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Chelsea Housing Authority to fund drug intervention programs (Preventive Education Narcotics), law enforcement, and after school tutoring.
The CHA has developed a comprehensive approach to eliminating drugs from its housing community.
Extensive input from residents, staff and community-based agencies has helped the CHA develop goals and strategies for a safer environment.
CHICOPEE
* $113,982 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Chicopee Housing Authority to provide its residents with a wide array of programs that will combat the presence of drugs in its communities.
Specific activities include an educational component to help raise reading levels.
A new peer support group will also be established, targeted at the particularly vulnerable mid-teen population.
This program will build on already established activities that together provide Chicopee residents with a true opportunity for success in the future.
FALL RIVER
* $443,820 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Fall River Housing Authority to continue already established and successful programs to address drug-related crime at its developments.
This comprehensive program, derived from consultations with local partners and residents, includes an increased police presence plus positive activities for families such as tutorial programs for students and recreation events.
This holistic approach will have a positive impact effect on public housing, its residents, and the surrounding community.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to John G. Hoffer, III, Milliken Affordable Housing for Milliken Apartments to reduce drug-related crime in and around the project and community.
Physical security, resident services, educational programs and the increased administrative efforts of management will be used to combat the problem of drug trafficking and drug use in the community.
The key elements of control rest with monitoring of the property, controlling access into the building and aggressively pursuing evictions of undesirable residents.
FRAMINGHAM
* $70,500 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Framingham Housing Authority to reduce drug-related crime and thereby increase the quality of life for residents through partnerships with local agencies and the empowerment of its clientele.
This will be accomplished with the use of community policing, physical improvements, and various drug prevention and intervention programs.
GLOUCESTER
* $50,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Gloucester Housing Authority to fund the continued operation of the Common Ground Drop In Center, which provides a safe environment for creative thinking and activities, drug education, and individual academic tutoring.
The Authority has been working to make public housing a drug-free community as well as a productive one.
In addition, the Gloucester Housing Authority has provided services to residents that will give them more opportunity and a brighter future.
HOLYOKE
* $241,800 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Holyoke Housing to provide for increased law enforcement and drug prevention activities.
Community policing will bring a sense of safety and security back to public housing.
Education, such as GED programs, and options for youth like the Boys and Girls Club, will counteract the attraction that drugs often hold for people.
The result of these actions will be a healthier and happier home for many families.
The Housing Authority conducted resident surveys and detailed research to established a comprehensive strategy for attacking the scourge of drugs at its developments.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Ann Berezin, Manager, Jarvis Heights Apartments Associates for Jarvis Heights Apartments to provide residents with a variety of opportunities for economic, civil, family and personal growth.
Programs developed by Incorporated Resident Organizations will provide employment training and placement, a computer technology center to prepare residents for the marketplace, a comprehensive and intensive mentor based youth program, a highly trained resident services coordinator, a family sports and recreation league and other innovations.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Ann Berezin, Manager, Riverplace Apartments Limited Partnership for River Place Apartments to provide residents with a variety of opportunities for economic, civic, family and personal growth and thus eliminate drug use and related crime.
The grant will help develop programs to prepare residents for the marketplace by establishing a computer technology center and will furnish a Residents Services Coordinator the means to provide greater opportunities to change the drug related problems that plague the project and neighborhood.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to South Canal Limited Partnership for South View Apartments to provide micro-enterprise opportunities and training by creating a community workshop and vendor market, provide youth with construction job training, create a neighborhood based community meals program, create and expand upon neighborhood watches, organize a summit for youth groups to network and assist city officials in collecting and analyzing crime data.
* A $125,000 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Ann Berezin, Manager, Sargeant West Apartments Associates for Sargeant West Apartments to provide residents with a variety of opportunities for economic, civil, family and personal growth.
Create an employment training and placement plan and a computer technology center to prepare residents for the marketplace.
Establish a mentor based youth program, a family sports and recreation league and other tenant centered programs to combat drug-related crime.
* A $129,960 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Holyoke River Place Apartments, Holyoke, to establish an array of programs to combat drug-related activities.
Activities will focus on law enforcement and drug prevention.
Specific actions include the continuation and expansion of the Safe Neighborhood Assistance Program which provides for the development of security related capital improvements and the investigation and/or prosecution of drug-related criminal activity in and around the development.
* A $211,845 Drug Elimination Grant will go to South View Apartments, Holyoke, to address safety and security issues of South Holyoke including the South View Apartments.
Specific actions include providing overtime for police officers to provide services above that which is normally given.
LAWRENCE
* $316,800 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Lawrence Housing Authority to provide residents with an enhanced quality of life within the housing developments.
By achieving this goal, the LHA plans to provide preventative/intervention outlets for combating drugs as well as increase security measures to fight drug related crimes.
The Housing Authority has an outstanding working relationship with state and local police agencies, social services and the Lawrence School Department.
LOWELL
* $427,440 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Lowell Housing Authority to reduce and eliminate the use of drugs and violent crime by partnering with local government agencies and other entities to establish effective and efficient programs.
Specifically, the Housing Authority, with this funding, will have a community policing program and a community drug educator.
With efforts at weeding out suspected criminal elements, and seeding positive and proactive community programs, the Housing Authority hopes to establish more livable environments for its families.
LYNN
* $136,800 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Lynn Housing Authority to develop a broad and inclusive program to proactively address the needs of its residents in relation to drugs and all its negative effects.
The Lynn Housing Authority will build upon already existing programs by continuing a community policing presence and drug prevention programs.
LHA will contract with local entities to provide education programs that will supplement its active Family Investment Center and give families real hope for the future.
* A $124,983 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Cobbet Hill Associates of Lynn for Cobbet Hill Apartments.
The grant will provide computer training for adult residents that need to re-enter the work force, drug abuse education and support services, English as a second language training, after-school tutorial programs, structured and supervised after school activities, an ethnic diversity program, more active resident counseling and field trips for young residents.
MARLBOROUGH
* A $56,721 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Emily Gliick, Property Manager, Marlboro Arms Associates for Countryside Village Apartments to establish and maintain an ongoing working relationship with local police, social agencies and church groups to combat drug use, to encourage changes in local housing laws to strengthen ability to remove those engaged in drug-related criminal activities, to install magnetic locks on all doors that are not primary entrances, additional lighting in interior hallways and stairwells and newer and better exterior lighting, to install a roof video camera for roof, to encourage interaction between project and local youths, and to hire one full-time program director and two part-time support staff.
NEW BEDFORD
* $425,880 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the New Bedford Housing Authority to create a comprehensive strategy to deter crime and violence in the public housing community through activities designed by housing authority staff, residents, and community partners.
The NBHA plans to use these funds to prevent a resurgence of drug and crime problems through law enforcement, adult and youth education programs and drug prevention programs.
* A $244,400 Drug Elimination Grant will go to New Bedford's United Front Homes and neighboring developments to fund an array of programs to combat drug related activities in the community's developments.
Specific actions include providing overtime for police officers to provide services above that which is normally given.
REVERE
* $97,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Revere Housing Authority to purchase supplemental policing services from local organizations, to fund a variety of social services from local organizations and to introduce new initiatives for residents include: after school day care, martial arts classes for youth, parenting education workshops, domestic violence counseling, police athletic league youth sports program and a job opportunity resource center.
SOMERVILLE
* $126,300 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Somerville Housing Authority to provide management, enforcement, security and drug prevention, and intervention and treatment programs through collaborations with the Somerville Housing Authority Public Safety Office, Somerville Police Department, and service providers group to ensure that conditions at the Mystic Development continue to improve.
SPRINGFIELD
* $375,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Springfield Housing Authority to prevent the abuse of drugs and fund programs that include: Law and Prevention, S.A.F.E. program, and the Community Access Program.
The Springfield Housing Authority's goals are to design programs that encourage drug and violence prevention and to continue other successful programs (Campus of Learners, Kick Gangs and Drugs, Say Nay to Drugs and Gangs) that will proactively combat the use of drugs.
* $345,020 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Springfield Housing Authority to fund various programs including: substance abuse programs, the Big Brother/Sister program, and the drop-out and truancy program.
The Springfield Housing Authority will also provide residents with protective services by the Springfield Police Department.
The Housing Authority has proactively pursued resident and community involvement in the planning and executing of their drug elimination plan and with continued support from various sources and the local police, the SHA hopes to achieve their goal of eliminating drugs from their community.
* A $245,440 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Springfield's Colonial Estates and surrounding neighborhood to fund an array of programs to combat drug related activities in the community's developments.
Activities will focus on law enforcement and drug prevention.
Specific actions will include the installation of area fencing, improved lighting, a guard house and additional police surveillance.
TAUNTON
* $97,800 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Taunton Housing Authority, which has developed a comprehensive program to attack the scourge of drugs in its community.
This plan was pulled together with the input and assistance of local entities and residents.
The approach is on the weed and seed model, with a concentrated law enforcement effort along with drug prevention programs.
Funds will allow for the provision of a community policing presence at the Housing Authority's developments.
Specific enrichment programs to be offered include a computer center and educational enrichment that will help keep youth from turning to the quick fix of drugs.
WESTFIELD
* A $97,611 Drug Elimination Grant will go to Edward A. Fish, President, Peabody Properties, Inc. for Powdermill Village to reduce the effects of drug use and related crime, maintain on-site community police substation, install new outdoor lighting and new fencing for the south end of the property and establish a Computer Learning Center to provide computer training for youths and adults to enhance academic achievement and job opportunities.
WORCESTER
* $560,560 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Worcester Housing Authority, which plans to address crime and drugs by developing partnerships with residents and community groups.
Successful law enforcement strategies will be administered to combat drugs while other prevention programs will be implemented as well such as, improve parenting skills, stay in school programs, job placement, and a computer learning center.
