Skagit Center Use Team July 23, 2003 [j0316739.jpg] Attending: Don W (facilitator), Brenda C., Joyce G., Steve W., Jim Y., Linda B. Absent: Angela H., Kathy K., Donna Z.
Center Issues:
v New membership card system is operational.
One problem presents itself when a large group comes in for first time logging in such as during the Wednesday orientation.
Possible remedies: 1) have clients fill out worksheet then the facilitator will make the cards.
2) have a card reader at each station.
All services require clients to swipe card.
v Career Choice class begins Monday, July 28.
New instructor on board, Shelly to do fill in for a few workshops.
Issue of redundancy to be addressed during the primary presentation, 2^nd day.
Don will instruct Shelly to collect material in a folder to be accessible to all other facilitators.
v Reserved spaces in the ES Job Hunter series classes cannot be saved.
Program is designed to deliver universal services and is on a 1^st Come 1^st Serve basis.
Limiting factor for number served: number of lab computers available.
v Handout of the simplified version of the Workforce Skills Standards (WSS) competencies and Foundation standards passed out.
v System Issue: If there is a customer complaint or question that didn't get answered satisfactorily, please refer client to Brian H.
Partner Sharing:
WDC: Kathy H. is leaving this October.
Diane of WDC is leaving at the end of this week.
Colorspot is laying off personnel.
Steve 
Suggested that this type of presentation tailored toward an ESL population be held more frequently - every other week.
Intalco may be closing down (150 have already been laid off) Plant has approx.
400 workers.
Laid off workers entitled to funds from the Trade Act Program.
Georgia Pacific may also shut down.
Skagit Center Statistical data:
Don will bring next time.
For the 1^st 
Ratings were averaging around 4-5.
Secret Mystery Shopper: Tips
Mystery shopper has to introduce himself/herself with their full name.
On the phone: Mystery shopper may ask about special accommodations, ask for directions, and/or check what is in place for someone that does not speak much English.
Brenda also reminded us of the cheat sheet she made up for the resource specialist.
When concluding with person always ask, "Do you know what your next step is?"
Review of CQI July
1.
Improve communications between partners re: referral process - discuss at next meeting (further clarification needed) 2.
Quarterly report to Leaders with matrix: Done 3.
Annual refresher training on WF Skills Standards.
New simplified version to be passed along to the Resource Specialists - Kathy to do 4.
Portfolio - discuss at next meeting 5.
Tour of Services working.
Done
Next Agenda: 1.
Center Issues 2.
Portfolios 3.
Improved Communications 4.
Review Statistical Data 5.
Partner Sharing 6.
Review CQI Calendar 7.
Next Agenda
