Statement of Glenn Picquet Executive Vice President, C.E. Jacobs Company, Albany, Texas on behalf of North Texas Oil and Gas Association; Panhandle Producers and Royalty Owners Association; Permian Basin Petroleum Association; West Central Texas Oil and Gas Association; and Texas Independent Producers and Royalty Owners Association
Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight, of the House Committee on Ways and Means
Hearing on the Incentives for Domestic Oil and Gas Production and Status of the Industry
February 25, 1999
Thank you Chairman Houghton for allowing me to make this statement on behalf of the North Texas Oil and Gas Association, the Panhandle Producers 
Together we represent more than 5,000 individuals and companies that are primarily based in Texas that explore for and produce crude oil and natural gas.
They are generally small companies with a majority having less than 100 employees, and most have less than 10 employees.
The decline in crude oil prices in 1998 has had a devastating impact on independents.
A December 1998 report of the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission (IOGCC), which is composed of the Governors of the oil and gas producing states from across the nation, notes that the U.S. oil and gas industry is particularly susceptible to long periods of low crude oil prices.
This is true largely because about three-fourths of the nation's oil wells are marginally economic.
About 436,000 of the nation's 573,000 oil wells produce less than 10 barrels per day.
On average, these low-volume "stripper" oil wells produce 2.2 barrels per day.
At these quantities, low crude oil prices may not cover production costs.
During periods of low prices, wells are idled, produced only sporadically to meet minimum lease requirements, or plugged and abandoned.
Marginal wells provide about 25 percent of the domestic crude oil production, excluding Alaska and federal offshore.
Higher volume wells are impacted, too.
As revenue for domestic producers falls, there are usually cutbacks in exploration and production expenditures; corresponding reductions in taxes for state, federal, and local economies; decreased revenue for royalty owners; job cuts in the energy industry and supporting services; and an increase in imports.
A dramatic illustration of vulnerability of U.S. oil wells comes from the fact that the average oil production per well in the U.S. is 11 barrels per day.
Compare that to the average production per well in Saudi Arabia is 5,773 barrels per day per well.
Companies' ability to raise capital for drilling and completion programs has also been affected.
While low oil prices made tapping debt and equity markets trying for much of the year, recent turmoil in global markets now appears to be shutting down capital markets entirely for most (energy) firms.
Energy concerns raised just $7.7 billion in capital markets during the third quarter, the lowest total since the third quarter of 1996.
Independent companies, pinched by lower stock prices and reduced cash flow, also are finding it more difficult to obtain loans.
As a natural consequence, rig counts are down significantly.
Since its high in 1981 of 4,500, the total number of rotary rigs running in the United States -- including oil, gas, directional, horizontal, vertical and miscellaneous -- decreased to an all-time low of 558 in January 1999.
Current revenue figures on the impact of lower production, prices and royalty payments on the federal government are not available.
However, the August auction of leases in the Gulf of Mexico reflects an industry slowdown.
Bids dropped sharply for the latest auction of offshore petroleum leases in the western Gulf of Mexico, mostly near the coast of Texas.
The Minerals Management Service reports 486 bids were received in its most recent sale for 402 tracts in the western Gulf.
That's far off the record, 1,224 bids taken on 804 tracts for the western Gulf sale in August 1997.
High bids for that sale totaled $616.2 million, according to IOGCC.
Several states rely on taxes and royalty income for their general fund and for school funding.
A decrease in production results in lower revenues for states from severance taxes, conservation taxes and ad valorem taxes.
A decrease in production from leases on public lands also impacts states by reducing royalty payments, which are often used to fund public education.
The IOGCC stated that in the first six months of 1998, an estimated 48,702 wells have been idled or shut in, according to a recent survey of 23 states.
If these wells were plugged and abandoned, it would represent a 142 percent increase over the number of wells (20,087) plugged and abandoned in 1997.
In Texas, oil severance tax revenues have fallen $94.9 million in the first eight months.
This represents a reduction of 34 percent.
About 2,800 jobs have been lost and 1,087 oil wells idled or shut in.
The IOGCC report states that a group of large independents posted a combined loss of $854.4 million in the first half of 1998, compared with a profit of $2.02 million for the first six months of 1997.
Revenues for this group fell 12.2 percent.
Despite an increase in revenue, a group of 30 small independents posted a collective loss of $68.5 million for the first half of 1998, compared with a profit of $47.2 million in 1997.
For major, integrated companies, earnings from domestic oil and gas production declined 50 percent, according to the Energy Information Administration.
In the past 15 years, the domestic production industry has changed dramatically.
In 1981, nearly 1.9 million people were employed in the oil and gas industry.
By 1996, the total employment was 1.4 million.
Forecasts indicate continued employment losses.
States have estimated that nearly 11,000 jobs in the oil and gas exploration and production sector have been lost this year.
The list of companies that have cut employees is extensive.
The Independent Petroleum Association of America estimates that 24,415 jobs have been lost since the price decline began in November 1997.
Based a survey of independents, IPAA estimates that if oil prices remain at $14 or lower for another six months, and additional 17,279 jobs will be lost.
In general, the domestic oil and gas industry is heavily dependent on smaller independent operators, as opposed to large, integrated companies.
Many of the major oil companies are concentrating their expenditures abroad.
Independent oil and gas operators accounted for drilling 85 percent of the domestic wells, producing 45 percent of the crude oil and 60 percent of domestic gas.
In addition to layoffs, the reduction in earnings has cut back exploration and production budgets across the board.
For the third quarter of 1998, completions of oil wells, natural gas wells and dry holes declined by 18 percent, compared with the same period last year.
In the third quarter, oil well completions declined 25 percent to 2,361.
Also for the quarter, completions of exploratory wells were down 20 percent and development-well completions dropped 17 percent, IOGCC said.
The United States continues to rely heavily on petroleum as its major energy source.
Petroleum demand is projected to grow at 1.2 percent per year through 2020 with 70 percent of the total used for transportation fuel, including gasoline, diesel and aviation fuel according to the Energy Information Administration's 1999 annual energy outlook.
With domestic demand increasing and domestic supply decreasing, the U.S. relies heavily on imported oil and this trend is expected to continue.
Many within government believe that this could create a national security problem.
In December 1994, the Department of Commerce found that "...the reduction in exploration, dwindling reserves, falling production, and the relatively high cost of U.S. production all point toward a contraction of the U.S. petroleum industry and increasing imports from OPEC sources.
Growing import dependence, in turn, increases U.S. vulnerability to a supply disruption because non-OPEC sources lack surge production capacity; and there are at present no substitutes for oil-based transportation fuels.
Given the above factors, the Department finds that petroleum imports threaten to impair the national security."
President Bill Clinton stated in February 1995 that "I am today concurring with the Department of Commerce's finding that the nation's growing reliance on imports of crude oil and refined petroleum products threaten the nation's security because they increase U.S. vulnerability to oil supply interruptions.
I also concur with the Department's recommendation that the Administration continue its present efforts to improve U.S. energy security, rather than to adopt a specific import adjustment mechanism.
(Emphasis added)" The situation is worse in 1999 than in 1995.
According to a poll taken by the Sustainable Energy Coalition, more than four out of five registered voters believe that the United States is still vulnerable to an energy crisis that could be caused by foreign nations shutting off oil supplies to this country.
"The poll...shows that an overwhelming majority of Americans believe that rising oil imports are a threat to our economic, environmental and national security," said Bill Richardson, U.S. Secretary of Energy.
The IOGCC report concludes that every key indicator of the health of the domestic oil and gas industry -- earnings, employment, production, rig counts, rig rates and seismic activity -- is down.
"If crude oil prices remain at continued low levels, there will likely be further contraction in the industry, a negative effect on economies of the states and nation due to a loss of tax revenues and jobs, the further loss of skilled labor, and increasing imports of crude oil," the report stated.
Additionally, exploration for and production of natural gas is projected to be impacted as overall earnings reductions result in lower capital expenditures in industry.
In conclusion, we believe that the U.S. Congress and the Clinton Administration should enacted a national energy policy that stresses trade fairness and that the domestic oil and gas industry is a viable aspect of the country's national and economic security.
We believe that a new American consensus must be forged to reduce our nation's growing dependence on imported oil; to stabilize U.S. crude oil and natural gas production; to ensure reliability of oil and natural gas supplies; to protect our national and economic security; and to save jobs of Americans.
We know that the status quo has not worked.
Now is the time for bold and aggressive action!
Therefore, we suggest the following solutions:
* Market stability -- The Congress and President must recognized that domestic oil and gas producers -- publicly and privately held companies -- must compete today in a global economy against foreign governments that control their petroleum production.
As stated earlier, U.S. producers are at a competitive disadvantage against foreign governments when our average production is 11 barrels per day per well and when Saudi Arabia produces 5,773 barrels per day per well.
Additionally, foreign governments do not have to pay the many taxes imposed on U.S. oil production (income, state severance, property taxes, state franchise taxes and sales taxes) and comply with a myriad of costly regulations.
Venezuela and Saudi Arabia have been fighting to increase their market share in the U.S. Sheikh Ahmed Zaki Yamani, former oil minister to Saudi Arabia, told and audience at Southern Methodist University in December 1998 that upstream cash squeeze is beginning to make serious inroad into drill rates and could affect actual production on non-OPEC areas sooner than expected.
"After all, if OPEC is to gain market share, as it hopes to do, it must do so from their higher-cost producers elsewhere," Yamani said.
By driving down prices, OPEC can drive out high-cost U.S. production and replace it with their own.
We believe that the U.S. government should recognize that this will be detrimental to U.S. producers and consumers in the long term.
Many independent oil and gas producers have suspected improprieties by foreign oil exporters and other investors, that could benefit from crude price futures fluctuation.
The number of crude oil futures contracts traded far exceeds worldwide crude oil production.
Foreign oil producers can influence the crude oil markets by increasing or decreasing their production having a dramatic effect on the world crude oil price.
As a result, they have the ability to directly influence their commodity price and the futures price.
They are in an unique position of being able to determine the direction of the crude oil future price.
In our opinion this ability has serious anti-trust and restraint of trade implications.
Therefore, we urge the Congress to investigate these allegations of improper trade practices within domestic U.S. markets by foreign oil producers.
We also encourage the Congress and the President to implement market stabilizing mechanism that would include a fee placed upon each barrel of oil and refined product that enters the U.S. by tanker or vessel.
The American Petroleum Institute reports that from 1980 to 1994 there were 58,159,000 gallons of petroleum products spilled from tankers, barges, freighters and other vessels compared to only 823,000 gallons from offshore facilities.
We believe that foreign oil and products should pay for environmental remediation as does domestic production.
In Texas alone, producers have funded its own environmental plugging and cleanup fund that has totaled more than $45 million from 1984 to 1996.
Foreign oil should pay its fair share.
* Federal tax relief - Many oil and gas producing states have recognized that as long as oil and natural gas wells continue to produce they are an asset to the state, providing jobs and tax revenues.
The IOGCC has produced a report, Investments in Energy Security: State Incentives to Maximize Oil and Gas Recovery, that catalogues incentives in 17 states that have a combined economic impact of more than $16 billion each year.
For each dollar invested in incentives, state and some local tax streams receive an average of $2.27 in return.
In the process, high-paying jobs are created inside and outside the industry and resources are recovered that otherwise would be lost.
We encourage the Congress to enact a tax package that would provide similar results.
These provisions -- a marginal well tax credit, an inactive well provision, immediate expensing of geological and geophysical costs and delay rentals, hydro and horizontal drilling classified as tertiary recovery projects and a tax credit for new drilling -- were included in a comprehensive bill introduced in the last session of Congress by U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison (R-Tx), S.B. 1929.
I understand that a similar bill will be introduced shortly by Senator Hutchison in the 106th Congress, and we encourage the Congress to pass it quickly.
* Other legislative solutions - (1) Independent oil and natural gas producers need an exemption from anti-trust laws to form cooperatives to sell our crude oil and natural gas.
The mergers within the major oil companies are creating fewer and fewer outlets for products.
Competition is dwindling in the oil patch.
If independents are to have a strong bargaining position, they must be able to form cooperatives to market their only source of revenue -- the sale of oil and/or natural gas.
(2) The federal government should purchase crude oil from domestic oil producers to resume filling the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR) while prices are low.
The Congress should allocate funds in its budget for this expenditure.
(3) Enact royalty-in-kind legislation that allows the federal government to take its oil in-kind when it does not want the operator of its leases to sell the oil.
Also, the Congress should enact a law that allow for producers to defer royalty payments to the federal government when prices drop below $15 per barrel, and reduce federal royalty on marginal leases (those producing 15 barrels per day per well or less).
* Environmental laws and regulations - The petroleum industry spent $8.2 billion in environmental expenditures in 1996, which is about one-fourth of the net income of the top 200 oil and natural gas companies, according to the Petroleum Industry Environmental Performance Sixth Annual Report by the American Petroleum Institute.
This is more than the Environmental Protection Agency's entire budget and comes to $83 per U.S. household.
Obviously, environmental regulations have become a big cost of doing business for domestic oil and gas producers.
Since the 1970s the federal government has passed 10 laws that impact the petroleum industry.
And, this does not take into consideration the many regulations that must accompany these laws, and the laws and regulations implemented by states.
We believe that laws and regulations should take into consideration the cost of compliance and the benefits derived from society.
If the cost are exorbitant and the benefits small, then Congress should reject or strike these laws from the books.
A few key areas that Congress should focus on to bring back some common sense to environmental laws and regulations for oil and gas are:
(1) Congress must ensure that the EPA does not expand the Toxic Release Inventory program to include exploration and production wastes.
TRI reporting would provide virtually no environmental or community "right to know" value because of the remoteness of most exploration and production facilities.
In addition, the episodic nature of events within the industry would make year-to-year comparisons of TRI data meaningless.
Expansion would created a huge new paperwork burden for independent oil and gas producers, and would cost industry more than $200 million in first year compliance costs and more than $100 million each subsequent year, according to the American Petroleum Institute.
(2) Congress should reject EPA's effort to remove oil and gas production's exemption from Subtitle C hazardous waste requirements under the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, and let state continue adopting regulations that are pertinent to their area.
(3) Compliance with procedures dictated in EPA's Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure Plans (SPCC) are confusing and costly with little benefit to the protection of surface waters.
Tank batteries near "navigable" water must have costly studies completed, then constructed with dikes or berms around them, and detailed paperwork must be completed on the continuous inspection and upkeep of the facilities.
The definition of "navigable" water is so broad that it applies to dry creek beds in arid West Texas.
It should be redefined close to Webster's definition: "deep enough and wide enough to afford passage to ships."
SPCC plans have expense built into them that is not necessary for the oil industry when dealing with oil and gas leases.
For example, there is no need to require a registered engineer to approve the plan, and to recertify if a material Change is made in a lease facility.
Spills that do not involve contamination of fresh water needs to be addressed as a separate issue, because crude oil is a naturally occurring organic compound that can be reduced and cleaned up by naturally occurring bacteria.
Many wells are prematurely plugged because the rule requires mechanical integrity tests instead of allowing wells to be monitored at the surface.
Regulations concerning hazardous chemicals should be different for oil and gas leases in remote areas.
Annual filings concerning crude oil in storage in remote areas is not necessary.
(4) Current Department of Transportation rules require "certain person" that transport or "offers" for transport crude oil in quantities of more than 83 1/3 barrels to register under its Hazardous Materials Registration Program (HMRP) and pay a $300 registration fee.
We believe that legislation should be passed to clarify that crude oil operators that sell their oil at the lease not be require to register under HMRP.
Mr. Chairman, the members, officers and directors of NTOGA, PPROA, PBPA, WeCTOGA and TIPRO encourage you and other members of Congress to look favorably upon these proposals.
We seek only what is fair.
We ask that you consider the fairness of competition between foreign governments and small independent producers.
We ask that you consider what is fair in the tax code when small independents must pay many taxes and yet foreign oil pays little if any.
We ask that you consider the fairness of the mountains of environmental laws and regulations that small companies must comply with just as major oil companies.
Mr. Chairman, the members of these associations are not asking for a hand out; all we seek is a helping hand up!
Thank you for allowing us the opportunity to submit these comments.
__________________________________________________________________
