Pam Slater, District 3 Supervisor [back_r2_c1.jpg] Pam Slater, District 3 Supervisor [back_r4_c1.jpg]
More than just a source of aggravation, many spam e-mails are sexually graphic and often offer fraudulent goods and services to unsuspecting consumers.
In addition to the personal annoyance posed by spam, these e-mails represent a tremendous burden on businesses, governments, and other large institutions that must protect their Information Technology systems from the onslaught of millions of unwanted junk e-mails.
Recommendations: SUPERVISOR PAM SLATER AND DISTRICT ATTORNEY BONNIE DUMANIS: 1.
Encourage San Diego County's congressional delegation to support federal legislation that will give both individual and institutional e-mail users the ability to protect themselves against spam and prosecutors the tools they need to pursue the worst spam offenders.
2.
Encourage the California State legislature to amend Penal Code §1524, which enumerates those circumstances justifying the issuance of a search warrant, to include the Business and Professions Code's prohibitions against unsolicited commercial e-mails (§17538.4).
3.
Seek recommendations from the District Attorney's Computer and Technology Crime High Tech Response Team (CATCH) on ways to help residents of San Diego County protect themselves from online fraud and provide businesses with tips on identifying and protecting their systems from bulk e-mailers.
4.
Request that the CATCH team's steering committee - which includes local organizations such as Qualcomm, Cox, Time Warner, and SDSU - compile recommendations on what can be done to reduce incidents of fraud in San Diego County related to unsolicited commercial e-mails.
Fiscal Impact: This specific item will not financially affect the county.
BACKGROUND: Since the rise of the Internet and e-mail communications as a mass medium, commercial interests, both legitimate and otherwise, have used e-mail as a marketing tool.
As with traditional bulk mailings, companies use e-mail to reach large audiences with minimal effort.
Unlike traditional mail, however, unsolicited commercial e-mails, while virtually free for those who send them, impose huge costs on businesses and governments that must establish ways to process or block millions of unwanted e-mails.
Also, unlike mail service, there are no regulatory bodies, such as the U.S. Postal Service, to monitor mass e-mails to protect against fraud and obscenity.
Both of these factors contribute to the misuse of e-mail by spammers that results in economic and social harm to society at large.
E-mail can be a helpful tool that allows businesses to connect to their customers with information on services, sales, and product upgrades.
Unfortunately, most unsolicited commercial e-mails are not sent by legitimate businesses but by those advertising chain letters, moneymaking schemes, pornographic web sites, stock offerings for unknown start-up corporations, quack health remedies, and illegally pirated software.
The numbers are staggering: It is estimated that 40 percent of all e-mail traffic in the United States is spam.
That is up from 8 percent just two years ago.
According to Ferris Research, a San Francisco consulting group, spam will cost businesses, governments, and consumers more than $10 billion in lost productivity, additional equipment, and increased manpower costs this year alone.
California, and San Diego in particular, has been on the forefront of the anti-spamming movement.
In 1998, two anti-spamming laws were adopted.
The first permitted Internet Service Providers (ISPs) to sue anyone who sends unsolicited commercial messages in violation of an ISP's policy if the sender has actual notice of the policy.
It also imposed criminal penalties upon those who cause computer system disruptions by using a false domain name to send messages.
The second act required unsolicited e-mail advertisements to include opt-out instructions with a toll-free telephone number or a valid return address and to include warning of adult materials at the beginning of the subject line.
In San Diego County, the District Attorney's office operates the Computer and Technology Crime High Tech Response Team (CATCH), an innovative, regional-computer crime task force founded with the aid of San Diego County and other governmental agencies to investigate and prosecute high-tech crimes.
CATCH and the DA's Office were the first in the state, and among the first in the nation, to file criminal charges against mass e-mail distributors.
As a result of their efforts, two individuals from the San Diego region were charged with three counts of disrupting computer services and illegally using someone else's domain name.
After pleading guilty, the defendants forfeited their computers, paid full restitution, and were put on probation.
The state legislature is currently considering two bills (AB 567 and SB 12) that will give consumers new tools for both filtering spam and fighting spammers.
While more stringent laws are welcome, the limited success of existing anti-spam law is in part the result of the legal inability of prosecutors to request search warrants for most misdemeanor offenses, including e-mails crimes.
It is for this reason that Supervisor Slater and District Attorney Dumanis are also recommending that the Board encourage the California State legislature to amend Penal Code §1524, which enumerates those circumstances justifying the issuance of a search warrant, to include the Business and Professions Code's prohibitions against unsolicited commercial e-mails (§17538.4).
The above request, coupled with the recommendations that CATCH work to devise ways to fight spam at a regional-level, will help San Diego County remain on the forefront of what has become an international problem.
It will not, however, provide sustained relief to the thousands of Internet users looking for protection from junk e-mail.
That will ultimately require federal legislation aimed at curtailing a practice that causes millions of dollars in unseen losses, promotes fraud, and assaults children and others with unwanted sexual materials.
Respectfully,
Supervisor Pam Slater
Bonnie Dumanis, District Attorney [back_r6_c13.jpg] [back_r7_c12.jpg]
