United States Embassy, New Delhi, India Consulates In India CHENNAI o MUMBAI o CALCUTTA Contact Us o Privacy Notice HOME PRESS RELEASES 
Mr. Karnik, Mr. Mookherjee, distinguished guests, it is a great pleasure to be here to welcome you and to participate in this important conference.
In the next 50 years, economic growth in Asia is going to outpace growth in other regions of the world.
A Goldman Sachs study projects that in 30 years India could be the third largest economy in the world, behind only China and the United States.
Information technology and other knowledge-based sectors will be the drivers for the Indian economy.
It is only appropriate and fitting, therefore, that India hosts this Asia Tech Summit.
I would like to touch for a few minutes on the U.S.-India bilateral relationship.
All of you know that relations between the United States and India have never been better thanks to the leadership of President Bush and Prime Minister Vajpayee.
The transformation that has occurred has its roots in our common values and interests.
We are the two largest democracies, committed to political freedom, tolerance, diversity and representative government.
As we look ahead to the challenges of the 21st century, our vision is for a partnership in which the United States and India will work to enhance global integration through trade, investment, shared technology, and improved communications.
Just as important we will join hands to combat the forces of disintegration: terrorism, weapons of mass destruction, organized crime, and drug and human trafficking.
The level of cooperation for the last two years between our two countries across a broad range of issues has been unprecedented.
We consult regularly at senior levels on political, economic, security and global issues.
But in notable contrast to the past, today we find that our positions increasingly are consonant and that we are able to constructively deal with our differences so that they do not obstruct the march forward in our relations.
If there is one area that encapsulates the United States and India's joint ambition to forge a partnership for the 21st it is in the area of high technology trade.
The United States has been a world leader in developing new technology because of the strength of our higher education system, and our legal and intellectual property regimes that encourage companies and venture capital continually to invest in innovation.
India has become an important partner for American business in this regard.
We all know about the thriving outsourcing operations in India, about which I will say more later.
What is less well known is that increasingly US companies are working with Indian partners not just to develop call centers, but to conduct highly sophisticated research and development.
General Electric, Intel, Cisco, Lucent, Ford and Texas Instruments are just some of the American companies that have set up high end research and development centers in India.
The U.S. and Indian governments have made promotion of high technology trade one of our top priorities.
Recently, Under Secretary of Commerce Kenneth Juster was in India leading a delegation to the second meeting of the U.S.-India High Technology Cooperation Group, otherwise known as the HTCG.
Our two governments established the HTCG in November 2002 to provide a framework for discussing how to enhance high-technology trade between our two great countries.
And much progress has been made.
Continued success in this regard will be very important to both our nations since India and the United States are engines of technological innovation in many sectors.
In the last 5 years no other country has made a more profound impact on the economics of the international Information Technology industry than India.
This IT miracle is well documented.
Last year the sector's exports grew at about 30 percent.
One hundred thousand new jobs were created.
Projections are that this steamroller will continue, especially in certain segments such as back office processing.
New industry segments will no doubt emerge.
I recently read a NASSCOM press release on the potential of the animation sector in India - what better fit in India than a discipline that represents the nexus of the entertainment and IT industries.
Innovation will undoubtedly trigger other sub-segments and spin-offs, including nanotechnology, biotechnology, and bioinformatics.
According to Nasscom, by 2008 the IT industry could generate $70 billion in revenues and add 2 million new jobs.
The Indian IT sector is the fastest growing part of the fastest growing industry in the world.
More important than the numbers, however, are some of the qualitative changes this growth has created in Indian society.
Gurgaon, Bangalore, and Hyderabad have been transformed by their IT incarnations.
A middle class with disposable income has expanded rapidly as tens of thousands of new well-paying jobs have been created.
More significantly, as Mr. Karnik and I discussed recently, the success of the Indian IT sector has pervaded other sectors and Indian society more generally.
It has allowed Indian business to be outward looking, less insular, more globally oriented.
It has given business, government and the broader society a sense of confidence that Indian businesses, including manufacturing, can compete with anyone.
Speaking at BSA's Global Tech Summit in October, Dr. Andrew Grove of Intel identified three factors that characterize an industry in a "take off" mode: capacity, cost, and productivity.
The Indian IT sector has advantages in all three areas.
India's capacity to make available a pool of technically-qualified, English-speaking manpower is vast.
The cost advantages in India for this manpower are compelling -- one-third or less of U.S. wage rates for similar skill levels.
Productivity levels of Indian IT workers are also increasing as the infrastructure improves and workers acquire a better understanding of their clients' needs.
The objective of this conference is for government and industry leaders to discuss important policy and industry issues as we move further into the digital age.
In this context, as important as capacity, cost, and productivity are to the Indian IT experience, I submit to you that equally crucial is the fact that the Government's hand has been minimal in this sector.
This has allowed the competitive advantages, the international linkages, and the entrepreneurial talent to realize their full potential.
American businesses hope that the Indian IT sector's experience provides broader lessons regarding the importance of privatization and minimizing Government intervention in other sectors.
But Government does have a role.
There are three areas where forward-thinking Government policies can stimulate the IT sector.
First, a strong intellectual property regime is a prerequisite for a thriving knowledge-based economy.
Despite improvements in copyright laws, many countries, including India, still do not offer the level of IPR protection needed for a modern economy, particularly with respect to enforcement.
Government also can help by reducing and simplifying tariffs and taxes on IT products and services, which will yield important benefits to the industry, the people who work in it, and to the economy at large.
Third, Government policies that support the establishment of a better infrastructure will go far in helping the IT industry.
I am not referring here just to roads and bridges and airports -- although improvement of such facilities will also help.
I mean policies that provide for a more reliable power supply, encourage proliferation of Internet connections and usage, and improve access to broadband technologies.
I would also like to say a few words about outsourcing.
This has been a much-discussed subject in India since I arrived last summer.
As companies in the United States and other developed countries seek to cut costs to remain competitive, digitization, high speed data transmission, and the internet have made possible the outsourcing of many services to countries like India, Ireland, the Philippines, and China, to name a few.
Certainly India has been at the forefront of this global trend.
Outsourcing offers India job creation and investment, provides U.S. firms with improved efficiency and profitability, and ultimately serves to enhance consumer welfare.
This would seem to present a true win-win situation.
But to succeed, trade must be a two-way street.
Indians must realize that there is much painful dislocation and job loss in the United States and this could become a political problem.
The answer to the economic challenges that we face in today's globalized world is not to restrict outsourcing.
It is to open markets.
An open international trading system has the benefit of more competitive markets, greater diversity of product choice, and improved access to innovation.
The best means of ensuring sustained growth is through broader economic liberalization and the removal of barriers to trade and investment.
Organizations such as NASSCOM understand this and have attempted to deal with the issue in a reasonable and balanced manner.
In conclusion, let me again thank the Business Software Alliance and Nasscom for organizing this conference, and let me warmly welcome all the participants, especially those who have taken the time and trouble to come from abroad.
I am sure there will be spirited and productive discussion for the balance of the day.
Thank you.
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
