[titlebanner_senate.gif] Special Cmte on Year 2000 Technology Problem Business | Government | Litigation | International Health Care | Utilities | Telecom | Transportation | Financial Services Y2K News Hearings Speeches 
Introduction Mr. Chairman, thank you for the opportunity to speak before this Committee about the implications of the year 2000 problem for the international oil industry.
The Paris-based International Energy Agency (IEA) is an intergovernmental body within the framework of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
It carries out a comprehensive program of energy security and policy cooperation among its twenty-four member countries, which include the United States, Canada, Japan and the countries of the European Union.
I am the Director of the Office of non-Member Countries, which handles relations with non-OECD countries, especially those large energy producers and consumers that can have an impact on the world oil market and thus on the energy security of our members.
In October 1998 our member countries gave the IEA Secretariat a mandate to examine the possible impacts of the year 2000 problem on the oil industry and the implications for the energy security of IEA member countries.
(Most IEA member countries are net oil importers.)
The US Department of Energy can be credited to a large degree for encouraging the IEA's increased effort on Y2K, both substantially and financially.
The government of Japan has provided additional financial support.
I will first describe the IEA project, then cover what we have learned from it so far.
Awareness Raising and Information Gathering The IEA year 2000 project in the oil sector has two main components: 1) awareness raising, and 2) information gathering The IEA is pursuing the "awareness raising" component by organizing a series of seminars in several of the world's most important oil producing and refining regions.
The seminars bring together year-2000 coordinators and other officials from governments, oil companies and the infrastructure providers on which the industry depends (such as electricity grids, pipelines, the shipping industry and ports), with the aim of raising awareness of the problem and facilitating the sharing of information, experience and ideas about solutions.
Both remediation and contingency planning are covered, though there is an emphasis on the latter.
We have made a special effort to include the large state-owned oil companies from developing countries -- which account for a large part of the world's oil production -- while participation by the major international oil companies helps promote a cross-fertilization of experience and ideas.
By raising awareness and providing a forum for the exchange of information, the IEA hopes to prevent at least some possible oil market bottlenecks related to the year 2000 problem.
+ The first seminar was held for the Latin America region on 11-12 March in Caracas, Venezuela.
It was attended by representatives from about a dozen countries, including a broad range of Venezuelan state and joint venture producers.
The meeting was co-hosted by the Venezuelan state oil company, PDVSA.
+ The seminar for the Asia-Pacific region took place on 25-26 March in Singapore.
It was also attended by representatives of about a dozen countries and was held with some assistance from ASCOPE, the ASEAN organization of state oil companies.
+ The third seminar, which will cover the Middle East / Africa region, is scheduled to take place on 4-5 May in Abu Dhabi, and will be co-hosted by the Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research.
+ We are examining the possibility of holding a fourth seminar for Europe and the former Soviet Union.
The second aspect of the IEA's project is information gathering and source identification.
This is facilitated significantly by the seminars, which bring together some of the major players on the international oil market.
The objective of our information gathering activity is to be in a position to advise our member governments what action, if any, collective or individual, they should take in response to the possible threat posed by the year 2000 problem in the oil sector.
In order to draw conclusions about the possible effects of the year 2000 problem in the oil sector, we have been trying to develop an aggregate picture of the situation.
Too few people are looking at the cumulative effect of small probability events across sectors on collective activities.
This is probably because everyone, understandably, is more concerned about their own micro-situation; and to the extent that they look beyond this, it is generally only to suppliers and infrastructure providers upon which they directly depend.
However, it is the aggregate result that will effect the oil market.
Thus the IEA, which is mandated by its members to look after energy security, may have a unique role to play in trying to develop an appreciation for this aggregate picture.
Drawing a macro picture requires piecing together the various micro pictures along the supply chain and across companies and regions.
This is extremely difficult because the micro information is scarce and very often unreliable.
We have found that many of our target companies are reluctant to share a lot of meaningful information because many of them are concerned about the legal and commercial implications of doing so, or about their national image of reliability.
Nevertheless, after two seminars and discussions with various participants in the oil industry and in the support industries on which it depends, we have come to some preliminary conclusions, which we plan to refine over the next few months.
Preliminary Conclusions - As in other industries, Y2K is not just an IT problem.
For one thing, in the technologically advanced oil industry, it is less of a computer problem than one of microchips embedded in industrial equipment used for production, transportation, monitoring and control.
And since there are so many chips (a typical oil platform has 10,000), companies must make a business decision on how much effort to put into remediation and then to prioritize their search and replacement activities based on the criticality of systems to the supply chain.
As in other industries, this means Y2K is a management problem.
- The good news is that, after exhaustive testing, a number of oil companies say they have found fewer problems at critical points than anticipated.
But it still takes as much effort to find one critical problem as it does to find 10.
Fortunately, less advanced companies can learn from the experience of companies that are farther ahead.
The American Petroleum Institute (API) maintains a data base of equipment its members have found to be Y2K compliant and non-compliant.
We would encourage the API in its recent efforts to provide access to this data base to non-API members.
This could help some companies save a considerable amount of time re-checking components already tested by the major international companies.
Even if companies do not have time or resources to replace many of the defective components identified, they can at least have a better idea about where problems are likely to occur, and this could aid them in their contingency planning.
- Low oil prices have been a particular burden for oil companies.
Although we do not have evidence that this has caused firms to cut Y2K budgets, there is reason to believe there will be pressure to spend less.
- As a general rule, the state oil companies -- especially those in developing countries -- probably lag the majors in addressing the problem.
A number have openly stated to us that they only began seriously looking at the problem around mid-1998, while most majors started some two years earlier.
However, the largest state-owned companies, which supply most of the oil imported by the US, generally started somewhat earlier and appear to be more advanced.
Contacts with Saudi Aramco and PDVSA in particular lead us to believe that these key suppliers to the US market take their preparations quite seriously.
Obviously, many oil producing countries outside the OECD rely so heavily on oil for their national revenue that they have considerable incentive to look after their industry.
Although most governments understand this imperative, it is not yet clear to us whether all are taking or are capable of taking the necessary action.
- Most oil companies probably have a fair chance of handling the major Y2K problems in their own organizations.
This is because oil companies are used to contingency planning, especially in the third world.
Moreover, some of the less advanced state-owned oil companies are less dependent upon technology prone to year 2000 problems.
- Similar to the situation in other industries, what could be a greater threat to the oil industry is breakdowns in infrastructure outside oil companies' control, for example, in electricity grids, telecommunications and shipping.
Such service infrastructure risks are probably more pronounced in less developed countries, though as stated before, are mitigated somewhat by less dependence upon Y2K-prone technology and greater experience in contingency planning from having to deal with it on more of a daily basis.
There is also some concern about the large amount of "outsourcing" for various services, which has increased in recent years.
Many oil service companies are small or medium-sized enterprises, and it is generally believed that SMEs are more likely to lag large compa nies in Y2K preparations.
- Oil companies have learned from Y2K gaming exercises that a few minor glitches can compound to create bottlenecks, and that what starts as a minor Y2K glitch can cascade into conventional failures.
Moreover, the likelihood of this happening is aggravated by the fact that such glitches could occur simultaneously.
Flexibility in contingency plans will be crucial.
Although one may never face the situation simulated, simulation exercises undoubtably make contingency plans and teams more flexible.
Unfortunately, it appears that only some of the majors are now at the point in their Y2K programs of engaging in simulation exercises.
- The duration of any overall disturbance is unclear.
Though fortunately, unlike the electricity sector, the oil industry does not operate in "real time", and therefore has some margin to bring things back to speed.
One of the reasons for this is that there is generally a large amount of oil in storage and en route, and there is currently a fair amount of surge capacity among producers.
According to some experts we have talked to, knock-on effects of Y2K in the oil industry could last into Q2 as problems compound down the supply chain over time.
Although such problems are likely to be mostly in the area of delayed shipment and payment problems, they could still affect oil supplies and markets.
- The oil market effect of Y2K is uncertain, especially since Y2K effects on the world economy could lower energy demand.
However, the oil market actually acts upon the expectation of supply and demand.
This means that any nervousness in oil markets about the availability of oil due to year 2000 problems could lead to an increase in demand in the run up to the year 2000 because of stock building, including down to ordinary citizens filling jerry cans with gasoline.
I might add that IEA governments, with the participation of a number of oil companies, are planning a test of their emergency response mechanism, simulating a response to possible Y2K-related disruptions.
We are now planning such scenarios.
The IEA will be refining its conclusions over the course of the year and provide updates to its member countries.
We cannot speculate at this time on whether there is anything the IEA might do collectively, for instance, in an effort to calm markets or respond to supply disruptions.
Our concern is that, unless carefully orchestrated, any such efforts can just as easily have the opposite effect on market attitudes if our preparations are read as a clear indication that there is a serious problem, perhaps perversely stimulating consumer disquiet.
It may well be that national level public information would be more effective in this case.
IEA Members will consider what measures might be appropriate either collectively or individually.
As a first step, Ministers of energy from the 24 member countries of the IEA will address Y2K issues at their bi-annual meeting in May.
Our efforts over the next weeks will be directed at identifying how we might structure a fourth seminar to address the various operating entities in the oil sector of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.
As our efforts progress in looking for the weakest links in the oil supply chain, we are increasingly alert to non-oil "real-time" phenomena which could seriously impede energy delivery systems, such as electricity and gas.
More of these considerations will figure in our fourth seminar.
Finally, I would like to direct your attention to the IEA's web site, which contains pages on the year 2000 problem.
These provide information on our seminars, IEA work on the year 2000 problem in the oil industry, and hyper-links to many relevant web sites dealing with this issue.
The IEA's web pages on the year 2000 problem in the oil industry may be found at: http://www.iea.org/ieay2k/y2khome.htm Thank you Mr. Chairman.
© 1999 United States Senate.
All rights reserved.
__________________________________________________________________
Special Committee on the Year 2000 Technology Problem United States Senate, SD-B40, Suite 3, Washington, DC 20510 (202) 224-5224, Year2000@y2k.senate.gov
