PREPARED TESTIMONY OF LYDIA WILLIAMS, POLICY ADVISOR, OXFAM AMERICA BEFORE THE COMMITTEE ON BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JUNE 15, 1999
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to testify today at this important hearing on debt relief for poor countries.
I've been asked to speak about the potential for strengthening the link between debt relief and poverty reduction.
The timing of this hearing could not be more opportune, given that the issue of poor country debt will be on the agenda at this weekend's Group of Seven Summit in Cologne, Germany.
Oxfam America is a private, nonprofit humanitarian organization and a member of Oxfam International, a network of eleven Oxfams around the world.
Together, we are working in 120 countries, where our main objective is to help strengthen the capacity of local groups to find lasting solutions to hunger and poverty.
Based on this on-the-ground experience, we also speak out on policies of the United States and international financial institutions that affect the poor communities with whom we work.
Witnessing the direct impact of the crushing debt burden on the lives of poor people, for the past several yearsdecade Oxfam has been working with local partner organizations in indebted countries on research and advocacy to end the crisis.
The last few years has seen a growing citizen movement in both creditor and borrower countries to forgive the debt.
In over 40 countries around the world, religious leaders and citizens have organized under the banner of Jubilee 2000, to demand an end to the debt crisis by the year 2000.
For Oxfam and our partners, debt relief is not an end in itself, but a means of mobilizing resources for poverty reduction and promoting self-reliance.
My testimony provides an overview of the debt problem as it relates to poverty and explores the potential of turning debt relief into poverty reduction if the creditors adopted proposals such as the Debt Relief for Poverty Reduction Act of 1999.
This legislation stands in stark contrast to the limited proposal that is on verge of being adopted by the United States and other Group of Seven countries.
The Scale of the Poor Country Debt Crisis
The World Bank and the IMF have classified 41 countries as heavily indebted poor countries (HIPCs) which means they have a per capita annual income of less than $925 and a debt level that is over 250 percent of annual exports.
Eighty percent of these countries are in sub-Saharan Africa.
The debt crisis has intensified since the 1980s.
The total amount of money HIPCs owe to external creditors jumped from an average of $122 billion for 1983-85 to $221 billion for 1993-95.
Three-quarters of this is owed to official creditors such as other governments (45 percent) and multilateral financial institutions (28 percent) and a quarter is owed to commercial creditors.
On average, debt servicing absorbs up to 40 percent of national revenue among HIPC countries.
According to the World Bank, HIPC countries spent $8 billion serving foreign debt in 1997.
The debt stock is so large that only 40 percent of scheduled debts are paid.
Much of this debt was accrued in the 1970s and 1980s by unaccountable governments and often was used to purchase military weapons or to finance wasteful or ill-conceived projects, frequently with strong support from lending governments and institutions - not to benefit the poor.
Yet is it the poor of today who have been left with the bill.
The Human Face of Debt
Debt burdens are usually defined in dry financial terms, such as the amount of foreign exchange a country dedicates to servicing its debt.
But for these poor countries, debt is about more than foreign exchange losses.
It is about the transfer to wealthy countries of resources that should be used for the social development of some of the world's poorest people.
Children sent home from school because their families cannot afford school fees, women walking miles each day for water, primary health clinics without even the most basic drugs - this is the human face of debt.
Of the 41 HIPC countries, over 80 percent are in the low human development category, according to the 1998 UNDP Human Development report.
Nowhere is the situation more starkly illustrated than in sub-Saharan Africa, the most heavily indebted region: * Half of the region's population lives in poverty.
* As many as half of Africans lack clean water and sanitation.
* Only half of African children complete primary school.
* Mothers have a one in 20 chance of dying during childbirth.
* One out of five children will die before his or her fifth birthday.
* One-third who do survive will suffer from malnutrition.
In short, being born in a HIPC country is a passport to a short life.
Average life expectancy is 51 years - 25 years less than we might expect in the United States.
Despite these indicators, African governments transfer to northern creditors four times as much as they spend on primary health and primary education combined.
* In Zambia, infant mortality rates are rising in the face of collapsing health provision and rising health care costs.
Despite this human development crisis, for every one dollar spend on health another four dollars is spent on debt.
* In Niger, debt servicing absorbs more than the combined budgets for health and education.
The country ranks 173 out of 175 on the Human Development Index, life expectancy is only 47 years, and only 14 percent of the population is literate.
* In Tanzania the government is currently spending four and nine times more on debt than on primary education and primary health care respectively.
In 1997 as debt payments rose, the budget for school materials was cut by almost 20 percent.
This in a country where half of the population is illiterate and primary school enrolment rates are declining, one third of the budget is eaten up in debt payments.
In the Shirnyanga area, where Oxfam is working with poor communities, drop out rates have increased from 8 percent to 30 percent since 1990.
Primary school used to be free, now it is not.
In one school, the headmaster, Shella Mandina, told Oxfam staff working in the region that after recent drought followed by flooding, school fees were not collected last year.
"It is difficult to collect the school fees," she said.
"Last year, over 300 [out of 962] didn't pay.
Now they have to pay for last year as well as this year.
For this about 250 have paid and 750 have not...
So we have to remind the parents by sending home their children during the morning.
Usually they are sent home once a month; we hope they might have the money at the end of the month."^1 ,
Not only does the debt situation divert scarce resources, but it also contributes to dependence on aid.
With debt repayments absorbing such a large share of budgetary and foreign exchange resources, governments have had to turn to foreign donors to fill the resulting gap.
If debts were reduced, governments would be able to invest their own internally generated resources in development rather than being dependent on aid, which is an unreliable source of financing, particularly now in the era of shrinking aid budgets.
This is not, however, an argument to replace aid with debt relief, rather it is a call to free up additional resources for development through debt relief.
In an increasingly knowledge-based, globalized economy, African countries can expect to fall further and further behind the rest of the world unless they make the necessary investments.
Research across a number of countries has shown that an unsustainably large debt stock tends to discourage private investment by creating uncertainty over interest rates, tax policy and inflation.
Perhaps more detrimental is the fact that debt service prevents governments from investing in human capital - a prerequisite for growth and poverty reduction.
No one would argue that debt is the sole cause of Africa's problems.
Conflict, corruption, weak institutional capacity as well as external shocks all play a role.
While not sufficient, debt relief is the sine qua non of poverty reduction.
Uganda: Translating Debt into an Opportunity for Development
One of the arguments against debt relief is that there is no guarantee that the benefits will accrue to the poor.
It is not only the creditors that are demanding accountability.
In fact, Oxfam partners in Tanzania, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Zambia and other countries are demanding that their governments pledge to translate debt into poverty programs and have advocated that concrete mechanisms be put in place to ensure that the poor reap the benefits.
The case of Uganda provides a compelling example of what is possible when creditors, borrowing governments and non-governmental organizations work together to translate debt into development.
Uganda is one of the world's poorest countries.
In spite of ten years of economic reforms - including trade liberalization, privatization, and fiscal and monetary policy reforms - the government acknowledged in 1994 that the economic growth that resulted was not translating into swift enough poverty reduction.
Recent evidence shows that poverty was reduced by 10 percent between 1992 and 1996, but it remains at 55 percent.
In 1995, with support from the World Bank, the government undertook a planning process to address the nation's widespread poverty.
The Poverty Eradication Action Plan was developed after an intensive two-year process that involved consultations with a broad segment of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, business, labor, women's groups, etc.
Oxfam also helped by conducting household surveys in poor communities to determine their priorities and inform the process.
Out of the process, the poverty plan identified five development priorities: primary education, primary health, agricultural production, rural feeder roads, and water supply.
The government plan also outlined steps to decentralize administration and shift resources from tertiary services like hospitals and universities that benefit the better off to primary service that help the poorest.
Unfortunately, in spite of the government's commitment, the claims by foreign creditors are restricting the ability of the government to make the necessary investments.
Last year, Uganda was the first country to receive debt relief under the World Bank - IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative (HIPC).
The HIPC program was launched in 1996 by the international financial institutions and creditor nations with the aim of providing a genuine exit for the endless rounds of rescheduling that have failed to bring an end to the debt crisis.
Prior to receiving the relief, the Ugandan government voluntarily pledged to deposit all of the savings into a Poverty Action Fund, which would allocate finance to the key priorities identified in the Poverty Eradication Action Plan.
The government also agreed to allow citizens to participate in the decision-making process about how the resources would be invested.
Under the HIPC program, Uganda will save roughly $40 million per year in debt service.
After consultation with civil society, rural roads, primary health care and primary education were identified as spending priorities targeted by the Poverty Action Fund.
In 1993, one third of all children of primary school age were not enrolled in school.
As in most African countries, families must shoulder a large share of the expense of educating their children, such as books, tuition, uniforms, and school maintenance.
Families throughout Uganda make enormous sacrifices to send their children to school, but even the most basic education is beyond the grasp of many families.
Cost is the single more significant factor behind the high absentee and drop out rates.
The budget constraints on the education system are so extreme that spending the $3 on a textbook is inconceivable; as a result, it is common to see six to ten children huddled around one book.^2 The high cost of schooling also forces many families to stagger the entry of their children into school.
It is not uncommon to find 14-year-olds in fifth grade classes.
Transfers to this fund are helping the Ugandan government realize the ambitious goal for achieving universal primary education.
The resources freed from debt relief combined with other sources, primary school enrollment has more than doubled in two years -- to 5.3 million children.
The Poverty Action Fund is also helping to improve government accountability and transparency.
A steering committee has been established to oversee the use of the Fund.
The committee includes civil society organizations such as the Uganda Debt Network, international non-governmental organizations including Oxfam; as well as USAID and other official donors.
Five percent of the donor grants were set aside for district level monitoring.
The government of Uganda developed operational guidelines that the Offices of the Inspector General of Government, the Auditor General, and Directorate of Accounts in the Ministry of Finance will enforce in the process of monitoring the resource use from the fund.
All financial flows are reported on a quarterly basis and an audit is to be published annually.
The Limits to the Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative
While the case of Uganda does demonstrate the potential benefits of debt relief, it also shows the failure of the HIPC initiative and points to the need for more aggressive measures.
* Debt relief is provided too slowly.
Because countries are required to complete six years of an IMF economic reform program before qualifying for multilateral relief, there have been unacceptable delays in delivering relief under HIPC.
The program is supposed to allow for credit to be giving to countries with solid track records.
But despite more than six years of performance, Uganda was still forced to wait a year before receiving debt relief.
As a result, the amount of debt relief provided to the country was cut by $205 million.
Because this entry requirement is so onerous, only three out of 41 eligible countries - Uganda, Bolivia, and Guyana - have been able to meet it.
By the end of 2000 only six countries will have received debt relief under HIPC.
Forcing such delays is counterproductive.
Rather than delaying relief until the end of the reform process, debt sustainability is needed now in order to support economic reform, attract investment and promote economic self-reliance.
Sustained improvements in policy and financing of areas that will generate broad-based growth are best achieved when governments can provide resources from their own budgets to achieve these ends.
* HIPC does little to free up resources for poverty reduction.
Under the HIPC initiative, a debt is considered sustainable if the debt stock is between two and two-and-one-half times annual exports.
Insufficient attention is paid to the real impact of debt on people - which is better measured by the amount of the national budget that a country must divert away from basic needs to service the debt.
In spite of the potential for progress in Uganda, the government is still spending roughly 18 percent of government revenue on servicing its foreign debt even after reduction under the HIPC initiative.
Moreover, just a year after receiving debt relief under the HIPC initiative, a drop in coffee prices - Uganda's chief export - has resulted in the country's debt stock slipping back to an unsustainable level of above 200 percent of exports.
While the HIPC criteria fail even by their own definition to achieve debt sustainability for poor countries, they also fail to provide sufficient resources to address poverty reduction and human development.
This stunning fact was acknowledged in a recent World Bank -IMF official review of HIPC^3:
For the first seven countries to reach the decision point, estimated scheduled debt service payments after receiving HIPC assistance are not dramatically different from the actual debt service paid for the period prior to the decision point...
Debt service owed by Burkina Faso and Mali are expected to increase.
In absolute terms, the [HIPC] Initiative may not be significantly reducing debt service from current levels paid.
On average, debt service payments are expected to be reduced on average by only 2 percent under the current HIPC program.
In sum, the HIPC initiative has been little more than an accounting exercise, successful only in removing that part of the debt that was not being serviced.
It has provided little in the way of real relief.
The Cologne G-7 Summit: another failed attempt to solve the crisis?
This is an important year for delivering on the promise of translating debt into development.
Pressure for bolder action on debt has grown among citizens groups and religious leaders in both creditor and debtor countries, including the Jubilee 2000 movement of which Oxfam is a member to deliver definitive debt relief by the year 2000.
Just last weekend, the Finance Ministers of the Group of Seven agreed to a broad outline for reforming the HIPC initiative, with final agreement by the leaders when they convene in Cologne this weekend at their annual summit.
In the run up to the G-7 summit, governments of Germany, Canada, France, Britain and the United States have each put forward proposals in favor of earlier and deeper debt relief.
The British, backed by the Canadians, have played a leadership role in pressing for bolder action.
At the same time, the Japanese and French governments have been reluctant to agree to deeper relief without an upfront assurance from the United States that we would pay our fair share of the cost.
The United States has been in the middle, pressing for deeper relief than what is provided under the existing HIPC framework, but steadfastly opposed to going as far at the British government.
According to Oxfam estimates, under the U.S. proposal, most HIPC countries will still be paying more than one-fifth of their revenues on debt service.
We believe the wealthiest countries can do better.
But without the personal leadership of President Clinton, the agreement about to be reached by the Group of Seven leaders will be a lost opportunity to solve the crisis once and for all.
The Debt Relief for Poverty Reduction Act (HR 1095)
The Debt Relief for Poverty Reduction Act of 1999 presents the Congress with the opportunity to shape the national debate on how to end the debt crisis.
I would like to commend you, Mr. Chairman, for co-sponsoring this important legislation and for building an impressively broad coalition behind the bill.
Oxfam is among more than 100 national and local organizations, including most major religious denominations that have endorsed this bill.
The goal of the bill is simple: it provides faster and deeper debt relief to more countries provided that these countries are committed to translating debt into sustainable development.
The potential benefits of H.R. 1095 are remarkable.
Based on Oxfam estimates, this bill would provide almost $100 billion in debt relief, in nominal terms.
Sub-Saharan African countries entering HIPC stand to save up to an additional $4 billion per year in total.
This represents more than the amount of resources needed to for achieving universal primary education in the region within a decade.
In a region where half of all children are out of school, and where the education infrastructure is collapsing, the potential is enormous.
A summary of H.R. 1095 is attached to my testimony, so here I will summarize a few main points: * It targets the poorest countries
Like HIPC, eligibility for debt relief under the bill is limited to countries with per capita annual incomes below $925.
This obviously does not include Brazil or Russia but rather countries such as Mozambique, Nicaragua, Uganda, Ghana, Tanzania and Mali.
By expanding the definition of "unsustainable debt" the bill also expands the number of poor countries that would be eligible for relief under HIPC from 23 to 45.
* The bill defines debt sustainability based on basic human needs.
The bill introduces a new definition of debt sustainability that reflects the human cost of debt.
Governments that meet the eligibility criteria, including the establishment of Human Development Funds, would see their debt reduced to a level such that annual debt service would not exceed 10 percent of internally generated revenue.
This provision would free up considerable resources for development.
* The bill speeds up the delivery of relief.
Under H.R. 1095, countries would not have to wait more than three years before receiving relief.
Under the plan being championed by the Clinton Administration, countries would begin receiving cash flow relief after three years, but the stock of debt would not be removed until certain economic reform targets are met, which could result in considerable delays in providing full relief.
* The bill calls for greater attention to poverty and environmental considerations and full participation of citizens in setting the conditions for debt relief
H.R. 1095 also calls for greater attention to poverty and environmental concerns within the economic and social reforms on which eligibility for debt relief depends.
In order to strengthen the ability of citizens to hold their own governments accountable, the bill also calls for greater transparency and public participation in decisions about the terms and conditions for debt relief.
Ultimately, it is the citizens of these countries who are affected by these decisions; they must have a voice.
Oxfam and many of our partners in indebted countries view these measures as essential to the success of any debt relief initiative.
* The bill provides a concrete mechanism to ensure that freed resources benefit the poor.
H.R. 1095 seeks to build on the positive example of Uganda.
In order to ensure that the resources freed from debt relief benefit the poor, HR 1095 calls for the establishment of a Human Development Fund by the recipient government.
It requires the participation of civil society - churches, women's groups, environmental organizations, the private sector, labor, etc. - in determining how the resources are to be spent.
Independent monitoring is required.
The intent is not to dictate narrow uses for the funds but rather to ensure that accountability mechanisms are in place so that debt relief benefits the poor.
* The bill calls for greater transparency and public participation in decision-making regarding new loans.
To prevent future indebtedness, the bill urges the Administration to use its influence within the multilateral development banks to ensure public disclosure of documents related to new loans as well as open participation by civil society in determining the conditions and uses of loans.
* The bill would leverage funds from other creditors.
Thirty-one HIPCs have debt owed to the United States, for a total of $6.8 billion.
The bill calls for the cancellation of debts made on concessional terms and not less than 90 percent cancellation of non-concessional debts.
Because most of this debt is not expected to be repaid, the cost to the Treasury of canceling this debt is roughly $600 million.
Because debt to the United States represents only three percent of the total debt owed by the HIPCs, U.S. action to cancel the debt -- within a burden sharing agreement with much bigger creditors like Japan and France - would leverage far more relief.
* The bill does not seek U.S. financing for the IMF debt relief or to bail out commercial banks.
The bill does not authorize appropriations for IMF financing of debt relief but rather envisages that the IMF would finance debt relief from its own resources.
While the issue is not addressed in the legislation, the sale of IMF gold and the use of reserve accounts could easily finance IMF relief, since the IMF holds over $30 billion worth of gold.
The bill does, however, authorize appropriations to the HIPC Trust Fund.
This fund was established primarily to help cover the cost of debt relief to the regional development banks such as the African Development Bank that would otherwise have difficulty participating in the HIPC relief program.
Very little debt held by HIPCs is owed to commercial banks, since these countries generally do not have access to such credit markets.
The focus of the bill is on public debt that is owed to creditor governments, such as the United States, and to multilateral development banks.
As under existing bilateral debt relief regimes, under H.R. 1095 debtor governments would be required to seek similar treatment from commercial creditors as is provided by official creditors.
If enacted, the Debt Relief for Poverty Reduction Act of 1999 would put the United States in a leadership position among the creditor countries.
Early action on the bill would demonstrate a U.S. commitment to ensure that poor and indebted countries move quickly to achieve debt sustainability, that sufficient resources are delivered to enable them to meet basic needs, and that debt relief resources are used within a transparent and accountable framework.
The cost of not acting
Today there are new opportunities in Africa and Latin America as conflicts end and democracy begins to take root.
But these are fragile opportunities, which will be undermined without support from the international community.
Certainly debt relief is not a panacea, but progress is unlikely without it.
If linked to poverty reduction, debt relief could help underpin change and encourage governments to move in the right direction.
There is a heavy moral imperative to the debt crisis.
As the United States enjoys an era of unprecedented prosperity, we cannot tolerate a situation in which demands for debt payment sustains mass malnutrition, disease and illiteracy.
Nor can we fail to act to prevent the threats to global peace and security, which will emerge if debt is allowed to weigh so heavily in the consignment of millions to economic decline and social degradation.
This is in countries where 4 million children will die this year from easily preventable diseases, and 50 million will never see the inside of a school.
There is an economic case as well.
If linked to sound governance, debt reduction could release the productive potential of marginalized communities and help create a framework for more self-reliant growth.
In an increasingly interdependent world, the dangers to stability posed by the deepening poverty associated with debt - such as the prospect of increased conflict, refugee flows and environmental degradation -- should not be underestimated.
The world's poorest and most vulnerable citizens must not be left paying for the past mistakes of creditors and debtors.
Creditors have an obligation to own up to the fact that much of the money they lent did not benefit the poor.
Governments have an obligation too: they must also demonstrate the required political resolve to allocate resources from debt relief into poverty reduction efforts, and to create transparent mechanisms for ensuring that the efforts have real impact.
Finally there is a continuing role for non-governmental organizations and other civil society groups in these countries - they must strengthen their own capacity to monitor debt relief schemes.
Oxfam is among a growing number of international organizations that is committed to providing support for this work.
If creditors, indebted governments and civil society resolve to work together in this way, we could realize the vision of a debt-free start to the new millennium.
Thank you.
__________________ 1.
Debt Relief for Tanzania: An Opportunity for a Better Future, Oxfam International, April 1998.
^
2.
Debt Relief and Poverty Reduction: New Hope for Uganda, Oxfam International, September 1996.
^
3.
HIPC Initiative: Perspectives on the Current Framework and Options for Change, International Monetary Fund, April 2, 1999.
