Saint Croix Island International Historic Site Teacher's Guide Dear Teacher, This traveling trunk contains materials designed to help you teach your students about Saint Croix Island International Historic Site.
Saint Croix Island was the site of one of the earliest European settlements in North America.
In 1604, before Jamestown, before Quebec City, and before Plymouth, French settlers came here to start a colony.
Though their establishment on Saint Croix Island was short-lived, the colonists did not give up but moved on to a better location at Port Royal.
So began an uninterrupted French presence in North America that continues to this day.
The story of Saint Croix Island is a compelling case study of contact, exploration, and settlement.
The traveling trunk contains materials for a variety of educational activities aimed at students aged 10 to 14.
They are primarily intended for social studies but can also be carried over to language arts, arts and crafts, drama, and other subjects
We hope you and your class enjoy it.
If you have any questions or comments, please call me at (207) 288-8802.
Deb Wade Chief Intepreter Saint Croix Island International Historic Site National Park Service __________________________________________________________________
How This Trunk is Organized
There are five teaching units in this Traveling Trunk.
Unit 1: Keeping a Journal
Activity 1.1.
In Champlain's Own Words
Activity 1.2.
Keeping a Journal
Unit 2: European Exploration and Settlement
Activity 2.1.
The Explorers Quest
Activity 2.2.
From Europe to North America
Activity 2.3.
Finding a New Home
Unit 3: Meeting of Two Worlds
Activity 3.1.
Wapaponiyik: People of the Dawn
Activity 3.2.
Two Worlds, Two Ways of Life
Activity 3.2.
Meeting Strangers
Unit 4: Saint Croix Island: Survival and Adaptation
Activity 4.1.
Building a Settlement
Activity 4.2.
Seasons on Saint Croix
Activity 4.3.
Headline News
Unit 5: Saint Croix Island's Legacy: Acadia and New France
Activity 5.1.
Port Royal (video)
Activity 5.2.
Acadia and New France
Appendix: Brief Historical Background
Learning Outcomes:
After a class carries out the five units, students will know that:
o The French settlement at Saint Croix Island in Maine was one of the earliest European settlements in North America.
It followed a handful of short-lived European settlements along the Atlantic coast.
It pre-dated the permanent settlements of Jamestown, Plymouth and Quebec City.
o The French did not discover St. Croix Island-it was already known and used by the First Peoples.
The First Peoples, who still live in the area, helped the French learn about life in this new land.
o Due to their inexperience in this climate, the French settlers suffered a terrible winter on Saint Croix Island, in which nearly half the colonists died.
o The French settlers moved to a more appropriate site at Port Royal and later at Quebec.
Saint Croix Island marks the beginning of a continuous French presence in North America.
After a class carries out the five units, students will have developed or gained enhanced skills in:
o Using primary sources
o Journal keeping
o Mapping
Unit 1: Keeping a Journal
This unit provides an overview activity that links to all the other components in the traveling trunk.
It can be used as an introduction, an ongoing activity, a wrap-up, or all three!
Most of what we know today about Saint Croix Island comes from the journals of Samuel Champlain -- journals he kept as an expedition record to give to the king of France.
Given the importance of the journals to the Saint Croix story, it is recommended that students keep a journal while doing all the units.
Activities 1.1.
In Champlain's Own Words 1.2.
Keeping A Journal
Learning Outcomes
o Students will know that Champlain's journals are a primary source.
They were written in 1604-5 by someone who was actually at Saint Croix Island, not by a historian looking back years later.
o Students will select and synthesize relevant information.
o Students will gain improved writing skills.
Activity 1.1-In Champlain's Own Words
Samuel Champlain kept a journal during the Saint Croix Island expedition in 1604-5.
Champlain's journals were published and titled, The Works of Samuel de Champlain, Volume 1: (Toronto: The Champlain Society).
They contain the original French (from the 17th century) and an English translation on the same page.
We suggest that you make copies of these extracts for your students to consult during the time you are teaching about Saint Croix.
Resources Needed: o Extracts from the Journals of Samuel de Champlain.
If you are having a difficult time tracking down the journals try writing to the Saint Croix Historical Society, 245 Maine St., Calais, ME 04619, or call 207-454-2604.
Activity Have your students read the first few pages of the extracts and answer the following questions.
o Why do you think Champlain kept a journal?
o What is the difference between this journal and a diary?
o What is a primary source and how does it differ from secondary sources?
Suggestions for Extended Study o Examine passages from Champlain's journals.
Can you tell very much about what Samuel Champlain was like as a person? Discuss the difference between an official journal like Champlain's and a personal diary.
o Look up history books, encyclopedia, and articles about the settlement of North America.
Is Saint Croix Island mentioned? How does the account compare to that given by Champlain in his journals?
o Discuss what our view of history would be if Champlain had not kept a journal.
Would we know about what happened on Saint Croix Island? In the future, what evidence will historians draw on to study how we live today? With so much being communicated by telephone and e-mail, will information survive for the future?
Activity 1.2-Keeping a Journal
Each student should keep a journal during the units of study.
Like Samuel Champlain's journal, it is intended that this be a formal record of their activities and observations.
They can include illustrations to help record and explain their observations, just as there were in Champlain's journals.
Resources Needed: o Journal and inside pages for your students.
Activity There are two suggested ways you can carry out the journal activity.
Option 1: A Present-Day Journal Each student should keep a journal describing what is happening in the classroom and in the community, making entries each evening much the same way Champlain must have done.
Before they begin, discuss the purpose of the journal as opposed to a diary.
Share entries later to compare how different students see the days "events" and discuss the question of personal bias in primary sources.
Option 2: A Saint Croix Boy's Journal Among the 79 male settlers on St. Croix Island were a number of boys from France.
Each student will "become" one of these boys and record his/her observations and research in a journal.
Some of the following questions could guide your journal-writers.
Please explain that most 17th century boys would not be able to read or write, unless they were from upper class families or were religious novices.
1.
Who are you? Give your character a name, age and family background.
Why are you leaving France? Are you accompanying your father as his assistant, have you been apprenticed to a skilled worker, or are you a novice in a religious order?
2.
What was your first sea voyage like? What type of ship did you travel in? How long was the voyage?
3 What kind of land did you see? Is Acadia (La Cadie) like the country in France? Is it what you expected? Is it difficult to explore the coasts and rivers? 4.
Did you meet First Peoples? Could you speak to them? Did you meet boys your age? How did they appear? What did you find out from them?
5.
Where will you settle? What kind of place is Pierre Dugualooking for? Are there many possible choices? Why did he pick Saint Croix Island? Who gives the names to the places you see?
6.
What is the settlement like? What different buildings are you constructing? Is it very different from your home in France? (Don't forget to write to your mother and sisters before the supply-boat leaves -- Do you miss them?)
7.
What is winter like? Is the weather different from France? Are you warm enough? Eating enough? What do you do on those short winter days?
8.
What is this terrible illness? Did you get sick? Is there a cure? Do you have a doctor? Were the First Peoples sick?
9.
How did you feel when spring arrived? What were the first signs? Can the ships from France get through? What are you looking forward to?
10.
What will you do next? You know you could return to France or accompany Champlain to Port Royal? Have you made your decision yet?
Suggestions for Extended Study
o Make a quill pen.
You will need a long turkey or goose feather, a sharp knife, and a candle.
Lay the feather flat side up on a cutting surface, then cut a diagonal slice at the bottom of the quill.
Clean out the quill if there is anything inside it.
Hold the quill over a candle to harden (it becomes transparent).
Use the knife to cut the quill to a point.
Dip the quill into ink or tempera paint thinned with a little water.
o Make your own paper.
Check in your library for instructions.
o Create your own journal cover using illustrations, photographs, calligraphy, stamps, seals etc.
Unit 2: Early European Exploration and Settlement
This unit is intended to provide background for the Saint Croix Island story and to set it in the larger context of the European exploration and settlement of North America.
In 1604, when Pierre Duguabrought his colony of French settlers to Saint Croix Island, it was the only European settlement in North America north of Florida.
Except for places where fishermen and whalers were active, most of the coastline of North America was still unmapped and unknown to Europeans.
Activities
2.1.
The Explorers Quest 2.2.
From Europe to North America 2.3.
Finding a New Home
Learning Outcomes
o Students will know the major reasons why Europeans came to North America.
o Students will know that Saint Croix Island was one of the earliest European settlements in North America.
o Students will know that Saint Croix Island was explored and settled by the French.
o Students will gain improved mapping and geography skills.
Activity 2.1-The Explorers' Quest
Resources Needed: o Spices (suggesting the search for the Orient) o Beaver Pelt (suggesting the fur tradem, may be difficult to find) o Salt cod (suggesting fishing/whaling industries) o Pyrite ("fool's gold") (suggesting riches and mineral wealth) o Cross (suggesting desire to convert First Peoples to Christianity) o Flags (suggesting imperial ambitions of England, France, Spain)
Activity Use the objects to discuss why Europeans came to North America.
Notes on Flags: Spain: This flag-the Spanish Cross-was used in the 1500s as the Spanish explored Florida, Mexico, and parts of South America.
France: Before the French revolution, France had no national flag so a variety of flags were used.
This flag-the Fleur-de-Lis-was commonly used in the 1600s, though not necessarily at Saint Croix Island.
England: This flag-the St. George's Cross-was flown by John Cabot and many other English explorers.
As an alternative or supplement to direct instruction, divide your class into groups, assigning an object(s) to each.
Each group should prepare a presentation on one of the objects.
Their research should include: o how important was this factor in motivating exploration? o what were the long-term impacts of this activity
Suggestions for Extended Study
History Consult the journals and history books to find out why Dugua and his colony came to North America.
Drama Develop a presentation in groups of three regarding the dialogue that may have taken place in a family in 17th century France.
An apprentice boy says good-bye to his aunt and uncle before joining Dugua's ship.
His aunt is very supportive of this opportunity.
His Uncle has spoken with Atlantic sailors and is very concerned about conditions at sea and in the "New World".
Include the thoughts of the boy in your presentation.
Activity 2.2-From Europe to North America
Resources Needed: o Blank map of Europe and North America o Blank map of Eastern North America
Activity Using the blank maps provided the students will:
o Draw the route of Dugua's ship from Havre de Grâce (now Le Havre, France) to Saint Croix Island (Maine, USA).
o Locate, showing name and date, the major settlement attempts in Eastern North America from the Norse in 1000 to the Plymouth Pilgrims in 1620.
Vinland (L'Anse aux Meadows) 1000 Stadacona 1535 St. Augustine 1565 Roanoke Island 1585 St. Croix Island 1604 Port Royal 1605 Jamestown 1607 Quebec 1608 Plymouth 1620
Suggestions for Extended Study
History/Art In a group, develop a mural timeline to cover the period of exploration from Christopher Columbus in 1492 to Lewis and Clark in 1806.
On your time line, include the following: name of the explorer, date of exploration, country of origin, means of travel, main reasons for exploration.
Use drawings and pictures of ships, countries, and the reasons for exploration to illustrate the mural.
Geography Using an overhead transparency for tracing, compare Champlain's charts to a modern map of the coast line.
Use different colors for contrast and note the names of physical features (rivers, bays etc.) which are the same.
Activity 2.3-Finding a New Home
Activity As a class, discuss what a group of settlers would look for in selecting a site for a new settlement (i.e. drinking water, food, firewood, place to anchor ships).
Students will:
o List in order of priority the features they would look for in locating a new settlement
o Consult Champlain's journals to find out the reasons why the Dugua expedition selected Saint Croix Island for its settlement.
o Compare their list of site features with those of Champlain.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Role-Playing/Planning Your group is responsible for planning an expedition to an unexplored location which can be on Earth or another planet.
Determine the reasons for your expedition, the means of travel, the knowledge and skills required and the equipment you will need.
Is there any comparison to Dugua's planning in 1604?
Unit 3: Meeting of Two Worlds
This unit reminds students that North America was home to the First Peoples, not a blank, empty space 'discovered' by Europeans.
Throughout their journeys in North America, European 'explorers' like Champlain were guided by First Peoples, who also served as interpreters.
The First Peoples shared their technology (canoes, snowshoe etc.) with the French and helped them adapt to conditions in this part of the world.
Activities 3.1.
Wapaponiyik: People of the Dawn 3.2.
Two Worlds, Two Ways of Life 3.3.
Meeting Strangers
Learning Outcomes o Students will know that North America, and specifically Maine and New Brunswick, were inhabited for thousands of years before the arrival of the Europeans.
o Students will know the identity of the First Peoples that lived in the area surrounding Saint Croix Island.
They will be able to name the four First Peoples that made up the Waponahki Confederacy.
o Students will know that the Waponahki peoples had well-established and long-lasting cultures which featured the interwoven elements of language, and spiritual beliefs, mythology, music and visual arts, and were based on their close relationship to nature.
o Students will gain a better understanding of the contrasts between the First Peoples and the French in the early 17th century.
Activity 3.1-Wapaponiyik: People of the Dawn
The people of the Passamaquoddy, Penobscot, Mi'kmaq, and Maliseet nations are collectively known as the Waponahki.
They live in Maine, the Atlantic provinces and Quebec, speak dialects of the Algonquian language, and share common cultural traits based on a close relationship with nature in this coastal environment.
Resources Needed: o Images of Waponahki material culture: stone arrow, birch bark canoe, work and fancy baskets.
o Paper for making birch bark container.
Activity o Make and decorate paper versions of a Passamaquoddy birch bark container.
o Discuss what containers are made of (birch bark, spruce roots, spruce gum-the birch bark container is sewn together with spruce roots and sealed with spruce gum so it does not leak) and how the First Peoples found everything they needed to survive in nature.
Please explain that students should not strip birch bark off a tree as it damages the tree.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Field Trip o Make a class visit to the Waponahki Museum and Resource Centre in Perry, Maine.
For information call (207) 853-4001.
Research o Research the present-day locations of the Passamaquoddy, Penobscot, Mi'kmaq and Maliseet peoples.
Identify cultural sites that present their culture and history.
o Challenge students to research the contributions of the First Peoples.
Topics could include food, medicine and transportation.
Language Arts o Read myths and legends from the First Peoples.
First Peoples Loan Kit o The Nova Scotia Museum has developed an educational kit on the Mi'kmaq and their ancestors.
It contains objects like sweet grass, tanned dear hide and red ochre along with a number of suggested activities to do in the classroom.
If you are in Nova Scotia, it can be borrowed through the Museum at (902) 424-6524.
If you are in New Brunswick, it is available from the New Brunswick Department of Education, Instructional Resources at (902) 453-2246.
Unfortunately, it is not available in Maine.
Activity 3.2-Two Worlds, Two Ways of Life
Resources Needed: o Images of birchbark canoe and French vessel o Images of Passamaquoddy moccasin / French shoe (Both wooden and leather shoes would likely have been worn by the St. Croix settlers) o Images of Passamaquoddy birch bark container / French cider mug (reproduction of 17th century style)
Activity Use the objects and images to discuss the differences between the two ways of life: o Which clothing and footwear is warmer and more practical in the winter? o Which vessel (a ship or a canoe) is better adapted to oceans; which to rivers? o Which type of community has the least impact on the environment?
Suggestions for Extended Study
History/Research o Have students research life in France and in Eastern North America around 1600.
Contrast and compare a day in the life of a First Peoples family and a French family in France.
o Discuss the types of misunderstandings which may have developed between the First Peoples and the French, given that their lifestyles and world views were so different.
Activity 3.3-Meeting Strangers
Resources Needed: o Journal extracts, section from Champlain's journal describing his encounter with the Native Americans, pgs.293-296
Activity With a partner, students should re-enact a first meeting between the Saint Croix settlers and the Passamaquoddy people.
Perhaps it can be a meeting between a Passamaquoddy child and a French boy of the same age.
Where is the encounter? How would they communicate?
After the role-playing, ask the students how they felt.
How would they feel if a weird-looking stranger showed up in their community and started building a home there? How would they feel if they went to an entirely new place and had to meet the people who lived there in a completely different way.
Ways to expand the scenario would be: o The Passamaquoddy boy goes home and tells his friends about the French; while the French boy tells his fellow colonists of his impressions.
o The Passamaquoddy boy (through an interpreter) gives the French some helpful hints on how to survive here.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Media Awareness o Discuss why "Indians" are usually portrayed as hostile in movies and on television.
History o Research the numbers of First Peoples in North America before and after contact with the Europeans.
Discuss the impact of disease.
Language Arts o Write a diary or story from the perspective of a Waponahki child (Hey Mom, What are those strangers doing at our place?).
Remember that the French would have been objects of curiosity, much like aliens might be arriving on Earth today.
Unit 4: Saint Croix Island-Survival and Adaptation This tells the story of what happened to the French on Saint Croix Island.
Activities 4.1.
Building A Settlement 4.2.
Seasons on Saint Croix 4.3.
Headline News
Learning Outcomes
o Students will know that nearly half of the French settlers on Saint Croix Island died during the winter of 1604-5 because of their lack of knowledge of the North American environment and the bad luck of a very harsh winter (in spite of help from Passamaquoddy and other First Peoples)
o Students will extract information from primary historical sources.
Activity 4.1-Building A Settlement
Champlain's journals contain a plan of the Saint Croix Island settlement showing the names of all the buildings.
This activity-while it seems elementary-challenges students to carefully observe this plan and extract information from it.
Resources Provided o Plan of Saint Croix Island with legend
Click here to view Champlain's drawing of the Saint Croix Settlement
Legends on Champlain's Plan of the Settlement on Saint Croix Island with comments:
A.
The Sieur De Monts' Dwelling: According to Lescarbot, this building, with the storehouse(C) was constructed of "fair sawn timber," which must have been brought for the purpose from France.
The other buildings were evidently n more than log-houses or huts.
Lescarbot visited this settlement two years after it was completed in company with those who had helped to build it; his authority is therefore of the best.
B.
Public Building wherein we spent our time when it rained: Lescarbot describes it as a covered gallery.
C.
The Storehouse: This was so solidly built that it was not thought practicable to remove it when next year the settlement was transferred to Port Royal.
D.
The Dwelling of the Swiss: They were presumably Swiss mercenaries taken as the professional soldiers of the expedition.
Lescarbot says this building was large and spacious.
E.
The Blacksmith Shop
F.The Carpenters Dwelling
G.
The Well: An old well, locally reputed French, is still to be seen in the position marked on the modern map, but it cannot possibly answer to the one show upon this plan.
H.
The Bake-House where the bread was made
I.
The Cook-House: It was probably given its overhanging position for convenience in disposing of the kitchen refuse.
Presumably the public building.
(B), served also at times as a dining-hall.
L.
The Gardens
M.
Other Gardens
N.
The Public Square with a tree in the middle of it
O. Palisade: Appparently the storehouse, the public building, Monts' residence, and the buildings R were joined together by palisades in order to form an inner line of defense in case of need.
Lescarbot speaks of the "Fort", inside which were the dwellings of the Sieur de Monts and the storehouse, while the other building stood outside in the manner of a suburb.
P. Dwellings of the Sieurs d'Orville, Champlain, and Champdore: Lescarbot states that the dwelling of these important persons was opposite the storehouse, and as the residences of Champlain and De Monts would naturally be close together, I infer taht the engraver has transposed his letters, and that (P) belongs where stands (R), this being the residence of Champlain.
In recent times the belief has become current locally that the name Devils Head, for a prominent headland near by, is a corruption of D'Orville's Head, but this guess is quite negatived by the fact that the former name appears in the earliest records.
Q. Dwellings of the Sieur Boulay, and other workmen: This letter was intended, I take it, to stand much closer to the building next above V, the only one not otherwise designated by a letter.
The Sieur Boulay later became Champlain's brother-in-law.
R. Dwellings where lived the Sieurs de Genestou, Sourin, and other workmen: According to the note under P this letter R should stand where the plan has P.
T. Dwellings of the Sieurs de Beaumont, La Motte Bourioli, and Fougeray: This roll of names recalls the list of the heroes in Homer, for most of these also are mentioned but once and find no other record in history.
V.
The Dwelling of our Priest:
X.
Other Gardens
Y.
The River which surrounds the island (St. Croix River)
Resources Needed: o Blank map of island to be filled in by students
Activity
Using Champlain's plan as a reference, students will:
o Label all the buildings and features on the Island.
o Colour-code each of the following types of functions:
-Dwellings and Residences
-Public Areas (Public building, square, gardens)
-Service Buildings (Storehouse, blacksmith shop, bake house, cook house; carpenters' house could be included since presumably the carpenters also worked there)
-Defence (Palisade; river, residence of the Swiss Mercenaries)
o Discuss the following:
-What are the most surprising aspects of the plan? (e.g. that buildings were spread out all over the island; lack of trees; buildings look like they are in France)
-What features show that Saint Croix Island was intended as a permanent settlement? (e.g. gardens, diversity of buildings, presence of mercenaries)
-What features show that the French were not well-prepared for life here? (Lack of trees for firewood and to provide shelter from wind; spacing of buildings; location on an island).
P Suggestions for Extended Study
Field Trip Visit Saint Croix Island International Historic Site -- preferably on a cold winter day.
As you stand on the shore, imagine what it was like for the settlers to be trapped there.
Please see the enclosed map for directions to the National Park Service site in along U.S. Route 1 in Calais, Maine or the Parks Canada exhibit along Highway #127 in Bayside, New Brunswick near St. Andrews, New Brunswick.
Activity 4.2-Seasons on Saint Croix
Champlain's journal is an excellent source of information about what happened at Saint Croix Island though it gives few exact dates.
This activity challenges students to extract key pieces of data from the journals.
Resources Needed: o Extracts and translations from Champlain's journals o Blank seasonal calendar
Activity Using the blank seasonal calendar provided, students will write or do drawings of the major events in four seasons: Summer 1604, Fall 1604, Winter 1605, Spring 1605 including the following areas: o Major events (construction progress, departure/arrival of ships) o Natural events (weather) o Seasonal activities If you have not taken the historical character approach to the journal in Unit #1, you could do that activity here.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Language Arts As winter ends, you are writing a letter to your mother describing your experiences on Saint Croix Island.
Begin it "Chère Maman".
Environmental Lessons It is finally spring 1605.
Return to the list you made for Dugua in Unit 2 and in two separate columns, list what were good suggestions for the location of the settlement and what did not work out.
Based on this data, draw up a short list of 5 "must haves" for any new settlement in Acadia.
Weather Study Were the Saint Croix settlers just unlucky? Can you research the weather records in your area to discover the usual dates for: o first frost o first snowfall o average temperature in winter o average snowfall o spring thaw Compare your results to what Champlain recorded for 1604-05.
Scurvy Research What does modern research say about scurvy? Why did they fall ill? Is scurvy common today? Why? Why not?
Drama Prepare skits showing scenes from life on Saint Croix Island.
Stop the action at different points to discuss how you feel and what could have happened differently.
Key moments might include: choosing Saint Croix Island, seeing the supply ships sailing off for France, seeing others die of scurvy.
Activity 4.3-Headline News
This activity challenges students to synthesize the information they have gathered about St. Croix International Historic Site and to select what is most important about it.
Resources Needed: o Extracts and translations of journals.
o Brochure from St. Croix Island International Historic Site
Activity In small groups, students will:
o prepare a news presentation (you may choose print, radio or television) to tell the story of Saint Croix Island.
You decide the date when this takes place and the nature of the story, for example: o Archaeological discovery: 35 grave sites are found on Saint Croix Island.
o This year is the 400th anniversary of the Saint Croix Island settlement.
o The year is 3000.
We've gone back in our time machine to visit and interview the Saint Croix Island settlers.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Language Arts o Write poems dedicated to those who died on Saint Croix Island.
Language Arts/Arts and Crafts o Pretend you own a travel agency and wish to promote visits to Saint Croix Island International Historic Site.
Prepare a bulletin board with photos, drawings, slogans etc. that will show the importance of this site.
Media Awareness/History o Discuss why most people have never heard of Saint Croix International Historic Site? Why do you think it was designated as North America's first International Historic Site? What is the role national parks (both American and Canadian) play in preserving history? Unit 5: The Legacy of Saint Croix Island-Acadia and New France
The purpose of this unit is to show that the SaintCroix Island settlement was the start of an ongoing French presence in North America-not an isolated episode like earlier short-lived settlements.
Unit 5: Saint Croix Island's Legacy: Acadia and New France
Activity 5.1 New France
Learning Outcomes
o Students will know that the Saint Croix Island settlers moved on to Port Royal where they applied the lessons they had learned to build a more successful settlement.
o Students will know that Saint Croix Island and Port Royal mark the start of a continuous French presence in North America that continues to this day.
Activity 5.1-New France
Resource Needed: o Blank map of North America
Activity On a blank map of North America, students will: o draw the boundaries of Acadia and New France around 1750.
Suggestions for Extended Study
Research o On your map, note French place names, such as Detroit, that have lived on to today.
o Do research projects on other French explorers: Cartier, La Salle, Iberville etc.
Internet Visit the Virtual Museum of New France at http://www.mvnf.muse.digital.ca.
