dem1.JPG (6015 bytes) [gr_ln_rgb8.gif] NEWS FROM.
CONGRESSMAN LANE EVANS RANKING DEMOCRATIC MEMBER COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AFFAIRS U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Room 333 Cannon HOB For More Information Contact: Washington, DC 20515 Mary Ellen Mc Carthy @ 202-225-9756
FOR RELEASE: February 28, 2003
EVANS CALLS ON VA TO VOID CONTRACT FOR OUTSOURCING PROPERTY MANAGEMENT SERVICES
VA Prepares to Hire Company Known to Use Low-Paid Workers in India for Work Currently Done by Federal Employees
Lane Evans (D-IL), the Ranking Democratic Member of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs, has called on the Secretary of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) to cancel a tentative contract for property management services with Ocwen, a Florida company.
Evans, a strong supporter of Buy American, told VA Secretary Principi that Ocwen is well-known for pioneering the offshore relocation of many backroom financial industry functions to India to reduce operating costs by using low-paid Indian workers.
If the VA contract to outsource property management services with Ocwen is approved, current VA Home Loan Guaranty Service employees could find their jobs exported overseas to be performed in a foreign country by native workers.
Evans said he fundamentally opposes outsourcing work now being performed by highly competent federal employees and more strongly objects to the federal government entering into contracts which could result in federal employees being replaced with low-paid foreign workers based overseas.
Based on the information available, Evans said, I am greatly concerned by and strongly oppose VAs decision to outsource VAs nationwide Property Management activity to Ocwen.
According to Evans, the VA decision to outsource to Ocwen sends a clear signal that VA and the Bush Administration fully support exporting American jobs to foreign countries, jobs which could be performed in America by veterans.
Noting that numerous questions have already been raised about the quality of the worked performed by Ocwen workers in India, Evans requested that Secretary Principi act immediately to cancel the contract VA has tentatively awarded Ocwen.
Evans acknowledged that Ocwens ability to achieve cost-savings under the A-76 outsourcing process for property management may not rely exclusively on its practice of employing low-paid foreign workers.
However, a company which advertises its ability to cut costs by using low-paid foreign workers for Global Outsourcing Services certainly raises grave concern.
The A-76 process which encourages federal agencies to compete government jobs that can be performed commercially, should not be a tool to make government employees obsolete and replace American jobs with low-paid foreign based workers.
Evans has a long history of supporting the rights of American workers.
He has supported efforts to require government purchases of goods made in the United States.
Evans said Congress should consider legislation which would prohibit governmental agencies engaged in competitive outsourcing to enter into contracts where low-paid foreign labor is used, resulting in the loss of American jobs performed by American workers, particularly highly skilled federal employees.
While outsourcing some governmental work may be appropriate and cost-effective in some circumstances, Evans called on Congress to oppose far-out sourcing of government work involving the use of low-paid workers in foreign countries.
-30-
Click here to view letter.
Back to Press Releases
