Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Wetlands Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
Guidelines for Design of Constructed Treatment Wetlands
A. Minimal Impact
Adverse impacts to waters of the U.S. should be avoided.
Potential adverse impacts may include, but are not limited to: disruption of the composition and diversity of plant and animal communities; alteration of the existing hydrologic regime of natural wetlands or adjacent surface water bodies; introduction and spread of noxious species; threats to fish and wildlife from toxins and/or pathogens; and degradation of downstream water quality and groundwater sources.
B. Natural Structure
Constructed treatment wetland designs should avoid rectangular basins, rigid structures and straight channels whenever possible (See Mitsch and Gosselink, 2000; Kusler and Kentula, 1989; National Research Council, 1992).
The use of soft structures, diverse and sinuous edges in design configuration, and bio-engineering practices that incorporate the existing natural landscape and native vegetation in constructed treatment wetlands is encouraged.
Use landform and gravity to your advantage and design your project for minimal maintenance.
For example, sites, slopes, and grades can be used to create depth variability and diversity.
Site planning should avoid conditions conducive to stagnant water and "short circuiting" and problems such as avian botulism and vector production.
C. Buffer Zones
Design the margins of your constructed treatment wetland system as natural transition zones, including woody vegetated buffer areas around the site.
Where appropriate, integrate the facility with other natural resource features to provide wildlife corridors and open space.
D. Vector Control
Where necessary, design your facilities to minimize mosquito problems by minimizing the potential formation of stagnant water, facilitating vegetation management, and by using natural biological control mechanisms, such as mosquito fish, stickleback, etc. (where native), bats, and purple martins.
Local mosquito abatement districts and local codes may provide valuable assistance in designing your project to minimize mosquito habitat.
In some cases, it may be important to consider providing access for active vector control.
E. Hazing and Exclusion Devices
Hazing or wildlife exclusion devices, such as noise-making devices or netting and fencing, should be used if the effluent or other water source being treated is toxic or presents a significant threat to wildlife.
Such devices may be necessary in facilities that are designed only for treatment, but their need should be decided on a case-by-case basis.
Using these wildlife control methods may also be necessary if excessive wildlife use is causing water quality problems.
In some circumstances, excessive use of wetlands by wildlife can result in: (1) wildlife stress and disease problems, (2) degradation of water quality due to high loadings of nutrients, solids, and fecal coliform, and (3) erosion resulting from loss of vegetation due to over-grazing and trampling.
F. Dedicated Water Source
Plans should be made for maintaining the wetland habitat during periods of drought.
Projects that are intended to provide wildlife habitat should have a dedicated water source for the life of the project and, if possible, beyond the life of the project to meet the long-term hydrological needs of the desired aquatic and terrestrial communities.
When doing this, be sure that adequate water supplies remain in adjacent streams for aquatic use and if ground water is used, be sure that its mineral content is not toxic to plant species (for example, excess iron can kill some plants).
G. Biological Diversity and Physical Heterogeneity
Where appropriate, design your constructed treatment wetland to provide habitat with a diversity of native species comparable to similar wetlands in the region.
Maximize vegetative species diversity, where appropriate, without increasing the proportion of weedy, nonindigenous, or invasive species at the expense of native species.
Project plans should include mechanisms to control or eliminate undesirable species.
The biological diversity of your project may be linked to, or dependent upon, physical heterogeneity.
This could include having both surface and subsurface flow while providing some areas of open water, creating nesting islands for waterfowl, and leaving some upland and buffer areas for other nesting species.
Developing a wide variety of wetland types will provide a range of diversity for different types of wildlife.
Considerations may include seasonal hydroperiods, depth-flow changes, vegetative succession, and accumulation of sediments.
H. Seasonality and Capacity Exceedences
Your project design should be able to accommodate extremes in meteorologic conditions and temporary exceedences of water storage and treatment capacity.
Considerations should be made for extremes in temperature and precipitation which can impact normal operations.
I. Forebays
Utilize sediment collection/settling forebays for treatment of storm water inflows and for additional treatment of wastewater.
Design and locate the forebays for ease of maintenance and to achieve greatest protection of wetland habitat and receiving waters.
Monitor forebay sediments, wetland vegetation tissues, and water quality to ensure the system is functioning properly and not becoming an attractive nuisance problem to wildlife.
Identify an upland disposal site to dispose of accumulated sediments that is consistent with sediment disposal requirements and monitoring criteria and standards.
Note that special disposal requirements may be applied for sediments containing hazardous waste materials.
J. Multiple Cells
The use of multiple cells may allow for residuals clean-out, repair of flow control structures, and specialized management of specific effluents without disruption of the overall systems operations.
They also facilitate the flexibility of the system to manage different portions of the system (i.e., individual cells) for different purposes, such as the use of cells nearest the influent source to settle out sediment, final cells to strip out algae produced within the system, and other cells used to encourage the development of habitat and food production for specific wildlife species, etc.
From a wastewater treatment standpoint, multiple cells often provide better treatment in part because "short circuiting" is minimized.
K. Maintenance Access
Design your constructed treatment wetland so that maintenance vehicles and personnel can safely and easily access the site with a minimum of disturbance.
Proper access design will facilitate proper operation and maintenance of the wetland so that it performs as designed.
L.
Public Acceptance
Consider the public's perception of your constructed treatment wetland project and its effects on neighboring populations and adjacent land uses.
Take into account potential concerns like drinking water contamination, unpleasant odors, mosquitos, access by small children and other safety and health issues.
By planning your project with community involvement early in the process, you will help ensure public support and approval for your goals and objectives while developing a safe project for everyone to enjoy.
M.
Public Use
When appropriate, encourage public access and use, work with local educators to design informative displays to install at your project, and help foster community education programs, especially for projects developed for water reuse and wildlife habitat.
In some cases, public access may need to be prevented due to safety and health concerns.
N. Pilot Projects and Design Criteria
A pilot project may be necessary for designing your full-scale project.
If a pilot is not utilized, then design considerations should be fully described and made available to future operators and regulatory staff.
To assist in project design, see the reference, Constructed Wetlands Treatment of Municipal Wastewater Process Design Manual (EPA 625-R-99-010), as well as other technical references such as those listed in Appendix IV.
Planning, design, and construction information is available from Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) offices nationwide; technical assistance may also be available from NRCS offices based on local priorities and workloads.
EPA's North American Treatment Wetland Database is a good avenue for networking by owners and their designers.
Information is generally not complete enough for design, as most of the data is not quality assured and key parameters may be missing.
<
You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader to view the Adobe PDF files on this page.
See EPA's PDF page for more information about getting and using the free Acrobat Reader.
About the Wetlands Program | Helpline | Publications | Espanol
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
