Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Wetlands Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
Federal Permits and Other Legal Issues
Federal, State, Tribal, and/or Local regulations, in addition to those listed below, may be applicable.
Please be sure to coordinate with the appropriate agencies on all projects and, when appropriate, have cooperative and collaborative planning and information-sharing sessions with community and business representatives, environmental groups, regulatory agencies, and the general public.
A. Clean Water Act and "Waters of the U.S."
"Waters of the United States" or "waters of the U.S." are those waters regulated by the Clean Water Act (CWA) (see definition in Appendix I).
By definition, waste treatment systems designed to meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act are not considered waters of the U.S. (40 CFR 122.2 9).
If, however, your constructed treatment wetland is constructed in an existing water of the U.S., the area will remain a water of the U.S. unless an individual CWA Section 404 permit is issued that explicitly identifies it as an excluded waste treatment system designed to meet the requirements of the CWA.
If your constructed treatment wetland is constructed in uplands and is designed to meet the requirements of the CWA, then it generally will not be considered a water of the U.S. under the waste treatment system exclusion to the definition of waters of the U.S.
If the constructed treatment wetland is abandoned or is no longer being used as a treatment system, it may revert to (or become) a water of the U.S. if it otherwise meets the definition of waters of the U.S.
This definition is met if the system has wetland characteristics (hydrology, soils, vegetation) and it is (1) an interstate wetland, (2) is adjacent to another water of the U.S. (other than waters which are themselves wetlands), or (3) if it is an isolated intrastate water which has a connection to interstate commerce (for example, it is used by interstate or foreign travelers for recreation or other purposes).
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the EPA decide on a case-by-case basis whether or not particular bodies of water are waters of the U.S. Contact your U.S. Army Corps of Engineers district or regional Environmental Protection Agency office for more information on this subject.
If your constructed treatment wetland, or a portion of your constructed treatment wetland, is considered a water of the U.S., then it falls under the jurisdiction of the CWA and one or more of the following sections of the CWA may apply.
If the constructed treatment wetland is not itself a water of the U.S. but it discharges pollutants into a water of the U.S., the discharge requires a permit under CWA Section 402.
B. Clean Water Act Section 303 Water Quality Standards
Under the CWA, States and Tribes (and in a few cases EPA) are to adopt water quality standards for all waters of the U.S. Water quality standards include designated uses for water bodies, criteria to protect these designated uses, and an antidegradation policy (Section 303).
Permits for discharges to waters of the U.S., including jurisdictional wetlands, must ensure the discharges will not cause or contribute to a violation of water quality criteria or impair designated uses in the receiving water or downstream waters.
If there are no water quality standards specific to a wetland, the water quality standards for the adjacent open waterbody may be applied to the wetland, depending on your state's policies.
Please see Appendix II, "Section 303 of the Clean Water Act, for additional information.
C. Clean Water Act Section 401 Certification
Projects involving a federally-licensed activity that may result in discharges to waters of the U.S. (such as a CWA Section 402 permit from EPA and/or a CWA Section 404 permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers) require certification under Section 401 of the CWA.
Your permit application will need certification that the proposed activity will not violate water quality standards or other State or Tribal requirements.
This certification must come from the State or authorized Tribe in whose geographic jurisdiction the discharge would occur, or in some circumstances from EPA.
Note that the State or Tribe may place conditions on its certification that are intended to prevent such violations.
States and Tribes may waive certification.
D. Clean Water Act Section 402
The CWA Section 402 program, also known as the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) program, regulates the discharge of pollutants (other than dredged or fill material, which is covered, below, under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act) from point sources into waters of the U.S.
Over forty states are authorized by EPA to administer the NPDES permitting program within their state boundaries.
The construction and/or operation of a treatment wetland may involve these discharges to waters of the U.S. and, as a result, require an NPDES permit.
If construction of the treatment wetland will disturb 5 acres or more (1 acre expected to apply in 2002), an NPDES permit for the discharge of storm water is required.
In most areas of the country, EPA or State NPDES permitting authorities have issued storm water general permits for discharges from construction activities.
These storm water general permits typically require operators of the construction project to submit a notice of intent (NOI) form, and prepare a site specific storm water pollution prevention plan, prior to disturbing any land at the site.
For more information, please contact your NPDES permitting authority.
A current list of State/Federal Storm Water Contacts is available at: http://www.epa.gov/owm/swlib.htm.
For more information, see VIII., Question and Answer #1, and Appendix II, "Section 402 of the Clean Water Act."
E. Clean Water Act Section 404
If your construction activities involve the discharge of dredged or fill material (e.g., rock, sand, and soil) to waters of the U.S., you will need authorization under CWA Section 404.
For example, if you wish to use a degraded jurisdictional wetland for wastewater treatment and plan to construct water control structures, such as berms or levees, this construction will typically involve discharges of dredged or fill material into that wetland.
(Note: The use of existing wetlands for purposes of wastewater treatment is generally discouraged.)
Subsequent maintenance may also require a permit, although Section 404(f) may exempt some routine maintenance from 404 permitting requirements.
You should contact the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (or the appropriate state agency) to determine the regulatory requirements associated with the proposed discharge of dredged or fill material.
For more information, see Appendix II, "Section 404 of the Clean Water Act."
Compensatory Mitigation: In general, wetlands constructed or restored for the primary purpose of treating wastewater will not be recognized as compensatory mitigation to offset wetland losses authorized under federal regulatory programs.
In some cases, however, components of constructed wetland treatment systems that provide wetland functions and values beyond what is needed for treatment purposes may be used for compensatory mitigation.
For example, project sponsors may be eligible to receive mitigation "credit" for using treated effluent as part of a constructed treatment wetland system that restores or creates additional wetland acreage beyond the acreage needed for treatment purposes.
The use of constructed treatment wetlands for mitigation for CWA Section 404 purposes is subject to approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, in consultation with other Federal and State resource agencies.
Such decisions need to be made on a case-by-case basis, considering, among other factors, the appropriateness of the constructed treatment wetland to fully offset the anticipated impacts from the loss of natural wetlands.
F. Preapplication Treatment (see definition in Appendix I)
If your constructed treatment wetland is considered a water of the U.S. (e.g., is constructed in a water of the U.S.), you must treat the effluent, or other source water (storm water runoff, agricultural and livestock waste, etc.) prior to its entering the constructed treatment wetland sufficiently to meet all applicable water quality standards (and to prevent degradation of wildlife or biological integrity) and technology-based requirements.
Municipal wastewater effluent generally must be treated to at least secondary levels before it enters waters of the U.S. (CWA Section 301).
Other examples of treatment include best management practices for storm water and confined animal feeding operations.
G.
Other Federal Legal and Programmatic Considerations (for descriptions, see Appendix II: Federal Statutes and Regulations)
* Clean Water Act Section 319 (Nonpoint Source Pollution Program) * Estuary management plans under Clean Water Act Section 320 * Coastal Zone Management Act, including Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 * Endangered Species Act * Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act * Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act * Migratory Bird Treaty Act * National Environmental Policy Act * National Wild and Scenic Rivers Act * National Historic Preservation Act
<
You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader to view the Adobe PDF files on this page.
See EPA's PDF page for more information about getting and using the free Acrobat Reader.
About the Wetlands Program | Helpline | Publications | Espanol
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
