J.E.FOGARTY INTERNATIONAL CENTER [shim.gif] About FIC FIC icon [shim.gif]
[bbluel.gif] Contents
DHHS, NIH, and FIC Personnel Announcements
FIC Budget FIC Programs and Initiatives
FIC Network Meetings
Regional Activities
Activities of FIC Staff Members
[bbluel.gif] DHHS, NIH, and FIC PERSONNEL ANNOUNCEMENTS
Dr. Elias Zerhouni was confirmed by unanimous voice vote of the full U.S. Senate on May 2, to become the 15^th Director of the NIH.
Dr. Zerhouni was sworn in on May 15.
Ms. Elizabeth M. Duke was named by Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Secretary Tommy G. Thompson to serve as Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA).
Ms. Duke is a long-time HHS career executive, who served from 1997 to 2001 as deputy assistant secretary for administration in the HHS Administration for Children and Families.
From 1986-1997 she was principal deputy assistant secretary for management and budget at HHS.
Dr. Richard H. Carmona has been nominated by President Bush to serve as U.S. Surgeon General, replacing Dr. David Satcher, whose term ended in February.
Dr. Louis Sullivan, former HHS Secretary, and former Oklahoma Congressman Tom Coburn will co-chair the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS.
Dr. Jerome M. Hauer has been named by Secretary Thompson to serve as Director of the Office of Public Health Preparedness.
He is taking over from Dr. D.A. Henderson, who will continue to serve as Principal Science Advisor to the Secretary for public heath preparedness and Chairman of the Secretarys Council on Public Health Preparedness.
Dr. Jeffrey P. Koplan, who led the CDC for the past three and a half years, resigned effective March 31 to move to Emory University as Vice President for Academic Health Affairs at the Universitys Woodruff Health Sciences Center.
Dr. David Fleming, CDC Deputy Director for Science and Public Health, will serve as CDC Acting Director as part of an interim management team consisting of Dr. James Hughes, Director, National Center for Infectious Disease (NCID); Dr. Julie Gerberding, Acting Director, NCID; and
Dr. Michael Osterholm, Director, Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, University of Minnesota.
Dr. Roderic I. Pettigrew has been named as the first permanent director of the new National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering.
Dr. Pettigrew is currently Professor of Radiology, Medicine (Cardiology) and Bioengineering and Director of the Emory Center for MR Research at Emory University School Medicine.
A graduate of Morehouse College, he holds a Ph.D. in applied radiation physics from MIT and received an M.D. from the University of Miami School of Medicine.
He is expected to begin his appointment in late August or early September 2002.
Dr. Marvin Cassman, Director of the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) for the past six years and an ex officio member of the FIC Advisory Board from 1998 to 2000, left the NIH May 3 to become the first director of the University of California San Franciscos Mission Bay campus-based Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Research (QB3).
The QB3 Institute was established to focus on areas such as bioengineering, structural biology, bioinformatics and the analysis of complex biological systems.
Dr. Judith Greenberg has been named Acting NIGMS Director and assumed this position on Dr. Cassmans departure.
Ms. Anne Thomas, NIH Associate Director for Communications, left the NIH April 19 to take up the position of Vice President for Public Affairs at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.
Mr. John Burklow has been named Acting Associate Director for Communications.
Ms. Sue Quantius, NIH Associate Director for Budget, left the NIH April 15 to join the House Appropriations Committee staff.
Ms. Quantius previously served the committee staff prior to holding the position of director of federal relations at the Association of American Universities, which she left in November 1997 to join the NIH.
Mr. Don Popple is serving as Acting Associate Director for Budget.
Dr. Jean-Marc DEpinay joined the FIC Division of International Epidemiology and Population Studies (EPS) in January.
His research here will be on mathematical modeling of infectuous diseases.
He is currently working on a malaria transmission model, and an influenza model.
Before joining NIH he was a team manager in a medical research center in Martinique (FWI) and a team manager in financial instruments at the Banque Nationale de Paris - Paribas (BNP-Paribas).
He received a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics from the Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussees, Paris.
Dr. Dean Jamison joined the FIC Division of Advanced Studies and Policy Analysis (DASPA) in February for a period of two years.
A Professor at the University of California Los Angeles, he directs the Program on Global Health and Education, and has been involved in international health economics and economics of education.
At FIC, Dr. Jamison will work on the second edition of Disease Control Priorities in the Developing World, as well as a number of other projects.
Dr. Linda Kupfer joined FIC March 25 as an Evaluation Officer in the Division of Advanced Study and Policy Analysis.
She comes to FIC from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), where she worked for the past 13 years, the last five as Director of the marine biotechnology program in the National Sea Grant Office.
In this position, she led the development of a framework for scientific program evaluation and established procedures, including the development of criteria and benchmarks that have been implemented over the past four years.
At FIC, Dr. Kupfer will work on issues related to evaluation and review of current and future FIC programs.
Mr. Mark Pineda joined the FIC Division of International Relations (DIR) in April as the Program Officer for South Asia and Western Europe.
Prior to joining FIC, he was a program analyst in the Office of Policy Analysis, NIAID, where he worked on constituency outreach and congressional activities.
Ms. Lauren Sikes joined the FIC Office of Administrative Management in April as Senior Administrative Officer in support of Center-wide programs.
Prior to coming to FIC, she was the senior Administrative Officer for the Office of the Director, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research.
[bbluel.gif] FIC BUDGET
NIH FY 2003 Budget Request: The Presidents FY 2003 budget request for the NIH is $27.335 billion, an increase of $3.712 billion or 15.7 percent over the FY 2002 level of $23.623 billion.
Within this level, the budget request for the AIDS program is $2.770 billion, an increase of $255.0 million or 10.1 percent over the FY 2002 of $2.515 billion.
The budget request reflects the final year for the doubling of the NIH budget that began in FY 1998.
The budget request includes major increases for cancer research and bioterrorism-related research.
FIC FY 2003 Budget Request: The FY 2003 budget request for the FIC is $63.8 million, an increase of $6.5 million or 11.3 percent over the FY 2002 level of $57.3 million.
Within this level, the non-AIDS budget is $42.3 million, an increase of $3.3 million or 8.4 percent.
The AIDS budget is $21.5 million, an increase of $3.2 million or 17.4 percent.
The increase in the non-AIDS budget will permit the establishment of the following three new research initiatives: * Brain Disorders This initiative, still under development, is aimed at building research capacity in the field of brain disorders, with specific focus on cognitive development and identifying and implementing mental health interventions that are relevant in low-resource settings.
* Stigma Research Initiative This program will support the study of the causes of and response to stigmatization of public health problems in both the United States and abroad.
* Health, Environment and Economic Development This program will support research to more clearly elucidate the relationships between health, environment and economic development.
Congressional Hearings:
Dr. Kirschstein, Acting Director, NIH testified on behalf of the FY 2003 Presidents budget before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on March 13 and before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on March 21, accompanied by the NIH Institute/Center (IC) Directors.
Each IC Director submitted a written opening statement to the Subcommittees.
Dr. Keusch, with the Directors of the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine and the National Center for Minority Health and Health Disparities, participated in the Collaborations in Biomedical Research Theme hearing before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on April 9.
Questions posed to Dr. Keusch at the theme hearing were:
1) Have you studied the correlation between health and economic development in a specific nation;
2) Does FIC track global health threats to the United States and how does FIC report potential threats to the American public;
3) Does FIC get information from around the world;
4) What is the role of the World Health Organization;
5) What activities does the NIH have with Russia;
6) FIC has ongoing work in more than 90 nations.
Which countries are more advanced in their research endeavors; and
7) What has FIC learned from research in other countries that is being put to use in this country today?
[bbluel.gif] FIC PROGRAMS AND INITIATIVES
Extramural Programs - Overview
The period since the last Advisory Board meeting has seen continued and expanded activities under the FIC Extramural Program.
Their has been a strong response to recent FIC Requests for Applications (RFA), including the Tobacco Use and Control Research Training Program, the Global Health Research Initiative for Foreign Investigators (GRIP), Phase I of the International Clinical, Operational and Health Services Research and Training Award for AIDS and Tuberculosis (ICOHRTA-AIDS/TB), and the International Bioethics Education and Career Development Award.
In addition, FIC reissued the Program Announcement for the Fogarty International Research Collaboration Award (FIRCA) in a modular format in February and plans to do the same for the AIDS FIRCA in shortly.
A new RFA for the International Centers of Excellence in Research (ICER) Program, a collaborative effort between FIC and NIAID, was published in the NIH Guide to Grants and Contracts on May 3 and, finally, FIC expects to issue an RFA for a new Stigma research program and Phase II of the ICOHRTA-AIDS/TB in the near future.
Third Global Forum on Bioethics in Research
The Third Global Forum on Bioethics in Research, organized by the United Kingdom Medical Research Council, was held in Cape Town, South Africa February 21-23.
The forum, launched by FIC in FY 2000, makes it possible for representatives from the developing world to share ideas and provide input on important ethical issues related to international collaborative research sponsored by industrialized countries and undertaken in the developing world.
The Forum was supported by FIC, the Medical Research Councils of South Africa and the United Kingdom, the World Health Organization, and the Wellcome Trust.
Of the 110 delegates attending the meeting, two- thirds came from developing countries.
Half of the 40 countries represented at the meeting were African.
The Forum considered three main themes and issues: 1) whether current ethical guidelines constrain or promote access to drugs, devices or vaccines subsequent to a trial; 2) challenges in developing ethical guidelines and review processes in developing countries; and 3) the standard of care to be provided during trials.
Case studies were used to illustrate these issues and to focus discussion.
Case studies also prompted discussion on the use of traditional medicines in research, genomics and global health, and culture and informed consent.
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries Project (DCPP)
The Global Health Program of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has awarded $3,505,000.00 to NIH to reassess and update the 1993 World Bank publication Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries.
The update of this publication is part of the three-year Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries Project (DCPP), a partnership between the World Bank, WHO, and the NIH that aims to produce authoritative, science-based publications and other resource materials to informnational-level and global-level health policy directed to improving conditions in resource-poor countries.
The second edition of this publication will be based on extensive analytical work and consultations with scientific and technical experts and policy makers around the world.
FIC is the site of the DCPP Secretariat.
Consultation on Modeling of Smallpox
FIC hosted a consultation in May on modeling the impact and control of smallpox.
The consultation was focused on infectious disease models that were tuned to address smallpox.
This consultation was a follow-up to an earlier consultation last December to determine the potential utility of mathematical and computational modeling in preparing for and responding to emerging infectious diseases and bioterrorism events.
Multilateral Initiative on Malaria (MIM)
MIM convened the first international conference on Plasmodium vivax malaria research in February in Bangkok, Thailand.
The conference attracted more than 180 of the worlds leading Vivax malaria scientists representing 25 countries and was supported by the MIM and its partners, including the NIH, Roll Back Malaria at the WHO, The Wellcome Trust, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Institut Pasteur, USAID, Mahidol University (Bangkok, Thailand), the Ministry of Health of Thailand, the Asian Centre of International Parasite Control (ACIPAC), and the Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR).
Research gaps and opportunities were identified.
MIM staff is planning and organizing the Third MIM Pan-African Conference, which will be held in Arusha, Tanzania November 18-22.
More than 600 abstracts were received prior to the May 1 deadline.
The Conference Theme Coordinators will review these abstracts in late May, make selections for sponsorship and finalize the Conference program.
MIM has also released a call for applications for the next MIM Secretariat.
FIC has served as the Secretariat for the last two years.
When the MIM was initiated in 1997, it was agreed that the Secretariat would rotate among MIM partners at regular intervals in order to maintain the multilateral nature of MIM and to represent all MIM partners.
FICs tenure will come to an end after the MIM Pan-African Conference in Arusha, Tanzania in November 2002 and the decision regarding the Secretariats transfer to the next organization will be made by early summer.
Medicine and the Media
FIC is in the process of consulting with a number of international and domestic public health, journalism, and communications stakeholders, a process that may in the future lead to an RFA related to media coverage of international public health issues -- to promote accuracy of reporting and to explain the medicine and science behind the research performed in the developing world.
A meeting on medical journalism, organized by FICs AIDS International Training and Research Program (AITRP) grantees at Berkeley and held May 2-3 in Bethesda, focused on what subject matter should be fundamental to coverage of health issues, while at the same time allowing such a curriculum to be adjusted to take into account specific health priorities of particular countries.
The meeting discussed how best this might be done through workshops or fellowships and using the internet, using physicians and scientists in FIC training programs, developing mentoring systems between North and South, and pooling of information resources.
An FIC-sponsored consultation took place on May 6 at NIH to explore the idea of collaborations between schools of journalism and schools of public health (ideally on the same campus or the same city, especially in developing nations) for joint registration of courses, joint degrees, fellowships, exchanges of faculty, etc.
Other options to be considered include: * Training workshops and short- and long-term fellowships for developing country journalists in which physicians, health professionals and scientists would be involved in explaining the science behind major diseases and particular health conditions; * Building capacity at developing country medical journals, through training courses, exchanges, fellowships, and peer-review collaborations; and * Support for media training of health professionals to learn how to communicate clearly with the media and understand how the media works, through courses and workshops.
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB and Malaria (GFATM): Technical Review
On January 14, FIC hosted a Working Group on Technical Review for the GFATM.
The Working Group developed and forwarded to the Funds Governing Board for approval a set of recommendations on the operation of a Technical Review Panel (TRP) that will review applications submitted to the GFATM for funding and provide recommendations to the Governing Board.
In late February FIC, in cooperation with OAR, NIAID, NICHD, and NHLBI, recommended a list of nominees to serve on the TRP and forwarded them, through HHS, to the GFATM Secretariat for further consideration.
The first round of TRP reviews took place March 25-April 4 in Geneva.
The GFATM has received pledges of nearly $1.9 billion, including $500 million from the U.S. and recently announced its intention to fund 40 projects in 31 countries for a total commitment of about $600 million, contingent on satisfactory progress.
Humanitarian Demining
FIC hosted a seminar on humanitarian demining on March 8 to learn about the scope of injuries due to landmines and of U.S. Government and non-governmental organization efforts to address this problem.
The discussion is part of an exploration at FIC to consider trauma, burns, and injuries in the developing world.
Participants included representatives of the Office of Mine Action Initiative and Partnerships, the Department of State, the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, the Department of Education, the War Victims Fund, and the National Center for Medical Rehabilitation Research of NICHD.
[bbluel.gif] FIC NETWORK MEETINGS
FIC and NIH partners convened a network meeting on April 18 of grantees and trainees under the International Training and Research in Emerging Infectious Diseases Program and Actions for Building Capacity (ABC) in support of the NIAID ICIDR Program in order to share information on experiences and discuss common concerns.
[bbluel.gif] REGIONAL ACTIVITIES
Latin America and the Caribbean
Pan American Fellowship Program
The Office of Research Coordination of the Pan-American Health Organization (PAHO) has announced a new competition for the NIH-PAHO Pan-American Fellowship (PAF) Program, which brings post-doctoral trainees to NIH intramural laboratories.
The PAF encourages collaboration between NIH scientists and the scientific community in Latin American and the Caribbean in the biomedical and behavioral sciences.
The application deadline is June 30, 2002.
On April 22, the Brazilian Minister for Science and Technology announced Brazils intention to take part in the PAF during his visit to NIH.
NIH-Caribbean Research Cooperation Workshop on HIV/AIDS
FIC, in partnership with the NIH Office of AIDS Research, the NIMH, NIAID, NIDA and NICHD, organized an NIH-Caribbean Research Cooperation Workshop on HIV/AIDS held April 3-5 in San Juan, Puerto Rico.
The goal of the workshop was to provide an effective forum for discussion and for the establishment of collaborative projects.
Working groups focused on developing collaborative pre-proposals in areas such as mother-to-child transmission, risk behaviors, behavioral interventions, stigma research, drug abuse, and HIV/AIDS care and management research.
The workshop also promoted the sharing of information related to opportunities for cooperation in international training and research and financial resources for HIV/AIDS available through various NIH ICs and other Federal agencies such as the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and organizations such as PAHO, the Latin American and Caribbean Council of AIDS Services, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, the Global Strategies for HIV Prevention, and the Community Network for Clinical Research on AIDS.
[bbluel.gif] ACTIVITIES OF FIC STAFF MEMBERS
Dr. Gerald Keusch participated as a panelist in a symposium entitled The Efficacy of Physical Sciences in Developing Countries at the American Association for the Advancement of Science annual meeting February 16-17 in Boston.
Dr. Keusch attended the Third Global Forum on Bioethics Research February 21-23 in Capetown, South Africa.
Dr. Keusch, Dr. Hrynkow, and Dr. Kirschstein met with a delegation from the French Institute of Health and Medical Reearch (INSERM), headed by Director General Dr. Christian Bréchot, March 4 at NIH to discuss the MIM, bioethics and mobility of researchers.
Dr. Keusch gave a presentation on NIH activities and trends in the field of neglected diseases at the "Crises of Neglected Diseases" conference March 12-14 in New York, NY.
This conference was sponsored by Doctors Without Borders and the Drugs for Neglected Diseases Working Group.
Dr. Keusch gave a talk on International Health Needs and Opportunities at the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine on March 29.
Dr. Keusch gave two talks at the University of Puerto Rico School of Medicine, April 17-19: The Baily K. Ashford Memorial Lecture on "Why Global Health Matters" and a research conference on "Epidemiology, Mechanisms and Clinical Manifestations of E. coli 0157:H7."
Dr. Keusch spoke at the Experimental Biology 2002 Symposium, Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology and the American Society for Nutritional Studies, on "Nutrition and Infection, Prologue and Progress since 1968" April 23 in New Orleans.
Dr. Keusch represented NIH at the US-China Joint Commission on Science and Technology April 25-26 in Beijing, China as part of a delegation led by Dr. John Marburger, the Presidents Science Advisor.
Dr. Keusch led the discussion on joint activities in the life sciences.
Dr. Keusch attended a meeting of the Center for Management of Intellectual Property in Health and R
The meeting focused on how MIHR can best support efforts in intellectual property management.
Dr. Keusch spoke about NIH activities with China as part of a panel entitled "Health Care for Chinese and Americans" May 15 at the Tufts University Medical Center.
Members of the panel conferred on the present status of health care in the U.S. and China and discussed research and training collaboration opportunities.
Dr. Keusch and Dr. Sharon Hrynkow attended the Social Science Research Council meeting to discuss integrative training and research in health and the social sciences, May 16 in New York.
Dr. Martin Alilio attended the Academy of Educational Awards Forty Year Anniversary Symposia Series: Investing in Health for Economic Development April 15 in Washington D.C.
Dr Alilio and Dr. Andrea Egan met with Dr. Peter Lange, Minister of Research Education of the German Ministry of Education and Science (BMBF), on February 6 to discuss areas of mutual interest and potential cooperation.
The BMBF has recently joined the MIM as a partner and will support the Arusha Conference to be held in November 2002.
Ms. Nalini Anand participated in a workshop entitled Traditional Knowledge, Intellectual Property, and Indigenous Culture on February 21-22 in New York City.
Ms. Anand attended the annual meeting of the Association of University Technology Managers February 28-March 1 in San Diego.
Ms. Anand participated in a workshop entitled The Crisis of Neglected Diseases: Developing Treatments and Ensuring Access, organized by Medecins sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders), March 12-13 in New York.
Dr. Kenneth Bridbord and Dr. Jeanne McDermott represented FIC at the HIV Preventions Trials Network (HPTN) meeting, February 20-22 in Washington, D.C.
Dr. Bridbord attended a meeting on the occasion of AIDS Science Day April 12 at Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
Dr. Bridbord gave a presentation on FIC programs at the HIV Vaccine Trials Network Full Group meeting May 8 in Alexandria, Virginia.
Dr. Andrea Egan attended the Annual Meeting of MIM/TDR, March 11-14 in Kampala, Uganda to observe the review of applications for MIM/TDR research grants.
Dr. Egan took part in the Conference Theme Coordinators Meeting and Conference Center site visit for the Third MIM Pan-African Conference, May 20-24 in Arusha, Tanzania.
Dr. Pierce Gardner attended the 10th International Congress on Infectious Diseases March 11-15 in Singapore, where he chaired an FIC-sponsored seminar, "The Global Extension of Care for Persons with HIV/AIDS.
Dr. Gardner represented the FIC at the Research America awards dinner at the Academy of Science, March 19 in Washington, D.C.
Dr. Gardner represented FIC at the Forum on Emerging Infections at the Institute of Medicine on April 16-17, and gave a presentation on "New Directions in Capacity Building.
Mr. George Herrfurth took part in an interagency meeting convened jointly by the State Department and the DHHS to discuss the outcomes of the meeting of a U.N. Ad Hoc Committee on an International Convention against the Reproductive Cloning of Human Beings, March 14 in Washington, D.C.
Mr. Herrfurth made a presentation on NIH and Fogarty Center programs to a class of Foreign Service Nationals from the Department of State on May 16 at the Stone House.
Dr. Karen Hofman attended a WHO meeting on Collaboration in Medical Genetics in anticipation of the WHO ACHR Report on Genomics and World Health April 8-9 in Toronto.
Dr. Hofman attended a conference on Road Traffic Injuries and Health Equity April 10 at the Harvard Center for Population and Development Studies.
Dr. Sharon Hrynkow and Dr. Ruth Kirschstein met with the Director of the Swedish Medical Research Council to discuss stem cell research and other priority topics February 12 at NIH.
Dr. Hrynkow, Dr. Bridbord and Ms. Minerva Rojo met with a delegation of Chinese officials to discuss potential areas for increased cooperation between NIH and China on HIV/AIDS.
Dr. Hrynkow convened a FIC/NIH meeting on human demining as part of initial exploration of broad issues of trauma injuries and burns in the developing world.
March 8 at NIH.
Dr. Hrynkow represented NIH at the 44^th meeting of the European Medical Research Councils (EMRC) held in Strasbourg, France in late April.
She gave a presentation to the Standing Committee on NIHs implementation strategy on stem cells.
Prior to the EMRC meeting, she met with officials at INSERM to discuss the MIM and other issues of common interest.
Dr. Hrynkow gave a presentation on Going Home: Opportunities for Post-Docs at the 2^nd Annual Post-Doc Conference convened by the AAAS, April 20 in Washington.
Dr. Hrynkow and Dr. Allen Holt represented NIH at an interagency meeting convened by the State Department to discuss preparations for the upcoming U.S.
China S
The Department of State and the Office of Science and Technology Policy agreed with their Chinese counterparts to hold the next Joint S
Dr. Hrynkow, Ms. Minnie Rojo and Dr. Luis Salicrup met with the Brazilian minister of Science and Technology and the Directors of several Brazilian Research agencies to identify areas of enhanced collaborative effort.
Dr. Hrynkow gave a presentation on NIH International Activities and Trends to a group of European visitors sponsored by the Scientific Research Administrators Society, May 9 in Washington.
Dr. Hrynkow convened the standing committee of IC International Representatives May 14 at NIH, at which Dr. Dean Jamison made a presentation on the DCPP Project.
Dr. Dean Jamison participated in a meeting of editors of Disease Control Priorities (DCPP) February 15 at NIH and in Geneva, Switzerland April 25-26.
Dr. Jamison met with the President-elect of the Institute of Medicine on matters related to the future of the IOM Board on Global Health March 11 in Stanford, California.
Dr. Jamison participated in the DCPP Consultation on Cardiovascular Disease March 24 in Lausanne, Switzerland.
Dr. Jamison met with Senior WHO staff in Geneva on March 25 and again on April 24 to discuss terms-of-reference for an IOM/DCPP assessment of financing options for antimalarial drug combinations.
Dr. Jamison participated in an IOM meeting to plan future IOM work on dealing with disparities in health March 27 in Washington.
Dr. Jamison participated in a DCPP consultation on Child Health and Nutrition May 2-3 in Annapolis.
Dr. Jamison gave a seminar on Slow Discounting at Resources for the Future May 10 in Washington, D.C.
Dr. James Lavery presented a paper entitled, "Individual Benefits vs. Value to the Community: A Critique of 10 USC 980" at the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, MD on January 30th.
Dr. Lavery attended the CIOMS International Conference On Revision of the 1993 International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects February 27 - Mar 1 in Geneva.
Mr. Michael McDowell attended and supported the May 2-3 meeting on medical journalism that was organized by FIC AITRP grantees at Berkeley.
Mr. McDowell organized and participated in the FIC-sponsored Consultation on Media and International Public Health May 6 in Bethesda.
Dr. Ellis McKenzie participated in a meeting on Mathematical Models of Influenza, February 3-4 in Princeton, New Jersey.
Dr. McKenzie participated in a National Intelligence Council Meeting on Modeling Bioterrorism Events March 12-13 in McLean, Virginia.
Dr. McKenzie participated in the DIMACS Working Group on Mathematical Science Methods for the Study of Deliberate Releases of Biological Agents and their Consequences March 22-23 in Piscattaway, New Jersey.
Dr. McKenzie organized and took part in a Consultation on Smallpox Models April 30- May1 at NIH.
Dr. McKenzie participated in a meeting on Mathematical Modeling of Malaria May 9 at Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health
Dr. Mark Miller took part in a workshop on Economic Evaluation of Alternative Devices for Delivery of Vaccines February 21-24 in Cuernavaca, Mexico.
Dr. Miller attended the International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases March 24-27 in Atlanta.
Dr. Miller took part in the Global Health Forum on Post-Eradication Polio Immunization Policy held April 1-5 in Geneva, Switzerland.
Dr. Miller attended the International AIDS Vaccine Initiative Meeting April 22 in New York.
Dr. Miller took part in the DCP 2 Consultation on Childhood Diseases and Nutrition May 2-3 in Annapolis.
Dr. Miller attended the Fifth Annual Conference on Vaccine Research, May 6 in Baltimore.
Dr. Rachel Nugent represented NIH at the Health and Environment Ministers of the Americas meeting in Ottawa, Canada, March 4-5.
The objective was to provide technical input on health and environment linkages to DHHS and EPA officials who were negotiating an agreement across the countries of the Americas.
Dr. Nugent participated in a workshop on "Science and the Media," organized by the Inter-academy Panel of Science Academies Globally and SciDev.net in February to explore needs and methods for improving communication between scientists and journalists in developing countries.
Mr. Mark Pineda represented FIC/NIH at a roundtable discussion with the Science and Technology Minister of Pakistan sponsored by the State Department to discuss the Ministers plans for expanding S
Dr. Aron Primack gave a presentation on Training Opportunities for Ethnic Minorities in the International Arena at the National Meeting of the Historically Black Colleges and Universities March 26 in Baltimore.
Dr. Primack gave a presentation at the American Association for Cancer Research on Funding Opportunities for International Research in Cancer, April 9 in San Francisco.
Dr. Primack represented FIC at the US-Japan Tobacco Conference February 25-26.
Dr. Primack represented FIC at the Rockefeller Foundation meeting on Tobacco Control as a Global Priority April 22 in New York City.
Dr. Luis A. Salicrup represented FIC at a meeting on HIV/AIDS and Development: Challenges and Responses in Latin America and the Caribbean and Science and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, conducted during the annual meeting of the Board of Governors of the Inter American Development Bank (IADB) in Fortaleza, Brazil, March 7-9.
Dr. Barbara Sina attended an interagency meeting on anti-malarial drug development at Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, April 16 in Washington, D.C..
Ms. Natalie Tomitch participated in a roundtable discussion with NIH visiting scientists from Bulgaria and the Sofia-based Sts. Cyril and Methodius Foundation to explore the development of closer collaboration between Bulgarian scientists and universities and the NIH.
Ms. Tomitch coordinated the NIH review of joint workshop and research project proposals in the life sciences, as part of the U.S.-Hungary and U.S.-Slovakia Joint Funds' final competitions.
The State Department sets aside funds for this competition as a means to stimulate bilateral cooperation.
Ms. Tomitch represented NIH at an initial planning meeting convened by the DHHS Office of Global Affairs to discuss preparations for the upcoming U.S.-Russia Health Committee Meeting, scheduled for late July.
The planning meeting was held March 27 in Washington, D.C.
Ms. Tomitch made a presentation on NIH opportunities for NIDA-supported INVEST and Hubert H. Humphrey fellows from 15 different nations March 1 in Washington, D.C.
Return to Minutes of the May 21, 2002 Advisory Board Meeting
top __________________________________________________________________
We welcome your questions and comments about FIC and its research programs.
Please send e-mail inquiries to the Office of Communications.
Telephone: 301-496-2075 Fax: 301-594-1211.
__________________________________________________________________
Office of Communications o Fogarty International Center o National Institutes of Health Building 31, Room B2C29 o 31 CENTER DR MSC 2220 Bethesda, MD 20892-2220
News, Events and Information International Services Programs and Initiatives Regional Activities
