#BuyUSA.gov Home Korea - Home Table of Contents Search! U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Administration Export.gov: The U.S. Government Export Portal BuyUSA: The U.S. Commercial Service E-Marketplace
* Contact Us * Site Map __________________________________________________________________
BUYUSA.GOV -- U.S. Commercial Service
Korea
Investment Climate Statement
* Openness To Foreign Investment + List of Restricted Sectors for Foreign Investment (as of March 14, 2001) * Right to Private Ownership and Establishment * Protection of Physical and Intellectual Property Rights * Taxation Issues Affecting U.S. Business * Performance Requirements/Incentives * Transparency of the Regulatory System * Corruption * Labor * Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment * Conversion and Transfer Policies * Expropriation and Compensation * Dispute Settlement * Political Violence (as it may affect investments) * Bilateral Investment Agreements * OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs * Capital Outflow Policy * Foreign Direct Investment Statistics + Partial list of major U.S. inverstors in Korea * Host and Country Contact Information for Investment-Related Inquires
Since the 1997-98 financial crisis, the ROKG has undertaken numerous measures to reforms its regulations on foreign investment.
Its most prominent accomplishments since 1998 are that foreigners can own land and real property; the ROKG and most of the Korean public now see foreign investment as a positive for Korea, rather than a negative; and the ROKG has sold many large, high-profile companies to foreign investors, such as Hanbo Steel to AK Capital in 2003, Daewoo Motor to General Motors (GM) in 2002, and Korea First Bank to Newbridge Capital in 2000, to name just a few.
All that has helped to make the Korean economy shed its long-standing reputation as a difficult environment for foreign capital and to become more attractive to investors.
Through 2002, the United States had the largest share of foreign direct investment in Korea with USD 26.7 billion or about 31% of Koreas total stock of FDI. Europe is the second-largest investor with USD 24.9 billion (29% of the total) followed by Japan with USD 12.9 billion (15%).
Overall FDI has declined 48.4% in Q1 2003 after jumping 39.2% year-on-year in Q1 2002.
The drop in FDI can be attributed to the increasing difficulties in attracting new investments.
In the wake of the financial crisis, foreign firms had eagerly invested in Korea and acquired a number of struggling corporations.
As a result, the number of valuable firms available for purchase has decreased.
However, the ROKG plans to continue to sell off to foreign investors a number of firms that it had acquired after the crisis.
The still-dominant position of Korean conglomerates -- the chaebol -- in the domestic economy continues to represent a significant problem for foreign competitors.
For instance, the chaebol purchase from "family" suppliers whenever possible.
The ROKG has initiated a program of corporate restructuring which aims to make the business activities of Korean companies, including the chaebol, more transparent and more accountable to share holders.
Those measures, combined with market realities, have encouraged the chaebols to sell off some of their constituent companies and have weakened chaebol dominance in the economy at large.
For example, serious financial troubles have led to the demise of the Daewoo and the splintering of Hyundai, Koreas two most powerful chaebol until several years ago, and the disappearance of twelve of Koreas top-30 chaebol prior to 1998.
However, the recent decision by the SK chaebol to bail out troubled SK Global over the strong opposition of SKs minority shareholders again showed the tenacity of the chaebol system, and the possible neglect of shareholder interests.
Openness To Foreign Investment
The new Foreign Investment Promotion Act (FIPA) went into effect on November 17, 1998, replacing the former 1966 Foreign Capital Inducement Act (FCIA).
Like the FCIA before it, the FIPA (and related regulations) categorizes business activities as either open, conditionally or partly restricted, or closed to foreign investment.
The FIPA considerably reduced the number of restricted sectors, although restrictions remain on 29 industrial sectors, two of which are entirely closed to foreign investment.
(Please see accompanying chart.)
In contrast, 120 categories were restricted in 1996.
Two completely closed sectors (inshore fishing and coastal fishing) were moved from the completely closed to partly closed in 2001.
The ROKG reviews restricted sectors from time to time for possible further openings.
According to the Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and Energy (MOCIE), the number of industrial sectors open to foreign investors is well above the OECD average.
Further opening could be accomplished in the context of a U.S.-Korea Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT), negotiations for which began in July, 1998.
The major points of the 1998 FIPA are as follows: - Simplified procedures, including those for FDI notification and registration; - Expanded tax incentives for high-technology FDI; - Reduced rental fees and lengthened lease durations for government land (including local governments); - Increased central government support of local FDI incentives; - Establishment of a one-stop Investment Promotion Center (IPC) within the Korea Trade Promotion Corporation to assist foreign investors in dealing with the bureaucracy; - Establishment of an ombudsman office within the IPC to assist foreign investors.
List of Restricted Sectors for Foreign Investment (as of March 14, 2001)
(Figures in parentheses denote Korean Industrial Classification Code)
A. Completely closed 1.
Radio broadcasting (92131) 2.
Television broadcasting (92132) B. Restricted sectors (partly closed) 1.
Growing of cereal crops and other crops for food (01110) 2.
Farming of beef cattle (01212) 3.
Inshore fishing (05112) 4.
Coastal fishing (05113) 5.
Publishing of newspapers (22121) 6.
Publishing of magazines and periodicals (22122) 7.
Processing of nuclear fuel (23300) 8.
Electric power generation (40110) 9.
Transmission of Electricity (40121) 10.
Distribution and Sale of Electricity (40122) 11.
Wholesale of meat (51312) 12.
Coastal water passenger transport (61121) 13.
Coastal water freight transport (61122) 14.
Scheduled air transport (62100) 15.
Non-scheduled air transport (62200) 16.
Leased line services (64211) 17.
Wired telephone and other telecommunications (64219) 18.
Mobile telephone services (64221) 19.
Cellular telephone services (64229) 20.
Other telecommunications (64299) 21.
Domestic commercial banking (65121) 22.
Investment trust companies (65931) 23.
Program providing (87221) 24.
Cable broadcasting (87222) 25.
Satellite broadcasting (87223) 26.
News agency activities (88100) 27.
Radioactive waste disposal (90230)
In sector categories open to investment, foreign exchange banks (all banks are permitted to deal in foreign exchange, including branches of foreign banks) must be notified in advance of applications for foreign investment.
In effect, these notifications are pro-forma, and approval can be processed within three hours.
Applications may be denied only on specific grounds, including national security, public order and morals, international security obligations, and health and environmental concerns, but it is rare for these grounds to be invoked.
Exceptions to the advance notification approval system exist for project categories subject to joint-venture requirements and certain projects in the distribution sector.
The relevant ministry or ministries still must approve investments in conditionally or partly restricted sectors.
Most applications are processed within five days; cases which require consultation with more than one ministry can take up to 25 days or longer.
The Fair Trade Commission no longer reviews large foreign investments, and the Ministry of Environment no longer conducts prior reviews of environmentally sensitive projects.
The ROKGs procurement law no longer favors domestic suppliers over foreigners, but some implementation problems remain.
Korea changed its procurement law effective January 1, 1997, to comply with its accession to the WTO's Government Procurement Agreement.
In addition, under the proposed BIT, U.S. investors would be treated as favorably as Korean nationals (that is, they would receive national treatment) from the pre-establishment stage of investment.
Restrictions on foreign ownership of public corporations remain, though ownership limits have increased.
Currently, foreign ownership is limited for Korea Electric Power Corp.
(KEPCO 49%), Korea Telecom (49%), and Korean Gas (30%).
Foreign ownership in Korean telecommunications companies (such as KT Telecom, Dacom, SK Telecom) is limited to 49%.
The Korean government plans to privatize many state-owned corporations.
The Korea Heavy Industrial Corp. was privatized in 2000.
Korea Telecom and Korea Tobacco and Ginseng Corp. were fully privatized in 2002.
The Ministry of Finance and Economy (MOFE) administers tax and other incentives to stimulate advanced technology transfer and investment in high-technology services.
Effective December 5, 1998 and expanded on January 14, 2002,foreign investments in 578 categories of high technology, including services, are eligible for an increased range of tax reductions and other incentives.
In addition, the scope of incentives was broadened to include tax waivers, including taxes on corporate profits and dividends for seven years after the foreign-invested project first realizes profits, and a 50% tax reduction for a further three years.
On top of that, local taxes, such as acquisition tax, registration tax, property tax, and aggregate land tax are exempted for the first five years and cut by 50% for the next three years.
Local tax reductions can be extended to 15 years by the legislature of the local government.
The most prominent of the ROKGs programs to encourage research and development (R
As the HAN projects are winding down this year, the ROKG has introduced a new USD 3.5 billion initiative -- the 21st Century Frontier R
Focusing on information technology, biotechnology, nanotechnology and new materials, the ROKG will launch development programs in 20 new strategic areas by the end of 2002.
Much ROKG-funded R
The Korean publics formerly negative attitude toward foreign investment has improved considerably in recent years and senior levels of the ROKG continually stress the importance of foreign investment for Koreas future.
The January 2000 sale of Korea First Bank which had been Koreas largest commercial bank to U.S.-based Newbridge Capital, was a watershed event.
Korea First Bank is the first and so far only Korean bank majority-owned by foreign investors.
No significant NGOs oppose foreign investment.
In fact, public opinion grew steadily more favorable during the 1990s, though vested interests and pockets of protectionist sentiment remain.
General Motors Corp., Daewoo Motor, and Daewoo creditors on October 16, 2002 signed a final agreement to establish a new auto manufacturing company, with GM and its business partners agreeing to pay USD 400 million in cash for a 67% stake in the new entity.
A variety of barriers to the importation of automobiles has limited the best U.S., European and Japanese exporters to a small share (1.1%) of Korea's booming 1.3 million-unit domestic passenger car market.
The imbalance between exports and imports is quite pronounced.
In 2002, Korea sold more cars in one day in the U.S. market than U.S. manufacturers sold in Korea during the entire year.
In fact, in 2002, Korea exported more than one million vehicles to the United States and Europe while all foreign manufacturers sold only 16,200 vehicles in Korea.
The United States and Korea signed a Memorandum of Understanding in 1998 to try to improve market access for foreign autos in Korea.
Since then, a series of steps have been taken that have improved market conditions; however, meaningful market access remains elusive.
Right to Private Ownership and Establishment
Korea fully recognizes rights of private ownership and has a well-developed body of laws governing the establishment of corporate and other business enterprises.
Private entities may freely acquire and dispose of assets; however, the Fair Trade Act may limit cross-ownership of shares in two or more firms if the effect is to restrict competition in a particular industry.
In a significant step, Korea liberalized its property ownership law in 1998.
The Alien Land Acquisition Act (as amended) grants even non-resident foreigners and foreign corporations the same rights as Koreans in purchasing and using land.
Portfolio investment in real estate is now permitted as well.
In fact, since the liberalization of real estate regulations in June 1998 through the end of February 2003, foreign entities had cumulatively purchased 2.52 million square meters of land in the Seoul area.
Almost no restrictions remain on foreign ownership of local shares.
As of 2000, Korean law permits foreign direct investment through mergers and acquisitions with existing domestic firms, including hostile takeovers.
Nonetheless, no hostile takeovers have occurred because of a lack of implementing regulations for the new law.
The prohibition on cross-ownership between companies was repealed on April 1, 1998.
Protection of Physical and Intellectual Property Rights
Korea could maintain its Watch List status under the 2003 Special 301 Decision.
However as a result of the incomplete implementation of several key April 2002 commitments that Korea made and the emergence of new IP issues in telecommunication standards and film title registration, USTR will conduct an Out of Cycle Review and decide again in the Fall 2003 whether Korea should be maintained on the Watch List or moved to Priority Watch List.
The ROKG strengthened IPR enforcement actions over the past year.
A total of 41,742 cases of IPR infringements were reported in 2002, which was up 14% over 2001.
Despite the ROKGs strengthened efforts, IPR enforcement continues to be an issue of concern particularly on transparency and sustainability.
More data is needed concerning the ROKGs enforcement efforts and deterrent penalties in order to fully evaluate the enforcement activities and to allow right holders to have the opportunity to take action against infringers.
In 2002, a Special Investigation Team (SIT) of the Ministry of Information and Communication (MOIC) was established to conduct inspections for software piracy.
The legislation to grant the SIT full policy powers to allow the team to conduct effective enforcement raids on its own was submitted to the National Assembly in November 2002.
As of June 2003 the bill is still being considered by the National Assembly Justice Committee.
The SIT enforcement continues to be an issue of concern particularly, transparency of the enforcement process.
The United States will continue to monitor the implementation even after police powers are approved.
In December 2002, the CPPA amendment bill was passed by the National Assembly with an effective date of July 1, 2003.
The amendment added transmission rights, a key element to protect right holders in the digital age.
The amendment also includes that online service providers should immediately stop the infringing activity upon request of the copyright owner.
Its implementation regulations are under process and U.S. government and industry provided comments asking to further strengthen further the notice and takedown procedure of on-line service providers.
In July 2000 and again in December 2001, the Government of Korea drafted revisions to the Copyright Act and this legislation was sent to the National Assembly in April 2002.
The amendments were finally passed by the National Assembly in April 2003.
Although previous versions of draft addressed the U.S. concerns about exceptions relating to reproduction in libraries, the U.S. is concerned about changes made before final passage of the amendment that introduced a statutory licensing system for reproduction in analog form (print out) of digital books and for transmission among libraries for reading purposes.
U.S. Government has also asked the ROKG to draft and submit legislation to the National Assembly that establishes the exclusive right of transmission for sound recordings, including both the full right of making available and the full right of communication to the public and seeks its enactment by the end of 2003.
In addition, the U.S. has urged Korea to delete the reciprocity provision relating to database protection in the Copyright Act as it discourages the introduction of databases fro other countries without such legislation.
The lack of full retroactive protection for pre-existing copyrighted works remains a concern.
Both for the CA and the CPPA, the U.S. has urged Korea to make additional amendments to clarify that the copyright owner has the exclusive right to make copies, temporary or permanent of a work or phonogram.
Additional areas where further improvement is needed are provisions on technical protection measures (TPMs) and restriction on circumvention of those measures in both the CA and the CPPA, with logical exceptions and limitations.
Also, the article providing limitations on the copyright liability of on-line service providers needs to be clarified.
The United States also remains concerned with respect to the availability of injunctive and ex-parte relief in civil enforcement actions, as required under the TRIPS agreement.
In 2002, a new concern emerged in the Korean film and video-rating system that allows foreign moves to be fraudulently registered in Korea.
Although an interim solution has been agreed upon, it is burdensome to the right holders.
A permanent solution needs to be sought through an amendment to the law to stop film piracy without placing undue burdens on legitimate rights holders to prove their rightful ownership.
Thanks to the efforts of the Korean government, the IP issues regarding the WIPI (wireless internet platform) were resolved in April 2003.
The USG will monitor the situation to ensure the agreement is implemented fully.
Korean patent law is fairly comprehensive, offering protection to most products and technologies.
Over the past year, changes to the Patent Act strengthened and streamlined the application process.
In 2002, Laws was amended to streamline the procedures for foreign PCT (Patent Cooperation Treaty) members.
From March 2003, the time limits for entering into the national phase of PCT international applications in Korea will be extended to 30 months after the priority date regardless of any international preliminary examination.
The revisions also gave the KIPO (Korean Industrial Property Office) more power to protect technologies exchanged through the Internet.
Despite such progress, U.S. industry still believes that deficiencies remain in the interpretation of claims and in the treatment of dominant and subservient patents.
As a result, KIPO has amended various Korean laws to address U.S. concerns on restrictions on patent term extension for certain pharmaceutical, agrochemical and animal health products, which are subject to lengthy clinical trials and domestic testing requirements.
But problems remain, including the lack of coordination between Korean health and safety and intellectual property officials.
This lack of coordination results in the granting of marketing approval for products that may infringe existing patents.
However, in March 2002, Korea agreed to provide full protection against unfair commercial use of test data submitted for marketing approval, as required by Article 39.3 of the TRIPS Agreement.
The Madrid Protocol, an international trademark application system, entered into force in Korea on April 10, 2003.
In preparation for membership, the Trademark Act was changed to bring the country into compliance with the Madrid Protocol and Trademark Law Treaty.
The Madrid system streamlines international application procedures for trademarks and service marks and enables trademarks registered in the contracting countries to be managed collectively by the International Register.
Applicants can now apply for international trademarks with more convenient procedure and lower expenses.
A single trademark application submitted to KIPO in English can be filed designating one or more countries that adopted the Madrid Protocol.
The Trademark Act, which was amended in March 1998, contains provisions for prohibiting the registration of trademarks without the authorization of foreign trademark holders by allowing examiners to reject registrations made in bad faith.
Despite this change, the burdensome legal procedures that U.S. companies must pursue in order to seek cancellation proceedings reportedly act as a barrier to effective enforcement by discouraging U.S. companies from pursuing legal remedies.
As such, problems still arise with respect to Sleeper trademark registrations.
(Sleepers are marks filed and registered by Korean entities without authorization in the late 1980s and early 1990s, when KIPO was still developing a more effective and accurate trademark examination and screening process) These are registrations that although infringing of the rights of legitimate trademark owners are not challenged and removed.
On a more positive note, a domain name dispute resolution committee was created in 2002 to arbitrate such disputes (without using courts).
Refer to the following website (www.ddrc.or.kr) for details.
The U.S. government has recommended that Korea include foreign participants on this committee.
Also in 2002, Ministry of Information and Communication prepared draft legislation for the Internet Address Space Management Act that gives more legal ground to a domain name dispute resolution committee and prohibits cyber-squatting.
The U.S. government continues to urge Korean government to increase their efforts toward halting the trade in counterfeit goods.
To enhance border enforcement against exports of counterfeit goods, the Korean Customs Service has upgraded its computer system.
Textile designs were afforded copyright protection (in addition to protection under Korean design law) through a July 2000 revision to the Copyright Act.
However protection remains problematic largely because of the lack of enforcement and some Korean companies allegedly pirate U.S.-copyrighted textile designs and export them to third countries.
Korean laws on unfair competition and trade secrets provide some trade-secret protection in Korea but these laws remain lacking.
For example, some U.S. firms face continuing problems with government regulations requiring submission of very detailed product information (i.e. formula or blueprints) as part of registration or certification procedures.
U.S. firms report that, although the release of confidential business information is forbidden by Korean law, government officials have not sufficiently protected submitted information and in some cases, proprietary information has been made available to Korean competitors or to their trade associations.
To its credit, the Korea Food 
Taxation Issues Affecting U.S. Business
There is a tax treaty in force between the United States and Korea.
Negotiations have begun between the two nations on a revised treaty.
The American Chamber of Commerce in Korea has identified the principal tax issues affecting U.S. companies as follows: the need for comprehensive revision of Koreas Corporation Tax Law to foster greater certainty in business planning and economic efficiency; the lack of a tax regime for non-corporate entities such as partnerships and trust; inadequate coordination between national and local taxes; inflexibility of Koreas tax penalty system and short time limits on the filing of amended tax returns; the tax treatment of stock options; donation expense rules; misclassification of some sales-related expenses as entertainment expenses; and increased tax burden on dependent tuition expenses for expatriate employees.
Performance Requirements/Incentives
Korea ceased imposing performance requirements on new foreign investment in July 1989 and eliminated all preexisting performance requirements in December 1992.
Transparency of the Regulatory System
The Korean regulatory environment is difficult for domestic firms to work in and poses an even greater challenge to foreign firms.
Laws and regulations are framed in general terms and are subject to differing interpretations by government officials, who rotate frequently.
The regulatory process is not transparent and frequent informal discussions with the bureaucracy are necessary.
Mid-level bureaucrats rely on unpublished ministerial guidelines and unwritten administrative advice for direction.
Korea has an Administrative Procedures Act and proposed rules (Act, Presidential Decree and Ministerial Decree) should be published and public comments solicited for 20 days prior to promulgation.
Draft bills are often available on the web sites of relevant ministries.
Nonetheless, the rule-making process continues to be opaque and non-transparent, particularly for foreigners.
Most notifications of proposed rules, including those in the government gazette, are only in the Korean language.
Proposed rules are still not always published prior to promulgation, or are published with insufficient time to permit public comment and industry adjustment.
For example, regulatory changes originating from legislation proposed by members of Koreas National Assembly are not subject to public comment periods.
After promulgation, rules can be applied retroactively and arbitrarily.
President Kim Dae-jung has made deregulation one of the cornerstones of his economic policy.
The ROKG has made a major effort to cut back on the number of regulations in force, but deregulation has so far taken a back seat to more critical economic and financial system restructuring.
The regulatory picture is mixed depending on the ministry or agency.
Some have made unprecedented outreach efforts to foreign business.
Complaints about regulatory impediments vary by business sector.
The practical effect of Koreas laws regulating monopolistic practices and unfair competition is limited by the long-standing economic dominance of a few large business conglomerates, referred to locally as "chaebol."
The Anti-Monopoly and Fair Trade Act has been repeatedly changed -- most recently in December 1999 -- to address the issue of unwieldy chaebol growth.
In this latest revision, the ROKG re-instituted restrictions on chaebol cross ownership, including the planned March 2001 implementation of a ceiling -- equal to 25% of a chaebols net assets -- on chaebol investments in affiliated firms.
(These restrictions do not apply, however, to chaebol investments in foreign invested companies for five years.)
In May 2001, the Korean government decided to delay implementation of this ceiling until March 2003 in response to complaints that it would thwart legitimate business opportunity.
New intra-group payment guarantees had been prohibited for the top 30 chaebol since April 1998.
Moreover, the top 30 chaebol committed to eliminating all pre-existing intra-group payment guarantees by March 31, 2001.
The top four chaebol have eliminated almost all cross-guarantees (up to 97.6% of total 1.5 trillion won as of March 31, 2001.)
Chaebol domination of the Korean economy causes some practical business problems for foreign investors.
Small-and medium suppliers, for example, may be reluctant to deal with foreign firms for fear of jeopardizing a prized chaebol relationship.
Distribution channels may be blocked by chaebol competitors who own or dominate distribution channels, although such practices are declining as result of the Fair Trade Commission's (FTC) intervention and consumer advocate activities.
Obtaining access to credit may be complicated by the privileged relationships competing chaebol enjoy with local banks, though regulations limit a banks exposure to any single chaebol group to 25% of capital and stipulate that 35% of lending must go to small and medium enterprises.
Corruption
Koreas historic style of governance -- lack of transparency in the formation of laws and regulations, inadequate institutional checks and balances, and a societal structure heavily based on personal relationships -- has provided ample opportunities for corruption and influence peddling.
The Kim Young-sam administration (1993-1998) resolved to break with this tradition and began a momentous reform process by requiring all bank accounts to carry real names by the end of 1993.
This basic change had a profound impact in an economy where illegal wealth traditionally was hidden through the use of multiple bank accounts established under fictitious names.
Yet, the original conditions that contributed to corruption -- principally the lack of transparency in government actions and close relationships between the government, the banks, and the chaebol -- continue to receive more lip service than critical attention.
The ROKG has taken important steps forward, including public hearings held by ministries to solicit popular views on proposed changes in regulations and laws, but much remains to be done.
The Kim Dae-jung administration (1998-2003) committed itself from the beginning to a more open and transparent system of government but was distracted by numerous scandals involving the friends and family of President Kim.
Kim's early eagerness to rid Korea of corruption is now derided by most Koreans as opportunistic hypocrisy.
Nevertheless, Korea continues to make progress against corruption, and the government hopes that its hosting of the third Global Forum on Fighting Corruption in 2003 reinvigorated anti-corruption efforts and project a positive image of Korean "cleanness" overseas.
Bribing a Korean official is a criminal act.
Penalties for bribery range from probation to life imprisonment, depending on the amount involved.
Bribing a foreign official is not a crime under Korean law, but anti-bribery legislation has been approved, bringing Korea into compliance with the OECD initiative against bribery.
The Supreme Prosecutor in each province is responsible for ferreting out corruption.
Many business leaders and officials -- including ministers and now presidents -- have been found guilty of corruption in recent years, yet few have paid heavy fines or served much time in prison.
Amid spreading public sentiments denouncing bribery and corruption, particularly during the April 2000 general legislative election, civic groups have become very vocal and achieved considerable progress by identifying supposedly corrupt officials and working against their re-election.
Public outrage helped propel Roh Moo-hyun, viewed by many as an untainted outsider, to the presidency.
The controversial Anti-Corruption Law passed by the National Assembly is now in effect.
Most notably, this law created the Korea Independent Commission Against Corruption (KICAC), which is semi-autonomous and is empowered to investigate public complaints of corruption at every level of government.
KICAC has established "reporting centers" in each of Korea's six largest cities and invites citizen complaints about their public officials via telephone, facsimile, email or Internet.
Despite KICAC's quick start and seeming sincerity, many Koreans believe corruption is rampant in Korea and will be hard for even the most well-meaning independent body to root out.
The National Assembly passed an Anti Money Laundering Bill in September 2001 that went into effect in November 2001.
The new legislation met the objectives of the Financial Action Task Force on Money Launderings 40 recommendations and created a Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) to trace suspect accounts and transactions and to facilitate international cooperation.
The enactment of this bill should contribute to reducing irregular practices in financial transactions by criminalizing money laundering.
The ROKG has cooperated fully with U.S. and UN efforts to identify and shut down sources of terrorist financing.
Labor
Korea has a skilled, highly educated labor force.
Although labor-management relations can be contentious, they have improved over the last decade as wages have risen considerably and working conditions have improved.
Labor disputes numbered in the thousands between 1987 and 1989 but have declined steadily to fewer than 500 annually in recent years.
Nevertheless, the early months of the Roh administration have witnessed increased labor agitation, and the governments weak response has led recently to greater investment-related uncertainty among both domestic and foreign businesses.
Korean labor groups are quick to escalate disputes and commonly resort to work slowdowns, abuse of leave, and disruption of business by holding rallies, wearing casual clothes, or displaying protest signs at the workplace.
These tactics fall outside the scope of Korea's labor law and lead to confrontations with management and authorities.
Sit-in strikes are common, and workers have on a few occasions occupied company offices or factories.
Korean workers are united in seeking a reduction in the workweek from 44-45 hours a week (five-and-one-half-work days) to 40 hours a week (five work days) while keeping the same pay.
The Tripartite Commission, composed of representatives of labor, management and government, continues to discuss implementation of the 40 hour week, which the government plans to phase in over seven years.
While labor disputes are more frequent at Korean companies, union members at foreign-invested firms tend to make greater demands on management.
Workers at foreign-owned firms perceive, most often incorrectly, that job stability and career prospects are relatively less attractive than at Korean firms, and as a result, labor is increasingly concerned about reductions-in-force and issues such as severance pay.
Although actions by striking employees may be illegal, police have been reluctant to enforce the law and arrest unionists unless violence occurs.
At times, organized labor may portray a dispute as a nationalist issue.
For some companies such as banks, whose activities are considered to be essential public services, the government has the right, although seldom used, to order binding arbitration to solve labor disputes.
In the case of the Chohung Bank strike in June 2003, where labor unionists had occupied bank offices, the government did not intervene forcefully, and mediated a compromise between the strikers and Shinhan, the corporation that had acquired the governments shares in Chohung.
In December 1991, following its admission to the United Nations, Korea joined the International Labor Organization (ILO).
However, Korea still has not ratified the basic ILO conventions on Workers Rights (Convention 87 on the freedom of association, Convention 98 on the right to organize and collective bargaining, and Convention 151 on public service employees' right to organize), and a number of international and domestic labor groups filed complaints against the Korean government with the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association.
In 1997, Korea amended its labor laws to permit more than one national labor federation.
At the time of this writing (June 2003), Korea had two national labor federations, the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions (Minnochong in Korean) and the Federation of Korean Trade Unions (Hannochong in Korean), as well as around 1,600 distinct labor unions.
Also in 1997, the government repealed its ban on intervention by third parties in labor disputes, thus enabling labor unions to seek outside assistance and counsel.
Capital Markets and Portfolio Investment
Financial sector reform is an ROKG priority.
The Korean banking and financial sectors are undergoing thorough structural reform, overseen by the ROKG, initially in close collaboration with the IMF and the World Bank.
The reforms aim at increasing transparency and investor confidence, and generally purging the sector of moral hazard, that is, the assumption that government would make good all losses and not permit large companies to fail.
Since 1997-98, the ROKG has recapitalized the banks and non-bank financial institutions; closed or merged weak financial institutions; resolved many non-performing assets; introduced western risk assessment methods and accounting standards; forced depositors and investors to assume appropriate levels of risk; and ended the policy-directed lending of the past.
Weak supervision and poor lending practices in the Korean banking system helped cause and exacerbate the 1997-98 economic crisis.
In the process of recapitalizing the banks, the ROKG also acquired de facto ownership of most of Koreas commercial banking system, although it has publicly committed to refrain from interfering in bank lending and management decisions, except with regard to prudential supervision.
In late 2002, the ROKG began its ambitious plan to reprivatize the banks under its control by first selling Seoul Bank to Hana Bank.
Shinhan Bank purchased Chohung Bank in June 2003.
The remaining four nationalized banks Hanvit, Kwangju, Kyongnam, and Peace Banks have been consolidated under Woori Holding.
(Hanvit and Peace Banks were merged into the Woori Bank brand name, while Kwangju and Kyongnam Banks have been maintained as separate entities under Woori Holdings umbrella).
However, the government owns minority shares in other banks, including Korea Exchange Bank.
Foreign banks are allowed to establish subsidiaries or direct branches.
Further relaxation of regulations has widened foreigners access to Koreas capital markets and permit foreign financial firms to engage in non-hostile mergers and acquisitions of domestic financial institutions.
Korea routinely permits the repatriation of funds but reserves the right to limit capital outflows in exceptional circumstances, such as situations when uncontrolled outflows might harm the balance of payments, cause excessive fluctuations in interest or exchange rates, or threaten the stability of domestic financial markets.
However, the ROKG did not impose such restrictions even during the height of the financial crisis in late 1997.
Foreign portfolio investors now enjoy almost completely unrestricted access to Koreas stock markets.
Aggregate foreign investment ceilings in the Korean Stock Exchange (KSE) were abolished on May 25, 1998 and foreign investors owned 35.1% of KSE stocks and 4.3% of the KOSDAQ by the end of March 2003.
The market turnover rate was 6 times market capitalization in 1999.
Retail investors are extremely active in the Korean stock markets.
Around 80% of retail trading is conducted online.
Thus, a large majority of retail investors are day traders, implying a constant source of volatility for the markets.
The ROKG permits stock purchases on margin, requiring that transactions be settled within three business days.
Aside from KSE, foreign portfolio investors have shown little appetite for the smaller, more volatile, technology-rich KOSDAQ or for Korean fixed-income investments.
In fact, since the spectacular collapse of Daewoo Group in 1999, the largest corporate bankruptcy in modern history, the bond market has been almost dysfunctional as sellers have far outnumbered buyers.
The total assets of Koreas commercial banks as of the end of 2001 were 641 trillion won, or about USD 496 billion.
Short-term interest rates remain low at around 4% and inflation at 2.8% remained subdued throughout 2002.
Inflation for 2003 is expected to be around 4%.
The spread between short-term money (the overnight call rate) and long-term money (the benchmark 3-year corporate bond rate) fell from its 400-plus basis points high in 2000 to about 300-basis points in May 2002.
The Bank of Korea (BOK) maintained until April 2002 its target for the overnight call rate at the comparatively low level of 4.0%.
However, the BOK decided to raise its target rate by 25-basis points to 4.25% in May 2002.
The interest hike sought to avoid excessive liquidity and strengthen price stability.
The central bank maintained its target rate at 4.25% from May until April 2003.
On May 13, the BOK lowered its target rate to 4.0% to avoid a sharp contraction of business activities.
Conversion and Transfer Policies
The ROKG has substantially removed past restrictions on financial transfers in and out of Korea.
In the past, foreign exchange transactions were strictly regulated by the Foreign Exchange Control Act and its associated regulations.
Even before this act was replaced in 1999, the ROKG liberalized transactions in medium- and long-term overseas borrowings, purchase and sale of local real estate, and trading in over-the-counter (OTC) stocks and bonds.
On April 1, 1999, the Foreign Exchange Transaction Act (FETA) came into effect, replacing the Foreign Exchange Control Act.
This act liberalized the foreign transfer law in two stages.
The first stage, which took effect immediately, fully liberalized all current-account transactions by business firms and banks, thereby paring down the former list of restricted transactions to five items, most of which cover foreign exchange transactions by individuals.
The FETAs second-stage liberalization dismantled most of the remaining restrictions as of January 1, 2001.
Only transactions that could harm international peace and public order, such as money laundering and gambling, remain controlled.
Three specific types of transactions were not liberalized: 1) non-residents are not permitted to buy won-denominated hedge funds, including forward currency contracts; 2) the Financial Supervisory Commission will not permit foreign currency borrowing by non-viable domestic firms; and 3) the ROKG will monitor and ensure that Koreans firms which have extended credit to foreign borrowers collect their debts.
The ROKG has retained the authority to re-impose restrictions in the case of severe economic or financial emergency.
Capital account liberalization under FETA also has been extensive.
All capital-account transactions are permitted unless specifically prohibited.
In addition, 72 of the 91 transactions specified by the OECD code of liberalization of capital movements now are permitted.
For instance, non-residents now may open deposit accounts in domestic currency (won) with maturities of more than one year and may engage in offshore transactions, such as issuing domestic currency (won) denominated securities abroad.
The right to remit profits is granted at the time of original investment approval.
Banks control the now pro-forma approval process for FETA-defined open sectors.
For conditionally or partially restricted investments (as defined by FETA), approval for both the investment and remittance rests with the relevant ministry.
When foreign-investment royalties or other payments are proposed as part of a technology licensing agreement, the agreement and the projected stream of royalties must be approved either by a bank or by the Ministry of Finance and Economy (MOFE).
Again, approval is virtually automatic.
An investor wishing to effect a remittance must present an audited financial statement to a bank to substantiate the payment.
To withdraw capital, a stock valuation report issued by a recognized securities company or the Korean appraisal board also must be presented.
Foreign companies seeking to remit funds from investments in restricted sectors first must seek appropriate ministerial approval and must obtain bank approval, after demonstrating the legal source of the funds and proving that relevant taxes have been paid.
Limits on how much money foreign and domestic travelers may take out of Korea per trip were dropped at the beginning of 2001.
Conversion of the national currency (the won) into foreign currencies for the importation of goods and services is possible at local banks.
The external value of the won is the responsibility of the Bank of Korea.
Daily fluctuation limits have been completely removed, and the Bank of Korea committed under the IMF program to limit its interventions to smoothing operations (rather than to attempt to manage the exchange rate).
As a reference price, the Bank of Korea uses the previous day's weighted-average of won-dollar interbank transactions.
Expropriation and Compensation
Korea follows generally accepted principles of international law with respect to expropriation.
The law protects all foreign-invested enterprise property from expropriation or requisition.
If private property is expropriated, it can only be taken for a public purpose, and then only in a non-discriminatory manner.
Property owners are entitled to prompt compensation at fair market value.
The Embassy is not aware of any cases of uncompensated expropriation of property owned by American citizens.
Dispute Settlement
Serious investment disputes involving foreigners are the exception rather than the rule in Korea, except in cases involving intellectual property rights.
There exists a body of Korean law governing commercial activities and bankruptcies which constitutes a means to enforce property and contractual rights, with monetary judgments usually made in the domestic currency.
The judgments of foreign courts are not enforceable in Korea.
Although commercial disputes can be adjudicated in a civil court, foreign businesses often feel that this is not a practical means to resolve disputes.
For example, proceedings are conducted in the Korean language, often without adequate translation.
Foreign lawyers (i.e., who have not passed the Korean Bar) are almost always prohibited by Korean law from representing clients in Korean courts.
Civil procedures common in the United States, such as pretrial discovery, do not exist in Korea.
During litigation of a dispute, foreigners may be barred from leaving the country until a decision is reached.
Legal proceedings are expensive and time-consuming.
Lawsuits often are contemplated only as a last resort, signaling the end of a business relationship.
Commercial disputes may also be taken to the Korean Commercial Arbitration Board (KCAB).
The Korean Arbitration Act and its implementing rules outline the following steps in the arbitration process: 1) parties may request the KCAB to act as informal intermediary to a settlement; 2) if unsuccessful, either or both parties may request formal arbitration, in which case the KCAB appoints a mediator to conduct conciliatory talks for 30 days; and 3) if unsuccessful, an arbitration panel consisting of one or three arbitrators is assigned to decide the case.
If one party is a not resident in Korea, either may request an arbitrator from a neutral country.
Under the proposed U.S.-Korea BIT, U.S. investors may obtain the right to refer investment disputes with Korean firms to binding international arbitration.
When drafting contracts, it always is a good idea to provide for arbitration by a neutral body such as the International Commercial Arbitration Association (ICAA).
U.S. companies should seek local expert legal counsel when drawing up any type of contract with a Korean entity.
Korea is a member of the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).
It has also acceded to the New York Convention (formally called the United Nations Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards).
Korea is a member of the International Commercial Arbitration Association and the World Bank's Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA).
It is important to keep in mind that Korean courts may ultimately be called upon to enforce an arbitrated settlement.
Political Violence (as it may affect investments)
Korea does not have a history of political violence directed against foreign investors.
The Embassy is not aware of any politically motivated threats of damage to foreign-invested projects and/or foreign-related installations of any sort, nor of any incidents which might be interpreted as having targeted foreign investments.
Labor violence unrelated to the issue of foreign ownership, however, has occurred in foreign-owned facilities in the past.
The historic summit meeting in June 2000 between South Korean President Kim Dae-jung and North Korean leader Kim Jong-il was a positive turn that improved inter-Korean relations.
However, dialogue between the two Koreas has stalled since early 2001.
Tensions on the Korean peninsula were again raised by the revelation in October 2002 that North Korea had undertaken a second nuclear weapons program after it had agreed to freeze an earlier one under the U.S.-DPRK agreement signed in Geneva in October 1994.
Bilateral Investment Agreements
The United States has a bilateral Treaty of Friendship, Commerce, and Navigation with Korea, which contains general provisions pertaining to business relations and investment.
During President Kims visit to the United States in June of 1998, President Clinton and President Kim agreed to negotiate a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT) between the two nations.
If such a treaty is realized, regulations dealing with foreign investment will be further liberalized.
OPIC and Other Investment Insurance Programs
U.S. investments in Korea are eligible for insurance programs sponsored by the U.S. Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC).
OPIC has yet to guarantee any U.S. investments in Korea since June 1998, when OPIC reinstated coverage it had suspended in 1991 due to concerns about worker rights.
Coverage issued prior to 1991 is still in force.
Even the lack of OPIC coverage was not seen as a serious obstacle to U.S. investors because OPIC never has had to cover claims in Korea for expropriation, political risk or currency inconvertibility.
Korea has been a member of the World Banks (IBRD) Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) since November 1987.
Capital Outflow Policy
Since liberalization began in 1986, Korean foreign direct investment abroad has been growing at an average annual rate of over 24%.
At the end of 2002, Koreas investment abroad totaled USD 62.99 billion, with USD 5.3 billion in the year 2002.
Much of the recent investment has gone to China and Southeast Asia in labor-intensive industries such as textiles and component assembly.
In recent years, outward investment in capital- and technology-intensive industries such as machinery and autos has increased markedly.
Asia has replaced the United States and Canada as the largest recipient of new Korean investment.
Since the establishment of formal diplomatic relations with China in 1992, Korean investors have been particularly active in China's northern provinces, where sizable ethnic Korean populations reside.
In early 1996, the government announced changes designed to ease controls on Korean portfolio investments overseas.
As of April 1, 1996, Korean corporate investors and individuals can purchase certain foreign securities (stocks, bonds, commercial paper and certificates of deposit) without limits; institutional investors have been able to buy these foreign securities since 1995.
Foreign Direct Investment Statistics
Foreign Direct Investment Flows - Into and Out of Korea (in USD millions) -------------- Flow -------------- Stock 2000 2001 2002 Total Inflow 15,217 11,292 9,101 84,650 - United States 2,448 772 1,403 26,299 - Japan 504 1,750 2,449 12,715 - EU 4,391 3,062 1,663 24,579 - Others 5,455 3,569 1,535 21,057
Total Outflow 5,907 6,236 5,317 62,990 - North America 5,907 6,236 5,317 62,990 - Asia 2,225 1,696 2,706 25,711 - Europe 351 4,396 1,559 14,196 - Others 133 15 70 3,478
Source: The Export-Import Bank of Korea and Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy
Partial list of major U.S. inverstors in Korea
U.S. Investor ------------ Products ------------
Amkor Technology Inc. Electric/Electronics S
Life Insurance Bowater Incorporated Wood and Paper E.I. Du Point De Nemours 
Chemicals Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. Electric/Electronics Caltex (Overseas) Ltd.
Oil Refining Morgan Guaranty Co.
Finance Procter 
Inc Wood and Paper Seminis Vegetable Seeds.
Inc Agriculture/Forestry The Gillette Company Electroc/Electronics 3M Co. Ltd. Electric/Electronics J. Lyons Inc.
Foods Ford Motor Company Transport Equipment Airtouch Communications Inc Other Services World CI USA, Inc.
Resort Yahoo Inc.
Other Services
Host and Country Contact Information for Investment-Related Inquires
The Korea Investment Service Center (KISC) is a one-stop shop for foreign investment in Korea, which was opened in Seoul in May of 1998 by the Korea Trade and Investment Promotion Agency (KOTRA).
This office provides Korean government publications on foreign investment as well as a consulting service for foreigners, made up of an investment consulting team, an administrative support team, and a project support team.
Most importantly, with the passage of the Foreign Investment Promotion Law, KISC will be able to handle up to 70% of all civil procedures related to the foreign investment process.
For more information, please contact:
Korea Investment Service Center KOTRA Building (6th Floor) 300-9, Yomgok-dong, Seocho-ku, Seocho P.O.Box 101 Seoul, Korea Tel: (82-2) 3460-7545; Fax: (82-2) 3460-7946 E-Mail: iksc@ANTISPAMunitel.co.kr Website: www.kotra.or.kr __________________________________________________________________
* Home * How We Help U.S.
Companies * How We Help Korean Companies * Doing Business in Korea + Meet Korea + Political Environment + Economic Trends and Outlook + Marketing U.S. Products 
* Our Worldwide Sites * Other Asian Markets * Export.gov Trade Portal * BuyUSA.com Matchmaking __________________________________________________________________
* Korean __________________________________________________________________
Search! ____________________ Submit __________________________________________________________________
* Printable version __________________________________________________________________
 2001-2003 All rights reserved * Privacy Policy * Disclaimer
