Return to VA Home Page PHSHG Home Page Public Health Watch AIDS Information Center Center for Quality Management in Public Health Conferences/Continuing Education HIV/Hep C Prevention HIV Testing and Informed Consent News/Press Releases National HIV/Hepatitis C Program Office Smoking and Tobacco Use Cessation Program SARS Staff Training VA Directives VA HIV/Hepatitis C News Service VA Information Letters World AIDS Day - 2003 [VA_Sea.gif] [accessibility.gif]
In places where there are breaks in vessels, platelets form plugs with serum proteins (clotting factors) to prevent blood loss while healing takes place.
What is a platelet count? A platelet count is a blood test done by counting the number of platelets in a known volume of blood.
A normal platelet count is in the range of 150,000 to 450,000 per microliter (mm3).
A low platelet count is called thrombocytopenia.
If your platelet count drops below 50,000/mm3, you may not be able to stop bleeding after a serious injury.
If you have a platelet count below 20,000/mm3, bleeding may occur spontaneously.
What are the symptoms and signs of a low platelet count? Persons with a low platelet count may bruise easily or bleed from the mouth or rectum.
If any of these symptoms are present, your platelet count could be low, but other explanations are also possible.
What causes a low platelet count, and what is its relationship to HIV disease? Platelets are normally depleted through aging and by sealing small breaks that occur in your body tissues.
Your bone marrow continuously produces new cells to form platelets.
Platelet destruction, impaired platelet production, or a combination of these can cause your platelet count to be low.
Immune-related thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), a relatively common condition in early HIV disease, is one cause of platelet destruction.
With ITP, the body develops antibodies that attach to platelets as if they were a foreign substance.
When these platelets circulate through lymph organs such as the spleen, the attached antibody causes the spleen to filter out the platelets and destroy them.
This may lead to swelling of the spleen, which in turn traps more platelets.
Fortunately, the platelet count in persons with ITP is usually not low enough to cause serious bleeding.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) are serious medical conditions that use up platelets and cause a low platelet count.
In contrast to ITP, persons with TIP or DIC usually are quite ill and have other symptoms.
Impaired bone marrow production of platelets may result from medications or the use of alcohol.
The platelet count usually returns to normal once the drug is stopped.
Infections associated with HIV disease can cause thrombocytopenia, either by directly infecting the bone marrow or, in some cases, by releasing chemicals that block production of cells in the marrow.
Examples of such infections include tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
Chronic hepatitis with liver scarring (cirrhosis) is another cause of low platelets.
HIV infection itself may also cause thrombocytopenia.
Tumors that grow in the bone marrow, most notably lymphoma, sometimes result in thrombocytopenia.
In addition, lymphoma may produce antibodies against platelets or cause an enlarged spleen that prematurely removes platelets from the bloodstream.
How is a low platelet count diagnosed? A low platelet count is determined by a blood test called a complete blood count.
If the platelet count is low, your doctor will review your medications to see if one of them could be causing the problem.
Your doctor will also check other components of the blood that help it clot by performing additional blood tests, such as the prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT).
In some cases, the cause of thrombocytopenia may be uncertain, and your doctor may suggest a diagnostic test called a bone marrow aspiration.
In other cases, however, if you feel good and your platelet count is not dangerously low, your doctor may presume the condition is ITP and perform additional tests only if there is evidence of another disorder.
A bone marrow aspiration is a procedure in which the doctor inserts a needle through your skin and into bone underneath, draws up (aspirates) into a syringe some cells from the marrow of the bone, and sends them to the laboratory for examination.
Usually the doctor inserts the needle into the iliac bone, which is between your hip and the middle of your lower back.
Your doctor will make the skin numb so the needle does not hurt going through it.
There is pain for a brief period of time when the needle enters the bone and again when marrow cells are aspirated.
What should I do if my platelet count is low? If your platelet count is low, do not take any new medications without consulting your doctor because some may affect your body's clotting process in other ways.
For example, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and naproxen, prevent platelets from functioning normally.
Alcohol should be avoided because it may block platelet production and also prevent the liver from making other factors necessary for your blood to clot properly.
In addition, you should not risk trauma from contact sports like touch football where an injury to your abdomen or head could cause internal bleeding.
How is a low platelet count treated? Most cases of HIV-related ITP do not require treatment.
If you have ITP, have no bleeding problems, and your platelet count is above 50,000/mm3, you do not need specific therapy.
If your platelet count is below 20,000/mm3 or if you have other risk factors for bleeding, several treatments are available.
These include antiretroviral drugs, corticosteroids, intravenous gammaglobulin therapy, splenectomy, and platelet transfusions.
Studies have shown that zidovudine (AZT, ZDV) increases the platelet count in many HIV-infected persons with thrombocytopenia; other antiretroviral drugs may do so as well.
If you have a low platelet count and are not taking AZT, your doctor will generally try combination antiretroviral therapy first.
It may take several weeks before your platelet count increases.
Some persons with HIV-related ITP have been successfully treated with prednisone or other corticosteroid medications.
However, there has been some concern about their use in this setting because steroids interfere with immune function and may increase the risk of infection.
Surgical removal of the spleen (splenectomy) results in an increased platelet count in persons with significant thrombocytopenia not helped by antiretroviral therapy or steroids.
Because the spleen is a lymph organ and plays a role in the body's defense against infection, there is concern that its removal could increase the risk of infection.
Intravenous gammaglobulin therapy can increase platelets for a short period of time.
This treatment is sometimes used to prepare patients for invasive diagnostic tests or surgery.
Platelets can be transfused like whole blood, and these transfusions temporarily increase the platelet count.
However, because transfused platelets are generally used up very quickly, this procedure is performed only if you have active bleeding or need surgery.
It is not practical for long term management.
[address.jpg]
Last Update: 5/25/01
Low White Blood Cell Count * What are white blood cells? * What are lymphocytes? * What are neutrophils? * What causes a low neutrophil count? * How is a low neutrophil count diagnosed? * How is it treated?
What are white blood cells? White blood cells, also called leukocytes, are cells that your body makes to help fight infections.
There are several kinds of white blood cells.
The two most common types are lymphocytes and neutrophils.
Neutrophils are also sometimes called granulocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs or "polys").
A white blood cell count (WBC) is performed by counting the number of white blood cells in a sample of your blood.
A normal WBC is in the range of 4,000 to 11,000 cells per microliter (mm3).
A low WBC is also called leukopenia, which is a common finding in persons with HIV disease.
What are lymphocytes? Lymphocytes come from your lymph tissue (spleen, lymph nodes, thymus gland).
There are different kinds of lymphocytes, including CD4 cells (T-helper cells) and CD8 cells (T-suppressor cells).
Lymphocytes identify foreign substances from bacteria or viruses in your body and produce antibodies and cells that specifically target them.
It takes from several days to weeks for lymphocytes to recognize and attack a new foreign substance.
What are neutrophils? Neutrophils are a major part of your body's defense against bacterial infections.
When the WBC is low, there may not be enough neutrophils to defend you against bacterial infections.
Neutrophils are made in the bone marrow and circulate in the bloodstream.
Neutrophils move out of the blood vessels into the infected tissue to attack the bacteria.
The pus in a boil (abscess) is made up mostly of neutrophils.
Normally a serious bacterial infection causes the body to produce an increased number of neutrophils, resulting in a higher than normal WBC.
A normal absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is in the range of 1,500/mm3 to 8,000/mm3.
If the ANC is below 500/mm3 for an extended period of time, your risk of serious bacterial infection may increase significantly.
A low neutrophil count is also called neutropenia.
What causes a low neutrophil count?
Neutrophils die continuously from age or from fighting infections, and your bone marrow must make new neutrophils to replace them.When something reduces production of neutrophils in your bone marrow, the neutrophil count will drop and may become dangerously low.
Prescription medications, such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX, Bactrim, Septra), ganciclovir, zidovudine (AZT), interferon, pyrimethamine, primaquine, and many chemotherapy agents used for Kaposis' sarcoma and lymphoma are common causes of neutropenia
.In almost all cases, drug-induced neutropenia resolves after the agent is stopped or its dosage is reduced.
Infections can cause neutropenia directly by infecting the bone marrow or indirectly through the release of chemicals that block production of cells.
Examples of conditions that infect the bone marrow include tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
HIV infection itself may also cause neutropenia.
Tumors such as lymphoma that grow in the bone marrow are another potential cause of neutropenia.
How is a low neutrophil count diagnosed? A low neutrophil count is diagnosed by a blood test called a complete blood count.
If the ANC is low, your doctor will review your medications to see if one of them could be the cause.
Sometimes the cause of neutropenia is unclear, and your doctor may suggest a diagnostic test called a bone marrow aspiration.
A bone marrow aspiration is a procedure in which the doctor inserts a needle through your skin and into bone underneath, draws up (aspirates) into a syringe some cells from the marrow of the bone, and sends them to the laboratory for examination.
Usually the doctor inserts the needle into the iliac bone, which is between your hip and the middle of your lower back.
Your doctor will make the skin numb so the needle does not hurt going through it.
There is pain for a brief period of time when the needle enters the bone and again when marrow cells are aspirated.
How is it treated? Treatment of neutropenia requires identifying and addressing its cause.
As discussed above, this may mean stopping or adjusting the dose of a medication or diagnosing and treating an infection or tumor.
If your ANC is below 1,000/mm3, you should pay close attention to new symptoms, especially fever, chills, pain, or tiredness, that may indicate an infection.
You should call your doctor promptly if any of these occur.
If you have a permanent intravenous (IV) line placed to receive medications or fluids, your risk for serious bacterial infection is especially high.
You should look carefully each day at the place the IV line enters your skin for any redness, tenderness, or drainage.
Colony stimulating factors are natural substances that stimulate the growth of bone marrow cells; synthetic versions are available by prescription.
The most common is granulocyte stimulating factor (GCSF).
This drug is effective at increasing the neutrophil count but must be given by subcutaneous injection and may have side effects, including bone pain and pain or soreness at the injection site.
If your ANC drops below 500/mm3, GCSF may be used if there is a temporary cause of neutropenia, such as recent cancer chemotherapy or new infection.
If your ANC remains below 500/mm3 and no cause of neutropenia is identified, your doctor may recommend long term treatment with GCSF.
[address.jpg]
Last Update: 5/25/2001
VA Home Page / Search / Site Map / Disclaimer / Privacy Statement / Contact Us / Consumer Service / FOIA / Current Benefits / Facilities Locator /
Reviewed/Updated: April 29, 2003
