Return to VA Home Page PHSHG Home Page Public Health Watch AIDS Information Center Center for Quality Management in Public Health Conferences/Continuing Education HIV/Hep C Prevention HIV Testing and Informed Consent News/Press Releases National HIV/Hepatitis C Program Office Smoking and Tobacco Use Cessation Program SARS Staff Training VA Directives VA HIV/Hepatitis C News Service VA Information Letters World AIDS Day - 2003 [VA_Sea.gif] [accessibility.gif]
Lymphocytes control the body's ability to recognize and fight infections and cancers.
CD4 lymphocytes help to identify, attack, and destroy specific bacteria, fungi, and other germs that infect the body.
In addition, they regulate the production of antibodies (proteins that fight infections) and cytokines (chemicals that regulate other immune functions).
CD4 cells are produced in the spleen, lymph nodes, and thymus gland, and they circulate throughout the body in the bloodstream.
How does HIV disease affect CD4 cells?
CD4 cells are a major target for HIV. HIV binds to the surface of CD4 cells, enters them, and either reproduces immediately, killing them in the process, or remains in a resting state, reproducing when the cell becomes active.
Although the body attempts to produce new lymphocytes in order to replace the ones that have been destroyed, the number of CD4 cells in the blood gradually declines as HIV disease progresses.
What is the CD4 count? The CD4 cell ("T-cell") count is a test which measures the number of CD4 cells in a blood sample.
Normal CD4 counts in adults range from 500 to 1200 cells per cubic millimeter (mm3) of volume.
Why is the CD4 count important? The CD4 cell count is a laboratory marker of the strength of your immune system.
It helps to determine how advanced your HIV disease is (staging) and to predict your risk of complications (prognosis).
Medical conditions, such as thrush, Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP), and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) disease, occur at particular stages of HIV disease (Figure 1).
The CD4 count is a "quantitative" test--meaning the result is a number that can be compared with the number obtained from an earlier test.
The HIV viral load (measurement of level of HIV in the blood) is also important for disease staging and prognosis.
Other laboratory studies, including the CD4 percentage, are less commonly used for these purposes.
How are the CD4 cell count and viral load related?
The CD4 cell count is a marker of the level of your immune function at any given time, while the viral load is a measurement of the level of circulating virus in your blood.
As the virus reproduces, it destroys CD4 cells and reduces your count.
In general, the higher your viral load, the more quickly your CD4 cells will be destroyed.
Both tests are useful in guiding the use of antiretroviral therapy, staging HIV disease, and determining prognosis.
The CD4 count is also used to identify problems for which you may be at risk and to determine what medications might be helpful.
Table 1 outlines specific ways in which CD4 count results may guide your medical care.
If your CD4 count declines over a period of several months, your doctor may recommend: 1) beginning or changing antiretroviral (anti-HIV) therapy; and/or 2) starting preventive treatment (prophylaxis) for opportunistic infections like PCP.
Your CD4 count should increase or stabilize in response to effective combination antiretroviral therapy.
What are the limitations of the CD4 cell count? Because of variations in procedure, the CD4 cell count is not a precise test.
Results may vary between laboratories, so your test should always be performed at the same site.
In addition, other situations may have an impact on your CD4 results.
The CD4 count tends to be a little lower in the morning and higher in the evening.
Acute illnesses, such as pneumonia, influenza, or herpes simplex virus infection, can cause the CD4 count to decline temporarily.
Cancer chemotherapy can dramatically lower the CD4 count.
In general, the CD4 count goes down as HIV disease progresses.
Any single CD4 count value may be different from the last one even though your health status has not changed.
You should not place too much importance on any one result; what is more important than any single value is the trend of CD4 counts over time.
The CD4 count does not always reflect how someone with HIV disease feels and functions.
For example, some people with higher CD4 counts are ill and have frequent complications, and some people with low CD4 counts have few medical complications and function well.
HIV-infected persons with CD4 counts below 200/mm3 are considered to have AIDS, regardless of whether they are sick or well, according to criteria established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
How often should I have a CD4 cell count performed? A CD4 cell count and viral load are obtained as part of a baseline laboratory panel when you are initially diagnosed with HIV infection.
Both tests should be repeated about four weeks after starting antiretroviral therapy.
If your regimen is maintained, the tests for CD4 count and viral load should be performed every three months thereafter, along with other laboratory studies.
If my CD4 cell count rises significantly on antiretroviral therapy, can I stop any other medications? There is evidence that PCP prophylaxis can be safely discontinued in patients who are on antiviral therapy, if their viral load is well suppressed and if they maintain a CD4 cell count of over 200/mm3 for 3 - 6 months.
There is evidence that MAC prophylaxis can be safely discontinued in patients who are on antiviral therapy, if their viral load is well suppressed and if they maintain a CD4 cell count of over 100/mm3 for 3 - 6 months.
Table 1.
CD4 Cell Counts and Medical Management
CD4 count above 500/mm3
No unusual conditions expected Emphasis on good health habits (nutrition, sleep, exercise) and health care maintenance issues (vaccinations) Combination antiretroviral therapy recommendations are individualized
CD4 count 200 to 500/mm3
Increased risk for shingles, thrush, skin infections, bacterial sinus and lung infections, and tuberculosis Opportunistic infections, such as PCP, MAC, and cytomegalovirus (CMV), are very rare Combination antiretroviral therapy generally recommended for CD4 count 
CD4 count 50 to 200/mm3
Increased risk for PCP and other opportunistic infections Combination antiretroviral therapy recommended Prophylaxis for PCP (TMP-SMX, dapsone, or aerosol pentamidine) necessary Consider prophylaxis for toxoplasmosis (TMP-SMX or dapsone/pyrimethamine) for CD4 count 
CD4 count below 50/mm3
Increased risk for opportunistic infections, including MAC and CMV Combination antiretroviral therapy recommended Prophylaxis for MAC (azithromycin, clarithromycin, or rifabutin) necessary
Figure 1.
Relationship between CD4 Cell Count and Opportunistic Diseases [cd4.jpg]
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline Avenue, Libby RM. 342 Boston, MA 02215 Phone: (617) 667-5529 FAX: (617) 667-2885 FAXBACK: (800) 399-AIDS
Last Update: 3/26/01
VA Home Page / Search / Site Map / Disclaimer / Privacy Statement / Contact Us / Consumer Service / FOIA / Current Benefits / Facilities Locator /
Reviewed/Updated: April 29, 2003
