Next page Previous page slag runoff Tapping off excess slag after the ore boil in the basic open-hearth process of steelmaking.
Bennett
slake
a.
To crumble or disintegrate, such as coal or lime. b. Small coal. c.
To mix with water, so that a chemical combination takes place, as in the slaking of lime. d.
To crumble in water.
Van Vlack
slaking
a.
The crumbling and disintegration of earth materials upon exposure to air or moisture; specif. the breaking up of dried clay or soil when saturated with or immersed in water, or of coal or clay-rich sedimentary rocks when exposed to air.
AGI b.
The disintegration of the walls of tunnels in swelling clay, owing to inward movement and circumferential compression.
AGI c.
The treating of lime with water to give hydrated (slaked) lime.
AGI
slam
Eng.
Thin slurry and mud, Yorkshire lead mines.
Arkell
slant
a.
Any short, inclined crosscut connecting the entry with its air course to facilitate the hauling of coal.
Commonly called a dip switch when the coal is not level.
See also:shoo-fly b.
A heading driven diagonally between the dip and the strike of a coal seam.
Also called a run.
See also:counter; stone drift; surface drift.
Fay
slant chute
Chute driven diagonally across to connect a breast manway with a manway chute.
See also:slant
slant drilling
See:directional drilling
slants
Eng.
A set of joints in slate parallel to the main cleavage, Denbighshire.
Arkell
slant vein
York.
One vein crossing another at an acute angle.
Arkell
slape back
Eng.
See:back
slash
a.
There are many successive ridges of shingle running in varying directions, and often with narrow strips of marsh enclosed between successive ridges.
Such bands of marsh have been given the very appropriate name of slashes in New Jersey.
AGI b. Swampy land, overgrown with dense underbrush.
Local in the Northeast.
AGI c.
An open or cutover tract in a forest strewn with debris, as from logging; also such debris.
AGI
slat bucket
A digging bucket of basket construction, used in handling sticky, chunky mud.
Nichols, 1
slate
a.
A compact, fine-grained metamorphic rock that possesses slaty cleavage and hence can be split into slabs and thin plates.
Most slate was formed from shale.
AGI b.
A coal miner's term for any shale accompanying coal; also, sometimes the equivalent of bone coal.
AGI c. Dark shale lying next to the coalbeds.
It contains impressions of the plant life of distant ages, proving the vegetable origin of coal.
Korson d.
A fine-grained metamorphic rock that breaks into thin slabs or sheets.
Usually gray to black, sometimes green, yellow, brown, or red.
Slates are composed of micas, chlorite, quartz, hematite, clays, and other minerals.
Found in Pennsylvania, Vermont, Maine, Virginia, California, Colorado; Europe.
Used for roofing; decorative stone; various building applications; in crushed form on shingles; abrasive; pigment.
See also:clay slate; phyllite; spotted slate.
CCD, 2
slate chute a.
A chute for the passage of slate and bony coal to a pocket from which it is loaded into dump cars.
Fay b.
A chute driven through slate.
Fay
slate cutter
In the stonework industry, one who operates an upright drilling machine to drill holes into slate so that the slabs may be fastened in place with wires or rods when installed in a building.
DOT
slate ground
A term used in southern Wales for a dark fissile shale, resembling slate.
AGI
slate handler
In bituminous coal mining, a laborer who shovels up falls of slate or rock along haulageways in a mine and loads it into cars.
Also called rock handler.
DOT
slate larryman
See:slate motorman
slateman
In anthracite and bituminous coal mining, a general term for a worker handling slate or rock as distinguished from coal.
Usually designated according to type of activity, as rock driller; rock loader; slate motorman; slate picker; slate shooter.
Also called rockman; slate handler.
See also:rockman; slate handler.
DOT
slateman helper
See:slate-shooter helper
slate motorman
In anthracite and bituminous coal mining, a person who operates a mine locomotive to haul trains of cars loaded with slate or shale, underground and at the surface of a mine.
Also called larryman; slate larryman.
DOT
