Secret Shopper Instructions Thank-you for agreeing to be one of our National Recreation Use Monitoring (NRUM) project's "secret shoppers".
Secret shoppers help us with quality control.
They evaluate how well NRUM interviews are being conducted on National Forest land.
They help us determine if our interviewers are being courteous to the public they interview, if they understand the questions in the interview, and if they have set-up their interview sites in a safe manner.
We have provided you with several items to conduct your secret shopper evaluations.
1.
A map of the specific forest location where the interview will occur.
2.
The specific date and time at which the interviewer will be on site.
3.
Guidelines we have given the interviewer on how to set up their traffic pull-offs, sign placement etc. 4.
A copy of the interviewer form so you are familiar with it before you get interviewed.
Do not allow the interviewer to see you have this form.
Here's what we expect of our secret shoppers: 1.
Sign and return your volunteer agreement to the project coordinator before you participate in the secret shopper program.
2.
Read and follow the job hazard analysis and safety precautions.
3.
Review the interview form provided before you arrive at the interview site.
4.
Arrive at the specified interview location sometime during the scheduled interview hours.
5.
Pretend you are leaving the site or area for the last time.
This may mean you drive past the interview location, hang out on the forest or site for a bit of time, then drive or walk past the interviewer and get yourself interviewed.
6.
The interviewer will ask you if you are leaving the site or area for the last time today.
Say yes.
7.
The interviewer will ask if you have recreated at the specific site or area during your visit.
Say yes.
8.
The interviewer will then ask if you would be willing to participate in an interview.
Say yes.
9.
The interviewer will ask who has had the most recent birthday.
This is so that they randomly interview visitors, not always just the driver of the vehicle.
Agree ahead of time with your traveling companions who this person will be so that they are prepared ahead of time to answer all the questions.
10.
Participate in the interview and DO NOT tell the interviewer you are a secret shopper.
Act natural and answer the questions as close to the truth as you can.
If you really did recreate on this particular national forest before you got interviewed, answer all the questions truthfully.
If you are just passing through to solely do this interview make up some answers but keep them reasonable.
For example keep your length of stay short and your answers to expenditures on recreation products as close to the truth as possible.
Exaggerated answers may bias our study results.
11.
At the conclusion of the interview, leave just as any tourist would.
12.
Stop out of sight of the interviewer to complete your secret shopper evaluation form.
Fill out your evaluation while it is still fresh in your mind.
13.
Return to the evaluation form to Sue Kocis in the envelopes provided.
We really appreciate your help in maintaining quality control for this national project.
Please keep us posted of your current address so we may send you a token of our appreciation for your help!
____________________________
Expires: 1/1/2001
