Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency EPA Top Banner spacer Pesticide Environmental Stewardship Program EPA Top Banner EPA Bottom Banner spacer spacer Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version spacer Search: __________ Run Search spacer Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
Chemical formulators benefit from the ease of packaging and shipping bulk tanks, and custom applicators benefit from not having to hand mix product at their shop location or in the field.
In addition, the amount of waste generated is initially reduced, as the bulk tanks can be reused multiple times and the small 2.5 and 5 gallon jugs must be disposed of after one use.
However, after approximately five years of use, the tanks have reached their suggested life.
Exposure to ultraviolet light and repeated use weakens the tanks, and the industry recommends that they be removed from use.
This recommendation is difficult to implement, as many chemical companies and applicators have no outlets for the tanks once they are out of service.
Although some of the largest chemical companies provide "take-back" programs for the minibulk tanks, other encourage their disposal at the final user location.
The tanks cannot be recycled easily due to the cross-linked polymers in the HDPE and due to their bulky size, so instead they continue to be used for pesticides, water or waste oil; stored indefinitely; or buried in Iowa's landfills.
These practices are dangerous as the tanks could rupture, releasing harmful chemicals into the land and water and potentially harming workers in the tank proximity.
They could also become homes for rodents and pests if stored for long periods of time.
The purpose of the Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project is to develop a system to remove these tanks from use after five years and recycle them.
The project involves three phases; education, implementation, and review.
The education phase will include the development and distribution of radio and print advertisements and articles designed to educate agribusiness companies on the need for minibulk recycling.
It will also include the development and mailing of a pamphlet detailing both the risks of continued use of outdated minibulks and the procedure to recycle them through the Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project.
The implementation phase will include the tank collection and recycling phases.
Once the project is complete, the project team, which includes representatives from the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship, Agribusiness Association of Iowa, Iowa Waste Exchange, and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, will review the results of both the educational phase and the recycling phase and determine strategies to manage tanks in the future.
There are potentially thousands of orphaned minibulk tanks across the state of Iowa.
An initial survey indicated 700 immediately available tanks; however, the project team believes the survey only revealed the tip of the iceberg as far as the actual number of available tanks.
Developing a system to remove the tanks and recycle them would benefit the chemical applicators, residents across Iowa as harmful pesticides are not released into the land and water sources, and the state's landfills as tons of plastic material are not buried.
Project Title and Description: Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project
The goal of the Iowa Pilot Minibulk Tank Recycling Project is to develop a system to remove minibulk pesticide tanks from use after their recommended five-year life cycle.
Currently many of the pesticide formulators and applicators realize that the tanks should not be used for longer than five years, but they have no system to remove and recycle them.
Small jugs for two to five gallons of product, and small drums up to 35 gallons, can be recycled through the Agricultural Container Research Council's (ACRC) container recycling program.
In Iowa, the container recycling program is cooperatively managed by the Agribusiness Association of Iowa, Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship (IDALS), and the Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) at 30 participating sanitary landfill collection sites across the state.
While some of the largest chemical companies, such as Monsanto, provide a "take back" program for their minibulk tanks, others assume that the formulator or applicator will handle recycling or disposing of these tanks themselves.
In many cases, the tanks are not recycled or disposed of.
The tanks may continue to be used beyond their recommended life; stored indefinitely; re-used for applications such as waste oil or water; burned; or buried in Iowa's landfills.
Objectives
The objectives of the Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project include: 1.
Educate Iowa chemical formulators and applicators about the recommended life cycle of minibulk tanks.
2.
Develop and implement a minibulk recycling collection system for the state of Iowa.
3.
Grind the tanks into alternative fuel to be used at power plants or cement kilns.
4.
Review the success of the project, based on number of tanks recycled, volume of plastic generated, and education of formulators in Iowa; and develop an on-going strategy for minibulk recycling in Iowa.
Justification
1.
Using minibulk tanks beyond their recommended life is hazardous to the pesticide applicators and to the residents who live around the sprayed ground.
By educating formulators and applicators about the risks of using tanks beyond their recommended life cycle, they will have a better understanding of the dangers they may face in continuing to use the tanks.
The health of the applicators, Iowa residents who live on or near the land having the chemical applied, and other Iowans through potential stormwater runoff, will be protected.
2.
By developing a system to collect and recycle the tanks, not only will the health of Iowans be protected but the volume of waste generated by pesticide formulators and applicators will be reduced.
Currently many of these tanks end up in Iowa's landfills.
They are bulky, odiferous, and will not break down.
The creation of a recycling system for these tanks will reduce the volume of pesticide tanks which end up in Iowa's landfills.
3.
Once the tanks are collected, they will be processed into alternative fuel at Bacon Recycling, one of the subcontractors to Tri-Rinse, Inc. for the ACRC container recycling program.
By restricting the end use of the plastic to alternative fuel, the potential residual impact on the environment from the pesticides is eliminated.
Studies show that high-density polyethylene burns at a higher BTU value than coal and produces virtually no ash.
Cement kilns and power plants are actively seeking this type of alternative fuel.
4.
When the pilot project is complete, the participants will evaluate the results to determine a further course of action.
Depending upon how the educational part of the project is received, further publicity may be effective in continuing the project.
In addition, although the minibulk recycling project may not be an annual event, further recycling projects are highly possible as the tanks will continue to exceed their life cycle.
Literature Review
There are numerous publications by state extension services, as well as the Agricultural Chemical Research Council (ACRC), that clearly describe the recycling program for small 2.5 gallons jugs.
Many states have established programs for the collection and recycling of this size of container.
The Agribusiness Association of Iowa manages this program for Iowa, in cooperation with IDALS and IDNR.
However, there are limited resources about proper handling for minibulks.
Rob Denny, ACRC president, wrote an article in the December 1998 issue of Dealer 
It recommends that HDPE/cross-linked polymer tanks be retired after five years, and states that the tanks should be recycled into energy.
However, Denny doesn't develop a plan for handling the tanks beyond the chemical company programs.
In addition, a position paper from the European Crop Protection Association (ECPA) states that energy recover through power plants and cement kilns is the "method of choice" in handling agrichemical containers.
A 1994 publication from the ACRC shows that HDPE plastic has nearly twice the BTU value of coal.
Other articles, including those from extension services, describe the cost and size benefits of polyethylene tanks as well as their limitations.
An article written by Iowa State University professor Dr. Mark Hanna, Spraying Equipment: Tanks and Agitators, describes polyethylene tanks as an inexpensive choice for chemical application, but notes that sunlight causes polyethylene to break down, and that the tanks cannot be repaired if broken.
There is extensive literature available on properly handling pesticide container rinsate, and on recycling 2.5 gallon pesticide jugs.
However, the issue of larger bulk containers has not been addressed other than through Denny's article.
Approach and Methods
The Iowa Minibulk Recycling Project will be accomplished through a partnership of resources including the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship (IDALS), Agribusiness Association of Iowa, Iowa Waste Exchange, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and Bacon Recycling, a privately-owned plastic recycling contractor.
These organizations are working together to successfully develop, implement, and track a recycling program for minibulk tanks which have exceeded their recommended life.
The partnership between several Iowa governmental entities is critical to the success of the minibulk recycling project.
The knowledge and resources each group brings is important for the long-term integration of minibulk recycling in the state.
The IDALS has thorough knowledge of pesticide producers and applicators across the state as well as access to resources for publicity.
The Agribusiness Association of Iowa has a regular faxed newsletter which is sent to its 1700 members, 1300 of which are independent and cooperative retail agribusinesses.
Their membership, in addition to their established channels of communication in the agricultural industry, are very important in disseminating information about the recycling event.
The Iowa Waste Exchange is staffed by regional specialists across the state who will be able to work closely with agribusinesses both in communicating the recycling event and in facilitating the movement of tanks.
The Iowa Waste Exchange is managed by Recycle Iowa, an office of the Iowa Department of Economic Development, and is funded by the Iowa Department of Natural Resources.
In addition, the Iowa Department of Natural Resources has been approached for additional funding for this project, and they have agreed to provide a $3,500 match, which is included in the budget, as well as an in-kind match of staff time and resources.
Phase one of the Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project is educational.
The Agribusiness Association of Iowa has completed an initial survey of their members and located over 700 tanks which are immediately available.
However, the Association received an unusually low response rate to this survey, most likely due to the fact that at the time of the survey there was no system in place to handle waste minibulks.
The Agribusiness Association of Iowa, Bacon Recycling, and the Iowa Waste Exchange have contacts with chemical formulators, dealers, and applicators across the state.
In the educational phase of the project, they will contact these companies, through newsletters, direct mail, and telephone, to inform them about the project and to invite them to participate in a minibulk recycling event.
Participants will be assessed a cost share which will be used for recycling expenses incurred by the contractor.
The educational phase will also include a general media campaign to inform Iowans about the life-cycle of pesticide tanks and opportunity to responsibly handle these tanks through the minibulk recycling program.
It will include the development of a pamphlet or publication detailing the project, which can be updated for future projects.
The pamphlet will be mailed to agribusinesses.
In addition, the recycling project will be publicized at agribusiness trade shows across Iowa.
Phase two of the project is the actual recycling event.
Based on the responses given to the Agribusiness Association of Iowa, locations for the recycling collection trailers will be determined.
Bacon Recycling has a fleet of 140 trailers, so they are well equipped to transport the tanks to their location for grinding.
They also have experience managing and grinding minibulk tanks from smaller recycling projects.
The project will likely entail trailers parked at multiple participating dealer locations.
Dealer staff will assist in handling and loading tanks onto the trailers.
Once the trailers are full, Bacon Recycling will haul them to their Hopkington, Iowa, plant for grinding.
Phase three will be the responsibility of Bacon Recycling.
They will grind the tanks and ship them to a pre-determined market.
The proposed market is currently testing the plastic as a potential alternative fuel, and during the course of the project other market research will take place to determine the most cost-effective outlet for the ground plastic.
If an Iowa market cannot be located, Illinois Power currently accepts ground minibulks for use as fuel.
Impact Assessment
The success of the Iowa Minibulk Tank Recycling Project will be determined through an evaluation of the educational campaign and through the number of tanks recycled.
A blind telephone survey will be utilized to determine if chemical formulators, dealers, and applicators are aware of the recommended five-year life cycle for minibulks, and of the potential danger (spills, leaks, etc.) from not removing tanks from use after five years.
The number of tanks recycled, and the response of dealers in bringing tanks, will determine if the project should be planned on a regular basis.
The number of tanks recycled will also directly show the reduced environmental impact, as these tanks would most likely have ended up in Iowa landfills rather than being recycled.
Appendix A. Literature Cited
Denny, Rob.
Take Time This Winter to Weed Out Old Minibulks.
Dealer 
December 1998.
Geinosky, Ruby.
Acreage Boom - Increase in custom application has dealers spending money to make money.
Dealer 
1999 electronic archives.
Gnirss, A., et al.
Energy Recovery.
European Crop Protection Association (ECPA) Position Paper.
1997.
Hanna, Dr. Mark.
Spraying Equipment: Tanks and Agitators.
Department of Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering, Iowa State University.
1989.
Klocke, N.L. et al.
Ecofarming: Selection of Tractor Mounted or Pull-Type Sprayers Cooperative Extension, Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources, University of Nebraksa - Lincoln.
1980.
"White Coal": Empty HDPE Pesticide Containers as an Energy Source.
Agricultural Container Research Council.
January 1994.
Appendix B. Timetable
Activity Responsible Party Date Develop direct mail, newsletter, and advertising campaign for project Agribusiness Association of Iowa staff member with assistance from Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship (IDALS), Iowa Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) August 2000 - December 2000 Survey interested participants for number of tanks 
Appendix C. Major Investigators
Curtis Bacon, Bacon Recycling, Hopkington, IA Curtis Bacon has owned and operated Bacon Recycling in Hopkington, Iowa since 1972.
The business provides garbage and curbside recycling services for nine communities in Eastern Iowa, and they offer plastic grinding services to manufacturers including Winnebago Industries in Forest City, Iowa; and Franklin Equipment in Monticello, Iowa.
They are a subcontractor to Tri-Rinse, Inc., the contractor to the ACRC for small pesticide jug recycling.
Bacon Recycling has been certified by Tri-Rinse as an approved grinder for the pesticide jugs.
Jim Ellerhoff, Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship - Pesticide Bureau The Pesticide Bureau has had an active role in the coordination of the Plastic Pesticide Container Recycling Program in Iowa since 1991.
The program was initiated in 1990 with a pilot grant from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region VII.
There have been 2,294,504 pounds of plastic recycled in Iowa from plastic pesticide containers for the period of 1990 through 1999.
The bureau has cooperated with Iowa State University Extension, Agribusiness Association of Iowa, Iowa Department of Natural Resources, and 30 Sanitary Landfills across Iowa to make the recycling program a success.
Mr. Ellerhoff is the Program Coordinator for the Pesticide Bureau and works with the EPA Initiative Programs for Groundwater Protection, Endangered Species Protection, and Worker Protection Outreach.
Chris Murray, Agribusiness Association of Iowa Chris Murray is Vice President of Public Relations 
Mr. Murray is involved with the Grassroots Contact program and enhancing member involvement in the agribusiness industry, both of which will be very helpful in marketing the minibulk project to the appropriate companies.
The Agribusiness Association of Iowa (AAI) is the largest state agribusiness association in the nation.
It represents all levels of agribusiness including grain, feed, plant food, crop protection products, and an array of allied industries.
Currently, the organization has over 1,700 members including 1,300 independent and cooperative retail agribusinesses.
Staff from the Agribusiness Association of Iowa will be hired to develop the advertising campaign and the pamphlet for the project.
Patti Tornquist, Iowa Waste Exchange - Area Resource Specialist, Area C The Iowa Waste Exchange is a partnership between the Iowa Department of Natural Resources, Recycle Iowa (which is an organization under the Iowa Department of Economic Development), and the Iowa Waste Reduction Center at the University of Northern Iowa.
Since 1996, Ms. Tornquist has worked as an Iowa Waste Exchange Area Resource Specialist, assisting North Iowa businesses in finding outlets for waste materials instead of the landfills.
Ms. Tornquist became aware of the need for a project such as the minibulk recycling project from chemical formulators in North Central Iowa, and she has spearheaded the effort to develop a system to handle large, potentially hazardous tanks such as minibulks.
Project Budget
Project Period: September 2000 - January 2002
Budget Category
Grant Funding Other Funding Total Funding Personnel
19,000
19,000
Fringe Benefits
4,000
4,000
Travel
500
500
Equipment Supplies Contractual
3,000
$.10/pound paid by dealers to contractor
$ 3,000 + $.10/pound * total pounds
Other: (indirect costs)
11,643
2,472
14,115
Printing costs for educational pamphlet
3,500
1,500
5,000
Mailing costs for pamphlet to Agribusiness Association of Iowa members 
2,000 2,000
Media advertising (Radio, TV spots, posters, etc.) 
10,000
10,000 Total
40,000
3,500 + dealer payments 43,500
spacer spacer
Publications | Jobs
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
