International Information Programs Washington File Washington File 15 July 2002 Fact Sheets: USAID Programs in Five South American Nations (Programs described for Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru) (2250) The U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) has issued fact sheets about its assistance programs in five South American nations -- Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador, Paraguay, and Peru.
The fact sheets, released July 9, concentrate on such areas as providing greater economic opportunities for the poor, improving health care, conserving biodiversity, and strengthening the role of local government and civil society in democracies.
Supporting efforts to reduce the production of illicit drugs is a focus of USAID programs in Bolivia and Peru.
Following are the texts of the USAID fact sheets:
(begin text of USAID fact sheet on Bolivia)
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WASHINGTON, D.C. 20523
PRESS OFFICE Web site: http://www.usaid.gov Telephone: (202) 712-4320
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 9, 2002
FACT SHEET: USAID ASSISTANCE TO BOLIVIA
Budget (Total in US$ Millions) --
FY 1999: $76 million FY 2000: $151 million (includes funding from the Plan Colombia supplemental appropriation) FY 2001: $49.6 million FY 2002: $84.4 million
The USAID/Bolivia program is providing greater economic opportunities for the poor, strengthening democratic values, improving the health of poor Bolivians and conserving natural resources, as well as supporting the great strides the country has made in reducing the production of illicit drugs.
Democracy: USAID programs help to increase citizen support for the Bolivian democratic system.
Programs help to reform the criminal justice system through implementation of a new Code of Criminal Procedures; support local governance through assistance to municipal governments and engaging civil society at the local and regional level; and strengthen the representation function of the legislature by developing and implementing mechanisms to bring congressional representatives closer to their constituents.
Economic Opportunities: USAID works to increase income for Bolivia's poor.
Programs provide services to increase production and marketing of agricultural commodities; increase access to financial services in urban and rural areas; and provide food assistance to support food-for-work programs, increase access to technology and market services, and support micro-irrigation projects.
Health: USAID seeks to improve the health of the Bolivian people.
The mission helps to institutionalize integrated prevention and management of childhood illnesses in medical facilities and communities, improve maternal and reproductive health services, control infectious diseases, and use food assistance for basic sanitation and immunizations.
Environment: Through its work in Bolivia, USAID helps to ensure that forest, water and biodiversity resources are managed for sustained economic growth.
USAID works with Bolivia to promote sustainable forestry management, increase forest value and create eco-certified forest products for export to high-value "green markets", support local community management of natural resources and reduce pollution generated by manufacturers and hospitals.
Alternative Development: USAID is helping the government of Bolivia to dramatically reduce the production of illegal and excess coca.
USAID has helped to: develop sustainable farm-level production and market linkages in the Chapare region; provide direct assistance to those Chapare farmer families residing in certified coca-free areas; increase licit net household income in the Yungas region; and establish a Community Development Fund to provide financing for productive infrastructure development, road maintenance, and other investments identified by the participating communities in the Yungas region.
(end text of USAID fact sheet on Bolivia)
(begin text of USAID fact sheet on Brazil)
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WASHINGTON, D.C. 20523
PRESS OFFICE Web site: http://www.usaid.gov Telephone: (202) 712-4320
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 9, 2002
FACT SHEET: USAID ASSISTANCE TO BRAZIL
Budget (Total in US$ Millions) --
FY 1999: $13.4 million FY 2000: $12.6 million FY 2001: $15.2 million FY 2002: $12.63 million
USAID maintains a small office in Brazil with programs in three strategic areas: environment, energy, and health.
USAID/Brazil's main strength is its ability to work quickly and effectively in key areas, thus modeling programs and leveraging funds from other donors.
Environment: USAID is assisting Brazil to develop environmentally and socio-economically sustainable alternatives for sound land use in place of harmful practices such as forest conversion and burning, which result in loss of biodiversity, forest degradation, and global warming.
USAID programs develop management plans for protected areas; introduce reduced-impact forest management alternatives; reduce the effects of uncontrolled burning on local biodiversity; and create policies on natural resource management with government officials at all levels.
Energy: USAID programs seek to increase adoption by key actors of concepts, methods and technologies for clean and efficient energy production and use.
USAID helps to assist the Government of Brazil to support the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency projects; and enhance technology cooperation between U.S. and Brazilian firms.
Health -- HIV/AIDS: USAID programs help to reduce sexual transmission of HIV among vulnerable and increased-risk populations, such as low-income women, adolescents, selected male groups, and commercial sex workers.
USAID programs foster behavior change through social marketing strategies; improve HIV/AIDS national programs' technical and management performance; and address TB/HIV/AIDS co-infection issues.
Health - At-Risk Youth: USAID works with Brazilians to improve the ability of at-risk and working children and youth to become productive, healthy citizens by ensuring that they receive the basic tools to overcome poverty, avoid early insertion in the job market and become competent citizens.
USAID programs seek to enhance opportunities for formal and complementary education; provide health education, particularly STD/HIV and early pregnancy prevention; assist AIDS orphans and children affected by AIDS with health issues; and remove children from labor situations and enroll them in the formal school system.
(end text of USAID fact sheet on Brazil)
(begin text of USAID fact sheet on Ecuador)
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WASHINGTON, D.C. 20523
PRESS OFFICE Web site: http://www.usaid.gov Telephone: (202) 712-4320
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 9, 2002
FACT SHEET: USAID ASSISTANCE TO ECUADOR
Budget (Total in US$ Millions) --
FY 1999: $15.5 million FY 2000: $27.3 million FY 2001: $17.9 million FY 2002: $34.4 million
USAID's principal objectives in Ecuador are to conserve biodiversity, increase support for the democratic system, improve the quality of life of the population living along Ecuador's borders and increase economic opportunities for the poor.
Environment: Ecuador may have more biological diversity than any other country on earth, and USAID's program is helping to conserve substantial areas of this globally significant habitat.
USAID efforts focus on improving the country's environmental policy and legal framework, developing improved natural resource management practices and strengthening the capabilities of local groups to carry out effective conservation actions.
The development of improved policies, legal frameworks and science-based regulations has played a key role in reducing the often violent conflict associated with management of the Galapagos Marine Reserve.
The biologically rich Reserve (the focus of USAID/Ecuador's efforts in the Galapagos) was declared a United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Site in December 2001, a landmark victory for conservation and USAID.
Democracy: USAID's democracy strategy focuses on strengthening the transparency and accountability of selected democratic institutions, fostering greater inclusiveness of historically disadvantaged groups in key democratic processes and increasing consensus on policies that are critical to democratic consolidation.
USAID was instrumental in supporting a new Criminal Procedures Code that came into effect in July 2001.
USAID's work with the accusatory justice system through effective training and other related efforts, such as improving civil society capacity to oversee government functions and expanding access to justice, is ongoing and will continue to fight corruption.
USAID will continue to provide technical assistance and training to key justice sector institutions to ensure proper implementation of the Code.
USAID is also supporting this year's elections as a means of reinforcing the legitimacy of democracy, strengthening the governing mandate of elected representatives and facilitating greater citizen participation in this key democratic process.
Border Development -- Southern Border: USAID supports the 1998 Peace Agreement to improve social and economic conditions of inhabitants along the Ecuador-Peru border.
USAID support focuses on income generation for small and micro-entrepreneurs; increasing availability and access to social services (with an emphasis on health, water, and sanitation); improving natural resources management (including sustainable forest management, land titling, and technical assistance in production and marketing of timber and non-timber products); and strengthening local government.
Border Development -- Northern Border: USAID's northern border program focuses on increasing stability and prosperity and strengthening local institutions.
USAID supports social and productive infrastructure (including health, water and sanitation services and the construction and/or repair of roads, bridges and small irrigation systems) and civil society activities including an ongoing land-titling program for small farmers; human rights and legal defense; the provision of environmental assessments and monitoring and a drug-use education and prevention program.
Additional activities are specifically directed at strengthening indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorian community organizations.
Poverty Reduction: USAID's program focuses on two areas: a) support for strengthening the micro-finance sector, allowing increased access to financial and non-financial services by urban and rural micro-entrepreneurs and b) strengthening the macroeconomic environment by increasing fiscal transparency, improving tax administration, strengthening the investment climate and promoting competitiveness.
(end text of USAID fact sheet on Ecuador)
(begin text of USAID fact sheet on Paraguay)
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WASHINGTON, D.C. 20523
PRESS OFFICE Web site: http://www.usaid.gov Telephone: (202) 712-4320
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 9, 2002
FACT SHEET: USAID ASSISTANCE TO PARAGUAY
Budget (Total in US$ Millions) --
FY 1999: $6 million FY 2000: $6.2 million FY 2001: $9.9 million FY 2002: $9.6 million
USAID is helping solidify democratic institutions in Paraguay.
The mission's program integrates environment and reproductive health initiatives into the overall democracy program by strengthening the role of local government and civil society efforts.
Democracy: The USAID program seeks to improve government responsiveness and accountability through the creation of an effective judiciary, an independent functioning electoral system, transparent local governments with decentralized services based on wide citizen participation, and an active and responsible civil society.
Environment: USAID's Paraguay mission has engaged landowners to join conservation initiatives and is providing examples of sustainable economic alternatives for land use in an effort to improve the public and private management of the country's protected areas.
Health: The USAID program is working to increase contraceptive prevalence and reduce maternal mortality, especially among poor women and rural populations, by expanding access and the use of family planning services.
USAID is also providing technical assistance to improve community based health care systems throughout Paraguay.
(end text of USAID fact sheet on Paraguay)
(begin text of USAID fact sheet on Peru)
U.S. AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT WASHINGTON, D.C. 20523
PRESS OFFICE Web site: http://www.usaid.gov Telephone: (202) 712-4320
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE July 9, 2002
FACT SHEET: USAID ASSISTANCE TO PERU
Budget (Total in US$ Millions) --
FY 1999: $109.3 million FY 2000: $110.2 million FY 2001: $153.2 million FY 2002: $146.3 million
USAID's strategy concentrates on promoting the expansion of sustainable opportunities for improved quality of life for Peruvians through their democratic institutions and processes.
Democracy: USAID is building the capacity of civil and political society to promote more democratic practices, raise public awareness of the need to monitor and implement democratic reforms and help key public institutions become more independent and effective.
These programs support the independence and efficiency of the judiciary; protect human rights, ensure freedom of expression and access to the media; help reform the electoral/political system, encourage the balance and separation of powers; support decentralization and help improve civil-military relations.
Poverty Reduction: USAID programs help the extremely poor improve their access to and participation in markets and support policies that promote economic growth and delivery of basic services.
The program provides technical support to micro-enterprises and small producers; expands the use of environmentally sound production practices; supports integrated food security efforts and improved nutrition practices; increases community participation in local development decisions; increases public investment in key infrastructure and improves the business regulatory framework.
Health: USAID works to ensure that quality health services are accessible and utilized, that people are practicing healthy behaviors, and that Peruvian health-sector policies and programs are more responsive to health needs.
USAID is encouraging Peruvians to take preventive actions (e.g., immunization) to prevent disease, promotive actions (e.g., breast-feeding and weaning practices) that contribute to good nutrition and curative actions (e.g., oral re-hydration therapy).
Environment: USAID works closely with the GOP to strengthen the national environment policy and legal framework and to increase environmental awareness, understanding and demand.
USAID supports the adoption of proven environmental policies and technologies; strengthened local capacity to interpret and apply policies (ordinances); increased national level knowledge of environmental issues and mitigation alternatives and increased citizen awareness of these environmental issues.
Alternative Development: USAID helps Peruvians in coca growing zones find other means of supporting themselves through alternative development projects which increase household income from licit economic activities, improve general social conditions and improve participation in and access to local government institutions.
Girls' Education: USAID helps Peru focus on the special educational needs of girls by improving policies and supportive regulations, giving girls increased access to and retention in quality basic education and helping to improve local government capacity to implement policies and programs that support quality education for girls.
Border Development: USAID is providing assistance to improve the quality of life along the Peru-Ecuador border.
This assistance includes enhancing social services (health, water, and sanitation), increasing respect and protection of rights of border populations -- particularly those of women and indigenous people, supporting the terms of the 1998 Peace Accords signed between Peru and Ecuador and increasing the capacity of border communities to manage development processes.
(end text of USAID fact sheet on Peru)
(Distributed by the Office of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State.
Web site: http://usinfo.state.gov)
_________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
