STATEMENT OF EUGENE L. WASZILY
ASSISTANT INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR AUDITING
U.S. GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
BEFORE
THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON OVERSIGHT, INVESTIGATIONS,
AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 7, 1999
Madam Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee today to provide to you an update on our continuing assessment of the General Services Administration's (GSA) efforts to enhance the level of physical security within Federal buildings.
With me is Mr. Joseph Mastropietro, our New York Audit Office Regional Inspector General for Auditing, who has served as overall project director for audit work concerning security issues.
At the June 4, 1998, hearing on building security, we reported that the Public Buildings Service (PBS) had made substantial progress in installing security countermeasures in Federal Buildings nationwide, and that the overall level of protection had been increased.
However, we also stressed that serious operational, financial and administrative shortcomings plagued the program and weakened its effectiveness.
The PBS Commissioner reported to you on the actions he had taken and additional actions planned to address the deficiencies we had found.
Our office pledged to the Subcommittee that we would continue to work with PBS and monitor implementation of its corrective actions.
In addition to fulfilling that promise, our office during the ensuing 15 months has undertaken additional audits to assess other aspects of PBS's physical security program.
I now would like to present to the Subcommittee the results of our more recent work, and discuss our current and future initiatives.
Security Countermeasures Program
Implementation Improves
In late fall of 1998, we launched an extensive follow-up audit of PBS's installation of major security countermeasures, such as x-rays, magnetometers, and surveillance equipment, to assess how well physical building security enhancement projects were progressing.
To conduct our review, we selected 207 major federal facilities, including installations in each of GSA's 11 regions.
We examined financial and operational records and physically inspected the security countermeasures in place at each location.
Our work disclosed that PBS had made improvement in ensuring that security countermeasures were installed as planned.
For the 207 buildings visited, we identified eight (8) countermeasures that were reported as completed but were not in place.
In comparison, our earlier study, covering 159 buildings, identified 32 missing countermeasures.
We were especially pleased with the progress made in the National Capital Region, where we identified only one deficiency at the 25 surveyed buildings.
In contrast, our earlier work found 24 instances of missing or uninstalled countermeasures based on a review of 52 buildings.
PBS has also taken steps to make use of most of the $2 million security equipment inventory that our original audit found sitting in a Washington, DC warehouse.
Most of the more expensive equipment items, such as x-rays and magnetometers, have either been put in service or had a designated use planned.
The inventory still included over 200 cameras, monitors and VCRs in storage.
We have encouraged the Federal Protective Service to survey all of its other regions to determine whether they have any use for this equipment.
While the assessment of physical security equipment installations showed substantial program improvement, far less progress has been made in ensuring that PBS has accurate and reliable information concerning security countermeasure installations throughout the nation.
Our review noted database discrepancies for information related to 104 of the 207 buildings in the study.
In total, we identified 178 data exceptions related to these facilities.
These inaccuracies render the national database unreliable for program management and decision making purposes.
They also demonstrate the need for more effective coordination between policy makers and regional officials with implementation and operational responsibilities.
In our original report, we noted that several regional offices had used security funds to acquire unapproved items and services.
Our follow-up work identified 8 additional instances where funds specifically reserved for security countermeasure efforts had been expended for other purposes.
The total security funds expended for unapproved expense items exceeded $900,000.
Our follow-up study also raised a new concern: security countermeasures that had been installed but were not operational, and had not been operational for several months prior to our visits.
At the 207 buildings inspected, we found 19 major security devices not in use, largely due to equipment breakdowns or because of discontinued use by tenant agencies.
This suggests to us that physical security personnel have not always been effectively coordinating work with PBS buildings operational personnel to ensure that security systems are consistently maintained in full operational mode.
It also suggests that better coordination and communication between PBS and the tenant Building Security Committees is needed.
NEW INITIATIVES
Over the past year, we have completed, or have ongoing, other work related to security at Federal facilities.
Improved Security Through Better Design and Construction Techniques
One way to enhance public safety is to design new facilities to give more consideration to security concerns and employ construction techniques that enable new or renovated buildings to better withstand assault with explosives.
In October 1995, following the Murrah Federal Building bombing, President Clinton issued an Executive Order that created the Interagency Security Committee.
Chaired by GSA's Administrator, the Committee was formed to establish policies for developing and evaluating security standards for Federal facilities, ensuring compliance with such standards, and overseeing the implementation of appropriate security measures.
GSA focused on developing enhanced security standards for planning, designing, and constructing new buildings, and for major renovation projects.
GSA adopted a draft of the standards in January 1997.
The Interagency Security Committee approved the enhanced standards, with minor modifications, in November 1998.
We conducted an audit to assess GSA's application of the new standards within its own construction program.
Our evaluation of the security standards for new and renovation buildings concluded that GSA is applying the enhanced standards where possible; however, the standards are too new to have been applied to every phase of all current building projects.
Since new construction projects take a number of years from the time a need for a building is identified to the actual construction, most current projects were planned prior to the development of the standards.
GSA has been applying the standards as practicable.
In addition, most construction projects currently underway are either for border stations, which are unique buildings exempt from the new standards, or projects to build courthouses.
While courthouse construction would be subject to the standards, GSA and the Administrative Office of the Courts have agreed, in a memorandum of understanding, that new courthouses will follow a unique set of rigorous, prearranged protection standards, and will not be subject to the individual threat assessments prescribed by GSA's standards.
While the study found that GSA is applying the new construction standards whenever possible, we did note that GSA had not used assessment standards when considering commercial properties for new leases of space.
We also pointed out to management that some regional personnel are unclear regarding which PBS work units should have lead responsibility for ensuring that security considerations are factored into each phase of project development.
PBS management agreed with our points and is working internally and with the Interagency Security Committee to establish supplemental policies.
Safeguarding Blueprints
We also performed a review of public access to Federal building design plans.
GSA, as the Government's primary landlord and property manager, is involved with the construction and major repair and alterations of many Federal facilities.
Integral to such construction work is the development of design plans that detail the physical layout of the structure and interior space of the building.
While blueprints are necessary for use in performing repair and alteration work, they contain information that would be very useful to terrorists intent on attacking a building.
We initiated this review upon learning that a set of Federal building blueprints had been provided to a nonprofit organization considering a municipal revitalization project next to the Federal building.
GSA officials had released the plans without any restrictive language regarding release to third parties and without stressing the need to safeguard the plans.
With further research, we learned that Federal building design plans are, in many cases, available to the general public through several sources.
More disconcerting was the fact that some of these sources were considering including Federal blueprints and designs in web sites on the Internet.
Clearly, this would present a heightened exposure to physical security risks.
Our audit surfaced a number of questions which needed to be addressed:
* Should GSA provide Federal building design plans to outside parties without specific provisions for physically safeguarding the plans? * Should recipients of the plans be required to acknowledge any non-disclosure requirements? * To what extent are plans available to the public, and what are the security risks arising from it?
A number of factors and differing opinions by various agency groups exist with regard to the need to allow access to design plans, in order to accomplish necessary work without materially increasing security risks.
We concluded that GSA needs to reevaluate current policy to determine when public access to plans represents a security threat, and decide if policy changes should be made in light of the Agency's responsibility to safeguard property and lives in today's environment of more heightened security concerns.
PBS management is in full agreement with the issues and concerns that we raised.
The Commissioner established an intra-organizational task group to develop policy that will allow needed drawings and plans to be given to contractors and governmental officials, but will reduce the opportunities for plans to fall into the wrong hands.
An instructional letter establishing this policy has been prepared and will soon be issued.
Contract Security Guard Program
In the past few years, the estimated numbers of contract security guards has doubled to an estimated 5000 to 6000, costing $120 million.
Guards are employed to perform access control and security patrols.
As more electronic security systems have been added to Federal facilities, guard personnel are increasingly assigned to operate these devices.
In recent months, we have initiated a nationwide review to assess the effectiveness of the security guard program.
We are still in the survey phase of our work, but we have already encountered individual circumstances, which are unacceptable.
Specifically, we have noted guard personnel placed in service without being subjected to criminal background checks.
We have also found guard personnel posted without proper training, and guard service firms providing inadequate levels of service for extended periods of time.
While it will take several additional months of work before we can form an overall assessment of the contract security program, it is clear from our initial work that improvements are needed.
Summary
In summary, over the past year we have reviewed various aspects of the PBS physical security program finding that many of its elements have achieved substantial improvement since our earlier assessments.
From our work, we conclude that the senior managers of PBS are committed to a sound physical security program for federal facilities.
They have developed ample policy guidance, and when our work has pointed out implementation shortcomings, they have reacted rapidly to correct the deficiencies.
That said, what remains of concern to us is the lack of an effective oversight system to ensure that PBS policy and plans are implemented as intended.
We appreciate PBS's efforts to empower its employees and assign decision-making responsibilities to the individuals who are closest to the task at hand.
However, we believe that a monitoring loop of some kind is essential to ensure critical requirements are fulfilled.
Madam Chairman, this concludes my formal statement.
I would be pleased to address any questions you and the Members of the Subcommittee have.
Background Information
The terrorist act of April 19, 1995, which destroyed the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building, killing 168 people and injuring hundreds of others, caused President Clinton to direct the Department of Justice to assess the vulnerability of Federal buildings nationwide to acts of terrorism and other forms of violence.
Under the leadership of the United States Marshals Service, security experts from across government were assembled to classify federal properties into one of five security levels and define minimum-security standards for each classification.
Then, federal facilities were physically surveyed to identify existing security conditions and prescribe what additional measures would be needed.
Overall, the study found that the typical federal facility lacked some of the features required meeting the new minimum standards.
Except for extremely high-level security sites, where agencies established their own unique security system, GSA was given the responsibility for upgrading security countermeasures for over 5,000 federal facilities.
Within GSA, the Public Building Service (PBS), through its Office of Federal Protective Service (FPS), was given the responsibility for implementing the security countermeasures upgrade program.
Program policy was developed at FPS headquarters in Washington, DC, while the responsibility for actual implementation of the security systems and providing additional security personnel was assigned to the 11 FPS regional offices.
Congress authorized GSA to spend $240 million to acquire and install x-ray screening devices, closed circuit television systems, lighting systems, protective barriers and other devices, as well as to significantly increase the number of security guards at many federal facilities.
In the spring of 1997, the Office of Inspector General first began hearing of possible implementation and financial problems affecting the security upgrade program and immediately initiated our review.
Later, we became aware that the Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Economic Development had asked the General Accounting Office to review GSA security efforts.
We arranged to coordinate the work of our respective offices.
At the June 4, 1998, hearing held by the Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Economic Development, concerning PBS's progress in upgrading the physical security system at federal facilities, we reported that, while overall security had been enhanced, serious operational and administrative shortcomings hampered full implementation of the security upgrade program.
We noted that FPS Central Office did not establish adequate guidance in critical areas, such as equipment procurement and installation, cost control and countermeasure criteria.
Even though FPS designed and implemented a centralized physical security database, to a large extent, the regions provided unreliable data to Central Office.
Given the significance of the program, the Subcommittee had requested that FPS intensify its efforts to correct the deficiencies and, after allowing a reasonable time period for corrective action, that our office reassess program implementation progress.
