menutop.gif (5504 bytes) County Officials Announce Arrest in Anthrax Hoax Incident November 2, 2001 [Allen110201.jpg]
Montgomery County officials announced today that the Montgomery County Police arrested a Mitchellville, Maryland man in connection with a false threat of Anthrax.
On November 1, 2001 at approximately 11:50 a.m., Montgomery County Police from the 3^rd District along with Montgomery County Fire/Rescue responded to the Crystal Ford dealership located at 3111 Automobile Boulevard in Silver Spring for the report of a possible Anthrax spill.
Upon arrival, it was learned that at 9:15 a.m., the suspect dropped off his vehicle at the dealership for service.
The suspect was carrying a plastic bag filled with an unknown white substance.
The suspect spilled the bag out onto the service advisors desk and stated look its Anthrax.
After the service advisor stated that it was not funny and nothing to play with, the suspect replied, yeah, well its Anthrax.
The suspect then proceeded outside and dropped the empty plastic bag into a trashcan and left the dealership.
The entire business was evacuated and the suspected substance was contained and collected by the Hazardous Material team.
The material was tested and confirmed that it was negative for Anthrax.
After a thorough investigation, a positive identification was made of the suspect including his home address.
Later in the evening, at approximately 7:45 p.m., the suspect returned to the dealership to retrieve his vehicle and was arrested without incident by members of the 3^rd District Special Assignment Team.
The suspect was transported to the 3^rd District station and interviewed by the 3^rd District Detectives.
The suspect was subsequently transported to the Montgomery County Detention Center and charged with Felony False Statement-Destructive Device and three (3) Counts of Second Degree Assault.
Arrested was Arlo Kenneth Allen, Jr., age 43, of the 2200 block of Bermondsey Drive in Mitchellville, Maryland.
He is currently incarcerated in the Montgomery County Detention Center on $100,000 bond.
Threats of anthrax are taken very seriously here in Montgomery County, and we will not tolerate hoaxes, said County Executive Douglas M. Duncan.
In commenting on last nights arrest, Police Chief Charles A. Moose stated: I hope this arrest makes it abundantly clear to anyone contemplating committing a hoax like this, that we will vigorously investigate and arrest those responsible for committing them.
There is nothing funny about causing fear and anxiety to innocent victims, not to mention the waste of public safety resources.
I want to send the strongest message that this kind of behavior is totally unacceptable.
A photo of Arlo Allen has been e-mailed to all known media contacts
Back to Press Release Page
menutop.gif (5504 bytes)
