FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE FOR INFORMATION CONTACT 6/3/98 Steven Gumplo, 703-519-8824 John Carsten, 405-521-2897 Lieutenant Governor Fallin Participates in National Women Legislators' Conference WASHINGTON, D.C. - Lieutenant Governor Mary Fallin has just completed the National Foundation for Women Legislators', Inc.
(NFWL) biannual Leadership College.
The leadership seminar took place June 1-3 in Washington D.C.
Lieutenant Governor Fallin was one of 30 applicants chosen from the NFWL's 1,600 members for the Leadership College based on her leadership as an elected official.
"We were delighted to have Lieutenant Governor Fallin attend the conference.
She is definitely one of the premier women elected officials in the country today and will increase her effectiveness as she interacts with other women in government from across the country," said NFWL President Robin Read.
The Leadership College program is designed to bring together experts on the ever-changing environment of leadership.
The College teaches elected women how to move into even higher leadership positions, enables elected women leaders to become more inclusive and work effectively in groups and provides a forum in which elected officials can be educated in effective leadership styles.
"I am honored to be chosen as one of the attendees at this college.
The NFWL has a long tradition of helping women in leadership positions keep abreast of the changing trends in public policy," Fallin said.
The college educates participants on a wide array of topics, including: creating a personal and professional strategy, stabilizing values, effective communications techniques, media presence and delivery on camera.
-more-
The Gallup organization is offering its insights and evaluate abilities to the College, as well as its expertise with the demand of leadership.
As high-ranking political representatives, participants at the College will receive evaluations of their skills and will be counseled on ways to build their strengths.
The speakers at the College will include Senate Majority Leader Trent Lott; White House Counselor to the President, Paul Begala; CNN Bureau Chief Frank Sesno and former Vice Presidential Candidate and HUD Secretary Jack Kemp.
Presentations will be given by popular leadership experts such as Dr. Neil Snyder, author of The Will to Lead and Vision, Values and Courage; Gene Landrum, author of Profiles of Power and Success; and Nicholas Lore, author of The Pathfinder.
The NFWL educates women elected officials on increasing their effectiveness in their role as elected officials.
The NFWL does not take ideological positions on any current issue, but rather exists to assist women elected on their individual issues.
Ultimately, the NFWL's mission is to provide strategic resources for women to be strong and effective elected officials and to develop leadership through knowledge and synergy they share in association with each other.
The NFWL achieves this mission through funding and strategic planning developed by t a Board of Directors comprised of sitting women legislators, representatives from the corporate world and individuals who bring a special talent or background to the Foundation in keeping with its mission.
In having a diverse group of people with a range of experiences and perspectives on the Board of Directors and as members of the Foundation, it ensures a broad range of support for women legislators throughout the United States, Puerto Rico and Guam.
The NFWL is a nonpartisan, nonprofit educational foundation consisting of members of the National Order of Women Legislators (current and former legislators) founded in 1938, and corporate and associate members (women and men).
The Foundation qualifies as a tax-exempt organization under 501 (c) (3) of the Internal Revenue Code.
-30-
