[USEMAP:Navigation%20(Copy%201).jpg] Woodpeckers of Alabama by MARK A. BAILEY, Conservation Biologist, Conservation Services Southeast
TF_Line.jpg (2191 bytes) Published in the Winter 1999 issue of TREASURED Forests
Each state has officially adopted certain plants and animals as symbols to set it apart and enhance its image.
For example, Mississippi has the Southern magnolia as its state tree and--along with Arkansas, Florida, Tennessee and Texas--the mockingbird as its state bird.
It is easy to see why the longleaf pine is Alabama's state tree, but did you know that we are unique among the 50 states in having a woodpecker as our state bird? We see the familiar "yellowhammer" depicted everywhere, from phone books and highway maps to the new "Alabama Forests" license plate.
That bird has become part of Alabama's history and cultural identity.
We are, in a sense, the Woodpecker State.
Click to view full screen The yellowhammer is one of nine woodpeckers native to Alabama.
Six species are fairly common year round, and another arrives in autumn to spend the winter in large numbers.
Take a walk through almost any wooded area with at least some mature trees and you will likely find one or more of these species.
You are far less likely to encounter the rare and endangered red-cockaded woodpecker, and it is probable that no living person has seen the now-extinct ivorybill in Alabama.
It is not difficult to recognize a woodpecker, and most species are easy enough to tell apart.
All of our woodpeckers are boldly marked and can be quite conspicuous on tree trunks and branches.
Most are black and white, with some red generally visible on the head.
The feet have strong, sharp claws, and unlike other birds, two toes point forward and two point backward.
A stiff central pair of tail feathers is used as an additional point of contact to prop the bird up as it climbs or perches on a vertical trunk.
The straight sharp bill is used to chisel insects from bark and wood as well as to excavate nest holes and to drum during courtship.
All species nest and roost in tree cavities.
Woodpeckers are not considered songbirds, but they do make a variety of harsh calls and Click to view full screen cries.
Let's take a look at each species.
Yellow-shafted Flicker (Yellowhammer)
You won't find the "yellowhammer" listed in the modern field guides--the official common name is yellow-shafted flicker--but the name was being used in the South long before the members of an Alabama Civil War regiment identified themselves by wearing yellowhammer feathers in their hats.
The story became folklore, eventually resulting in the Legislature declaring the yellowhammer as Alabama's state bird.
This is our only yellow-brownish woodpecker.
Only males have the black "mustache."
Flickers can be found in a variety of habitats, but seem to prefer open hardwoods, where they often feed on the ground.
Ants account for about half of their food intake, and flickers reportedly eat more ants than any other North American bird.
Their diet includes other insects as well as pokeberries, dogwood berries, wild plums, and seeds.
Flickers have suffered greatly from competition for nests with introduced European starlings.
Pileated Woodpecker
With the ivorybill gone, this crow-sized bird is Alabama's largest woodpecker.
Mostly black, it has a red crest ("pileated" means crested) and white on the wings and neck.
The "yucka-yucka-yucka" call is similar to the call of the flicker, but louder.
It feeds heavily on carpenter ants and wood-boring beetles.
This woodpecker declined dramatically with the initial logging of the old growth forest, but has adapted well to second growth woods, and it is now seen in back yards.
Nests are typically in dead trees or dead branches of living trees, but one aristocratic pair has taken up residence in the hollow columns of a vacant antebellum home in Greene County.
A new nest cavity is excavated each year, and old ones are often used by wood ducks.
Red-bellied Woodpecker
As the late Alabama ornithologist Tom Imhof observed in his book, Alabama Birds, this bird was named by someone who probably didn't realize that its reddish belly, usually pressed against a tree trunk, is not its most prominent feature.
Look for the horizontally-striped zebra-like back pattern and the red nape and cap (females have the red nape only).
The "churr-churr-churr" call is a familiar sound, even in the suburbs.
A variety of animal and vegetable foods are taken, including wood-boring beetles and acorns.
Red-bellies frequently come to feeders and are among our least shy woodpeckers.
Red-headed Woodpecker
With a head and neck that appear to have been dipped in blood, this black and white woodpecker is striking in appearance.
This bird is found wherever there are numerous dead standing trees.
New beaver ponds are ideal habitat, as are areas with beetle-killed or ice-damaged trees.
Sometimes nest cavities are drilled into telephone poles in towns.
Starlings frequently evict red-headed woodpeckers from their cavities.
This species rarely drills into trees for insects.
Because these woodpeckers often fly low and dart out from perches to snatch flying insects, they suffer surprisingly high mortality from automobiles.
Yellow-bellied Sapsucker
This is the only woodpecker that does not breed in the state.
It is a common winter resident, but is often overlooked because it is usually quiet and doesn't fly often.
It utters a mournful, catlike cry from time to time.
About the size and color of the hairy woodpecker, it has a red crown, and males also have a red throat.
Unlike our other woodpeckers, this bird makes a living by drilling rows of small holes in a variety of deciduous and coniferous shrubs and trees (including pines) and feeding on the sap and insects attracted to the sap.
Scarred trees may look as though they were hit with small-caliber machine gun fire.
The state champion tulip poplar in the Sipsey Wilderness has large sapsucker scars that, with the tree's growth, have expanded to several times their original size.
The bird that drilled those holes may have lived a century ago.
Hairy Woodpecker
Except for being larger and having a longer bill, this woodpecker is very similar in appearance to the downy woodpecker.
Named for its slightly shaggy appearance, this black and white woodpecker has a solid white back (not barred like the sapsucker's) and males have a small red patch at the back of the head.
The call is a sharp "peek" that is similar but much louder than that of the downy.
Preferred food is the larvae of wood-boring beetles (the stomach of one hairy woodpecker contained 100 round-headed wood-borers) and other insects.
This is a shy bird; when approached it will dodge around the other side of the tree to stay out of sight.
Downy Woodpecker
The little downy is our smallest woodpecker, but is easily confused with the hairy.
Its bill is much shorter and its call is lower in pitch and volume.
More common and tamer than the hairy, the downy is a frequent visitor to feeders in suburbs.
It generally nests in dead snags and it eats beetles, ants, caterpillars, moths, and some wild fruits.
This trusting woodpecker frequently allows people to approach to within a few feet before flying to a nearby tree.
Red-cockaded Woodpecker
This is another poorly-named bird.
It actually has no red visible on the head, at least 90 percent of the time.
Males display a tiny spot, or "cockade," of red when excited.
A better name would be the pine woodpecker.
Most forest owners have heard of this bird (often as the "RCW") because of its federal endangered status, but few have seen it.
This was formerly a common species of mature pine forests, but it is gone from most of its historic range.
In Alabama, the RCW has declined to probably fewer than 500 birds in a dozen or so locations, and fragmented small populations continue to disappear.
The RCW lives in small family groups, which cooperate in feeding of young and the excavation of nest and roost cavities in living pines.
Its endangered status is mainly due to its strict habitat requirements: expanses of open, park-like pine forest, such as that maintained by fire, and mature pines for nesting.
The Alabama Forestry Commission is working with the Alabama Department of Conservation and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to implement a statewide conservation plan for this bird.
Ivory-billed Woodpecker
This magnificent bird was our largest and always the rarest.
Dependent on virgin hardwood bottomlands and cypress swamps, it disappeared as the big timber was logged out.
Illegal shooting was also a factor toward the end, as museums and collectors scrambled for the last of the last.
Larvae of large wood-boring beetles were the principal food.
Arthur Howell, in his 1928 Birds of Alabama, wrote of what may have been the last ivorybill documented in the state: "C.W. Howe, a trapper who has spent many years in the wilder parts of Alabama, tells me that he killed one of these birds about 1907 in the Conecuh swamps north of Troy, the only one he ever saw in the State."
The species survived in Cuba into the late 1980s or possibly early 1990s, but all indications are it is now extinct.
Conclusion
Have you ever been awakened at dawn by a woodpecker jackhammering the side of your house? Rather than proclaiming their territories like songbirds, woodpeckers peck or tap rapidly on objects to make a loud noise that is recognized by other woodpeckers.
This is called "drumming" and differs from pecking for food or nest holes because it does not often make a hole--it just makes a loud racket.
Drumming usually starts in late winter and continues into spring.
Sometimes woodpeckers choose gutters, siding, or other metal surfaces as drumming spots because they can get a louder sound from them.
This might be great for the woodpecker, but few people will tolerate this for more than a few consecutive mornings.
The best way to combat the behavior is to put something over the drumming spot, like a piece of foam rubber, which dulls the sound.
If the spot no longer makes a loud noise when hammered, the bird will soon move on in search of another, better location.
Woodpeckers are truly an enjoyable component of Alabama's natural (and cultural) heritage, and they are dependent on us for the perpetuation of their habitat.
In return, they reward us by controlling forest pests and by adding to the color and sound of our woodlands.
Back to Index | Back to Topics | Home
