Div. of Animal Industry 407 S. Calhoun St Tallahassee, FL 32399-0800 850/410-0900 FAX 410-0915 (Web colors green text, cream marble background)
Text Navigation Index to Website Disease Reporting Form
.Chronic Wasting Disease Information Page
Not to be confused with Human's CJD _________________________________________________________________
Table of Contents
Articles Links Emergency Rule
Link to Florida Department of Agriculture 
Articles
03/03/2003 Minnesota Legislation to Combat CWD 01/24/03 Chronic Wasting Disease found in a farmed elk from Stearns County Case marks the second time this disease has been detected in Minnesota -01-03-2003 How does your state compare? -11-18-2002 USDA Issues Permit for Chronic Wasting Disease Antigen Test Kit -11-13-2002 Wildlife officials say relocation could protect Key deer -11-01-2002 Illinois CWD Report -7-17-2002 -Correction to Michigan Report - There is no CWD -6-1-2002 - Texas preparing for Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) in a wild mule deer -5-23-2002- New test procedure finds 4 more CWD positive deer (Wisconsin) -5-22-2002 - New test procedure finds four more cwd-positive deer (news release 
Due to the concern of Chronic Wasting Disease in cervids, an emergency rule was placed in effect on April 30, 2002, prohibiting the importation of deer and elk for 180 days into New Hampshire.
-4-27-2002 - Michigan imposes a one year mandatory all live deer and elk imports -4-23-2002 - Canadian Food Inspection Agency - Animal Health Fact Sheet -CWD of Deer and Elk
-4-22-2002 Import of Deer and Elk Banned to Prevent Spread of Chronic Wasting Disease - Springfield, Illinois.
-- Emergency rules were filed today banning the importation of captive deer and elk into Illinois in a continuing effort to prevent Chronic Wasting Disease from coming into the state.
The new rules filed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture also require a permit to be obtained by an owner before any captive deer or elk change ownership or move within the state.
In addition, the animals must come from a herd enrolled in a monitored herd program.
The new rules take effect immediately.
We must take this action to keep Chronic Wasting Disease out of Illinois, to protect our farmers who raise captive herds of deer and elk and to protect our wild herds, said Illinois Agriculture Director Joe Hampton.
We appreciate the assistance we have received from owners of captive herds and sportsmen in implementing these changes and in monitoring the health of deer and elk in the state.
The import ban was recommended by a task force of key staff from the Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
The emergency rule will remain in place for no more than 150 days, until a new rule is adopted.
The task force is continuing to gather information and develop strategies for addressing Chronic Wasting Disease issues.
There are still a lot of unknowns regarding Chronic Wasting Disease.
We want to take every necessary precaution to prevent CWD from coming into Illinois, IDNR Director Brent Manning said.
This step is not a permanent solution, but allows us time to assess whats occurring on the national landscape.
During the coming weeks and months, we will be working together to put additional safeguards in place.
Chronic wasting disease is a fatal neurological disease found in deer and elk.
The disease attacks the brains of infected animals, causing them to become emaciated, display abnormal behavior, lose coordination and eventually die.
Although Chronic Wasting Disease never has been diagnosed in Illinois, the disease has been found in captive deer and elk herds in Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, Montana, Oklahoma, South Dakota and the Canadian provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta.
It has also been confirmed in wild deer herds in Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska and Wisconsin.
Scientists test for Chronic Wasting Disease by examining the brain tissue of animals.
Illinois regulations require that any captive cervid (member of the deer/elk family) that dies from an unknown cause and has exhibited a neurological disorder must be tested for Chronic Wasting Disease.
Programs are in place for establishing Certified Monitored Chronic Wasting Disease herds for captive deer and elk and Contained Monitored Chronic Wasting Disease herds for captive deer.
Illinois has participated in a targeted surveillance program for Chronic Wasting Disease in wild deer for about 5 years, since that approach was first proposed by the Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study, a diagnostic and research service which investigates wildlife diseases.
In this program, deer that exhibit symptoms that could be caused by Chronic Wasting Disease are submitted for testing by an approved laboratory.
During the fall 2001 shotgun deer season, Illinois officials also systematically sampled hunterharvested deer from around the state for testing.
To date, no animals from Illinois have tested positive for Chronic Wasting Disease, but surveillance efforts for the disease are being expanded in response to the diagnosis of the disease in Wisconsin.
Indiana Suspends Deer 
Indianapolis (16 April 2002) - Beginning this Week, Deer, Elk and Other cervid species are prohibited from importation into the state of Indiana.
The emergency rule, adopted today by the members of the Indiana State Board of Animal Health, is an effort to protect the state's free-ranging and farm-raised cervids from chronic wasting disease.
On July 2, at their next regular meeting, Board members will again vote on a permanent version of today's rule that would extend the suspension of all such imports though May 1, 2003.
A public hearing will be held prior to the vote, when written and oral comments will be considered.
The proposed one-year moratorium on imports generated broad-ranging support from the farm-raised deer and elk industries, as well as conservation and wildlife groups and the Indiana Department of Natural Resources.
Representatives of each organization expressed support for the measure during today's public hearing.
"While a one- year suspension falls short of a permanent solution, this action affords us time to assess the rapidly changing events occurring nationally regarding CWD," said Indiana State Veterinarian Dr. Bret D. Marsh.
"Because so little is known about how this disease is transmitted and live- animal diagnostics are currently nonexistent, we feel this is our best option for protecting Indiana's cervid industry and natural resources until science can provide us more answers."
Chronic wasting disease, also known as CWD, is an always-fatal brain-wasting condition that affects animals in the cervid family, including elk, and various types of deer.
Little is known about the slow-progressing disease that is part of the category of illnesses known as transmissible encephalopathies.
This category includes unrelated diseases such as Cruetzfeld-Jakob disease in humans and bovine spongiform encephalopathy (or "mad cow" disease) in cattle.
CWD has noknown human health effects.
On going research has not yet identified a cure or live-animal test for CWD.
Although the disease has never been diagnosed in Indiana, seven states and two Canadian provinces have reported positive cases in captive and/or free-ranging animals.
Concern about the spread of the disease in the United States has heightened recently at the discovery of several infected deer in Wisconsin last month.
Indiana State Board of Animal Health and Department of Natural Resources staff members plan to launch a CWD surveillance program in Indiana this year to verify the health status of native populations.
The public may submit written comments on the proposed rule to the Indiana State Board of Animal Health until the close of the comment period on July 2.
Denise Derrer, Public Information Director, Indiana State Board of Animal Health, 805 Beachway Drive, Suite 50, Indianapolis, IN 46224-7785, ph#317/227-0308, fax#317/227-0330, dderrer@boah.state.in.us
Wisconsin DNR News Release Madison, 5 Apr 2002 -- Efforts to sample and test 500 white-tailed deer from western Dane and Eastern Iowa counties continued today with wildlife officials reporting they've received notification of 2 more positive cases from the testing laboratory.
This brings the total of known CWD-diseased deer in the area to 12.
With the help of area landowners, wildlife managers are now very close to finishing the job of collecting the 500 deer veterinary experts determined were needed to present an accurate picture of the extent of the disease in the surveillance area.
The total number of deer collected by the CWD Sampling Operations Center early Friday morning was 471.
Wildlife health specialists are processing the tissue samples rapidly and sending them off to a laboratory in Ames IA for testing.
A total of 272 samples have been tested.
The newest positive samples came from Sections 5 and 9 in the Town of Vermont about 5 miles northwest of Mt. Horeb.
Landowners have provided most of the deer killed for testing.
More information can be found on the Chronic Wasting Disease page on the DNR Web site: http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/wildlife/whealth/issues/CWD.
-- Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources PO Box 7921 Madison WI 53707 http://www.dnr.state.wi.us 4/15/2002 Albany, New York.
- New York will no longer import deer and elk as a precautionary step to prevent the introduction of chronic wasting disease (CWD) in animals, state environmental and agricultural regulators said Friday.
The new regulations take effect immediately.
"By banning the import of deer and elk into the state, we can reduce the risk of the chronic wasting disease entering New York and help to prevent our abundant wild deer herds from being exposed to this deadly disease," said Erin Crotty, commissioner of the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
More than 400 entities in the state raise nearly 10 000 deer and elk in captivity and routinely import captive-bred deer and elk from other states.
Chronic wasting disease is characterized by weight loss in animals and is always fatal.
The disease has been diagnosed in captive members of the deer family in Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska, Montana, Oklahoma and South Dakota.
There are no known cases of the disease in New York.
---------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------- 4-15-2002
Mule deer shot near Gering tests positive for wasting disease - ------------------ Gering, Neb. - A 2-year-old female mule deer has tested positive for chronic wasting disease (CWD).
The animal was shot 4 miles southeast of Gering by a Nebraska Game and Parks conservation officer on 25 Mar 2002 after a citizen reported a sick deer in the area, said Bruce Morrison, assistant administrator of the commission's wildlife division.
"This just underscores the importance of our monitoring and testing program," Morrison said.
"And it demonstrates how necessary it is for citizens to contact the commission if they see any sick animals in the wild."
Since the 2000 firearm season, 14 wild deer in Nebraska have tested positive, 3 of which were killed by hunters.
The remaining 11 were taken during several commission culling operations as part of a monitoring program.
The majority of those were taken within a several-mile radius of a captive elk ranch in northwest Sioux County.
Nearly half of the deer culled from within the game ranch fences have tested positive for the disease.
Morrison said there are several captive elk herds in the Gering area in western Nebraska.
However, he said all elk from those herds have that died or been killed have tested negative for the disease.
The disease is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy (TSE) found in deer and elk.
It is closely related to mad cow disease (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy) and scrapie in sheep.
The disease attacks the central nervous system of infected animals and is always fatal.
Signs include extreme weight loss, excessive salivation, and listlessness.
While the disease appears to spread through animal-to-to animal contact, it is not known to transmit to humans, livestock or animals other than deer and elk, the commission said.
It was first identified in research pens at Colorado State University in the 1960s.
Since then, it has been found in wild deer and elk populations in Colorado, Wyoming, Nebraska, South Dakota, and most recently in Wisconsin.
It also has been found in captive elk herds in Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, Montana and Saskatchewan.
For more information: Dr. William C. Jeter (850) 410-0900 For Immediate Release: April 9, 2002
Florida Suspends Importation of Deer, Elk 
Tallahassee To prevent the potential introduction of Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD), the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services (FDACS), along with the support of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC), has issued an emergency rule establishing a 90-day ban on importation of deer, elk and other similar animals from any state or location with reported cases of CWD and a 90- day restriction on importation of those animals from all other states or locations.
In addition, all veterinarians, deer and elk licensed owners, and hunters are requested to notify the State Veterinarian of any neurological symptoms they observe.
This emergency rule will allow the FDACS and FWC time to determine whether CWD presents a threat to the states livestock, wildlife and animal populations.
It will also provide time for those agencies to improve entry and surveillance requirements for the animals via appropriate rules and regulations.
Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD) is a progressive neurological, debilitating disease that belongs to a family of diseases known as Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSEs), or prion diseases.
CWD is a progressive disease that attacks the brains of infected deer or elk, causing the animals to become emaciated, display abnormal behavior, lose bodily functions and subsequently die.
Additional clinical signs can include drooling, excessive thirst, dramatic loss of weight and body condition, poor hair coat, and staggering, and finally death.
CWD has become of particular concern due to its lack of known prevention and treatment, lack of live animal diagnostic test, and unknown origin and means of transmission.
There is no evidence that CWD is a risk to human health.
In the past, CWD has been detected in eight (8) states in both captive and free ranging elk, white-tail deer, black-tail deer and mule deer.
By mid-March 2002, CWD was detected in free-ranging white-tail deer in Wisconsin.
This was the first time the disease was detected east of the Mississippi River.
To date, animals from the initial eight (8) infected states have been found in an additional thirteen (13) states.
Current growth and resultant rapid widespread movement in the deer and elk farming and hunting preserve industry as well as the large wild deer population are increasing the potential for spread of CWD and other diseases of such animals.
Because there is no live animal test, and because CWD is a chronic disease that develops slowly over months or years, herds must be monitored for at least five years before they are considered "free" for CWD.
Herd monitoring involves collecting and examining brain tissue from every deer or elk in the herd that dies, either from slaughter, natural death, or hunter harvest to determine if the animal had the disease.
Therefore, the rule just promulgated bans any such animals from entering Florida from any state or location that has had a confirmed case of CWD.
Deer and elk from any state or location that does not have a confirmed case of CWD are restricted from entering Florida until an appropriate permit is obtained.
The following conditions must be met before entry into Florida is allowed:
* Each request for entry will undergo a risk assessment by the State Veterinarian identifying the incoming animals as low risk or no risk relative to CWD.
* A prior permit number must be obtained from the State Veterinarian and must be clearly displayed on the Official Certificate of Veterinary Inspection (OCVI).
* All permitted deer and elk entering the state must be accompanied by an Official Certificate of Veterinary Inspection (OCVI) showing that the veterinarian issuing the OCVI inspected the animals at the time of movement.
The OCVI must contain a statement by the issuing veterinarian that the animals identified on the OCVI are free of signs of infectious, contagious and neurologic disease and the vectors of any infectious, contagious and neurologic disease.
The certificate must include statements verifying that the animals are free of signs of the disease as well as the location from which the animals originated.
* All animals permitted must comply with current importation requirements as specified in Florida Administrative Code 5C-3.011.
* All animals permitted must be consigned to a destination with a Florida Fish 
A permitting system will be initiated to monitor movement of deer and elk within the state.
This permitting system will be used as an aid to implementing a surveillance and testing program for CWD in Florida.
Over the 90-day period of the emergency rule, the Department will work with USDA, FWC, veterinarians and the industry to develop a sound surveillance monitoring and state certification program for deer and elk.
Neurological symptoms in any such animals in the state must be reported to the State Veterinarian at (850) 410-0900 or toll-free at 1-877-815-0034.
4-9-2002 Chronic Wasting Disease, Wisconsin 3/12/2002 Chronic Wasting Disease, West Virginia (Embargo) 03/12/2002 Chronic Wasting Disease, Texas: Immediate ban the import of whitetail and mule deer into Texas.
San Antonio, Texas - Texas Parks and Wildlife Department commissioners, citing an "imminent threat" to white-tailed deer from chronic wasting disease, voted Monday to immediately ban the import of whitetail and mule deer to Texas.
The unprecedented move, which passed as a temporary emergency order, comes after the discovery of chronic wasting disease in wild Wisconsin deer.
Sixteen whitetails have been brought to Texas breeding facilities from Wisconsin this year, 10 of them from a facility within 40 miles of the outbreak site, said Jerry Cooke, game mammal branch chief for Parks and Wildlife.
The commissioners will vote on a permanent ban on April 4.
03/11/2002 Chronic Wasting Disease, Colorado: Initial CWD Tests Completed on Domestic Elk For Immediate Release March 11, 2002 Contact: Wayne Cunningham (303) 239-4161
Initial CWD Tests Completed on Domestic Elk
Lakewood, Colo. - The Colorado Department of Agriculture has completed its efforts to eradicate chronic wasting disease (CWD) in Colorado's domestic elk herds.
Test results on the first 542 animals have been completed with two animals testing positive for CWD.
Both animals were among the 337 elk in Del Norte, Colo.
None of the 205 animals at the Cowdery, Colo., facility tested positive.
"We expected a low number of the animals to have the disease, so this isn't a surprise," said Wayne Cunningham, state veterinarian at the Colorado Department of Agriculture.
"We can all breath a little easier because we've stopped the spread of the disease to the wild."
Last week, state and federal officials completed the process of depopulating about 1,500 elk at nine facilities in the state, which began on February 8.
Testing for CWD is required of all domestic elk mortalities in Colorado.
Since there is no reliable live test for CWD on elk, the animals are killed, so samples of their brains can be taken for the test.
During the depopulation, the state used an air curtain incinerator to burn the carcasses and inactive the CWD prion, which classifies the disease in the family of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
The mobile incinerator helped process the remains, leaving about a 2 percent residue.
In Colorado, CWD testing has been required of all domestic elk deaths for nearly four years.
The Colorado Department of Agriculture was the first state to require mandatory surveillance of domestic elk herds for CWD.
In addition during the past six years, Colorado elk ranchers have been required to identify and inventory all domestic elk.
Chronic wasting disease is a neurological disease that attacks the brains of infected animals, causing them to become emaciated, display abnormal behavior, lose bodily functions and die.
At this time, there is no evidence that CWD is a risk to human health.--- Linh Truong Public Information Officer Colorado Department of Agriculture phone (303) 239-4100 fax (303) 239-4176 linh.truong@ag.state.co.us Missouri Deer and Elk Rule Changes 2001 12/05/2001 Indiana elk import restrictions -- Due to the movement of elk from CWD infected herds, Indiana has temporarily stopped issuing import permits for elk from any state until the issue of tracing these animals has been resolved.
Also, Indiana will not permit the import of deer from any state that has had CWD in wild or domestic animals.
11/29/2001 Texas "Fences Out" Colorado Deer and Elk Colorado State Veterinarian's office media release: CWD quarantines Colorado State Veterinarian's office memo: Continuation of moratorium on alternative livestock movement A copy of all the issues of the Deer Farmers' Digest can be found at http://digest.deerfarmer.com and in the National Library of Canada at http://collection.nlc-bnc.ca/100/201/300/deer_farmers_digest/.
Colorado AG Commission Approves Emergency Regulations to Control CWD In an effort to control the spread of chronic wasting disease, the Colorado Agricultural Commission approved emergency regulations for stricter guidelines on the import of elk and licensure of new facilities.
The Commission unanimously gave Wayne Cunningham, the state veterinarian, authority to increase import requirements and restrict new facilities in CWD-endemic areas.
"This is another step in getting us where we eventually want to be," said Don Ament, commissioner of the Colorado Department of Agriculture.
"We want to do everything we can to help Dr. Cunningham control chronic wasting disease [CWD] in Colorado."
According to the emergency regulations, all imported alternative livestock, including elk, and the herd of origin must be under surveillance and free of CWD for at least three years prior to entering the state.
Surveillance includes laboratory testing of all mortalities, regardless of cause.
In addition, the rules restrict new alternative livestock facilities in the CWD-endemic area, as determined by the Colorado Division of Wildlife.
Before becoming permanent, the emergency regulations can be modified during the next 90 days.
These restrictions are in conjunction with the 30-day moratorium, which took effect October 1, that restricts the movement of all domestic elk in Colorado.
"This comes close to closing our borders, but we have to act quickly and aggressively before it does more damage to our domestic herds and potentially harm our wildlife," said Wayne Cunningham, state veterinarian.
The Department has placed seven elk ranches under quarantine, which includes about 1,300 animals in Cowdery, Colo.; Del Norte, Colo.; Longmont, Colo.; Sterling, Colo.; and Stoneham, Colo.
Two of the four quarantined locations are within the area where CWD is endemic among the wild deer and elk population.
The two newest quarantines, Del Norte and Cowdrey, are outside of the CWD endemic area but have been linked to domestic elk within this area.
The Colorado Department of Agriculture was the first state to require mandatory surveillance of domestic elk herds for CWD.
During the past six years, Colorado elk ranchers have been required to identify and inventory all domestic elk.
Testing for CWD has been required of all elk mortalities during the past three and a half years.
The Colorado Department of Agriculture plans to begin the indemnity appraisal process immediately, which involves determining the value of each quarantined elk and a reasonable compensation for the owners.
Chronic wasting disease is a neurological disease that belongs to a family of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, or prion diseases.
It attacks the brains of infected animals, causing them to become emaciated, display abnormal behavior, lose bodily functions and die.
At this time, there is no evidence that CWD is a risk to human health.
(Contact: Wayne Cunningham, 303/239-4161) 9 Feb 2001 posting on the occurrence of chronic wasting disease (CWD) in a herd of captive elk in Oklahoma contained erroneous information taken from The Shawnee News-Star.
The press release in question contained a suggestion that 3 cases of CJD among young hunters may have been related to CWD.
Please note that no link has been proven between CWD and human disease, and that the three cases mentioned in that article had been confirmed as sporadic CJD and not CJD (new var.), the form of disease associated with BSE in cattle.
The current posting will clarify the current status of CWD in Colorado and the surveillance system in place.
Mods.MPP/TG
[1]
Date: Fri 16 Feb 2001 10:41:01 -0700
From: Beth Williams storm@uwyo.edu We feel compelled to clarify some items in a recent post to ProMED-mail about the occurrence of chronic wasting disease (CWD) in farmed elk in Oklahoma.
Unfortunately there were several important errors in the piece reprinted from the Shawnee News-Star, 8 Feb 2001.
It is unsettling that such errors are printed in local newspapers and even more disturbing that these items are posted to ProMED-mail without the appropriate caveats.
Many of the facts presented in this article could have been easily checked for accuracy.
The cases of the 3 hunters with CJD ([Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease,] NOT CWD) were investigated by the Centers for Disease Control [and Prevention]
We are not aware of a specific Colorado law designed to curb CWD by requiring "whenever a deer or elk dies in that state, the hunter or owner must take in the animal's head for testing."
Over 80 000 free-ranging deer and elk are harvested annually in Colorado and testing every deer or elk would be an overwhelming and totally unnecessary endeavor.
Chronic wasting disease is a significant problem in the commercial elk industry and in free-ranging cervids in geographically limited areas of Wyoming, Colorado, and a small corner of Nebraska.
However, it is important that factual information about the disease be disseminated on ProMED-mail.
_ __
Beth Williams Department of Veterinary Sciences University of Wyoming Laramie, Wyoming Mike Miller Colorado Division of Wildlife Fort Collins, Colorado
*****
[2]
Date: 14 Feb 2001
From: Michael W. Miller, D.V.M., Ph.D. mike.miller@state.co.us
With respect to surveillance for CWD in Colorado, we have no law requiring submission of every deer or elk that dies in our state.
Obviously such a law would be neither practical nor enforceable.
We do have an ongoing program combining targeted and harvest-based surveillance for CWD in select free-ranging deer and elk populations, as described in our recent publication (and several previous ProMED-mail postings).
Under some circumstances, we have required sample submissions from harvested animals in order to boost sample sizes and improve prevalence estimates.
In addition, there are rules in place requiring that privately-owned, 12 month-old elk and deer be submitted upon death for CWD screening.
Again, this is part of ongoing CWD surveillance rather than some form of public health action, as implied in the [Shawnee] News-Star story.
_ __
Michael W. Miller, D.V.M., Ph.D.
Wildlife Veterinarian Colorado Division of Wildlife 317 West Prospect Road Fort Collins, Colorado 80526-2097 USA phone: 970-472-4348 fax: 970-472-4457 e-mail: mike.miller@state.co.us
*****
[3]
Date: 16 Feb 2001
Source: Colorado Division of Wildlife [edited] http://www.dnr.state.co.us/cdnr_news/wildlife/2001116113028.html Tests Confirm Wasting Disease Has Not Spread
_ ______________________________________________
An ongoing testing program conducted by the Colorado Division of Wildlife [CDW] has found that chronic wasting disease is still confined to a small portion of northeastern Colorado.
It has not spread to deer herds elsewhere in the state.
"Based on our testing, CWD is still confined to the endemic area in northeastern Colorado," said Division veterinarian Mike Miller.
"We've examined more than 1500 animals from throughout the state, including Middle and North Park, the Gunnison area, the Uncompahgre Plateau, San Luis Valley, the Piceanace Basin, the Colorado Springs and Canon City areas, and other areas in northwestern Colorado over the past 4 years," Miller said.
"None have been infected with wasting disease."
Chronic wasting disease is a transmissible spongiform encephalopathy, or TSE.
Other TSEs include scrapie in sheep, bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in cattle, Creutzfeldt-Jacob Disease (CJD), a rare brain disease in humans, and Kuru, once found among New Guinea tribesmen who ate the brains of their dead relatives.
Miller has worked closely with state and federal health officials because BSE, dubbed "mad cow disease" in Great Britain, has been linked to more than 80 fatal cases of a new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease in humans.
State and federal officials say there is no evidence to link chronic wasting disease to naturally occurring TSEs in humans.
More than 200 animals taken by hunters last fall [2000] were examined, Miller said.
Tests conducted this fall in the area in northeastern Colorado where wasting disease already exists show the incidence of the disease remains about 5 per cent.
"The level of infection hasn't changed appreciably since we began testing 5 years ago," Miller said.
"The pathogen seems to be firmly established in the endemic area, but transmission does not appear to be accelerating."
Chronic wasting disease attacks the brains of infected deer and elk, and is fatal.
Infected animals appear disoriented, lose weight and lose control of bodily functions as their overall body condition deteriorates.
The animal dies within a few weeks or months of the first symptoms.
The disease was first noted in the late 1960s but was likely present previously.
Wildlife officials don't know how it began and why it has only been found in portions of northeastern Colorado and southeastern Wyoming.
Infection rates in deer have ranged from one to 15 percent in those areas.
Experiments underway in several states have shown that it is extremely difficult to infect cattle with the pathogen, and in fact, the only way researchers have been successful is to inject the CWD pathogen directly into the brains of test animals.
Cattle that have been in close contact with infected deer or have ingested the pathogen have not developed the disease.
"Based on this research, it appears that there is a good biological barrier between the transmission of CWD between deer and cattle," Miller said.
BSE, or mad cow disease, has never been found in the United States, nor have there been any cases of the new variant of CJD in the US.
Other TSEs, including scrapie in sheep, have existed in the US for decades, but health studies have found no link between scrapie and any human disease.
The CDW continues to discourage hunters from taking animals that appear to be sick no matter the cause.
Animals that appear to be diseased should not be consumed.
The CDW especially recommends that the brain and nervous tissue of deer and elk not be consumed, though human consumption of these organs is unusual.
Hunters who field-dress game animals should wear protective gloves, especially if they have open cuts or wounds on their hands.
They should also carefully wash knives and other tools used to field-dress game.
Miller said hunters have reported a number of animals that appear to be sick.
Most have been ill with other diseases such as hemorrhagic disease and other bacterial or viral infections, injuries or old age.
"If hunters, landowners or others see ill animals, they should report them to the local Division office," Miller said.
Last November, the Colorado Wildlife Commission approved a late deer hunting season in Game Management Unit 9 north of Fort Collins as part of the DOW's efforts to reduce the incidence of chronic wasting disease.
Only deer hunters who had previously obtained permission from private landowners were allowed to purchase a deer license at the Division's Fort Collins office.
"If hunters don't have permission for this hunt from a private landowner, they may not participate," Miller said.
Links
For an excellent overview of current information on Chronic Wasting Disease of deer and elk, see the Southeastern Cooperative Wildlife Disease Study (SCWDS) site at : http://www.uga.edu/scwds/briefs.htm Open or download the SCWDS Briefs Vol. 18 No. 1 from April of 2002.
This document is in Adobe Acrobat format.
If you do not have the Adobe Acrobat Reader program on your machine, a link is provided on the site to download the program which is free.
Frequently asked questions about CWD are on the TPWD Web site http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/hunt/
Various other Web sites offer information, including the USDA site http://www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/nahps/cwd/index.html
Human health information for BSE and CJD is on the Center for Disease Control site
http://www.cdc.gov/nip/vacsafe/concerns/bse/bseparentqa.htm
Other information is available on Web sites of states where CWD has been detected in free-ranging deer:
Wisconsin: http://www.dnr.state.wi.us/org/land/wildlife/whealth/issues/CWD/index. htm
Colorado: http://wildlife.state.co.us/cwd/
Nebraska: http://www.ngpc.state.ne.us/wildlife/cwd/cwdinfo.html
Details on Texas regulations suspending deer and elk importation are on the TAHC site: http://www.tahc.state.tx.us/
_____
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/oa/cwd/ and http://www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/cwd.htm
Cervidae
Contact(s): Staff in the Division of Animal Industry will be glad to assist you.
For more information contact : Paul N. Driggers, Acting Director, Division of Animal Industry William C. Jeter, D.V.M., Diagnostic Veterinarian Manager, Acting State Veterinarian G. Ashby Green, D.V.M., Chief, Bureau of Animal Disease Control John E. Crews, D.V.M., Chief, Bureau of Diagnostic Laboratories Cesar Ruiz, D.V.M., Veterinarian Manager, Bureau of Animal Disease Control Greg S. Christy, D.V.M., Veterinarian Manager, Bureau of Animal Disease Control Samuel R. Lamb, D.V.M., Veterinarian II, Bureau of Animal Disease Control .
Division of Animal Industry, 407 South Calhoun Street, Tallahassee, Florida 32399-0800 Phone: 850-410-0900 Fax: 850-410-0957
.
Back to the Top of this Page
.
.
Copyright � 2003 FDACS, Division of Animal Industry All Rights Reserved .
Best Viewed in Netscape 4.0 or higher .
Navigation: Department Home Page | Division Home Page | Index to Division Web Pages | Director's Office | Bureau of Animal Disease Control | Bureau of Diagnostic Laboratories | Animal Industry Technical Council (AITC) | Annual Report | Director's Bulletins | Division History | Division Statistics | Email 
Back to the Top of this Page The links provided on this web site are for information purposes only.
Links to organizations or companies other than the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and it's affiliated Division's web pages should not be construed as endorsement nor sponsorship of the linked organization or company.
