Newsroom Bob's Home Page Bob's Bio E-Mail Bob Constituent Services Current Issues Successes High Technology Interesting Links CONGRESSMAN BOB GOODLATTE'S WEEKLY REPORT: May 30, 2003 Its Time to Can Spam I constantly hear from constituents who are understandably frustrated by spam e-mail, particularly those that are explicit in nature.
Spam affects countless Americans which is why I recently introduced legislation, the RID Spam Act, which provides consumers the choice to opt-out of commercial email and cracks down on spammers who falsify their identity to send unwanted e-mail that clogs in-boxes.
Unsolicited commercial e-mail, such as advertisements, solicitations or chain letters, is the junk mail of the information age.
When unwanted mail is hand delivered to your home or post office box, you can ask the postmaster not to deliver it.
When telemarketers call you at home you may ask to be taken off their solicitation lists.
But there is little recourse for citizens whose in-boxes are flooded with unsolicited correspondence.
These unwanted messages burden consumers by slowing down their e-mail connections, make children vulnerable to pornography and other undesirable e-mail solicitations, and cause big problems for small Internet Service Providers that are trying to compete with larger companies and larger servers.
The RID Spam Act makes it a criminal offense to send a commercial e-mail which falsifies the spammers identity.
Additionally, the legislation makes it a crime if the spammer fails to place warning labels on e-mail that includes sexually explicit material, or if the spammer harvests (goes into an online business electronic list of e-mail addresses and then takes the list without permission) an e-mail and uses that e-mail to violate another section of the bill.
The civil provisions of the legislation make it mandatory for all commercial e-mail to include a clear notice that the e-mail is an advertisement or solicitation and provide the opportunity for you to opt out of future unsolicited commercial e-mail.
Furthermore, the legislation mandates that there be a working return e-mail address that you can use to send the message that you do not want to receive any more unsolicited e-mail from the spammer, and requires a valid physical street address for the spammer.
The bill prohibits the spammer from sending more commercial e-mail to you once you have opted out of receiving future commercial e-mail, using fraudulent routing and header information in commercial e-mail, and sending commercial e-mail that has been harvested.
The legislation does not preempt state laws regarding the falsification of a spammers identity, computer fraud laws, or laws such as general trespass or consumer protection statutes.
While Virginia has a tough existing anti-spam law, this legislation will only further protect Virginians, because most spam e-mail originates from outside the state.
The RID Spam Act is an exciting development in the effort to curb spam, and given the wide- spread support of many in Congress and the growing need for action, I am hopeful that it will move forward quickly.
