In September of 1955, a Senate sub-committee convened in New York state to address growing social and governmental concerns related to the growing narcotics trade in the United States calling it a "nefarious trade and pernicious racket".
Committee members were united in their mission and vowed to declare a "war on drugs."
Yet, since that declaration, numerous drug use trends have reached epidemic proportions resulting in grave social concerns to include the abuse of cannabis, hallucinogens, cocaine, and crack cocaine.
Slowly gaining popularity in the mid to late 1980's, methamphetamine has now emerged to become the most challenging epidemic to date in American society.
The significance of methamphetamine is not based simply upon its unique properties as a drug.
Methamphetamine introduces a broad range of problems due to its production upon demand, extreme potency, public safety issues, long term environmental hazards, and an unrestricted market.
Methamphetamine is a powerful central nervous system stimulant that can be inhaled, smoked or injected and is associated with a rapid onset of action.
Easily manufactured in clandestine labs, methamphetamine has a legal manufacturing base, it is relatively easy to make, and it produces a more pronounced affect than any other stimulant.
Its popularity has soared during the 1990's particularly in the West, Southwest, and Midwest regions without regard to sociostatus.
An estimated 4.7 million Americans have experimented with this substance that like all other such drugs, harms families, destroys neighborhoods, impedes educational institutions, overwhelms criminal justice systems, impairs health, and taxes social service systems.
Methamphetamine is classified as a psychostimulant similar in properties to cocaine and amphetamine.
Although this class of stimulants have similar psychoactive effects, methamphetamine possesses remarkable differences in the basic mechanisms of how it works at the level of nerve cells and chemical makeup.
The drug effects both the cerebral cortex and the limbic areas which are now recognized as major reward pathways for the activation of methamphetamine and most responsible for contributing to its addictive makeup.
Essentially, methamphetamine results in an accumulation of the neurotransmitter dopamine and this excessive dopamine concentration produces intense feelings of euphoria by the user.
Unlike other stimulants, methamphetamine is not quickly metabolized in the body.
The resulting prolonged concentration allows it to maintain a much longer duration of action remaining virtually unchanged while in the body for an extended stimulant effect.
The half-life of methamphetamine rages from ten to twenty hours dependent upon the dosage and duration of use.
For many, the most dangerous consequence of this drug, however, is its ability to produce neurotoxicity effecting cardiovascular, central nervous, and pulmonary systems.
Chronic abuse or binge use of methamphetamine can and often does result in episodes of violent behavior, paranoia, anxiety, confusion, and insomnia.
Intoxication results in manic or mixed mood features.
Delirium and psychotic behavior are the two most remarkable.
Delirium associated with methamphetamine use is most often the result of high doses or sustained use that contributes to sleep depravation.
Methamphetamine induced psychotic disorder is similar in ways to schizophrenia.
However, one distinguishable hallmark in methamphetamine psychosis is the presence of paranoia.
This feature is recognized as contributing to the series of bizarre behaviors witnessed by law enforcement and other parties confronted with persons under the influence of methamphetamine.
Methamphetamine is not a new drug, but it is one that has gained popularity over time due to several factors.
It was first synthesized in 1887 from the drug ephedrine, an organic substance used as a medicine in China for centuries.
Its pharmacockinetic properties were found to be beneficial in the medial community in the treatment of such disorders as inflamation of nasal passages, narcolepsy, and obesity.
However, along with its exposure in the medical community it began to gain recreational popularity during the 1960's and by 1970, the Controlled Substances Act was passed that included the stringent regulation of methamphetamine production.
In 1980, smokable forms of methamphetamine were introduced and new epidemics began to spread from Japan and Korea to Hawaii and the Western United States.
In the 1990's the substance drifted Eastward at a rapid pace.
One of the more significant events of this time and one that moved methamphetamine to the forefront of preferred drugs was the discovery of a recipe for "Nazi Meth."
This German method, produced for field soldiers during World War II, became public knowledge and accessible to millions world-wide.
Persons quickly learned this basic recipe could be reproduced with little or no scientific knowledge.
So refined, many began to manufacture methamphetamine in neighborhood homes, dorm rooms, hotel rooms, and automobiles.
Due to its low manufacturing cost and high profitability, manufacturers have easily aquisitioned ingredients where a $150.00 investment could easily be turned into several a thousand dollar profit.
Although large scale operatoors in Mexico are identified as trafficking methamphetamine across Southern borders, it is a drug that has no country of origin and is easily manufactured with relative simplicity within the borders of the United States.
At issue in the manufacturing of methamphetamine are the legal chemicals ephedrine and pseudoephedrine that are found in literally dozens of sinus medications, diet supplement, and "energy boosters."
Although large quantities are required for extraction to produce methamphetamine, amateur chemists are acquiring the necessary amounts through mail order or other means and combining them with such ingredients as battery acid and red phosphorous to make large quantities.
One of the most common methods of synthesis is through the reduction of ephedrine into methamphetamine.
This is accomplished by using hydriodic acid and red phosphorus.
The methamphetamine produced by ephedrine reduction is a lipid-soluble, pure base form that is highly volatile.
To disrupt the manufacturing process, the Drug Enforcement Agency in 1994 placed domestic recordkeeping and reporting requirements on ephedrine tablets, but manufacturers quickly changed their choice of precursors by using pseudoephedrine drug products and continue to devise means to obtain the necessary supplies.
The methamphetamine epidemic has evolved in spite of increased penalties and heightened supply reduction efforts introduced by Federal, state, and local governments across the country.
Most notable in the codification of laws aimed at eradicating drug and/or drug related crime is the Methamphetamine Anti-Proliferation Act of 1999.
This bill amended the Controlled Substances Act and the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act relating to the manufacture, traffic, import, and export of amphetamine and methamphetamine, "and for other purposes."
Depending upon jurisdictions and the offense, penalties for drug law violations can range from several years to life terms.
The result of mandatory minimum sentencing laws will affect projected arrests for the year 2000 which some estimate to be close to 1.55 million.
Although these numbers do not account specifically for drug or drug related offenders, it does speaks to the enormity of the problems faced by society in combating the war on drugs.
Since the enactment of mandatory minimum sentencing for drug users, the Federal Bureau of Prisons budget has increased by 1,350 percent.
Its budget has jumped from $220 million in 1986 to 3.19 billion in 1997.
In 1998, the U.S. imprisoned more than 1,185,000 persons for nonviolent offenses at an annual cost of more than $24 billion.
In studies conducted across the nation, it is estimated that upwards of 80 percent of these offenders have a drug problem.
At our current rate of incarceration, it is projected by the year 2002, the nation will spend some $100 million per day to incarcerate individuals with serious drug and alcohol problems.
These figures are staggering, but none more so than the estimated total economic costs to the United States from substance abuse to be approximately $166 billion per year.
The "war on drugs" theme has echoed throughout society for decades now.
The wide spread use of mood and mind altering substances, including methamphetamine, has caused such a degree of havoc in the United States that one presidential candidate in the early 1990's referred to the problem as "domestic chemical warfare."
In spite of all efforts to date, it is estimated that some 15 to 18 percent of the nations population, or roughly some 36 to 42 million persons, will become addicted to at least one drug during the course of their lifetime.
The history of the war on drugs has been one of moral victories, but the war itself continues to wage and has now carried over to foreign countries where crop eradication and supply reduction efforts are costing billions of dollars in attempts to stem the tide of drugs imported into the United States.
These issues are highly relevant in addressing the war on drugs where methamphetamine has become the "public enemy" and our most formidable threat to date.
Governmental agencies, academic institutions, and health care have all made significant advances over the past ten to fifteen years in understanding the dynamics of substance use, abuse, and their relationship to crime.
Probably no single voice underscores the importance of the need for broader public policy and strategy as accurately as the Methamphetamine Interagency Task Force.
The task force, authorized with the Comprehensive Methamphetamine Control Act of 1996, concluded in its findings that the most effective means of eradication would come by combining prevention and treatment with education and enforcement.
The task force emphasized that in order for both demand and supply reduction initiatives to work, they must be supported by appropriate organizational structures to include comprehensive, coordinated, community based strategies.
Moreover, that collaboration between Federal, state, and local agencies must be timely and accurate.
Although overall crime rates in the United States have declined in recent years, there remains a disproportionate number of drug offenders among arrestees.
The methamphetamine and chronic drug problems experienced in the United States cannot simply be incarcerated.
The current approach, supported by statistical data, clearly demonstrates a gap in public policy as the traditional criminal justice methods of incarceration, probation, or parole have not stemmed either the tide of drug use among offenders or drug related crimes.
Sentencing guidelines have left judicial and law enforcement personnel with narrow ranges of alternatives and often frustrated over the seeming revolving door of drug use and crime.
Yet, as public officials, they are bound by and responsible for maintaining public safety and upholding the law.
They carry out the scales of justice with which they are charged.
This approach, however, is void of any type of therapeutic or sociological jurisprudence, focusing more on the process than the outcome.
In other words, the system only allows for a linear solution to the problem: arrest the offender, charge the offender, convict the offender, objective completed.
One emerging result of this process has been the recognition of a high rate of recidivism.
Both the increased incarceration and recidivism rates may more accurately reflect the problem as one of addiction rather than a predisposition to criminal behavior.
This would account for the continued growth of incarcerated substance abusers and support the Methamphetamine Integrity Task Force's findings and recommendations for a more collaborative and equitable approach.
Current research would support reexamining the approach to our nation's drug problem not only through the enactment of laws regulating production, distribution, and possession, but through the increased funding of effective alternatives.
Recommendations call for demand reduction measures that include treatment, intervention, and prevention.
This remains a highly difficult task, though, as evidenced by historically disproportionate funding streams.
The proposed drug control budget for the fiscal year 2000 provides some $19.2 billion for demand and supply reduction.
However, the split has generally allocated only one-third of this funding to demand reduction, a distribution trend that has consistently remained the same over the years.
It is strongly believed the adverse consequences of drug use in the United States can be effectively combated through demand and supply reduction, but neither approach is sufficient by itself.
The U.S. Justice Department, Center For Substance Abuse Treatment, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration and other such organizations have gradually demonstrated the improved effectiveness of substance abuse treatment over the past several years.
Nationally the cost of untreated addiction runs as high as $172 billion a year, yet dollars directed toward prevention and treatment services equal less than one percent of this amount.
The Center For Substance Abuse Research determined in 1998 that 55 percent of the costs of both alcohol and other drug abuse are born by either society, governments, private insurance companies, or victims.
Moreover, the findings of these research initiatives have begun to clearly demonstrate not only the improved effectiveness of drug treatment, but its efficacy as well.
This is significant given the fact that for many years most officials and social agencies alike questioned the effectiveness of treatment for drug and alcohol abuse.
Treatment remains a very new field in comparison to other methodologies.
For example, as late as the 1980's many states were unable to provide services to persons seeking treatment for drug abuse, as funds were only available for the treatment of alcohol abuse.
In addition, up to and prior to this time, most of the responsibility for the provision of treatment services were delegated to paraprofessionals, most of whom were without academic training.
Successful outcomes were limited due to the treatment providers absence of clinical and theoretical training.
Their efforts were remarkable given the circumstances, but nonetheless lacking in comprehensiveness.
Addiction is a biopsychosocial phenomenon of brain disease with behavioral and social context aspects.
The resulting conclusion is that the most effective treatment methods must deal with all of those aspects: biological, behavioral, environmental, and social.
Although drug use is a voluntary behavior, addiction is not.
Numerous advances have been made in this field where, for years, abstinence was considered the measure of success by drug and alcohol treatment centers and professionals alike.
But along with improved knowledge came an improved understanding of the dynamics involved in the recovering process.
The new generation of providers, along with paraprofessionals, now understand that it is necessary to treat not only the person, but the person in the environment.
As one notable example of this, substance abuse is one of the top two problems exhibited by families in 81 percent of reported cases to state protective services.
Across social lines, domestic violence, sexual abuse, illiteracy, poverty, and other such variables predictive of successful recovery are now readily recognized as critical issues in the scope of treatment, issues that must be addressed and resolved during the course of the recovering process.
The provision of a full continuum of care, strong case management, and comprehensive services have all resulted in improved outcomes.
However, treatment providers and agencies alike have been limited not only by an absence of adequate funding, but time constraints as well.
The limitations have come in the expectations of treating such a chronic problem with acute interventions.
Under those constraints, treatment providers have been held to unrealistic standards of assessed effectiveness.
Given the same time as incarceration, these agencies would have an opportunity to accomplish much more to the benefit of not only the individual involved, but society as a whole.
Treatment centers are given less than one month to accomplish desired outcomes that penal institutions are afforded years to accomplish.
In many cases, treatment centers can provide a year of services at one-third the cost of housing an inmate for a single year.
Although both vary in the philosophical approach to the problem, each seeks the ultimate outcome of returning responsible and productive persons to their respective environments.
The benefits and merits of such an approach are probably best demonstrated using the recent success of drug treatment courts operating throughout the United States.
Beginning in the 1980's jurisdictions began to assess their approach to handling defendants charged with drug or drug related offenses.
In 1998, the concept of a drug treatment court was introduced in Dade County Florida.
Supported by both Attorney General Janet Reno and Drug Czar Barry McCaffrey, the mission of the drug court efforts was to reduce incarceration costs, drug abuse, and recidivism rates.
The design of the Dade County Drug Treatment Court introduced a psychosocial approach recognizing drug possession and use as not simply a law enforcement/criminal justice problem, but a public health problem as well, with broad community implications.
The key premise was based upon the belief that treatment works frequently enough to merit implementation of intervention oriented drug courts.
Furthermore, that these methods were a better alternative than conventional case processing for some types of offenders.
The approach is not applicable to all substance abusing offenders.
Nor does it alleviate anyone of personal responsibility and accountability for their actions.
A reduction in criminal recidivism was a significant factor in the creation of drug courts.
Virtually all drug courts are required to maintain current outcome studies and recidivism rates among those participants involved to date, regardless of whether they completed the program have ranged from 5 to 28 percent.
Among graduates, recidivism has been approximately four percent.
The cost effectiveness of such initiatives have been promising as well, but vary by jurisdiction.
Since their conception in 1989, some 323 drug courts have been established and now operate in 48 states.
Since 1995, eleven states have enacted legislation dealing with the funding of drug courts and one state now has implemented statewide drug court programs based upon their successful history.
In 1996, voters in Arizona passed an initiative which mandated drug treatment instead of prison for non-violent drug offenders.
At the end of the first year of implementation, Arizona's Supreme court issue a report which found tax payers saved $2.6 million in one year.
In the same findings, some 77.5 percent of probationers tested negative for drug use after the program.
A Rand study found for every additional dollar invested in substance abuse treatment, it saves tax payers $7.46.
The merits of such a comprehensive approach to the nation's drug problem goes well beyond incarceration issues and strikes at the core of supply and demand reduction initiatives.
It is a means to achieve desired goals through a more collective approach, maximizing resources in a manner promotive of a safe society and improved quality of life for all its members.
It is an approach that has been long overdue.
There are and have been judicial, law enforcement, probation and parole, treatment, mental health, school, and other camps seeking the same outcomes in regard to drug and alcohol abuse in the United States.
However, the collaboration has been absent.
Working by themselves, each can demonstrate efficiency.
But, working by themselves, none can be totally effective.
Initiatives should be introduced that promote the unified efforts of these groups by pooling resources.
Therefore benefitting from each others shared knowledge and leverage.
Unified in their approach, they have great influence and power.
