Office of Congressman Steve Israel Home Contact Us Biography Photo Album E-Mail Updates FAQs Search [spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Israel Calls for Adm. John Poindexters Resignation from Pentagon
Armed Services Committee Member Urges Colleagues to Join in Call for Resignation for Terrorism Futures Scheme
HAUPPAUGE NY, July 29th - Today, House Armed Services Committee Member Congressman Steve Israel (D-Huntington NY) urged his colleagues to join him in calling for Admiral John Poindexters resignation.
Poindexter currently heads up the Pentagons Defense Advanced Research Projects Unit (DARPA).
It has recently come to light that the program has set up a futures market for terrorismwhere the investors could profit from correctly predicting future acts of terror.
My Congressional District lost 200 people on 9/11, Israel said.
To allow prospectors to bet for or against terrorism goes beyond the pail and is an affront to their memory.
Nothing less than John Poindexters resignation is acceptable.
The scheme, known as the Policy Analysis Market (PAM), is joint venture between DARPA; the Economist Intelligence Unit, the business information arm of The Economist Group, publisher of The Economist; and Net Exchange, which is responsible for design, development and operation of the PAM trading system.
PAM would work like other financial markets, allowing investors to buy shares in events they think likely and sell others they think unlikely to occur, profiting from shares they own if the event actually happens.
Thus, a terrorist planning an attack could profit from his own terrible action.
Congressman Israel, a moderate Democratic member of the Armed Services Committee, with a good working relationship with the Pentagon, has circulated a letter to his colleagues in the House calling for Poindexters resignation.
Poindexter, well known for his role in the Iran-Contra scandal, faced criticism earlier this year for DARPAs Total Information Awareness program, which would develop computer software to monitor databases of commercial transactions and personal data for clues of terrorist activity.
[headshot_flag.jpg]
Latest News
Press Releases
News Clippings
E-mail Updates
Local News
