[USEMAP:et_head_2.gif] About Utility Restructuring About the Electricity Restructuring Program Restructuring Grants Electricity Restructuring Weekly Update May 10, 2002 Table of Contents Federal: * U.S. Department of Energy Releases National Transmission Grid Study * FERC Releases Enron Memos on California Wholesale Market Trading Strategies
Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) News: * AEP Signs MOU with PJM to Transfer Control of Transmission
States: * Illinois + Illinois House Passes Bill to Freeze Rates; State Legislature Sends Bill Requiring Aggregation Study to Governor * Texas + Parallels Drawn between Wholesale Trading Tactics in California and Texas + Texas Legislative Oversight Committee Reprimands ERCOT Official
Federal:
Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham announced the release of the National Transmission Grid Study on May 8, which includes 51 specific recommendations on improving reliability and reducing electricity costs to consumers.
The study was conducted in response to suggestions in the President's National Energy Policy to identify transmission bottlenecks and measures to eliminate them.
One result from the report will be the formation of an Office of Electric Transmission and Distribution within the Department of Energy.
Other recommendations related to electricity restructuring include making regional transmission organizations (RTOs) responsible for maintaining the reliability of the grid and ensuring that the transmission bottlenecks are addressed, developing standards for evaluating the performance of RTOs, passing Federal legislation that mandates compliance with reliability standards, establishing regional transmission siting forums to develop protocols and "best practices," and granting the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) limited Federal siting authority to be exercised when national-interest transmission bottleneck issues are not resolved by regional bodies.
The report is located on the Department of Energy's National Transmission Grid Study web site at http://www.ntgs.doe.gov.
U.S. Department of Energy Press Release, May 8, 2002
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) has released Enron memos written in December 2000 that describe market-trading strategies.
The information was made public as part of FERC's investigation into California's accusations that energy marketers manipulated the wholesale electricity market during the state's energy crisis.
The memos described strategies such as "Death Star" and "Get Shorty" that were designed to increase profits in the California energy market.
FERC requested more information about the strategies, and gave Enron until May 10 to provide the additional data.
FERC has also ordered more than 100 energy companies, cities, municipal power producers, and others to submit details regarding their energy trading practices in the Western energy market by May 22.
The mandate covers energy trading companies that did business in the Western United States during the 2000 to 2001 period of blackouts and brownouts.
Reuters, May 6 and 8, 2002
Regional Transmission Organization (RTO) News:
PJM Interconnection announced on May 8 that it signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with Ohio-based American Electric Power (AEP) that would eventually lead to the utility becoming a member of PJM.
The agreement establishes a process for the companies in AEP's east transmission zone to become part of PJM West, which was successfully implemented on April 1, 2002.
The MOU would add AEP transmission lines located in Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Ohio, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia-which serve more than 20,000 megawatts of peak demand-to PJM's grid that covers parts of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Delaware, Ohio, Virginia, West Virginia, and the District of Columbia.
AEP is currently a member of the Midwest Independent System Operator, which is working to set up a single wholesale transmission market and grid with PJM, but has not turned control of its transmission over to it.
Reuters, May 8, 2002; PJM Interconnection Press Release, May 8, 2002
States:
Illinois The Illinois House passed a bill on May 2 that would extend the freeze on electricity rates through 2007.
The existing hold is set to expire in 2005.
State representatives in favor of the legislation claim the measure will protect consumers from price spikes by continuing with rates that were set in 1997, and at the same time will provide more time for utilities to prepare for an open marketplace.
Those who oppose it believe the bill provides an unwarranted benefit to utilities.
The Illinois Commerce Commission submitted an analysis of the legislation to members of the House before they voted on the measure that predicts the freeze could keep rates artificially high during a time when wholesale prices are relatively low.
Lawmakers assert that safeguards built into the legislation would assure that any "excess earnings" for utilities would be distributed back to consumers.
The bill is now under consideration in the Senate.
On May 7, the Illinois House sent a bill to the governor for signature that would order the Illinois Commerce Commission to conduct a study on the value of aggregating customers so they may negotiate electricity rates with local utilities.
The report would be due January 15, 2003, and would include an analysis of the potential costs, benefits, and barriers to municipal and other forms of aggregation.
Advocates of the bill believe aggregation will allow residents to get lower rates than they could individually, and that it will make the market more attractive to alternate energy suppliers.
The bill was passed the day before East Central Illinois customers were allowed to choose an alternate power supplier under the state's deregulation law-in a market where there are no providers other than the incumbent Illinois Power and Central Illinois Light Company from which to choose.
Chicago Tribune, May 3, 2002; Chicago Sun-Times, May 6, 2002; The News-Gazette (Champaign-Urbana, Illinois), May 8, 2002
Texas Officials with the Public Utility Commission of Texas (PUCT) and the Austin office of Consumers Union have drawn parallels between Enron's alleged market manipulation in California and operations of Enron and five other companies in Texas.
Texas utility officials suspect that Enron may have used similar tactics to those used in the California market to artificially cause congestion on the state's power grid, and then make money by easing it.
The companies allegedly scheduled more power than was needed at peak times, and then collected fees to remove the power from the transmission system to clear the way for other energy providers.
The PUCT believes that six companies made more than $1 million each through the artificially created congestion.
Fort Worth Star-Telegram, May 8, 2002; Austin American-Statesman, May 8, 2002
During a legislative oversight committee hearing in Texas, state lawmakers reprimanded the director of the Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) for delays in transferring customers to new energy providers.
Tom Noel, ERCOT director, said that the current success rate of 81 percent is a significant improvement from the 50 percent success rate that was measured on February 15.
ERCOT's goal is to reach a 95 percent success rate by year's end.
Lawmakers made it clear that the current switch rate and ERCOT's goal do not meet their expectations, as the transfer is not soon enough for energy providers that are ready to start serving new customers.
Approximately 150,000 TXU customers and 90,000 Reliant Energy customers have gone without electricity bills-some for up to four months--supposedly due to billing errors within ERCOT's computer system.
Director Noel expects a report soon that will recommend several system improvements.
Despite the frustration over the customer transfer errors, the Center for the Advancement of Energy Markets rated Texas as leading the nation in electricity restructuring.
The organization publishes the Retail Energy Deregulation Index, evaluating states based on their success in bringing better prices and services to residents, the soundness of the deregulation plan, and the percentage of customers voluntarily switching power providers.
The Dallas Morning News, May 9, 2002; Fort Worth Star-Telegram, May 9, 2002; Reuters, May 7, 2002
Disclaimer: The content of this document does not represent the opinions or policies of the U.S. Department of Energy or Energetics, Incorporated.
In an effort to provide timely information, secondary data sources are used and therefore, the accuracy of the content of the summaries is not guaranteed.
EL-24114 Weekly Update Related Links
Webmaster | Home
