Main Site Navigation Header Animal Shelter Index Animal Shelter Home Animal Shelter Policy Contact Information Frequently Asked Questions Legal Aspects of Animal Ownership Oral Rabies Vaccine Please ID your pets Rabies Information Legal Aspects of Animal Ownership you are here: homepage 
Dog licenses will be sold only upon presentation of a certificate that the dog has been inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian.
Dog licenses cost $5.00 per year for spayed/neutered animals and $10.00 for fertile animals.
To obtain a $5.00 license, certification must be provided that the animal has been spayed/neutered by a veterinarian or is infertile.
All dogs must have a license tag securely attached to a collar and worn whenever the dog is off the owner's property.
Cats over four months old must be inoculated against rabies but are not required to be licensed (County Code Section 41-2-1, 41-2-2, and 41-2-3).
Register your dog
Adoption of Pets top of page
Dogs, cats and other pets are available for adoption at the Animal Shelter from: Tuesday through Saturday 10:00A.M.-4:00P.M.
A legally binding adoption contract must be signed agreeing to humanely house and treat the animal, have the animal spayed/neutered and other reasonable rules concerned with the welfare of the animal.
An adoption fee of $20.00 for dogs, cats and rabbits is charged.
At the time of adoption, a certificate is provided which authorizes a free physical examination of the animal from any of the participating veterinarians.
The certificate is also good for spaying/neutering of the animal at a reasonable price under a reduced cost program offered as a public service by Northern Virginia Veterinarians.
Virginia State Law mandates that all dogs and cats adopted from a shelter must be spayed/neutered.
The citizen is responsible for paying 100% of the cost for spaying/neutering to the shelter at the time of adoption.
Both dogs and cats are inoculated with one shot of vaccine for distemper at the time they enter the Shelter County Code Section 41-10-1)
Redemption of Impounded Dogs and Cats top of page
If your dog or cat has been impounded at the Animal Shelter, you may redeem your pet by: * Presentation of a valid Rabies Certificate * If your impounded dog does not have a valid Rabies Inoculation, one must be obtained before the animal can be released to you * Current Dog License (if applicable) * Payment of a $20.00 fee plus $10.00 board for each day the pet was impounded after the first day * Purchase of a Dog License, if the dog is not currently licensed (County Code Section 41-2-2, 41-2-5)
Cats top of page
County Ordinance and state laws require rabies inoculation of cats over four months of age.
Licensing of cats is not required; however, the wearing of an identification tag on a safety collar is recommended.
If you have a problem with unowned roaming cats, you may rent a humane trap to capture the cats and bring them to the Shelter.
Animal Wardens will respond to nuisance cat complaints when the owner is known as well as bite cases and rescue of injured cats or cats in distress.
Roaming cats cause injuries to themselves, wildlife and people.
For the protection of your cat and the community, it is best to keep your cat indoors.
Reporting Injured Animals top of page
Any vehicle operator who strikes a domestic animal should stop (unless stopping would endanger human life), render assistance as soon as possible and report the injury or death to the animal's owner.
If the owner cannot be identified, the accident should be reported to the Animal Control Division of the Police Department.
Injury or death of wild animals should also be reported.
Disposal of Dead Animals top of page
The owner of any animal or fowl which has died is responsible for having the body cremated or buried.
The state Highway Department is responsible for pick-up of dead animals on a State right-of-way.
Telephone 631-9611.
Citizens may bring deceased pets to the Animal Shelter for disposal at no charge (County Code Section 41-1-3)
Animals Creating Nuisance / Animal Waste (Scooping) top of page
It is against the law to allow animals to trespass on, destroy or damage another person's property.
Animals must not frequently and habitually make loud and objectionable noises or be kept in such a manner as to cause unsanitary conditions.
County Code concerning dog poop, pet waste: The owner or custodian of any dog shall be responsible for the removal of excreta deposited by such dog on the property of another, including public areas ("pooper scooper" regulation).
(County Code Section 41-1-2, Section 108-5-2 and Section 41-2-6)
Animals Running Loose top of page
It is against the law to allow animals to run at large on public property or the private property of others.
Dogs must be restrained by a dependable leash and controlled by a responsible person when off the property of the owner.
(County Code Section 41-2-4)
Vicious and Dangerous Animals top of page
Owners of vicious animals must keep them confined and not permit them to be a danger to people or other animals.
It is against the law to keep wild or exotic animals as pets.
(County Code Section 41-2-7 and 41-7-1)
Cruelty to Animals top of page
It is against the law to maliciously kill, disfigure or poison animals.
All pets must be humanely treated with proper food, water, shelter and exercise.
It is also against the law to overload, torture or cruelly beat any animal.
(State Code 3.1-796.122)
Wild Animal Problems top of page
If you have a problem with wild animals, you may call the State Game Warden at (540) 899-4169.
Emergency situations that involve sick or injured wildlife or immediate public safety risks by prime vectors of rabies (raccoons, skunks, foxes and bats) may be reported to the Animal Control at 830-3310.
All wildlife belongs to the State.
Citizens may not trap and relocate wild animals without the knowledge and permission of the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.
Animals that have Bitten Humans top of page
Any person having knowledge of a wild or domestic animal which has bitten a human should report the event to the Dept. of Animal Control or Police.
If possible, the biting animal should be contained.
(County Code Section 41-2-9)
Your Animal Control Officer and State Game Warden top of page
County Animal Control Officers are responsible for enforcing State Laws and County Ordinances dealing with animal control and cruelty to animals.
State Game Wardens enforce the laws dealing with hunting and fishing and assist citizens having problems with wild animals.
The primary function of ACO's is to help and protect Fairfax County Citizens while dealing with animals as humanely as possible.
The cooperation and assistance of all citizens, however, is necessary to provide for good human/animal relationships in our community.
Animal Control Services top of page
* Uniform enforcement of County and State Laws dealing with domestic and wild animals.
* Removal of stray dogs and livestock from streets and public areas, eliminating potential health and safety hazards.
* Investigation of animal cruelty complaints.
* Large Animal/Livestock Services.
A small barn is available for temporary housing of large animals.
* Sale of Dog Licenses -- at the Animal Shelter, by mail and the County Government Center.
* 24-Hour emergency service for injured stray animals.
* Provision of temporary housing for all stray and unwanted animals.
* Quarantine services for animals which have bitten humans.
* Radio dispatched vehicles for roving patrols and law enforcement.
* Animal adoptions - to County residents.
An adoption fee is charged and 100% of the spaying/neutering cost collected for deposit.
Non-County residents may adopt a dog or cat 6 months of age or older providing the dog or cat is/or will be neutered prior to leaving Fairfax County.
The Animal Shelter will assist with the arrangements.
* Issuance of exhibitor's permits.
Top of Page Search Entire Site ______________________ submit advanced search and site map Footer Site Menu
Web Privacy Policy ©Copyright 2003, Fairfax County, Virginia Last Modified: Saturday, June 28, 2003
