_________________________________________________________________ STATEMENT OF THE HONORABLE JOHN T. DOOLITTLE ON THE "PUERTO RICO-UNITED STATES BILATERAL PACT OF NON-TERRITORIAL PERMANENT UNION AND GUARANTEED CITIZENSHIP ACT"
June 26, 2000
Mr. Speaker, I have long been concerned about threats to the American taxpayer and to our Constitution.
I rise today to address an ongoing and significant threat to both.
The issue involves the status of Puerto Rico.
For too long the American public has been misled about how Puerto Rico's commonwealth status affects them.
Most Americans seem to tolerate Puerto Rico's present relationship with the United States because they do not realize the direct harm it causes, including to Puerto Rico itself.
Mr. Speaker, the truth is that Puerto Rico's commonwealth status is a drain on the American taxpaying public.
Its status is an affront to our constitutional system of government.
And, though it is hard to imagine, the leading proposal to continue and to enhance the current commonwealth status is even more offensive.
First, the residents of Puerto Rico do not pay one dime in federal income taxes, yet collect roughly $11 billion annually in federal subsidies including massive welfare payments.
This fact alone should offend all taxpaying Americans.
At a time when Americans are working longer and harder to provide for their families, it is outrageous that we are shipping $11 billion of their hard-earned tax dollars to Puerto Rico and getting demands for more benefits in return.
Second, the subsidy to Puerto Rico is likely to remain as long as it retains its commonwealth status.
Under commonwealth, Puerto Rico has become home to a poor population that is losing ground compared to the mainland.
Indeed, half of the island's residents receive food stamps - a rate considerably higher than the poorest of our 50 states.
Mr. Speaker, we passed welfare reform in 1996 because we said the poor and out-of-work in America needed some "tough love."
This policy has proven successful; it is time to implement it in Puerto Rico.
Third, the residents of Puerto Rico, even though they are U.S. citizens and mostly educated in public schools that receive large federal education funding grants, do not have access to a public English language education.
Instead of diversity and respect for local heritage along with our common heritage in the United States, under decades of profoundly misguided federal and local policy we are allowing the creation of a Quebec-like enclave of linguistic separatism in Puerto Rico.
According to the Census Bureau, only 25 percent of Puerto Rico's population is fluent in English and another 25 percent is only somewhat fluent.
This percentage has not risen in years.
English is the language of our nation and it is the language of global economic opportunity, which is why the wealthy in Puerto Rico send their kids to private schools that teach in English.
As long as one dollar of federal funds is going to Puerto Rico we should require an end to the linguistic segregation of students in the public schools of Puerto Rico.
Other facts demonstrate the cultural divide under commonwealth.
For example, four times as many residents of the island consider themselves "Puerto Ricans" as opposed to "Americans."
Yet 95% vote to retain U.S. citizenship.
We need to end this "have it both ways" relationship and be honest about Puerto Rico's status.
In my congressional district alone, I know many individuals whose ancestors have come from Ireland, Germany, Mexico, and all over the globe, but I know they consider themselves to be Americans first.
Recent developments in Vieques cast further doubt on the wisdom of the current commonwealth with the United States.
For the first time, American servicemen and women are being denied critical training exercises on U.S. soil.
We all regret the recent accident that took the life of a civilian employee working for the Navy, but if we are truly serious about protecting lives, we will continue live-fire training there so that our American military personnel are fully prepared for battle.
Instead, we are paying an inordinate amount of attention to an extreme overreaction to any U.S. military presence on the island by a population that relies on that military to keep them free.
These are the facts about Puerto Rico.
They might not be politically correct, but they are the truth.
I share them today, Mr. Speaker, because I believe it does the American people and the residents of Puerto Rico a great disservice to perpetuate the fiction that Puerto Rico's federally subsidized commonwealth status can continue indefinitely.
I have little doubt that, if fully armed with the facts, the American people would overwhelmingly oppose continued commonwealth status for Puerto Rico.
But like a doctor who treats a bad reaction with a double dosage of the same bad medicine, the leaders of the pro-commonwealth party in Puerto Rico are now proposing an "enhanced" commonwealth status that gives Puerto Ricans more rights and even fewer responsibilities.
This enhanced commonwealth proposal, Mr. Speaker, is an outrage that should be swiftly and forcefully rejected by this Congress.
This change would not only continue to take advantage of American taxpayers, it would violate the United States Constitution.
Article IV, Section 3 of the Constitution states that, "Congress shall have Power to dispose of and make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States."
Read in conjunction with the Supremacy Clause of Article VI, the Framers of our Constitution could not have been clearer as to the proper sovereign of U.S. territories.
In short, it is the Congress that has sole authority under our Constitution to make all laws and regulations with regard to Puerto Rico.
Any proposal that asserts or promises otherwise is irresponsible and plainly unconstitutional.
And, yet, the formula to enhance commonwealth being proposed plainly asserts that the Territorial Clause of the U.S. Constitution does not apply to Puerto Rico now or in the future.
It does so without identifying the source of constitutional authority for Congress to abdicate its territorial powers through statute and to conduct a "bilateral" relationship with the "nation" of Puerto Rico.
Mr. Speaker, this is not "union" at all under the Constitution.
It represents a treaty-based form of free association, despite the fact that Congress already has determined that free association is terminable at will by either party, not permanent.
Under such a formula, U.S. sovereignty, nationality, and citizenship would be terminated at once.
To continue or, worse yet, to somehow "enhance" this fraudulent relationship with Puerto Rico will only lead to increased resentment on both sides.
Consider the anti-death penalty demonstrations taking place today on the island.
The majority of Puerto Rico's residents not only disagree with mainland Americans' support for the death penalty, they even object to U.S. officials applying capital punishment for federal crimes committed within Puerto Rico.
This is another example, Mr. Speaker, of the desire to have it both ways under commonwealth.
Commonwealth proponents want binding permanent union, guaranteed U.S. citizenship, and an uninterrupted stream of federal assistance, but do not want to be bound by federal capital punishment for federal crimes.
Enough is enough.
Mr. Speaker, I think the majority of the American people would agree with me and reject both the current and proposed commonwealth status for Puerto Rico.
It is about time they were given the opportunity to do so.
They should have the opportunity to make their voices heard through their elected representatives.
This can only happen if we have a legislative vehicle upon which to begin this debate.
The legislation I am introducing today will provide that vehicle.
It is the "United States-Puerto Rico Bilateral Pact of Permanent Union and Guaranteed Citizenship Act."
This bill would implement under federal law the "Proposal for the Development of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico" as adopted by the Governing Board of the Popular Democrat Party of Puerto Rico.
It would permit Puerto Ricans to continue to receive government handouts without having to pay income taxes.
It allows for separate Puerto Rican and American cultures, including different languages.
And it would grant to Puerto Rico the authority to negotiate international agreements.
I am introducing this bill today with the intention that it never becomes law.
I do hope, however, that this bill will provoke an honest discussion of Puerto Rico's future and the truth about its current status.
