Design and Implementation Team Meeting March 14, 2002 [daitno1.gif] Attendees: Barbara Burgener, Gay Dubigk, Bob Scott, Alex Kosmides, Nancy Maxwell, Jim O'Brien, Barbara Urbach, Carl Johnston, Kathy Kerkvliet, Malinda Bjaaland, Martha Williams, Mike Riber, Ronnie Sue Johnson, Bonnie Clark, Gary Smith, Rich Sandeen, Brian Humphrey, Kathy Kerkvliet, Kim Shillinger, Tiffany Merkel-Rinke, Kathy Howell , Consuelo Guandique, Donna Zimmer, Tammy O'Neal, Barbara Korst, Kathie Harrison, 
Her role will also include internal communications.
She is here today to observe.
Bob Scott is the new Coordinator for the Workforce Development Council at WorkSource-Whidbey.
State of the Union
We last met at the WDC Planning Conference and Community Forum, which served as our 4^th Quarter 2001 meeting.
However, it has been six months since we have met as a Design 
Rich presented and led a discussion of events and occurrences to catch us up to date on what is happening throughout the nation, state, and local Partnership.
Communicating effectively is essential to staying connected to our Partners.
Federal
Post September 11^th the country is experiencing a major recession/downturn.
Washington has the 2^nd highest Unemployment rate.
The Bush Administration has proposed a budget cut to DOL's Employment 
Conversation: Over the next year we will all be involved in dealing with the political structure to promote our needs in order to deal with the way business is changing due to the current state of affairs.
State
There is a $ 1.6 billion state budget deficit and a hiring freeze.
A new Director, Mike O'Brien, was appointed to DVR. DVR's Order of selection has been modified, locally most individuals on the first two categories of disabilities are now served and there are no, or minimal, wait lists.
ESD's Commissioner Mundy took a Fall tour visiting WorkSource-Whatcom.
A successful Building Skills Conference was held.
SKIES training has occurred for Partnership staff.
SKIES system has not yet come about but is predicted to... soon.
Regional * DSHS, a non- mandatory WIA partner, withdrew from the NW Partnership due to budget cuts and a renewed focus on their core mission.
* The Meridian site curtailed its pursuit of WorkSource Affiliate status, but ESD continues to use the products and processes of the Partnership at its WorkFirst unit at the CSO. * WorkSource Whatcom was re-certified.
- Applause - * The NWDC held its Community Forum 
* Shirley Osborn, of Whidbey Island Bank, is the new chair of the Workforce Development Council.
Colonel Betz remains on the Council.
* The Northwest Alliance for Healthcare Skills was awarded two new grants, recognition as a statewide best practice, and a new project manager, Pat Doering, has been hired.
* Training has been given on informed consent, we have not -to date- been able to come up with a single, common form that can be used across the board for referral.
This is due to laws and regulations governing each agency's Release of Information.
* Employment Security Department has been working through a corrective action plan for Whatcom County.
* Both the Business Services Implementation Team and the Customer Services Delivery and Design Team, who's final work was the 12 Competencies for Workforce Development Professionals, have concluded their work on behalf of the DAIT.
The Competencies SubGroup celebrated their successful product with an overnight trip to Lopez Island.
* An employee survey on quality to improve communication was created by ESD. * SVC will have a new president in the near future.
* Job Corps was recognized nationally for a job well done.
Location of the Cascades Job Corps Center remains undetermined.
Kim thinks it will stay in Skagit County.
* Meeting schedules of NWDC Board, Leadership, and DAIT meetings are now organized in a quarterly, sequenced schedule.
This provides the structure for information and work to move effectively through the levels of the system.
What is a System?
Gary led an interactive session with the team to explore the elements that come together to comprise a "system".
Using the FTD system as an example, team members discussed the following elements of a system from the discussion.
The parallels to the workforce development system were readily apparent.
What is a system?
Things that interact (people, functions) Services independent of each other working together to deliver a service
What makes a system a system?
Common customers Common products Consistent quality standards Related parts that all work to a common goal to meet performance expectations
How do you identify a system?
Logo 
How does the customer measure success of a system?
Wide range of services Meet quality expectations Consistent services Common products but perhaps some specialties in each place Customers' needs are defined and responded to (researched, responding to customer feedback) Single point of contact/ front door to a larger set of services or products Ability to have voice heard (give feedback and be responded to)
What is the value of being a part of a system?
Convenience (people to back you up) Common Information/Communication system Standardization Shared Marketing New and Repeat business Customer satisfaction More Income/revenue Cost savings- pooled funds Employees get standardized/consistent training
Application to us: What is it that you (your organization) need from a one stop career center system?
Honest communication Specialized/targeted service to my customers Issue resolution (systems issues) structure and opportunity Customers for my programs and/or classes Consistency Access to additional services/resources Acknowledgment of and support for my organization's contributions Understanding of how we fit in Training to the same level Future oriented/ forward thinking - strategic planning
What do you get now? What do you value?
Mutual support Well prepared customers for education Get additional resources (monetary, information) Leverage (of resources) Assistance in meeting performance measurements
What do you bring to the one-stop career center system?
Skilled staff; expertise and experience Money Knowledge of labor market 
Is the NW career system serving your organization's needs as the point of access to your programs? * It's become a better point of access and referrals because partners are more aware of what is available through partner services.
* Somewhat- we acted well as a system through the GP issues, meeting those customer needs, areas to improve in using core services to move customers effectively through employment and training programs.
* Mutual clients are more informed when they walk through the doors * Not sure that the system has been completely successful in how we work with the WorkFirst customers, we have been doing a better job of opening up businesses to hiring WorkFirst clients- Think we can do it more, but it is much improved.
Note: not all partners/programs goals are to get more customers.
* The center is not yet meeting the needs of the OIC client group.
We definitely need to improve.
* Job Corps students are getting most of their placement needs met through their own systems rather than through the Center Services.
* Don't think the Centers have integrated flow to other programs, run by function rather than by customer need.
Don't think that the Center is where we get our customers.
* NWDC when performance measures are more clearly defined across the partnership it will focus in and improve.
* We all put money into the system.
We all have the right to have expectations to have outcomes from the Center.
For each expectation there is an associated commitment of resource by the party anticipating the outcome.
* The system is assisting in serving the ESD customer base.
An increased demand is brought to the system due to the current UI situation.
Their needs are being met.
Think a better job can be done about customer flow.
The system is at capacity.
How can we improve? * Give more options or awareness in core to customers for them to self assess or through triage be directed in the correct direction.
* Increase partnership perception of DVR accessibility * Clients who can not read and write in English or are not comfortable on computers would be able to access core services.
- more universally customer friendly.
* Hours of operation are not broad enough - and other access issues * Youth needs are not apparent in the Centers
System Integrators
We have a set of "system integrators" which are those products and practices that serve to unite us together as a system of workforce development.
The remainder of the day's activities will be organized to explore where we are with some of these integrators and to define what the work ahead of us looks like.
Quality Standards
Certification of Career Centers and Affiliate sites:
WorkSource-Whidbey
Whidbey's CUT is highly functional, and involves all staff that works at the center.
A CQI calendar has been developed to keep track of 
The team has planned out, and prioritized, their improvement strategy.
One of their priorities is expanding the business customer base and building business services.
The team turned in the Certification application in January of 2001 and was certified last June.
Skagit Career Center
Working to get WorkSource certification now.
The process for educating the Resource Specialists on Baldridge and certification is occurring in small pieces.
Since February staff training on each of the Baldridge Criteria and the Partnership began on a weekly basis.
This process will take eight weeks to move through a background/history, then the 7 Baldridge indicators one at a time.
It appears to be highly successful.
A lot of positive interaction is occuring between partnership staff.
The CUT will begin working on the improvement strategy and then fill out the application by May.
There is a lot of interest by partners to co-locate.
We are looking to find a suitable Career Center location in Skagit County.
WorkSource-Whatcom
Please click on the link below to access the WorkSource-Whatcom report that identifies the quality improvements and activities for the last six months.
Attached WorkSource Whatcom Report
Some lessons have been learned and some things have not worked in the last 9 months of housing multiple agencies in the WorkSource Whatcom Center.
While we started with the best products and processes the Partnership had at the time, some were not fully saturated into the work of each co-located agency.
We have felt things out and discovered what works and what doesn't.
There is a need for continual improvement to key processes and customer flow.
Processes will be reengineered or improved to ensure the best possible delivery of services for customers (internal 
We will be mapping customer flow and improvement strategies and tracking our progress.
Gary distributed The Customer Flow Toolkit: A Framework for Designing High Quality Customer Services (NYATEP.ORG).
This is a product developed by NYATEP, whom we have worked with in the past, and will be used as a platform to launch the mapping activities at WorkSource-Whatcom.
This exercise will inform the process of developing services and centers in other counties in this region.
Facilitation of the mapping activity is being negotiated with Barbara Burgener.
Mutual focus for the partnership to strengthen things that we do well and assist in things we need to work on.
How is this work being shared with the other Centers?
Saturation issue.
DAIT members are responsible to bring back information.
Information is available via Inside WorkSource Northwest, partnership training, and other partnership work teams.
This involves organizational commitment to communication and the accountability of each partner to disseminate information to all staff.
System products and services are consistent.
Some additional services may be available depending on location.
How are you building and growing your understanding and integration of Baldrige Quality structure into your work?
Examples were given; Whatcom CUT's and the B'ham WDC's staff Meeting Agendas are structured using a Baldrige model.
Reports of successes and challenges to Leadership
DVR- statewide committee has staff members who will bring info back to staff meetings.
Annual assessments on quality standards.
BTC not using the language but in action/concepts are in use.
OIC is bringing everything learned from DAIT back to staff.
Has been an educational experience for all OIC staff.
Not going well: Saturation (without it, you don't know what doesn't work)
Performance Outcomes
Gary asked the team to identify the methodologies we now have in place to gather data from our customers:
Comment cards CQI Team Focus groups Training evaluations Usage data Exit surveys
The newest tool we have is the business customer comment card.
It is available on line and as a franked card that fits neatly into the WorkSource Thank You card.
Whatcom sends a Thank You to each business after they use our service, include the comment card, and share information about another service they may be interested in but not yet used.
We have had a 21% return rate on the mailed out comment cards to business.
We took a look at the business comment card results
[daitno2.gif]
Suggestion that follow-up calls be made to clarify business customer responses.
This may be something the CQI Team will take responsibility for in the future.
The CQI Team will analyze the cards until such time as a Business process improvement team is established.
Mystery Shopper
Barbara Bergener presented a brief overview of the mystery shopper program.
This is another method to get accurate customer feedback.
Picking up data on a checklist of items.
Located an excellent company to conduct the assessments.
Names of staff will not be used in their reports.
Partners located at the Centers are supportive of this endeavor.
This is not intended to be repetitive of data collected by the CQI Teams, a member of the CQI Team will be communicating with the Mystery Shopper planning group to provide an integrated approach.
Some generic ratings will be similar to our comment card results.
Staff courteousness, clarity of directions, triage to services, referral to resources.
Assessment will be conducted by phone, internet, and in person.
Mystery shopper process will occur quarterly over a two-year period.
LUNCH BREAK
What three questions do we (NW Partnership) want to know from the job seeker and business customers' point of view?
We broke into two smaller groups to identify the 3 local questions we want to see in the shopper checklist for the Northwest.
Job Seeker Questions: * Did you get your questions answered? * Do you know what your next steps are? * Did the products seem to work with the flow? *We agreed to work on this question with the help of the Barbara Bergener's office
Business Questions: * Were you introduced to additional services? * Were you provided the opportunity to give feedback? * Were you asked enough questions to develop a plan to meet your needs?
Common Performance Outcome System
Alex presented.
Our outcomes need to have positive, common, `correlational' relationships.
The Washington State Core Indicators of Workforce System Performance were presented in matrix format - attachment.
It was noted WIA and Wagner-Peyser performance measures are aligned in 4 of the 6 federal measures.
WorkSource Outcomes 
attachment
Here is a link to the State's national report http://www.wtb.wa.gov/wia2001report.pdf
Discussion about those customers who are and are not registered, as well as who needs to be registered vs. those involved in core services.
The conversation also turned to the difficulties of tracking customers.
Many of our customers can access a wide variety of core services through the Internet.
Future Topic: Our system needs to find a way to capture entered employment rate.
There was some confusion about common performance outcomes.
ACTION: The Training Team should take a role and build training about performance outcomes for the Partnership.
This is a training of Partnership system-wide concern.
12 Competencies for Workforce Development Professionals
Feedback from the DAIT on the final draft of the product received at the previous meeting was taken into consideration and the final product was distributed today.
Twelve Competencies for Workforce Development Professionals.
The team celebrated its successful efforts to develop the competencies with a weekend trip to Lopez Island.
Applause from DAIT
Assignment from the last DAIT to each organization was to report today on the following questions:
What is your plan to address challenges you've identified to incorporate the competencies into your organization:
ESD
Build an action plan Build competencies into evaluations Build competencies into job descriptions Build into recruitment efforts Attend Partnership training
WDC
Job Descriptions Staff evaluations-compare to current
OIC
Utilize Inside WorkSource Northwest site Get staff up to par as Resource Specialists in the Center Begin using SKIES
BTC
Individual development plans
Define who you have identified as workforce development professionals
ESD
Baseline - Leadership, line staff (admin will meet some but not all) Specialist- WorkSource Staff including supervisors
WDC
Baseline- Everyone Specialist- All direct service staff
SVC
Worker retraining person
BTC
Focus on career development staff
DVR
Yet to be defined
What assistance do you need from your Partners to help you implement?
ESD
An answer key Additional detail on measures Training sessions to move staff to meet competencies
OIC
Training/education Use of technology
BTC
Module training Easy to use self assessment grid
DVR
Tools Observation of other agencies implementation strategies
The Competency Assessment Tracking Tool was distributed.
This can be used by individual staff members and their supervisors to track existing competencies and develop a plan for attaining the additional required competencies.
Training options that are being considered are electronic, internet based, training.
These would be as needed, easily accessed training modules.
A PowerPoint format presentation training was piloted a few months ago.
Suggestion: have recognition of those staff who attain the Specialist Level.
The decision has not been made yet as to who is conducting the certification process, whether it happens within each agency, by a team, or by another individual or group.
Training Team forum w/Supervisors of the Partnership
The Team met with Supervisors to explore the important relationship the Supervisor plays in the success of the training effort.
Participants discussed a wide range of factors influencing the outcome of training.
Took into consideration internal customers needs and how training announcements are distributed.
OUTCOMES: Supervisors will be alerted to training announcements and when training follow up evaluations go to the staff who attended training.
Summaries of staff evaluations will be available from Inside WorkSource Northwest.
Supervisors' ideas on how to train to the 12 competencies were discussed.
An answer key was requested.
The answer key would be a guide with multiple options not a definitive, correct answer which would have the effect of limiting "right" answers.
A training for supervisors to fully understand what the competencies, measurements, and answer key work was also requested.
ACTION: - Leadership Team will figure out where the Answer Key development work goes.
It was suggested the Supervisor group work together to develop the key, thereby building their understanding of each of the measures and indicators in the process.
Business Services and Contacts * The Department of Labor just established a task force to ensure business is the "primary customer" of the system.
* Washington State ESD established priority planning track for business services and hired a staff, Dennis Loney, to coordinate that effort * OTED emphasis on business outreach for WorkFirst, WPLEX moving toward outreach with business community via telecenter activity * NWDC Community Planning forum developed business services-focused Action Plan for 2002 * WDC Board adopted the 2002 Action Plan * National Association of Workforce Board's national conference focused on strategic alignments with business customer needs * DOL Industry Sector approach is heavily emphasized and funded.
The NW Alliance for Health 
New money is available to bid for another key industry in our area.
We need to ensure we are all talking about the same things when we speak of Business Services.
We have had some products and processes developed within our Partnership (common job order, business comment card, on-line guide).
We need to present ourselves as a system not as an individual agency or program; a unified approach to meet the needs of our business customers is required.
Gary distributed an article from Inside WorkSource Northwest, Evolution of Business Services, to recap the history of this work in our Partnership.
We are all in agreement business customer focus is important to us and to our communities and that we have had mixed results in our work in the past.
Marketing business services is not about stamping a new label on old services but finding out from businesses what they are looking for and responding to those needs.
Saturation of Specific Tools on Inside WorkSource Northwest
In the saturation survey data we looked at in September, staff rated the site highly in their knowledge of, use of, and agency use of it.
However, they were not aware, nor did they use, specific tools hosted on the site.
Jim O'Brien demonstrated The Business Services Guide.
The Guide provides information on each Partner's business services and is designed for staff member's quick access to business service information.
It is a main link from the home page.
You can select any agency or service to get more in depth information including contact information and external links.
Any information links that are not underlined or the x mark is absent means that the information is not complete or does not exist with that service provider.
ACTION: All Partners Please e-mail revisions and additions to Business Services Guide content (in MS Word format) to Gary Smith or Kathy Kerkvliet.
Summary of Action Steps:
Action: Create a process improvement team for business services
Action: Invite legislators to Centers to see the work we do, provide good data to tell our story
Action: Accountability in system to the system (saturation)
Action: Check our on-line directions to the centers (MapQuest)
Action: Check to see if we are asking questions to make sure customers know their needs, options, and next steps.
Action: Form ad-hoc group to finalize questions for secret shoppers
Action: Need to review and understand the system to collect data on people who get and keep jobs (performance)
Action: team to develop training around the competencies (start w/training team)
Action: Need competency answer key....
Leadership to determine who will do this work
Action: Develop Supervisor training around competencies
Action: Marketing to business customers- goes to Leadership team next agenda
Action: Go back to your office, look at the business services guide, send complete info to Gary 
Action: Mark your calendar now:
NEXT DAIT MEETING:
JUNE 13 , 2002 8:30-4:30
Answers to DAIT query- "What would make the Design and Implementation Team Valuable?"
Meeting Feedback
