TESTIMONY OF MR. JOHN SWENSON
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR MIGRATION AND REFUGEE SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE UNITED STATES CATHOLIC CONFERENCE ON IMMIGRATION IN THE NATIONAL INTEREST ACT OF 1995 H.R. 1915 JUNE 29, 1995
Mr. Chairman, my name is John Swenson.
I am the Executive Director of the Migration and Refugee Services (MRS) office of the United States Catholic Conference (USCC).
USCC is the public policy arm of the U.S. Catholic Bishops.
I am pleased to have been invited to testify on H.R. 1915, the "Immigration in the National Interest Act of 1995."
I regret that the scant week between the bill's introduction and this hearing have made it difficult for us to examine this measure with the kind of careful scrutiny and thoughtfulness that we would like.
I would like to ask for additional time to amend the testimony to include in the record the wider range of concerns that we may have.
The Catholic Church and Migration My comments today are shaped by the Church's role as a sign of Christ in the world.
One important aspect of that sign is the Church's solicitude for the stranger among us.
The theme of welcoming the stranger is woven throughout the Old and New Testaments.
In one of the numerous Old Testament references to the treatment of strangers, Leviticus 19:33-34 instructs, "When strangers sojourn with you in your land, you shall not do them wrong.
The strangers who sojourn with you shall be to you as the natives among you, and you shall love them as yourself; for you were strangers in the land of Egypt...."
The New Testament comments on this topic on more than one occasion as well.
Matthew 25:35 provides the greatest impetus for service to the stranger: "For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, a stranger and you welcomed me..."
Thus, for the Church, in the face of each stranger is the face of Christ.
The Roman Catholic Church in the United States has a special sensitivity to the newcomers in our midst.
Since the founding of this nation, the Catholic Church has been assisting immigrants and these immigrants have, in turn, profoundly shaped the character of the Church in the United States.
As a result, the Church, which is an expert on humanity, has also developed an special knowledge of human migration, both in its effects on the human beings involved and in its legal technicalities.
I will draw on that experience in my testimony today.
As part of a global Church, the U.S. Catholic Conference hopes to bring to this discussion a more transnational perspective on immigration.
This broader viewpoint is concerned with the common good of all peoples .
Our greatest concern revolves around the effects that H.R. 1915 will have on the lives of the human beings it touches.
The Committee on Migration of the U.S. bishops' conference has recently affirmed a series of precepts that guide our consideration of policies effecting immigrants.
They are as follows:
* Persons fleeing persecution or other refugee-like situations have a special moral standing and thus require special consideration.
ù Workers have the right to work and live without exploitation.
ù Family reunification remains the appropriate basis for just immigration policy .
ù Every effort should be made to encourage and enable highly skilled and educated persons to remain in or return to their homelands.
ù Efforts to stem migration that do not effectively address its root causes are not only ineffectual, but permit the continuation of the political, social and economic inequities that cause it.
Today, I would like to focus on those aspects of H.R. 1915 that address the treatment of deport able and excludable aliens, humanitarian categories such as refugees and others fleeing persecution, and the family immigration system.
Treatment of Inadmissible and Deport able Aliens
We have attempted to work through Titles ll and lll of the bill which are highly technical and involved.
From this very preliminary reading, we believe a number of the proposed changes have detrimental implications.
Title 301 of the bill is remarkable in that it seeks to change a history of law and legal interpretation as to which noncitizen has or does not have constitutional due process protections.
While it provides, on its face, procedural due process, even these rights are linked with terms like "expedited", "streamlined", "simplified", etc.
These changes represent a particularly dangerous trend in a nation governed by the rule of law like the United States, by attempting to so severely circumscribe due process rights for these individuals as to potentially make them meaningless.
H.R. 1915 makes an inadmissible person who has been in the U.S. in an unlawful status additionally inadmissible for a period of time based on the length of time the person has been in the U.S. unlawfully.
It makes minor exceptions for children and asylum-seekers.
This type of penalty represents a radical departure from prior immigration law, which recognized that not all undocumented immigrants were necessarily detrimental to the United States.
An individual whose "status" in the U.S. might be unlawful is not necessarily a "criminal" or "bad person."
Registry, Suspension of Deportation and Legalization along with other forms of immigration relief, by their very nature have required an individual to have been present in the U.S. in an unlawful status.
In all of these instances, if the individual is able to establish good moral character over time, his or her status could be changed.
This new form of penalty represents an unfortunate swing toward the criminalization of the undocumented regardless of their situations.
To treat an alien visitor who has inadvertently overstayed a visa or an alien student who is working to make ends meet the same as an alien who has committed murder blurs the basic constitutional concept of having the severity of the punishment match the severity of the crime.
Section 301 also attempts to eliminate the current definition of "entry" and replace it with a new term, "admission."
The proposed term, "admission" is highly problematic.
For example, "an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States shall not be regarded as seeking an admission into the United States for purposes of the immigration laws unless the alien has engaged in illegal activity after having departed the United States."
This would mean that if human rights activist, Hongda Harry Wu, who was apparently arrested after trying to enter the Peoples' Republic of China to document the labor camp brutality tried to come to the U.S., he would be regarded as "seeking admission to the United States" only if he were a lawful permanent resident.
The expedited removal of arriving aliens without documents or those previously removed or deported is addressed in Section 302 of the bill.
Under this system, the only pre-removal review for most arriving aliens would be an examining officer's determination of inadmissibility.
If the alien affirmatively asks for asylum or indicates a fear of persecution, he or she would be referred to an asylum officer for an expedited interview to determine "credible fear.
" If determined to have a credible fear, the alien would be referred to a "supervisory officer" at the port of entry who would conduct an expedited interview.
The alien would be allowed to consult with "a person or persons" (presumably an attorney) prior to this interview, but this "shall not delay the process" and "shall be at no expense to the Government."
This scheme provides essentially no due process protections to asylum seekers, except limited post-removal judicial review and violates U.S. international commitments on the treatment of refugees.
There seems to be no provision for administrative or judicial review of a negative determination at any stage in this process.
There is no provision for legal representation in any of the interviews.
There is no provision for putting on evidence.
Those arriving avoid immediate removal only if they affirmatively request asylum or express a fear of persecution--something that persons who have been tortured do not readily do.
Even if the individual manages to surmount that initial hurdle, any other immigration officer can challenge admissibility and put the individual into a hearing before an immigration judge.
One worrisome change involves the proposed new section 240A(b)(2) of the INA.
Section 304 of the bill retains the language of the recently-enacted battered spouse/child "suspension", but adds new categories ineligible for that suspension including battered spouses and children who were admitted as visitors, students, or J-exchange non immigrants.
The only exception is for those who have subsequently obtained lawful permanent resident status.
Humanitarian Categories
The United States Refugee Program (USRP) has played an essential role in meeting U.S. foreign and humanitarian policy goals.
Some of these goals, which grew out of Cold War considerations, have provided the basis for a significant portion of refugee admissions over the past 50 years.
With the passage of the Cold War, these programs have begun to wane and there is a feeling that the admissions program needs to be reformed or changed.
In fact, it is our belief that the program is, on the whole, structurally sound as it stands.
No one disputes that a reduction of refugee admissions is likely to be appropriate in the coming years.
In particular, it is acknowledged that the two largest programs, refugees from the former Soviet Union and from the Indochinese states, both of which stemmed originally from the Cold War, are expected to decline significantly in future years.
At the same time, we see reductions in refugee admissions required by the bill in FY 1997 to 75,000 and in FY 1998 to 50,000 as premature.
It is true that the Indochinese program is nearing the end of established commitments under the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) and the Orderly Departure Program (ODP).
Nevertheless, significant numbers of Hmong refugees in Thailand and former Vietnamese re-education camp prisoners still wait in line and the commitments implied under HR 1564 for Indochinese still in the camps, while uncertain in number, are significant.
As we understand the European program, it will be several years before it is expected to meet the commitments still outstanding for the admission of Jewish and other minorities from the former Soviet Union, which includes persons now in the processing pipeline or who have applied for admission to the program and have been standing in line awaiting interviews for many years and who face the threat of significant persecution.
Further, it would be an error to automatically project a reduction in the need for refugee admissions commensurate with the projected reductions in the Indochinese and former Soviet Union programs.
For example, issues of nationalism and anti Semitism in Russia are still far from resolved and the need for continued admissions of Jewish refugees, beyond the completion of the present program, as a result of post Cold War instabilities in Russia, is unfortunately a serious possibility.
There has recently developed a new flow of refugees from Cuba which is likely to continue for a considerable number of years.
Other resettlement needs in Africa and elsewhere continue apace.
And, hard as it is to estimate the future requirements at this time, there are few observers of the situation in former Yugoslavia who do not believe that, at the end of the day, there will be a significant requirement for the resettlement of Bosnians to the United States.
Admittedly, this should be, in the first instance, a European problem: but, just as the Europeans resettled about forty per cent of the Indochinese caseload, a United States contribution to the resettlement of Bosnians can help to make a heavy load manageable.
Of recent date, a good deal has been made of the fact that the resettlement recommendations made by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) has in recent years been significantly less than refugee admissions by the United States.
However, the two figures are simply not comparable since the UNHCR counts as refugees only those persons who are outside their country of origin or habitual residence.
As you know, Mr. Chairman, the Refugee Act of 1980 provides for the admission of persons, otherwise qualified as refugees, who are still in their country of origin.
By far the majority of the admissions by the U.S. Refugee Program is from this group by way of in-country processing, including programs in Russia, Vietnam, and Cuba.
Mr. Chairman, it is the very dynamism and volatility of the refugee equation which renders the need for admissions uncertain and difficult to predict and, in the opinion of the U.S. Catholic Conference, which makes the establishment of a cap on admissions unwise.
We believe that the system of consultations, established in the Refugee Act of 1980, gives the Congress a full opportunity to participate in decisions on proposed refugee admissions.
Not only are prior consultations required but extensive requirements are mandated for the submission of information both justifying the admissions on a foreign and humanitarian policy basis but also in estimating the domestic impact of such admissions.
It is true that the 1980 Act mandates only consultations and, in the end, the decision on admissions rests with the President.
But, we do not recall any instance in which the Congress expressed a clearly negative view on proposed admissions, only to have them ignored by the Executive Branch.
Indeed it would be unwise for the Executive to fail to respond to congressional views since, at the end of the day, refugee admissions can simply not be accomplished unless the Department of State is provided the funds by the Congress to implement an Executive determination on such admissions.
To place a cap on refugee admissions which could only be exceeded after an act of Congress had been passed, with all of the potential for delay which such a requirement implies, seems to us very dangerous.
It would seriously limit the ability of the Unites States to respond to emergency refugee situations in which it can be time urgent that the United States make certain commitments to admit refugees.
While the actual processing of refugees can sometimes, though not always, wait for a while, it is often urgent that the United States be able to assure a host country that help is coming in order to insure that the principle of first asylum continues to be honored.
This was essential, for example, during the critical years of the Vietnamese boat crisis in the late 1970's.
Similarly, if the United States is to continue in its role as a leader in the international system, developed for the protection of refugees, it will need the ability to make commitments on a timely basis as to the share of the burden that the United States is willing to bear.
To this end, a flexible and expeditious mechanism for authorizing the admission of political refugees will continue to be needed.
We have a similar concern, Mr. Chairman, with respect to the new category of "humanitarian immigrant".
As we read this legislation, basically this new category replaces parole which, to the extent that it remains in the present bill, is defined so restrictively that it can no longer meet the needs previously served by humanitarian and public interest parole.
Looked at in this light, this new category is severely limited in both numbers and flexibility.
Unless refugee admissions fell below 50,000 annually, it would appear that the reductions called for in Section 503 would limit the admission of humanitarian immigrants to well below 10,000 annually.
Even without the limitation, under Section 525 (d), preventing more than 50% of the available humanitarian immigrant numbers, in any year, to be provided to persons coming from any one country, we already see requirements above this level arising from the United States/Cuban migration agreement.
The commitments implied under HR 1564 to receive Vietnamese boat people would also appear to require the use of significant humanitarian immigrant numbers .
The idea that a separate category of admissions for persons in refugee like circumstances and who are of special concern to the United States for either foreign policy or humanitarian reasons, but who do not meet the strict definition of the Refugee Act, has merit.
However, we believe that it needs to be adequate and flexible.
We do not believe that the present bill meets either test.
Firstly, we would suggest that humanitarian immigrants should be Del inked from other humanitarian admissions.
It serves different needs of the United States and should not be hostage to refugee admissions or other considerations.
Thus a stand alone quota of 10,000 "humanitarian immigrant" numbers should be established, which is not tied to per country numerical limitations in any way.
Secondly, in order to preserve the essential characteristic of flexibility, we believe that it should be possible for the Attorney General to exceed this level of humanitarian immigrant admissions upon the authority of a Presidential Determination that United States humanitarian and other national interests justify such an increase and after consultations with the Congress similar to those required under the Refugee Act of 1980 for mid-year emergency refugee admissions.
Finally, while this category is designed for those persons who do not fit the strict definition of a refugee, most persons in this category are likely to be entering in refugee like situations which is to say, often without bringing with them much in the way of material wealth and likely to need assistance similar to that provided to refugees to assist them in moving expeditiously towards the ability to be self supporting.
Therefore, we would recommend that humanitarian immigrants be granted resettlement assistance similar to that granted to refugees.
In the end, this should prove less costly to both Federal and state/local programs than a program which leaves such immigrants to fend for themselves.
This was done for the reasons cited in the case of the Amerasians program and for a number of other programs involving non-refugees such as that for Cuban/Haitian immigrants.
Thus, Mr. Chairman, we believe that what is needed at this time, rather than a major structural overhaul of the system of refugee and humanitarian admissions, is a review and reconfirmation or redefinition of some of the objectives and priorities underlying the admissions criteria and numbers.
Admissions Criteria Need for protection: Protection must continue to be the key criterion for a refugee admissions policy.
With 20 million refugees worldwide and a similar number of displaced, all other possibilities must be tried first.
These include peaceful repatriation, establishment of safe haven or safe areas within the country of origin, local settlement in the country of first asylum, and long-term residence under acceptable conditions in countries of temporary asylum.
But where such solutions are not available and the danger of persecution is imminent, a significant priority is created for resettlement.
The need for protection should always form the principal basis for refugee admissions.
But the number of such refugees require that we add other considerations in the design of the United States program.
Burden sharing: The U.S. Refugee Program should give some priority to sharing protection/resettlement requirements with other developed nations.
There are good practical and political reasons for regional arrangements in which regional countries take on a major share of responsibility for solving local problems.
But, the United States must also be prepared to assist in such circumstances.
In Bosnia, for example, a relatively small U.S. contribution can encourage the European nations to continue with their much larger programs of resettlement and temporary refuge.
Association with U.S. programs and purposes: There are both moral grounds and clear national interest reasons for the United States to reach out and assist those who have been associated with the United States in the past and who are now suffering or threatened by that association.
This rationale underlay a significant part of the Indochinese caseload.
Most applicants of this nature have been or are in the process of being taken.
But there will certainly be other situations in the future which would provide the justification for similar admissions, though usually in much smaller numbers.
Other foreign and domestic policy goals: Though hard to define in advance, it is clear that those refugees admitted will often be from populations whose assistance has a clear relationship to a U.S. foreign policy goal or which has a strong domestic constituency.
Major refugee problems which are left unaddressed are sources of regional instability.
Though assistance programs and temporary protection in the country of first asylum is often a sufficient answer to such problems, resettlement, especially as part of a coordinated international effort, must also be an available option.
The numbers admitted should reflect both the numbers and urgency of the refugee problem abroad, including considerations of U.S. national interest, and factors affecting the domestic impact of the program such as the state of the economy.
The refugee processing systems developed over the years, including the Joint Voluntary Agency system for processing refugees in the field, the joint allocation system in New York to coordinate the sponsorship systems of the resettlement agencies and the networks developed by the resettlement agencies, provide a flexible, efficient and relatively smooth means of integrating significant numbers of refugees into the American society.
It is a system designed to bring to bear on the domestic resettlement process a significant volume of resources from the private sector and which has as its goal the earliest possible move to self sufficiency by the refugees.
In sum, Mr. Chairman, we believe a cap on refugee admissions would be an unwise limitation on United States flexibility in responding to new problems.
The consultation process mandated in the Refugee Act of 1980 provides the right mix in a flexible and appropriate manner.
The President takes the first step by proposing admission numbers for the coming fiscal year for consultation with the Congress.
The judiciary committees provide their views and the President makes the final determination, subject to confirmation by the Congress through the appropriations process.
Unforeseen emergencies during the year can be the subject of emergency consultations.
We do not believe this procedure should be changed.
The one area in which we see a problem in the current procedure is in the appropriations process.
Obviously, the most accurate projections of the need for refugee admissions the following year will be made towards the end of the fiscal year when the most relevant information is available.
Since the appropriations process begins early in the fiscal year, the funds to be provided for the refugee resettlement are already in the budget document and almost impossible to change by the time the formal consultation on refugee admissions takes place.
Thus, consultation figures tend to influenced by appropriations rather than the other way around as should be the case.
A related problem is the difficulty of providing funds for refugee admissions authorized through the emergency consultation process.
Both of these problems could be addressed by establishing a Refugee Resettlement Fund, separate from the Emergency Migration and Refugee Assistance Fund (ERMA), to meet unfunded admissions approved through the consultation process.
It might be appropriate to require the positive approval of the judiciary committees before disbursements from this fund could be made for this purpose.
A further appropriations problem has been the difficulty in providing adequate funds for those resettlement activities managed by the Community Relations Service (CRS) of the Department of Justice.
While if some resettlement assistance were to be provided to humanitarian immigrants, it is not clear from which government department this assistance would be managed.
If this were to be the CRS, similar flexibility in funding flexibility should be built into the system.
Finally, we agree, as many have noted, that appropriations provided by the Office Refugee Resettlement (ORR) in the Department of Health and Human Services should be sufficient to at least provide for the number of refugees admitted.
However, until it is clear how welfare reform will affect ORR's activities, it is hard to make specific recommendations in this respect.
Family Immigration We believe that family reunification remains the appropriate basis for just immigration policy.
The family unit is the basic building block of any society.
In the United States, the family is under siege at all levels.
The crisis in the nuclear family has placed more children in poverty than at any point in U.S. history.
Yet, part of the disintegration of the nuclear family itself lies in the loosening of bonds between wider family units.
Where extended families have previously provided a cushion enabling nuclear families to weather difficult times, those supports have often been eroded.
At the same time, many immigrant groups represent cultures which place a premium on family ties and in which the contributions of all family members--young and old--are integral to the social and economic stability of society.
It is important that, as a nation, we recognize the importance of affirming family within the immigration context as a means of not only affirming the family in the U.S. in general, but as a means of providing buffers for immigrants who seek to acclimate to this society.
We are deeply concerned about H.R. 1915's approach to family immigration.
The changes that this bill proposes in the family category are sweeping and difficult to absorb on such short notice.
When we testify, we usually try to offer our concerns and possible solutions to the questions we raise.
In this instance, however, l will flag some of the problems we have with the bill and must promise to engage in further discussion on possible solutions.
Family Immigration We are deeply concerned about the provisions that attempt to reengineer the family immigration system.
Our perspective is as follows:
ù Provisions that would eliminate of many of the family categories in current law targets a system that has served this nation well and unduly penalize those U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents whose families include all of their children regardless of ages, as well as those citizens petitioning for their brothers and sisters.
ù The redefinition of the immediate relatives of U.S. citizens (USCs) to include only spouses and children and the subsequent burdensome requirements placed on the immigration of parents unduly penalize those citizens wishing to petition for their parents and requires more explication and discussion.
ù The reduction in the number of visas available annually to the spouses and children of lawful permanent residents (LPRs) potentially only exacerbates the backlog, while the backlog reduction program of 50,000 visas per year for that category does not adequately address the need for timely reunification in that category.
ù An overall cap on immigration that pits family immigrants against each other and potentially against employment-based immigrants is a breeding ground for conflict.
This is even more so currently, since forcing the IRCA bubble through a capped system could create the false impression that this one-time, foreseeable event signifies a family system out of control.
Elimination of Certain Family Categories Title V of the bill includes a sweeping redefinition of the family immigration system that limits the types of family relationships through which persons may immigrate to the United States.
In the process, those who are currently in line and eligible for visas-unmarried sons and daughters of U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents, married sons and daughters and brothers and sisters of U.S. citizens--are summarily eliminated.
Presumably, this measure follows the announced recommendations of the Commission on Immigration Reform, yet it is unclear from the Commission's pronouncements why family immigration is so targeted.
There is ample evidence that family immigrants have been of tremendous benefit to this country and that families are the natural buffers that assist in the acculturation process.
Under current law, the majority of immigrants are family immigrants, with most of them being family members of U.S. citizens.
The proposed evisceration of the family system and the summary dismissal of the vast majority of those persons currently in line for immigrant visas seems to imply that there is no connection between those people and the American community.
We know that not to be true, yet the message this provision sends to citizens with current petitions that will be eliminated is that their ties to their unmarried sons and daughters and brothers and sisters are simply not important.
H.R.1915's insistence on the nuclear family as the "American" norm is particularly ironic on the eve of the July 4th holiday--celebrated by many Americans with family reunions that trace kinship far past the nuclear family.
In fact, while bonds may change as individuals marry or grow older, that change does not intimate a qualitative difference in the relationship.
It is clear that U.S. citizens highly value the current preference categories for unmarried sons and daughters and siblings and that these visas are in great demand.
Redefinition of Immediate Relatives of U.S. Citizens H.R.1915 limits the immediate relative category to spouses and children of United States citizens.
Parents of U.S. citizens over the age of 21, which are currently admitted as immediate relatives, would constitute one of two family preference categories and would be limited to a maximum of 50,000 visas per year.
This preference would be available only in instances in which the petitioning citizen child is one of the 50% or more of the parent's children residing in the U.S. legally as citizens or lawful permanent residents.
In addition, the petitioning child must be able to prove that the parent will have adequate health insurance.
This provision raises several disturbing issues.
First, the requirement that a simple majority of a parent's children be residing in the U.S. legally adds an element of government pressure to decisions that have traditionally been left to families to address.
If two children of a family of five children reside in the U.S. and petition for their parent to join them, that parent may not come to this country regardless of the U.S.-based children's ability to support their parent or their siblings possible inability to do so.
If the real issue is concern about the use of health care benefits by the immigrant parents of U.S. citizens, this provision seems at least redundant since H.R.1915 demands that the parent be adequately insured before arrival in the U.S.
Reduction of Visas Available to spouses and Children of Lawful Permanent Residents H.R. 1915 ensures that at least 85,000 visas will be made available annually to spouses and minor children of lawful permanent residents.
This number is below the 115,000 that will be used this fiscal year, and any addition to the 85,000 would be dependent on some of the visas available to some parents of U.S. citizens not being used.
At the same time, the backlog under current law in visas for spouses and children of LPRs is well over 1,000,000.
If the full 50,000 maximum for parents of citizens were not used and were rolled over to spouses and children of LPRs, that number plus the 85,000 minimum and the 50,000 five year backlog reduction plan might begin to put a some dent in the backlog.
Unfortunately, the way the cap on family immigration numbers is constructed, it is likely that the backlog for those visas will only continue to grow.
Overall Cap on Family Immigration The overall cap on family immigration that this bill envisions would, within a very few years potentially exacerbate the backlog for visas for spouses and children of LPRs in at least the short run, pit the entry of spouses and children of USCs against parents of USCs and ultimately so impact the employment-based immigration system that backlogs in those categories would grow precipitously.
Under this bill, all family immigration would be capped at 330,000.
The entry of spouses and children of USCs would continue without limit, but would occur within the cap.
Although 85,000 visas would be reserved specifically for spouses and children of USCs, all of the remaining visas, (designated for parents of USCs) could potentially be used for spouses and children of USCs if that number reaches 245,000.
If more than 245,000 spouses and children of USCs enter in a given year, they begin to be mortgaged against the next year's employment-based immigration numbers.
While there is presently some give in those numbers, it is possible that within five to seven years, family immigration numbers will cut into the actual numbers being used for employment immigration, thereby building backlogs in those categories.
Even the temporary backlog reduction program targeting the backlog in spouses and children of LPRs potentially adds to this problem, since family members of those who gained legal status under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA) would be placed at the end of the line for these visas.
Since the majority of those in that backlog are family members of persons who legalized, many will simply remain in the backlog and only move out of it into the unlimited stream once their LPR petitioner naturalizes.
While we would oppose the family cap proposed by H.R.1915 at any time, we are particularly opposed to its enactment at a time when the entirely foreseeable demand for visas generated by family members of persons legalized under IRCA is beginning to play out.
As the IRCA population has become eligible to naturalize, they have become eligible for the immigration benefits available to all U.S. citizens.
Just as the Congress determined that the legalization program was a one time phenomenon, so too is the processing of IRCA-family members through the immigration system.
The imposition of a cap at a time when an exceptionally large population is moving through the process by definition sets up a series of unnecessary conflicts that will not easily be resolved.
Conclusion A review of the measures proposed in the Immigration in the National Act of 1995 yields two overwhelming impressions.
First, in addition to the costs inherent in such sweeping changes to the current process, the bill includes a number of what would look to be extremely expensive programs.
You have already heard or will hear about the cost of implementing a verification program from Ms. Munoz.
In addition, the bill contemplates major construction efforts at the border, increased use of detention to the extent that closed military bases be reactivated and staffed; interior and third-country repatriation programs, etc.
I would assume that as the Congress struggles to balance the budget, there will be some effort to determine what the cost of implementing a bill like H.R 1915 might be and precisely what that money will buy.
It will not buy full employment for inner city African American males, it will not reduce the cost of health care in this country, and it will not assist in the acculturation of immigrants already residing in the U.S.
The second perception I would like to leave you with is that this bill is costly in another way.
Throughout the programs and changes envisioned in H.R. 1915, there is a consistent theme of denying people access to the immigration system, be they asylum seekers who--too afraid to ask their local despot for genuine documents-have the misfortune of producing fraudulent documents upon arrival or siblings of U.S. citizens who has just gotten to the head of the visa line.
At the same time, the system itself would deliberately be diminished.
Thus not only are fewer people able avail themselves of the benefits, but those that do are put in direct competition with others trying to do the same.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
