Statement of Chairman Henry J. Hyde
On the Implementation of the Church
Arson Prevention Act of 1996
March 19, 1997
Nearly eight months ago, on May 21, 1996, we met in the same room to address a problem that was shaking the nation--the rash of church arsons that swept across America and the Southeast in particular.
Every week brought new reports of the torchings of our houses of worship.
People were rightfully fearful.
The sight of these places of sanctuary and peace burned to ashes was, and is, chilling.
Even more chilling was the thought that such heinous acts were possibly the part of a larger coordinated effort.
When we met last May, we had a number of questions that needed answering.
We needed information about the arsons; whether they were connected in any way and whether racial or religious hatred was a motivating factor.
We needed to determine if federal law enforcement agencies were investigating, prosecuting and preventing these fires as effectively as possible, and whether any changes to the law were necessary to achieve that goal.
We also needed to know if there was sufficient communication and coordination between federal law enforcement agencies and with state and local law enforcement officials.
Finally, we needed to determine what the appropriate role was for the federal government in rebuilding burned churches and in preventing future church arsons.
The Judiciary Committee, as well as the entire Congress, moved swiftly to address this problem.
In just over six weeks, Congress passed and the President signed the "Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996" (P.L. 104-155).
The law was intended to enhance the investigation and increase arrests in church arson cases, make prosecution more meaningful, prevent further church arsons and rebuild churches that were damaged and destroyed by arson.
The Act was intended to achieve these goals in a variety of ways: * First, it increased the maximum penalty for arson from 10 years to 20 years.
* Second, it broadened federal jurisdiction to prosecute church burnings.
The ability to prosecute such cases now applies to any conduct within the interstate commerce clause of the Constitution.
* Third, it eliminated the requirement that damage to the church exceed $10,000.
This will allow for prosecution even where the church is not of great monetary value.
It also allows for prosecution when a church is defaced or desecrated but not completely destroyed.
Although the economic damage caused by spray painting swastikas on synagogues or firing a shotgun through church windows may be de minimis, the intimidation and fear they cause are great, and such acts should be prosecuted.
* Fourth, it established a loan guarantee program through the Department of Housing and Urban Development that is to be used for rebuilding damaged churches.
* And finally, it authorized additional funds for the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Justice, including the Community Relations Service, to investigate, prevent and respond to church arsons.
By all reports, this bipartisan effort has proven to be a great success.
According to the January 1997 Interim Report for the President of the National Church Arson Task Force, since about the time we passed this law, the number of church arsons has steadily decreased; more than 100 suspects have been arrested, arrest rates in church arson cases has been double the general arrest rate for arson; and several churches are being rebuilt with the Federal Loan Guarantee Fund established by the Act.
At this oversight hearing, we need to review how the law has been implemented, expose any problem areas and decide if any further action is necessary.
In closing, I would like to thank the gentleman from Michigan, John Conyers, as well as his staff, for their efforts in organizing this hearing.
Mr. Conyers' leadership and cooperation have been welcome in this successful bipartisan effort.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
