[kyafield.gif] Youth Waterfowl Season The weekend of October 14 and 15 is the youth waterfowl hunt for youth hunters in the Eastern Youth Hunt Zone.
The youth waterfowl hunt for the Western Youth Hunt Zone is February 3 and 4, 2001.
During the youth waterfowl hunts, hunters age 15 and under may hunt ducks, coots, mergansers and geese.
Junior hunters participating in these special seasons must comply with hunter education and hunting license requirements and be accompanied by an adult who is at least 18 years of age.
The Eastern Youth Hunt Zone consists of all counties east of Daviess, Ohio, Butler, Warren and Simpson counties (except for the waterfowl refuge in the vicinity of Cave Run Lake).
These five counties and all counties west of them are in the Western Youth Hunt Zone.
Bag limits for the youth hunt weekends are the same as regular duck and goose seasons.
For more information, call the KDFWR at 1-800-858-1549.
2000 Kentucky National Wildlife Art Exhibit and Wildlife in the Park
The KDFWR and the Ohio Valley Art League announce the opening of the 2000 Kentucky National Wildlife Art Exhibit on October 13, 2000 at 6:30 p.m.
(Central Time) in the Henderson Fine Arts Center galleries.
Robert Koenke, editor of Wildlife Art Magazine, served as juror for this exhibit and chose 85 artworks representing 30 states in mediums ranging from bronze to watercolors.
Cash awards totaling $10,500 will be presented to wildlife artists at the opening.
There is another reason to attend this opening other than the artwork: a free concert by Larry Gatlin sponsored by the Henderson Area Arts Alliance follows the opening at 8 p.m.
The event is free and open to the public.
Henderson will be hopping the next day on October 14.
The first Wildlife in the Park will be held in downtown Henderson's Central Park from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.
The Wildlife in the Park event features turtle races for children, a fishing tournament, a duck calling contest, the John James and Lucy Audubon re-enactors and music by the Wildwood Flowers (Kentucky Dulcimer Players), the Kylindi Pipes and Drum (bagpipe band) and John Branson playing hammer dulcimer.
The Ohio Valley Art League duck calling contest will be held at Holy Name Parish at 4 p.m. and precedes the Ducks Unlimited twenty-fifth anniversary dinner at Holy Name.
The adult division prizes are $200 for first place and a plaque, $75 for second place and a plaque and $20 for third place and a plaque.
The Greenwings Division (age 17 and under) prizes are $50 first place and a Knight and Hale duck call, $25 for second place and a Knight and Hale duck call, $10 for third place and a Knight and Hale duck call.
The fourth and fifth place finishers receive Knight and Hale duck calls and all participants receive a membership to Ducks Unlimited.
There is a $25 entry fee for adults and $10 entry fee for children under 17 for the duck calling contest.
Blast off for the Ohio Valley Art League fishing tournament on the Ohio River is 6:30 a.m. at the Hays Boat Ramp in Henderson with weigh-in at 2 p.m. Entry fees are $40 per boat which includes a $5 big bass pot.
There will be 100 percent payback of the entry fee to the prizes.
First place receives 50 percent of the pot, second place receives 30 percent of the pot and third place receives 20 percent of the pot.
Entry fees may be mailed by October 10 to Oval Bass Tournament, P.O. Box 1043, Henderson, KY, 42419.
Those who wait until the day of the tournament must pay cash.
For more information on these events, please call Jules McClellan, executive director/curator of the Ohio Valley Art League, at (270) 826-3003 or email at oval@henderson.net.
[dptlogo.gif] Menu Homepage
