US National Archives and Records Administration ...ready access to essential evidence...
Genealogy Attention users of screen reader software.
There are 4 possible starting points on this page, please select where you want to start using this page from the following choices: Start at the NARA Website Quick-links Skip the NARA Website Quick-links and start from the main navigation choices Skip the Quick-links and the Main Navigation choices and go to the Section-Specific Navigation choices Skip all navigation choices on this page and go directly to the content.
The NARA Website quick-links below provide a way to immediately navigate to frequently accessed areas of NARA's Website.
Where is Hot Topics / What's New Where is The Constitution Where is The Declaration of Independence Where is The Bill of Rights Where is Genealogy Where is Veterans' Service Records Where is Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Where is Access to Archival Databases (AAD) Where is eVetRecs Where is Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Where is Archives Library Info.
Center (ALIC) Where is Calendar of Events Where is FAQs Where is FOIA Reading Room Where is Information Security Oversight Office Where is Interagency Working Group (IWG) Where is Locations and Hours (Facilities) Where is Media Desk Where is Organization Chart Where is Preservation Where is Prologue Magazine Where is Publications How do I Use this Site How do I Order Copies How do I Contact NARA How do I Visit NARA How do I Apply for a Job How do I Volunteer at NARA How do I Research Online How do I Find a Public Law How do I Apply for a Grant How do I Find Records Management Training Attention users of screen reader software.
The NARA Website quick-links above are repeated verbatim in a HTML form below.
The form below is designed for traditional web browsers.
Select this link to skip past the form.
[ Where Is...? / How Do I...?..........]
GO! December 22, 2003
Welcome About Us Research Room Records Management Records Center Program Federal Register NHPRC and Other Grants Exhibit Hall Digital Classroom Records of Congress Presidential Libraries Search Site Index The National Archives Experience Our Documents - A National Initiative on American history, civics, and service Support the National Archives FirstGov: Your First Click to the U.S. Government Print-Friendly Version [clear_pixel.gif] Sections skip section navigation menu 1 skip to content Main Section Genealogy Main Page Main Section About Genealogy Research Main Section Research Topics Current Page Using Census Catalogs Sub Section Online Catalogs Main Section Forms to Order Records Main Section NARA Publications Resources skip to content Main Section Contact Us Main Section Sources to Answer FAQs Main Section Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Main Section Guide to Genealogical Research Main Section Search Microfilm Catalogs Main Section Workshops Main Section Independent Researchers Main Section Related Web Resources Main Section Search in Genealogy
How to Use NARA's Census Microfilm Catalogs Census page and family 1790-1930 If you know the state, county, and town in which your ancestor lived in the census year, go to the microfilm catalog.
Locate the census year, state, and county from the list.
This shows the microfilm publication number and roll number.
For example, The 1790-1890 Federal Population Censuses: Catalog of National Archives Microfilm (Washington, DC: National Archives Trust Fund Board, 1993), shows that the 1860 census for Medina County, Ohio, is on roll number 1007 of microfilm publication M653, Eighth Census of the United States, 1860.
(The microfilm publication number and title is shown at the beginning of the listings for the 1860 census--just before Alabama.)
Microfilmed Indexes, 1880-1930 Microfilmed indexes are available for these censuses.
Microfilmed indexes for the 1880 and 1900-1930 censuses use the soundex indexing system.
Read How the Soundex Indexing System Works for instructions.
The microfilmed index to the 1890 census is arranged alphabetically by surname, thereunder by first name.
Published indexes to the 1790-1870 censuses have been published by various private companies; these can be found at many public libraries and other institutions with large genealogical collections.
* 1880 The 1880 census is indexed only for families with children age 10 years or younger.
If your ancestor resided in a household that did not include a child age 10 or less, you will have to search the census of the community in which he/she lived line by line.
* 1890 This census is indexed by microfilm publication M496, Index to the Eleventh Census of the United States, 1890, Roll 1 (surnames A-J), Roll 2 (surnames K-Z).
A Department of Commerce fire in 1921 destroyed most of the 1890 census.
* 1900 There is a soundex index for all states.
* 1910 There is a soundex index for only the following states:
Alabama Missouri Arkansas North Carolina California Ohio Florida Oklahoma Georgia Pennsylvania Illinois South Carolina Kansas Tennessee Kentucky Texas Louisiana Virginia Michigan West Virginia Mississippi If your ancestor lived in a state for which there is no soundex for 1910, you will have to search the census of the community in which he/she lived line by line.
* 1920 There is a soundex index for all states.
* 1930 There is a soundex index for the following areas only: Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky (only counties of Bell, Floyd, Harlan, Kenton, Muhlenberg, Perry and Pike), Louisiana, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia (only counties of Fayette, Harrison, Kanawha, Logan, McDowell, Mercer, and Raleigh).
How to Use Soundex Microfilm Go to the catalog for the appropriate census year (1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, or 1930), then find the state, microfilm publication number, and roll containing the soundex code.
Note that only the beginning and ending soundex codes contained on each roll are shown.
For example, The 1920 Federal Population Censues: Catalog of National Archives Microfilm (Washington, DC: National Archives Trust Fund Board, 1995), the shows that, for California for 1920 soundex code A-266 is included on microfilm publication M1551, Index (Soundex) to the 1920 Federal Population Census Schedules for California, roll 3, because roll 3 begins at A-246 Nathan and ends with A-350 Douranana.
Special Note: Within each soundex code, the microfilmed index cards are arranged alphabetically by name of head of household, such as A-266 Albert, A-266 Ann, A-266 Arthur, etc.
For additional information how to use the soundex indexes and census schedules, read the on-line introductory material to each census microfilm catalog.
Once you have located a soundex index card for the person or household in which you are interested, note the following information: county of residence; city, town, village, or township of residence; and the four numbers located in the upper right hand corner of the index card: volume number, enumeration district (E.D.) number, sheet number, and line number.
Use the county name and enumeration district number to determine which roll of census microfilm you need.
For example, for 1920 only, Los Angeles County, CA, Enumeration Districts 1-11, 13, 14, 33-37, and 16-32 are located in microfilm publication T625, Fourteenth Census of the United States, 1920, roll 102, while other enumeration districts for that county are located on rolls 103-120.
Note that the soundex indexes and census schedules are on microfilm; you will not be able to search them on-line.
You can get access to census microfilm through the National Archives Microfilm Rental Program, in which many public libraries participate.
Census microfilm is also widely available at public libraries, state archives, and other institutions with large genealogical collections.
Order forms for requesting census records
Top of Page
Privacy and Use Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us NARA Home Page NARA Address: 700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20408, Telephone: 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272
[nojavascript
