US National Archives and Records Administration ...ready access to essential evidence...
Genealogy Attention users of screen reader software.
There are 4 possible starting points on this page, please select where you want to start using this page from the following choices: Start at the NARA Website Quick-links Skip the NARA Website Quick-links and start from the main navigation choices Skip the Quick-links and the Main Navigation choices and go to the Section-Specific Navigation choices Skip all navigation choices on this page and go directly to the content.
The NARA Website quick-links below provide a way to immediately navigate to frequently accessed areas of NARA's Website.
Where is Hot Topics / What's New Where is The Constitution Where is The Declaration of Independence Where is The Bill of Rights Where is Genealogy Where is Veterans' Service Records Where is Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Where is Access to Archival Databases (AAD) Where is eVetRecs Where is Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Where is Archives Library Info.
Center (ALIC) Where is Calendar of Events Where is FAQs Where is FOIA Reading Room Where is Information Security Oversight Office Where is Interagency Working Group (IWG) Where is Locations and Hours (Facilities) Where is Media Desk Where is Organization Chart Where is Preservation Where is Prologue Magazine Where is Publications How do I Use this Site How do I Order Copies How do I Contact NARA How do I Visit NARA How do I Apply for a Job How do I Volunteer at NARA How do I Research Online How do I Find a Public Law How do I Apply for a Grant How do I Find Records Management Training Attention users of screen reader software.
The NARA Website quick-links above are repeated verbatim in a HTML form below.
The form below is designed for traditional web browsers.
Select this link to skip past the form.
[ Where Is...? / How Do I...?..........]
GO! December 22, 2003
Welcome About Us Research Room Records Management Records Center Program Federal Register NHPRC and Other Grants Exhibit Hall Digital Classroom Records of Congress Presidential Libraries Search Site Index The National Archives Experience Our Documents - A National Initiative on American history, civics, and service Support the National Archives FirstGov: Your First Click to the U.S. Government Print-Friendly Version [clear_pixel.gif] Sections skip section navigation menu 1 skip to content Main Section Genealogy Main Page Main Section About Genealogy Research Main Section Research Topics Sub Section African Americans Current Page Census Records Sub Section Immigration Records Sub Section Military Records Sub Section Native American Records Sub Section Other Research Topics Main Section Using Census Catalogs Main Section Forms to Order Records Main Section NARA Publications Resources skip to content Main Section Contact Us Main Section Sources to Answer FAQs Main Section Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Main Section Guide to Genealogical Research Main Section Search Microfilm Catalogs Main Section Workshops Main Section Independent Researchers Main Section Related Web Resources Main Section Search in Genealogy
Census Records * Adobe Acrobat PDF Availability of Census Records About Individuals * * Clues in Census Records, 1790-1840 * Clues in Census Records, 1850-1920 * The Fate of the 1890 Census * 1930 Federal Population Census + Procedures for Viewing the 1930 Census + Circa 1930 City Directories Available at NARA + How the 1930 Census Enumerators were Appointed * Myths and Realities about the 1960 Census * Nonpopulation Census Records, about researching in agriculture, mortality, business, and social statistics schedules * The Soundex Indexing System * How to Use NARA's Census Microfilm Catalogs + 1790 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1800 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1810 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1820 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1830 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1840 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1850 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1860 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1870 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1880 Federal Population Census Catalog, Soundex, Census + 1890 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1900 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1910 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1920 Federal Population Census Catalog + 1930 Federal Population Census * NARA Census Microfilm Rental Program * Online data: + 1790-1930 United States: homepage of a free database of the USGenWeb Census Project.
+ 1790-1930 Census Records: homepage of a fee-for-search database from Ancestry.com + 1790-1960 Historical Census Data Browser + Census Online: Links to Online Census Records + 1850-1880 Pittsburgh and Allegheny County, Pennsylvania + 1880 United States Census (also 1881 British and Canadian Censuses) + 1885 Dakota Territory Census: project of the Institute for Regional Studies, North Dakota State University Libraries, Fargo, ND
Top of Page PDF File Icon.
Click here to download the free Adobe Acrobat Reader.
PDF files require the free Adobe Acrobat Reader.
More information on Adobe Acrobat PDF files is available on our Accessibility page.
Privacy and Use Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us NARA Home Page NARA Address: 700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20408, Telephone: 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272
[nojavascript
