Statement By Senator Charles E. Grassley Cochran Amendment number 512 to S.1 the Better Education for Students and Teachers Act
Mr. President, I rise in support of the Cochran Amendment to the Better Education for Students and Teachers Act.
Specifically, I would like to speak to two elements of this amendment that are of particular importance to me and my state of Iowa.
I would first like to speak to a portion of this amendment that addresses an often overlooked segment of our student population, gifted and talented children.
There are approximately three million children in the United States who are considered gifted and talented.
It is important to point out that these gifted and talented children do not simply possess an extraordinary level of intelligence, but they actually have a unique way of thinking and learning.
Gifted and talented children look at the world differently and often have a different way of interacting socially.
As a result, gifted and talented students have different educational needs from other students.
These remarkable children have enormous potential.
Today's gifted and talented child may grow up to become a leader in the field of science or a world-renowned performer.
However, this will not happen automatically.
Gifted and talented children need to be challenged and their unique skills must be nurtured.
Currently, many gifted and talented children do not receive the educational programs and services they need to live up to their potential.
In fact, many gifted and talented children lose interest in school; they learn how to expend minimum effort for top grades, have low motivation, and develop poor work habits.
Others abandon their education altogether and drop out of school.
This is a tragedy not only for the students, but also for our society.
Much of the federal role in education is focused on helping states to meet the needs of disadvantaged students and students with special learning needs.
Currently, the availability and quality of gifted and talented educational services varies widely from state to state.
This situation adversely affects all gifted and talented students, but especially disadvantaged students.
In areas without adequate public school services for gifted and talented students, more well-off parents can afford to place their children in a private school that offers gifted and talented programs or pay for private supplemental educational services like tutors and summer camps.
Meanwhile, disadvantaged talented and gifted students remain in public school settings that cannot meet their unique educational needs without federal assistance.
My gifted and talented initiative, which is contained in the Cochran Amendment, will help to ensure that ALL gifted and talented students have the opportunity to achieve their highest potential by providing grants, based on a state's student population, to state education agencies.
These grants will be used to identify and provide educational services to gifted and talented students from all economic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds including students with limited English proficiency and students with disabilities.
My proposal outlines four broad spending areas but leaves decisions on how best to serve these students to states and local school districts.
The legislation ensures that the federal money benefits students by requiring the state education agency to distribute not less than 88 percent of the funds to schools and that the funds must supplement, not supplant, funds currently being spent.
Additionally, rather than simply accepting federal funds, states must make their own commitment to these students by matching 20 percent of the federal funds.
The matching requirements will help ensure that programs and services for gifted education develop a strong foothold in the states.
The Cochran Amendment also reauthorizes the Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Program.
The Javits Program is a research program that funds a national research center and provides grants to a wide range of public and private entities in order to build a nationwide capability to meet the special educational needs of gifted and talented students.
The research results from the Javits Program provide invaluable tools to help schools and teachers learn how to identify gifted and talented students and improve gifted and talented programs.
I would like to emphasize that, because of the nature of this program, a continued federal commitment is required.
It simply wouldn't be practical or prudent to ask each state to conduct its own research into gifted and talented education.
And yet, the research fostered by this program remains essential in ensuring that teachers have the best possible information about how to help gifted and talented students reach their full potential.
I am pleased that my own state of Iowa is one of the leaders in gifted education.
Indeed, I have learned of many remarkable young people and dedicated education professionals through the advocacy efforts of the Iowa Talented and Gifted Association.
I have come to believe, strongly, that Congress must support initiatives designed to identify and serve the special learning needs of gifted and talented children.
Our nation's gifted and talented students are among our great untapped resources.
However, our help is needed to ensure that states and local school districts are able to address the unique educational needs of gifted and talented students.
In the spirit of the President's challenge to leave no child behind, I would urge my colleagues to remember America's gifted and talented children.
I would also like to express my support for another portion of this amendment that addresses an important educational need in our country.
The Cochran Amendment reauthorizes provisions for the National Writing Project.
The National Writing Project is a nationally recognized nonprofit organization that works to improve student writing achievement by improving the teaching and learning of writing in the nation's schools.
Each summer, successful writing teachers at 167 local sites in 49 states, Puerto Rico, and the District of Columbia attend annual summer institutes through the National Writing Project.
At these summer institutes, teachers examine their classroom practices, conduct research, and develop their own writing skills.
After completion of one of these summer institutes, the participating teachers return home and provide professional development workshops for other teachers in their home schools and communities.
These follow-up activities are conducted throughout the entire academic year in order to maintain and encourage continued use of writing skills.
As a result, the National Writing Project is able to reach far more teachers than would be possible through directly administered professional development activities and teachers are able to reap the benefits the whole year long.
I am proud to say that the National Writing Project has a long and successful history in Iowa.
The Iowa Writing Project was initiated in 1978 and was among the first in the Nation.
Since its inception, over 8,000 teachers have taken part in the annual summer institutes.
And, this group of teachers has served as the means of administering and conducting workshops and in-service training programs for many more thousands of Iowa teachers.
In fact, upon returning home from attending one of these summer institutes, Iowa Writing Project participants can in turn impact as many as fifty percent or more of their fellow educators in their community.
Thus, the relatively small number of teachers who participate in the Iowa Writing Project summer institutes can provide professional development opportunities in writing for entire communities.
The success of the National Writing Project has resulted in substantial support in the areas where it has been implemented.
In fact, for every dollar of federal funding, writing project sites generate more than six dollars in support from states, host sites, and other public and private sources.
Yet, while the National Writing Project has a regional focus and widespread local support, the 167 local sites could not operate without the coordination and support provided by the national organization.
At a time when both institutions of higher education and businesses are increasingly discovering that Americans do not have the writing skills they need to be successful, it is essential that we support proven writing programs, like the National Writing Project.
Mr. President, the two portions of this amendment which I have addressed are examples of areas where there are clear educational needs that cannot be met by states alone and where our existing efforts have proven successful.
I support the general goals of the B.E.S.T. bill, including consolidating or eliminating programs that are not working or that interfere with decisions that are more properly made at the state or local level.
However, where our efforts have been shown to be successful and needed, our support should be maintained.
Therefore, I would urge my colleagues to support the Cochran Amendment.
