FIGHT BACK WITH LOVE: Every Adult Has a Responsibility to Prevent Bullying Curriculum Materials Endorsement: The Greater Phoenix Child Abuse Prevention Council is pleased to endorse the contents of this video series.
If the victim is a child--Bullying is child abuse-- whether done by an adult or another child.
These videos are making an important Chairpersons, April 2003 contribution to child abuse prevention.
TABLE OF CONTENTS BY DESIGN--How to Use these videos and curriculum materials............................3 Why bullying is a focus today..................................................................4 The BULLY....................................................................................................7 The VICTIM................................................................................................10 The BYSTANDER.......................................................................................13 Gender Issues...........................................................................................15 Bullying in the community and workplace.........................................17 Handouts....................................................................................................18 Resources..................................................................................................22
Copyright, 2003.
Permission is given for duplication and use of all materials for educational purposes, not for commercial or for-profit uses.
Citation credit to:
Maricopa County Juvenile Probation Department Every Adult Has a Responsibility to Prevent Bullying
FIGHT BACK WITH LOVE:
Video and Curriculum Series
http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/
All materials have been created and prepared by the Maricopa County Juvenile Probation Dept. through grant funding from the Offices of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
2
By Design:
How to use these videos and curriculum materials
We have designed this set of videos to be as specific as possible to the behaviors and developmental phases of the two predominant age groups that fill our school campuses: the younger group, generally those beginning school through the fifth grade and the older group, roughly the middle school and high school students.
Within these two groups studies have found that the discrete acts of bullying differ due to the developmental phases of the students but the goal of the bullying behavior is the same: dominance.
Each video will discuss bullying in the same manner and, therefore, the only one Viewing Guide is necessary.
What differentiates the videos into age groups is the cover footage and the student testimonials.
So, the viewer listens to the facts about bullying while watching age appropriate students in age appropriate real bullying situations.
1.
We recommend that these videos be used in a group setting of 8-10 sets of parents.
2.
Each viewer should have a copy of the Viewing Guide in order to follow the video and take notes.
3.
Following the video, a facilitator should a. guide a group discussion of the facts, b. offer local resources (available for download: http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/, c. offer additional handouts (available for download: http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/ d. offer the opportunity to become involved at the school to work with the teachers or counselors on this issue, e.g., facilitating other groups with parents, developing a bullying policy, researching one of the Model Programs on bullying, assisting faculty in supervising the playground, lunch room, etc.
These videos have application in more settings than just a school! Every adult in the community needs to know about this issue and make a contribution to preventing Bullying! Offer your materials for use at the: 1.
Neighborhood Associations 2.
Businesses, large and small, near your school 3.
Churches near your school 4.
Civic groups like the Elks, Moose, etc. 5.
Block Watch meetings 6.
Any group of adults willing to understand and to intervene Specific to the use of schools, teachers and counselors have told us that they intend to use these materials in some of the following ways: 1.
Gather a group of parents whose children seem to be bullying; show the video and lead the discussion toward ways of understanding what prompts the dominating behavior so that parents and teachers can work with any particular child in a cooperative way; use handouts geared toward the issues of the Bully.
2.
Gather a group of parents whose children are victims and follow the above approach to help the victims learn new roles.
3.
Gather a group of mothers of Middle School girls; show the video and lead the discussion toward resolving the memories of the mothers' stories of female peer group cruelties; use handouts and resources specific to Relational Violence.
4. Make attendance at a video showing and group discussion part of the conditions prior to a student returning to school following a suspension for any act of aggression.
5.
Show video at PTA/PTO meetings to educate parents on how to approach their by-stander child in order to avoid the confusion and fear of witnessing bullying.
6.
Show video at "Muffins with Mom" and "Donuts with Dad" meetings; allow viewers to sign up for group discussions and become involved in the school.
7.
Show the video in the classroom to students and lead the discussion to teach the "language" and encourage the students to use those words when talking to faculty and parents.
8.
Show the video as a Faculty In-service; lead discussion about concepts and the school's policy.
3
This information was developed to help a facilitator introduce the videos, explain some of the details, exhort adults to action, etc.
WHY BULLYING IS A FOCUS TODAY The decade of the nineties will be remembered as a time of "School Shootings".
This bubble of school violence rocked our nation, scared our communities and made us all examine how children are growing up these days.
The landmark research done by the Secret Service to develop a profile of a "school shooter" resulted in our realization that there is no "profile".
The closest common quality was that nearly all of the "shooters" had been long-standing victims of bullying by peers.
Their violence erupted from unresolved feelings of ridicule and hurt.
"Perhaps if we understand the dynamics of bullying, we can intervene," came the cry from parents and teachers.
Massive research is being funded, reports are being written and programs for schools are being developed.
This set of Videos and Curriculum Materials will, hopefully, contribute to further the understanding and spur new ways to intervene.
WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT BULLYING Bullying is about DOMINANCE.
There are many different "acts" of bullying but the goal is always the same: dominance.
Dominance may seem to be a rather harsh word when we examine some of the playground antics of the 5 
The reality is that a child this age is learning and solidifying social interaction patterns-- dominance is one of those.
Children are learning their interaction patterns from parents, siblings, neighbors, relatives, from watching strangers in life, on TV and in movies.
Much of what they experience and observe is how Person 1 gets Person 2 to do what Person 1 wants--and most of the time, it is through intimidation, threat, or force (dominance).
General Comments to All Adults: We, the adults of society, remember being bullied in school, some of the memories were more painful than others, but we didn't resort to murder! What is with the kids today? When we were bullied, we told a teacher who promptly told us not to tattle, to ignore the bully who only wanted the attention, and to learn to "take it" since it was part of growing up.
So, why doesn't that work for kids today? Perhaps, it is the fact that our world is shrinking: technology brings us the news of what is happening across the continent and the ocean just minutes after it has happened; we live in large urban areas with few close friends and a great sense of anonymity; our schools welcome hundreds and/or thousands of students daily, increasing our sense of anonymity; there are many students who do not see an adult between school and dinner and rely on TV for companionship and guidance.
Perhaps, it is the fact that violence is glamorized in our media--the vocals of "popular" music, the story lines of TV, comic books, movies, the headlines of our newspapers.
Perhaps, it is the stress and agitation of our families as they strive to financially better themselves, working more than one job and very long hours, that spills over into little time for attention to the kids, family togetherness and fun.
Perhaps, it is the record number of families, struggling with the same issues, who handle the stress by yelling, blaming, and even hitting.
So many of today's children have been introduced to violence by witnessing parents and neighbors.
Our world honors the person who is strong and forceful in getting what he or she wants immediately.
Think of the number of TV shows where the protagonist must force or threaten the police, the teacher, the person in charge in order to accomplish something.
This is the "guidance" our young people are getting on 4
how to be an adult; they copy these methods at school where they socialize and try to accomplish something.
Only in this environment, the behavior is called bullying.
So, the fact remains that research is now available that gives us insight into the acts of bullying that are common on our school campuses.
There are definite results from these behaviors that are shaping the attitudes and developmental processes of our children.
We can make some choices and our choices can have an affect on how our children grow up in our society.
We are the adults; we are the ones who are vested with the responsibility of guiding, teaching, molding, influencing, correcting, etc. the development of socially appropriate behaviors in children.
We all share this world; we all have a stake in making it a kinder, more civil world.
We all need to display behaviors that are not driven with dominance (bullying) and we all need to become more proactive in our community to help prevent dominance (bullying).
That is why this set of videos and materials have been created to reach ALL ADULTS IN OUR COMMUNITY! Please, watch the video and follow along in the Viewer's Guide.
Jot down your questions.
Take particular note of those statements you disagree with.
Allow your memory to roam through your own growing up years and your experiences of bullying--either as a bully, a victim or a bystander.
We will discuss some of these issues after the video is over.
Some additional thoughts for particular sets of adults: To all Educational Professionals: You are faced with this issue daily in your career--how to handle acts of bullying at your school.
You know how corrosive it is; you read the professional literature; you know that children cannot and will not learn in an environment of fear and shame.
This set of videos and materials have been created to help you learn more of the nuances of bullying, why it happens at school, what things you can do to help and what things to avoid, how to engage parents in the effort.
We hope you will use these materials with many groups of adults.
To Parents of Children in school: You know the fear, pain and anger of your student coming home with a defeated look, not being able to articulate what is happening, or not being able to figure out what to do about what is happening.
Or you know the knot in your throat when the teacher calls and tells you that you child is bullying other students.
All of these situations churn up emotions in you, most of which are to "settle this situation."
Several scenarios race through your thoughts, in all of them you are setting the school or the parents of the other students "straight".
This is a natural response; no parent wants to believe "my student" is a bully or a victim so our thoughts go immediately to a resolution that relieves our student of the burden by holding someone else responsible to change.
This very thought process is one of dominance.
To really help the student, this thought process needs to be altered.
We created this set of videos and materials in order to help you get passed the embarrassment and fear that your student is displaying behaviors that are problematic.
We hope you will use these materials to help your own student and spread the word to help other parents and students, too.
You can learn to facilitate a group of adults in watching the video and having a group discussion--talk to the faculty at your student's school.
To Adults without children in their care: Now, inside your head, you may be saying, "I don't work with kids."
"I have no children of my own."
"My kids are raised-- I'm done with that."
"We live in an adult community so I don't even know any kids."
But in the same breath, we all agree 5
that: "Someone needs to teach that kid how to behave."
"Kids didn't act like that when we were growing up."
"Parents today are too interested in getting rich instead of raising their kids."
"Kids today are given too much freedom."
"Kids today have too much money."
"Kids today don't respect their elders."
etc.
Yes, all of the above statements might be true.
So, just what is the responsibility that all adults have as members of this society and of our immediate communities? What is your responsibility? How do you fulfill that responsibility? For more than 40 years studies have shown that there is one consistent factor that makes a positive impact on the developing attitudes 
That factor is ONE CARING ADULT--just one consistent adult who gives the time to engage with a kid/teen.
Maybe you can't have that one-on-one relationship with a child but you can be part of the work that encourages it and supports it.
How can YOU join in the effort? These videos are just one way for you to learn the facets of needs of our children today and they are about only one issue confronting our children: Bullying.
Give a small amount of your time to learn how you can make a positive impact: watch the video, engage in a group discussion about the bullying facts in the videos.
You can learn to facilitate a group also!
6
The Bully: Every child will be a bully at some time in growing up--some kids get stuck in that role because of their need for power.
Estimates are that 6-8% of students on any campus are bullies.
These students are the informal "leaders"--they lead through ridicule, threats, acts of aggression and rejection.
Signs and Symptoms The kid everyone follows and seeks approval from Social interest centers around those he can influence Tends to minimize his wrongdoings Schoolwork may exactly match that of bright, shy student Angry Uses people Shows little empathy to other's pain or hurt Uses derogatory words in descriptions of others Antisocial tendencies Aggressive friends Early dating and sex Dating violence Drops out of school Delinquent/criminal behavior Risk of adult incarceration Risk of inability to sustain meaningful relationship Tips for Parents 1.
The most important element in your relationship with your child is your modeling behavior that is nonviolent, non-threatening, and gently guides the child to better human relationships.
Examine the relationships within your home to make sure they are not verbally abusive, physically abusive or examples of power struggles.
2.
Examine the type of books your child reads, the type of movies and TV he/she watches, the type of video games played; limit all of them to non-violent themes.
3.
Watch your child at play with peers-=-examine how the group makes choices and who emerges as a "leader".
Take this issue seriously; all children will show traits of aggression at one time or another, but the danger comes when power over another child becomes the preferred behavior.
4.
Realize that bullies will try to minimize, deny or "explain away" these behaviors.
Do not fall for that.
Help your child to understand exactly what this type of behavior is by using words like: power struggle, mean words, hurting another's feelings aggression, lack of empathy, intimidation, etc.
Make sure your child knows that you do not approve of nor tolerate that behavior.
5.
Increase the amount of supervision you give your child and spend that time praising the actions and behaviors that are cooperative and respectful without power issues.
6.
Discuss your child's behavior with the school; agree on some consequences that are meted out without anger and power if the child is involved in any type of bullying at school.
Cooperate with the school in following the bullying policy they have in place.
7.
Seek out assistance from a metal or behavioral health professional.
It is critical to help the student learn more respectful patterns of relating immediately.
7
Tips for Teachers 1.
Recognize that the bully needs power and attempt to steer that student to experiences that acknowledge his/her abilities.
This will help build appropriate self-esteem and lessen some of the circumstances for bullying.
2.
Get trained on how to handle a bullying incident! 3.
After a bullying incident, confront the Bully with kind but firm words.
Let the student know that the behavior is unacceptable and why! Do not ask for explanations or blame.
Problem solve--how could you have behaved more respectfully? Etc. Use your school's policy on interpersonal relationships to consequence.
4.
Set an appointment with the student's parents and discuss.
Help the parents to recognize that they can help turn this around in their child but that the school will not tolerate it.
The campus will be kept safe.
5. Make sure your school has a well-developed policy on interpersonal relationships (bullying, acts of aggression, showing affection, touching another's belongings, etc.).
If your school does not have one, work at creating one; it is a critical matter of VIOLENCE PREVENTION.
6.
Work tirelessly to increase supervision at the school in the most vulnerable areas: restrooms, locker areas, PE rooms, schoolyard, lunch room, halls between classes, anywhere that students congregate with poor or no adult supervision.
7.
Take EVERY report of bullying seriously.
Make sure your school policy on bullying encourages all students to report any acts of bullying they know of.
Make sure you DO SOMETHING if a student reports to you.
Some suggestions are: a.
Ask if the student is Reporting or Tattling--even young students can be taught the difference.
b. Thank the student for reporting and redirect the student to another activity.
c. Investigate the situation to possibly see or hear the incident.
d. Call in the victim and bully SEPARATELY for a discussion.
Be frank that the incident was reported to you and that you are concerned that all students are safe while at school.
e. Consequence the bully by following the schools' policy.
Make sure the student knows that his parents will be contacted.
f.
Have supportive discussion with the victim.
g. Conduct a discussion with all your classes about bullying behavior and the responsibility of every student to report any incident they witness.
Bystanders are the secret weapon that can end bullying.
8.
Remember to speak with each student involved SEPARATELY! This is about dominance; there is no equality between the bully and victim.
9.
There are families that function within the dynamics of a bullying incident--it is obvious who is dominant in the marriage relationship and which child is seen as the "black sheep," "runt," "noaccount-kid," etc.
A child in this dynamic may develop into a bully or a victim.
It is important to get behavioral health assistance for such a youngster--and the family.
Refer to school psychologist.
8
Some suggested Group Discussions: If you are inviting a group of adults to watch the video and have a discussion, probably parents because their students have been brought to the school's attention for Bullying, these are some of the tactics your might try in facilitating a group discussion:
REMEMBER--
Before you ask the question, be sure to know what your response might be if the person advocates an approach that is violent or aggressive.
How will you turn it around so that you are advocating for helping kids to be kinder.
1.
So, what do you think about the statement: Most kids learn bullying behaviors in the home? Sounds like you are being blamed, doesn't it? 2.
Is it possible to be a parent who is "in charge" without being one who dominates over the kids? How does a parent do that? 3.
Do you agree that when parents or adults in the same home, are calling each other names or blaming or hitting, that that shows the kids that dominance is desirable? 4.
If the kids do not learn it from watching you, where do they learn it? How do you work with your kids to make them aware that you do not tolerate that type of behavior? 5.
What do you think bullying is? Is it ok for one kid to dominate another kid? Is it ok for one person to dominate another? 6.
What are some of the ways we see adults dominating other adults? 7.
What do you tell your sons is the best way to handle a bully? Why? What is behind your answer: is it that you believe that it is better to be a bully than to be a victim of one? Is it that you hurt for your kid? Is it that you were a victim and want to make sure you kid is not one? 8.
What do you tell your daughters about the same issue? Why is it different? What do you expect of your daughter that you do not expect of your son and visa versa? You might want to finish the discussion with the fact that all children are bullies at some time in their growing up years; all are also victims and bystanders.
As they experience each of these roles they figure out why one role feels better than the other and they move into that role as the preferred one.
It is the responsibility of the adults to help a youngster move into a role that does not dominate others, that is not dominated by others, and that does not stand by and allow it to happen to others.
That is much easier said than done.
But, it is the only way that all people ware treated with respect.
Please, send us your ideas, comments, success stories and "I'll-never-dothat-again!" stories.
Everyone wants to learn from how things went for you! http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/
9
The Victim: Every child will be a victim at some time in growing up--some kids get stuck in that role and don't know how to get out; some stay in it because negative attention is better that no attention.
Estimates are that 6-8% of students on any campus are Victims.
These students are those who do not know their own gifts and strengths; they do know their weak points.
Bullies quickly learn those weak points and use them to gain their power.
Signs and Symptoms Withdrawn, fearful Cannot name a friend at school Does not call or invite over any friends Comes home with torn or dirty clothes Money and personal items are frequently "missing" School related illnesses: stomach ache, headache, etc.
Loss of appetite or eats constantly Sleep disturbances "Hates" school Poor school performance Depression, anxiety Anger Self-harm: eating disorders, cutting on self Suicide/homicide Tips for Parents 1.
Ask your child directly but hold your feelings in check--do not increase the child's sense of helplessness by showing your hurt and anger.
2.
Support your child! Tell him that no one has the right to make him feel badly about himself and you are sorry he is having to deal with this.
Promise to help him learn more about what he can do to handle it.
3.
Suggest some responses he might use that are kind but firm: Do not speak to me that way! That is unkind.
It is bullying.
You need to stop it right now! Encourage your child to disempower the bully through words but not to become a bully in the process.
4.
Instruct your child to find an adult in authority and report the incident--even if the Bully has threatened him not to tell.
5.
Encourage your child to report any incident to you also--take those opportunities to listen and share the hurt with your child.
Suggest ways the child can ensure his won safety: hang out with other kids in a group, find friends who are supportive, etc. 6.
Contact the school; find out what the school policy on bullying is; report the incidents you know of; insist that your child be kept safe; work with the school on how to manage that; advocate for the parents of the bully to be contacted and the bully to be consequenced.
7.
Work on building your child's self-esteem--his inner strength (not to be confused with his ego or sense of entitlement).
8.
Seek professional help to learn better ways of helping your child.
10
Tips for Teachers 1.
READ as much as you can find on this topic; LEARN why it is so critical that you take action.
2.
Talk to your students about power and control--how it works in relationships.
3.
Teach students that "ignore" does not mean that the hurt is not there or will go away; it means you are acting as if it doesn't hurt.
To ignore a bully means that you are taking some of the power and control away from him.
4.
Get trained on how to handle students involved in bullying.
If teachers are not appropriately trained, victims stop looking to teachers to help them.
Often teachers give glib answers like, "Just ignore it" because the do not know what else to do--the victim is again hurt, this time by the adult whose job it is to help them learn how to handle the situation.
5.
Do not expect the victim to change in order to prevent the bullying.
It is the bully whose behavior needs to change.
6.
Develop an approach to befriending a student you think might be being victimized.
Use caution so that the bully does not use this as addition ammunition.
7.
Develop some common questions to begin a conversation: Sometimes kids are afraid at school because other kids tease them or call them names.
Is something like that happening to you? You can tell me about it.
Has this happened more than once? How many times? Did you talk to your parents about it? What did they suggest? Do other students see this or hear this? What do they do? You know, this behavior is bullying and it is not right.
I want to help you learn ways to handle this.
8.
Take EVERY report of bullying seriously.
Make sure your school policy on bullying encourages all students to report any acts of bullying they know of.
Make sure you DO SOMETHING if a student reports to you.
Some suggestions are: a.
Ask if the student is Reporting or Tattling--even young students can be taught the difference.
b. Thank the student for reporting and redirect the student to another activity.
c. Investigate the situation to possibly see or hear the incident.
d. Call in the victim and bully SEPARATELY for a discussion.
Be frank that the incident was reported to you and that you are concerned that all students are safe while at school.
e. Consequence the bully by following the schools' policy.
Make sure the student knows that his parents will be contacted.
f.
Have supportive discussion with the victim.
g. Conduct a discussion with all your classes about bullying behavior and the responsibility of every student to report any incident they witness.
Bystanders are the secret weapon that can end bullying.
9.
There are families that function within the dynamics of a bullying incident--it is obvious who is dominant in the marriage relationship and which child is seen as the "black sheep," "runt," "no-account-kid," etc.
A child in this dynamic may develop into a bully or a victim.
It is important to get behavioral health assistance for such a youngster--and the family.
Refer to school psychologist.
11
Suggested Group Discussion Questions If you are inviting a group of adults to watch the video and have a discussion, probably parents because their students have been brought to the school's attention as victims of Bullying, these are some of the tactics your might try in facilitating a group discussion:
REMEMBER--
Before you ask the question, be sure to know what your response might be if the person advocates an approach that is violent or aggressive.
How will you turn it around so that you are advocating for helping kids to be kinder.
1.
Think back to your own childhood--do you remember being the kid who was the leader, everyone followed your ideas, asked your advice, etc. or do you remember being the follower, the one who had ideas but was too shy to offer them or the one who frequently did not get invited along or the one with the embarrassing nickname: the KLUTZ, the MUMBLER, the GOOF, etc.
Now, fastforward those incidents to today's society--what do they look like today? What are the nicknames today? How does the leader keep his position? 2.
To the women, remember back to those days of making sure you were dressed right, had the right hair cut, etc.
What are some of the memories you have of being embarrassed when you failed at having those things "right"? Do you remember the names of those who made fun of you? How do you feel right now as you remember them? (these memories stay with us at an incredible intensity if we have not been able to resolve them) Frequently, it is this intensity of emotion that drives what we say or do to help our children.
Many mothers coax daughters to be the leader, the one who sets the standard and puts down anyone who does not meet it.
This is about me, not my daughter! But it is a powerful force that I carry inside me....
3.
To the men, what do you want to tell your son when you find out he is being teased and ridiculed? What kinds of experiences did you have as a youngster--were you the bully or the victim? What does the memory mean to you now? You might want to finish the growing up years; all are also out why one role feels better responsibility of the adults to dominated by others, and that discussion with the fact that all children are victims at some time in their bullies and bystanders.
As they experience each of these roles they figure than the other and they move into that role as the preferred one.
It is the help a youngster move into a role that does not dominate others, that is not does not stand by and allow it to happen to others.
That is much easier said than done.
But, it is the only way that all people ware treated with respect.
Please, send us your ideas, comments, success stories and "I'll-never-do-that-again!" stories.
Everyone wants to learn from how things went for you! http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/
12
The Bystander: Every child will be a bystander to bullying at some time in growing up--some kids prefer to stay in that role because they shy away from public attention; some are afraid they may become a victim; others have been exhorted by parents to "mind your own business;" some are studying the dynamics, are emulating and cheering the bully; but, many have become so accustomed to seeing it, that they are able to walk by without any feeling for the victim.
Estimates are that 85% of students on any campus are bystanders.
These students are the "good kids" with pro social skills.
They are being intimidated into silence by the fear of becoming victimized, by the desire to become a "bully" with that power and /or by the subtle closing down of their own empathy.
Signs and Symptoms: Conversations about fights of others kids Confusion/guilt about why he/she found an incident to be funny or cheered it on Fear about becoming a target or being forced into supporting a bully Guilt about not intervening Fear of reporting, lack of trust in adults in positions of authority Withdrawing from responsibility for school safety, "minding my own business" Developing an attitude of "no community involvement", a lack of citizenship Tips for Parents 1.
Ask if your student sees or know of bullying on campus--or anywhere? What are the details of the behavior: How does your student respond? 2.
Talk to your student about "respect."
Use hypotheticals, like what would you want someone to do if you were being bullied? 3.
Talk to your student about living in society and having a responsibility to be a good citizen.
Explain how those skills are learned at school; a good citizen reports acts of cruelty to the police.
4.
Ask: Who is the best adult on campus to report an incident to? Why is that the best person? 5.
Ask: What would you expect that person to do to help the victim? 6.
Ask: What words would you use to report it? Does your school have a policy about acts of bullying and violence? 7.
Ask: What might you say to the Bully in an incident? Or the victim? How could you support the victim? Give suggestions if your child needs them.
Tips for Teachers 1.
Know your school's policy on bullying! If there is not a policy, become the fore to create one.
2.
Discuss with every class the need to care for one another by not allowing any one student to be a victim.
Explain the difference between "tattling" and "reporting".
Interestingly enough, even high school students need to have this explained.
13
Some suggested Group Discussions: If you are inviting a group of adults to watch the video and have a discussion, probably parents because their students have been brought to the school's attention for being Bystanders, these are some of the tactics your might try in facilitating a group discussion: Before you ask the question, be sure to know what your response might be if the person advocates an approach that is violent or aggressive.
How will you turn it around so that you are advocating for helping kids to be kinder.
REMEMBER--
1.
Why do you think that so many of our "good" students prefer to "not get involved" when they witness acts of bullying on campus? 2.
What are some of the things that students might say to the Bully when they see a behavior that no adult or faculty sees--tripping in the halls between classes, knocking someone's books down in the crowded hallways, acts of aggression and meanness at recess and breaks; threats and intimidation, etc? 3.
What are the risks of a student standing up to another student at school? How could those risks be lessened? What would you, the parents or community, need to do to accomplish that? What would the school need to do? 4.
It has been said that Bystanders are the most negatively affected set of students within the Bullying "roles".
Do you agree with that? Why or why not? 5.
How would society profit if we all practiced responsible citizenship by reporting crimes and incidents that negatively affect our community? You might want to finish the discussion with the fact that all children are bystanders at some time in their growing up years; all are also bullies and victims.
As they experience each of these roles they figure out why one role feels better than the other and they move into that role as the preferred one.
It is the responsibility of the adults to help a youngster move into a role that does not dominate others, that is not dominated by others, and that does not stand by and allow it to happen to others.
That is much easier said than done.
But, it is the only way that all people ware treated with respect.
Please, send us your ideas, comments, success stories and "I'll-never-do-that-again!" stories.
Everyone wants to learn from how things went for you! http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/
14
Gender Issues: Gender issues begin to show up in all relationships during the Middle School years when physical maturation begins.
The specific behaviors that are involved in bullying at this eimt are closely connected to dominance as it relates to romantic relationships.
As maturation continues into High School, the behaviors become more subtle and sophisticated.
Many high schools mistakenly believe they do not have a bullying problem because it is not overt.
Sexual identity is one of the strongest prompts in adolescent bullying.
Historically, boys have been encouraged to develop into "men" by showing prowess and girls into women by showing submission.
Although the rhetoric of today does not support that, the gender roles still contain a great deal of male dominance.
Even in same sex relationships.
It is expected that one person will be dominant.
All of this becomes important as the adolescent is testing out his/her identity.
Girl Issues: For girls, adolescence becomes a time to "belong" to a group of friends.
This belonging only has value if particular others are excluded from the belonging.
Consequently, "groups' and "cliques" develop.
These gain power as those in the group are able to exert influence over one another to all think the same of others who are not in their group.
The resulting behaviors take the shape of choosing one person to reject, spread rumors about, and gain support of all the others in the group to do the same.
It is not enough that one girl thinks of it and says it; all of them must join in.
With girls the behavior easily develops into vicious set-ups, lies, property destruction, and reputation annihilation.
Victims of this behavior are almost always affected for the rest of their lives.
Many resort to self-harm, becoming deeply depressed and even commit suicide.
Those who are able to continue functioning, carry those hurtful rejections into adulthood.
Many of them, unconsciously, raise their daughters to be "popular", wear the "latest fashion", shop at the "right stores", etc. in order to prevent them from being rejected by the "group".
And, many of these daughters actually become the "bullies", or the dominant force in the "group" who set up the rejection of others.
This is a serious issue! Schools are the most prominent locations for this type of bullying to occur and the most accessible for reaching both the mothers and the daughters.
Another element emerges as girls continue to mature.
If they identify heterosexually, they tend to see other girls as competition and will withhold friendship or openly reject them while warming up quickly to boys whom they see as the desirable "prize".
If they identify homosexually, they will befriend boys easily both as a cover and because boys are not seen as desirable, while avoiding friendships with girls who may be rejecting of their advances.
Helping girls through this maze of conflicting fears is critical for their self-esteem.
At this phase in development, they are highly vulnerable to being victimized by bullying and need to have an adult with whom they can process.
Boy Issues: As they mature boys tend to turn to physical activity as a great outlet for the confusing emotions of development.
However, the same "groups" tend to emerge as the physical prowess leads the school team to victory or the musical prowess leads to fame, etc.
Boys DO form "cliques" and 15
they DO reject and persecute others.
Generally, boys are not as verbally vicious as girls and tend to choose a wider variety of victims and they do not require the backing of the group.
For boys, this is also a very important time to have an adult with whom to process what is happening because it is just too easy for boys to make quick assumptions about who they are developing into.
While much of society conditions boys to assume the dominant role in relationships, there are equal pressures for boys to develop their sensitivities--their "feminine side".
For many fathers this contradicting set of expectations presents a fear that his boy might become gay.
It is important to recognize that there are bullies among all members of both sexual identity groups.
A young man who is sensitive and does not assume a dominant role is not necessarily gay, nor is he necessarily a victim.
We must be very careful to not stereotype adolescents along these lines.
We must also be very vigilant to bullying incidents that are connected to sexual identity and intervene immediately.
It is easy to read into the bullying behaviors of boys that they are testing out that "manly role" of dominance.
However, that becomes an excuse to avoid challenging the fact that dominance is the key ingredient in bullying; if the boy is praised and rewarded for behavior that allows him to use his power to control over another person, he is being conditioned to believe that bullying is expected of him.
This is a dangerous conditioning; it leads to an adult life of relationship problems such as domestic violence, child abuse, and aggression as a control mechanism.
Relational Violence: Relational Violence is a term used to identify the type of bullying (dominance) that is prevalent in people once they grow out of the child stage.
It means that a relationship between two or more people does exist.
It means that one exerts dominance over another or, is able to use one or more of the others to inflict or support the infliction of dominance or violence over others.
The "groups" that emerge as part of adolescent development are a good example of relational violence as one or more in the group is able to influence the rest of the group to reject and hurt someone.
This is the same dynamic that is found in many marriage relationships where one person is extraordinarily dominant.
It is also found in many workplace situations.
Relational violence can be a predictable outcome of bullying that has not been effective handled in childhood.
16
Bullying in the Community and the Workplace: Bullying does not magically end when students graduate from high school.
It is pervasive in the workplace, in families and in the community.
In some recent reports as many as 37% of workers report being "bullied, harassed, physically and emotionally terrorized" in the previous 30 days while at work.
Bullying is not accidental--it is purposeful and intended to hurt.
It is not just a one-time happening--it is continual.
IT is an assertion of power and domination.
It happens in government, corporations, families and schools.
It changes shape as it meets us in different life situations: the preschool play group, the school bus teasing, the adolescent cliques, the gang violence, workplace harassment, child abuse, domestic violence, elder abuse, etc.
If we are to help our children develop patterns of behavior that are respectful of others, that stand up to bullying and dominance, we must model to them just how to do it.
We must become more aware of those patterns in our adult interactions and challenge them with kindness and firmness.
The great news is that in modeling any of this behavior, we automatically build a child's self-esteem so that he is not so susceptible to being victimized.
In the modeling of how a Bystander might handle a Bully, you are also modeling an inner strength and a respect for others that prevents becoming a Victim or a Bully.
Tips for Any Adult who Witnesses Bullying between Children: 1.
READ as much as you can find on this topic; LEARN why it is so critical that you take action when you witness or learn of an incident--if you do not take action, you are supporting the bully and increasing the hurt of the victim.
2.
Approach the group where the incident is happening and ask something to the effect of "It looks like your are having some difficulties here.
What can I do to help? Shall I call someone's family or the school? Picking on each other or hitting each other is not an acceptable way to act in our community, so how shall we start to resolve this?" 3.
Be prepared for a rude, vulgar response or a belittling of the problem.
Keep your cool! Take a one-down stance by saying something like, "Oh, I must have misunderstood your behavior--it didn't look like your were having fun."
4.
If you know the children, contact the parents; call the school nearby and report the behavior, describing the children as best as possible.
The school may not be able to do anything about it, but you will be building community awareness and ownership of the problem of bullying among children.
17
Handouts: All handouts are available to link for download from our website:
http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/ The following is a list of materials currently available for use as handouts.
This site will be maintained, with new articles added, as long as there is interest in the topic as counted by the frequency of the number of visitors to the site.
Documents to print as Handouts: In English FIGHT BACK...
Video Viewing Guide FIGHT BACK...Video Curriculum Materials On-Line Resources Bullying Breeds Violence (an article) In Spanish FIGHT BACK...Video Viewing Guide FIGHT BACK...
Video Curriculum Mat erials
Bullying: Both Sides of the Fence (an article) Cyber-bullying (an article) Memorandum from a Child to Parents Limit Setting
** in the margin indicates an article recommended for parents:
Direct Links to download articles to use as Handouts:
http://www.findarticles.com SEARCH: How to Protect Your Child from Bullies ** How To Protect Your Child From Bullies (Johnson) ** How To Protect Your Child From BULLIES (Walker) ** When Bullies Strike: An Opportunity to Teach Your Child Strength and Compassion http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/parents/article_secondary_12032002.shtml Say Boo to Bullying! (Suri) http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/parents/article_primary_05032002.shtml Fight Bullying! (Suri) http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/parents/article_primary_03022003.shtml Discipline--A Positive Act (Suri) http://www.emotionalhonesty.com/artschlresp.html School Responsibilities for Assisting Students who are Bullied http://www.emotionalhonesty.com/acclaim.html (responses of those reading and using book: School Responsibilities for Assisting Students who are Bullied)
18
http://www.readersdigest.ca/mag/2001/10/bullyingexpert.html How to Deal with a Bullying Problem (questions and answers from the Anti-Bullying http://www.readersdigest.ca/mag/2001/10/bullying.html ** Parents' Primer on School Bullying (Goldbloom) http://www.rd.com/index.jhtml/?articleId=9524829 ** 10 Steps Toward Raising a Tolerant Child (Datcher) http://www.rd.com/common/nav/index.jhtml?channelId=3
Hotline)
http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1028.html Bullying in Schools (Success Unlimited) http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1030.html Helping Young Children Deal with Anger http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1031.html Bullying and Young Children http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1032.html Bullying and How to Beat It http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1033.html What is Bullying and What Can You Do About It http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1036.html Bullying in Schools (Banks) http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1050.html Bullying, Teasing May Have Long Term Effects http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1056.html Why Does a Child Become a Bully? http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1057.html Bullying Can Be Overcome by Nurturing the Individuality of Children http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1060.html ** Easing the Teasing: How Parents Can Help Their Children http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1062.html ** Bullying: Information for Parents and Teachers http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1063.html You Can Beat Bullying--A Guide for Young People http://ericcass.uncg.edu/virtuallib/bullying/1069.html Bullying in Early Adolescence: The Role of the Peer Group
19
"database...ERIC, click on "basic search" and enter: Protecting Students AND Harassment to reach the Abstract and Order form for:
http://www.ed.gov/pubs/HateCrime/start.html Preventing Youth Hate Crime: A Manual for Schools and Communities http://www.ed.gov/index.jsp Scroll to "About Ed" 
Bully ** **
http://www.family.go.com SEARCH: Bullies ** Family Fun: Child Development Expert: My Daughter, the Day-Care Family Fun: Your Best Friend's Boy is a Bully Family Fun: Development: Helping Your Child to Stand Up to Family Fun: Development: Helping Your Kids Cope with Name Family Fun: Child Development Expert: Empathy Over Rough and Tumble
Bullies ** **
Calling Play
http://www.ncpc.org SEARCH: Bullies ** Bullies: A Serious Problem for Kids (NCPC's brochure on Bullying) Effective Strategy: Preventing Bullying in Schools ** Ignored by Parents, Girl Bullies Run Wild Girl Bullies Don't Leave Black Eyes, Just Agony It Wasn't Like This When You Were Growing Up The Hidden World of Bullying
http://www.cnn.com/2001/US/03/08/violence.survey/index.html Study: Kids Rate Bullying and Teasing as "Big Problem" http://www.twistedscholar.com/home.htm Gum in My Hair! (anti-bullying video for students-order forms) http://www.bangbangyouredead.com Bang Bang You're Dead (site of free script for that play, written for student actors) http://www.karisable.com/crssstbul.htm Bullying and Harassment Page of Resources http://www.tolerance.org Click on "For Teachers", click on "our magazine", Click on "Spring We Don't Use That Language Anymore (Blezard) Unwelcome Advances (Frazier) 20
2003 issue", scroll to articles:
http://www.aic.gov.au (Australian Institute of Criminology magazine, Trends and Issues) SEARCH: Bullying Bullying and Victimisation in Schools: A Restorative Justice Approach (Morrison) Feb. 2002 (#219) http://www.safechild.org/bullies.htm Coalition for Children--Safe Child: Bullies http://www.cfchildren.org/article_walls1.shtml Committee for Children--Bullying and Sexual Harassment in Schools http://www.lfcc.on.ca/bully.htm London Family Court Clinic--Bullying: Information for Parents and Teachers
http://www.scre.ac.uk/bully/index.html Scottish Council for Research in Education--Finding Out About Bullying
Building a better Teenager: A Summary of "What Works" in Adolescent Development http://www.parentpatrol.org/youngest_school_kids_not_immune_.htm Youngest Kids Not Immune to Bullying http://fact.on.ca/news/news0011/gm001127.htm Bullies Push Their Victims to Suicide (Alphonso)
http://www.childtrends.org/PDF/k7Brief.pdf
21
Resources: On-line resources about Bullying and related topics: (this is also downloadable from our website: http://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/juvenileprob/
Reports on School Violence 1.
Final Report and Findings of Safe School Initiative 2.
Terrorism and Violence in Our Schools 1.
Early Warning, Timely Response: A Guide To Safe Schools 2.
Youth Violence: A Report of the Surgeon General www.ed.gov/offices/OESE/SDFS/preventingattacksreport
For Professionals:
www.asse.org/psmar.pdf www.ed.gov/offices/OSERS/OSEP/products www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/youthviolence/toc.html
Great Web Sites 1.
Juvenile Info Network 2.
National Youth Violence Prevention
www.juvenilenet.org www.safeyouth.org www.ed.gov www.hamfish.org www.safetyzone.org www.nwrel.org www.safeschools@nwrel.org www.nssc1.org http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu/temphome.htm www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dash/violence/index.htm www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org www.nisws.com www.museumoftolerance.com www.aboutourkids.org www.chci.org/chciyouth
Resource Center 3.
Federal Resources for Educational Excellence 4.
Hamilton Fish Institute Newsletter: BULLETIN (Education research and Policy) 5.
National Resource Center for Safe Schools (Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory) a.
School-wide Prevention of Bullying b. Rebuilding Schools as Safe Havens c. Fact Sheets 6.
National School Safety Center 7.
UCLA: Center for Mental Health in Schools 8.
Center for Disease Control 9.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention 10.
National Institute for School and Workplace Safety 11.
The Museum of Tolerance 12.
About Our Kids 13.
Congressional Hispanic Caucus Institute (CHCI)
Free On line Subscriptions 1.
2.
3.
4.
USDOE (information from and about publications) Join Together On line (JTO) Restorative Practices Children's Defense Fund (Violence Prevention Listserv) www.ed.gov.mailinglists www.jointogether.org www.restorativepractices.org www.childrensdefense.org
Model Programs 2.
1.
The Source Book of Drug and Violence (Prevention Programs for Children and Adolescents)
www.umdnj.edu/vinjweb/resources/sourcebook
3.
Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) 4.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) 5.
The Challenge Newsletter 6.
AEL: School-Based Programs to Promote Safety and Civility 7.
Moral and Character Development http://chiron.va 8.
Blueprints Programs
Safe Schools Healthy Students, School Violence Prevention www.mentalhealth.org www.samhsa.gov/centers/csap/modelprograms/
www.mentalhealth.org/schoolviolence/programs.asp www.thechallenge.org www.ael.org/rel/policy/schbas.htm
ldosta.edu/whuitt/col/morchr/morchr.html www.colorado.edu/cspv/blueprints
22
Bullying Resources 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
For Families (and Professionals): Don't Laugh at Me (Operation Respect) Jigsaw Classroom Louis Brown Peace Institute Olweus Bullying Prevention Program Bullying Interventions The Lion and Lamb Project The Love and Safety Club for Children Amazon Books on Bullying Bullying.org--Where You are Not Alone Resources, Support Groups)
(Games,
www.dontlaugh.org www.jigsaw.org www.institute4peace.org www.colorado.edu/cspc/blueprints/ www.nwrel.org www.lionlamb.org www.geocities.com/EnchantedForest/ www.bullying.com www.bullying.org
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
Help for Parents 1.
2.
3.
4.
Let's Talk About Bullying (English 
(Children's Media Violence Consumption at Home and Aggressive Behaviors research)
Websites for Students 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Frontline--Inside the Teenage Brain www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages www.familiesandwork.org Families and Work Institute (how to handle both) www.childrensdefense.org/parentresnet-violence.php Children's Defense Fund: Parent Resource Network The Coroner's Report: Gang intervention www.gangwar.com Nickelodeon TALK (tips about "hard Topics: sex, drugs, etc.) www.everythingnick.com Talking With Kids About Tough Issues www.talkingwithkids.org Bullying Online (Advice to Parents) www.bullying.co.uk/parents/ Emotional Honesty www.emotionalhonesty.com Family.com www.family.go.com Family Education Network www.fen.com Get Your "Angries" Out www.angriesout.com National Coalition Against Domestic Violence www.ncadv.org Family Violence Prevention Fund www.fvpf.org People Activating Communities Everywhere for Student Safety (PACESS)www.parentpatrol.org www.theantidrug.com Parents.
The Anti-Drug.
(free list serv also) AZ Character Education Foundation www.azcharacteredfoundation.org www.afterschool.gov www.ycwa.org www.reportsomeone.com www.nationalsave.org www.dosomething.org www.noviolence.net www.verbnow.com www.nick.com/your_world www.bullying.org http://fekids.com/kln/
After School Youth Crime Watch of America Report Someone and Save Lives Students Against Violence Everywhere (SAVE) Do Something National Campaign Against Youth Violence Verb: It's What You Do Nickelodeon TALK (the "Talk Challenge") Bullying Support Group for Youth Family Education for Kids
23
11.
Stay Alert...Stay Safe (SASS)
www.sass.ca/bully.htm
Bibliography of Research Used in these Materials (in addition to all previously listed): Beane, Allan L. (2002).
The Bully Free Classroom.
Free Spirit Publishing, Minneapolis, MN. Brill, Ronald.
(2000).
Emotional Honesty 
Xlibris, Philadelphia, PA. _____.
(2002 rev).
Best Practices of Youth Violence Prevention: A Sourcebook for Community Action.
US Department of Health and Human Services/Center for Disease Control: Atlanta.
(also available in Spanish) Connolly, J., et al.
Dating Experiences of Bullies in Early Adolescence, Child Maltreatment.
2000, 5:4, 299-310.
Davis, R., et al. (2002).
FIRST STEPS: Taking Action Early to Prevent Violence, A Guide.
Prevention Institute, Oakland, CA. De Voe, J. F., et al.
Indicator of School Crime and Safety: 2002.
US Departments of Education and Justice.
NCES 2003-009/NCJ-196753.
Washington, DC: 2002.
Dickenson, A. Sexual Bullying: Schools are Now Required to Protect Kids from Lewd Harassment, TIME. 1999, 153:22, 86.
Espelage, D 
(2001) Hayworth Press: IL. Frey, Karen.
Forging Adult-Child Partnerships to Reduce Bullying and other Aggression: The Role of Adult Leadership and Student Social-Emotional Skills.
Presentation at Hamilton Fish Conference, Monterey, CA: June 2002.
Galinsky, Ellen 
(2002).
Youth and Violence: Students Speak Out for a More Civil Society.
(Ask the Children Series).
Families 
Galinsky, E. (2000).
Ask the Children: How to Succeed at Work and Parenting.
Quill: New York.
Garrity, Carla, et al. (2000).
Bully-Proofing Your School: A Comprehensive Approach for Elementary Schools.
Sopris West Publishers, Longmont, CO. Garrity, Carla, et al. (2000).
Bully-Proofing Your Child: A Parent's Guide.
Sopris West Publishers, Longmont, CO. Geffner, Robert A., el al.
Bullying Behavior: Current Issues, Research, and Interventions, Journal of Emotional Abuse, 2: 2 
Goldstein, Arnold.
(1999.)
Low-Level Aggression.
Research Press, Champaign, IL. Harrison, M. Equal Partners, Teaching Tolerance.
Fall 1997, 41-46.
_________.
(2001).
Hatred in the Hallways: Violence and Discrimination Against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Students in US Schools, Report from: Human Rights Watch.
HRW: New York.
_______.
Here's What to Tell Victims of Bullying, ED Nursing.
April 2002.
Hoover, J. 
The Bullying Prevention Handbook: A Guide for Principals, Teachers, and Counselors.
National Education Service: Indiana.
24
Horn, Sam.
(2003).
Take the Bully by the Horns: Stop Unethical, Uncooperative or Unpleasant People from Running and Ruining Your Life.
St Martin's Press: New York.
____.
(2001).
Hostile Hallways: bullying, Teasing, and Sexual Harassment in School.
AAUW: Washington, DC.
Huesmann, L. Rowell, et al.
Longitudinal Relations Between Children's Exposure to TV Violence and Their Aggressive and Violent Behavior in Young Adulthood: 1917-1992, Developmental Psychology.
2003, 39:2, 201221.
Kaufman, P. et al.
Indicators of School Crime and Safety: 2001.
US Departments of Education and Justice.
NCES 2002-113/NCJ-190075.
Washington, DC: 2001.
Kimmel, M. Snips and Snails...and Violent Urges, Newsday.
March 8, 2001: A-41-44.
Klinefelter, Annette.
Getting to the Core of the Hurt: Relational Aggression Prevention 
Presentation at Hamilton Fish Conference, Monterey, CA: June 2002.
Limber, S. 
1999, 3:2, 13-15.
Morrison, Brenda.
Restorative Justice and School Violence: Building Theory and Practice.
Paper delivered at International Conference of Violence in Schools and Public Policies: Palais de;'UNESCO, Paris.
March 2001.
Nansel, T., et al.
Bullying Behaviors Among US Youth: Prevalence and Association with Psychosocial Adjustment, JAMA. 2001, 285: 16.
Noll, Kathy 
(1998).
Taking the Bully by the Horns: Children's Version of the Best Selling Book "Nasty People."
Unicorn Press, New York.
Novince, Loretta.
Emotional Intelligence in School-based Violence Prevention.
Presentation at Hamilton Fish Conference, Monterey, CA: June 2002.
Olweus, Dan.
(1991).
Bullying at School: What We Know and What We Can Do.
Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen: Bergen, Norway.
Omori, Miya.
Bullying: A New Sense of Need in the US Educational System, Child Research Net.
April, 2001.
Peacock, D. 
November 2001.
15 pages.
_____.
(2001).
Progress in Prevention: Report on the National Study of Local Education Agency Activities under the Safe and Drug Free Schools and Communities Act.
US Department of Education: Washington, D.C.
Rosenbluth, B. School and Agency Partnerships: Meeting the Needs of Youth in Violent Homes, Youth in Crisis.
Rosenbluth, B. 
SafePlace: Austin, TX. Sanchez, E., et al.
Preventing Bullying and Sexual Harassment in Elementary Schools: The Expect Respect Model, Bullying Behavior: Current Issues, Research, and Interventions.
Hayworth Press: IL, 2001, 157-180.
Silverman, J., et al.
Dating Violence Against Adolescent Girls and Associates Substance Abuse, Unhealthy Weight Control, Sexual Risk Behavior, Pregnancy, and Suicidality, JAMA. 2001, 286: 572-579.
Simmons, Rachel.
(2003).
Odd Girl Out: The Hidden Culture of Aggression in Girls.
Harcourt Brace: Orlando.
Stein, N. Gender Violence in Elementary and Secondary Schools, Coalition Commentary.
Fall 2001.
25
Stein, N. Sexual Harassment Erodes the Notion that School is a Safe Place, Harvard Education Letter.
Jan/Feb 2000, 6.
Stein, N. Sexual Harassment is an Era of Zero Tolerance.
WCW Research Report.
Fall/Winter 2000, 3 pages.
Voors, William.
Bullying: Both Sides of the Fence.
Paradigm, 6: 4, Winter 2003.
Viadero, D. Tormentors, Education Week.
Jan. 15, 2003.
Vossekuil, B., et al. (2002).
The Final Report and Findings of the Safe School Initiative.
US Departments of Education and Justice: Washington, D.C.
Wiseman, Rosalind.
(2003).
Queen Bee's and Wanna Bee's.
Crown Publishing Group: New York.
Arizona Foundation for Legal Services and Education State Law Related Education 111 W. Monroe, Suite 1800 Phoenix, AZ 85003 602-340-7361 available: The Bully Barometer, 19 Signs which Identify a Bully Boo Bear Learns About Bullying And many other resources for schools
26
