BUSINESS 
Steven Galli Saint Agatha School, Franklin County Teresa Whitman, Teacher Beatrice Smith Henshaw During an intense Scrabble game my dad put down a seven-letter word.
My great aunt heard this and said, "I am glad you put down that big word instead of a small word, because I despise it when a two letter word in a corner gets tons of points."
My Great Aunt Bea always believed that you had to work hard to get good outcomes.
In 1928 Bea was a freshman at the University of Detroit.
She supported herself entirely through her college education by cleaning houses, babysitting, busing tables and other random jobs.
Through her hard work and persistence in doing the best she could, she became the first woman to be ranked number one at the University of Detroit, and she did this her freshman year.
In 1948, Bea and her husband, Hugh, opened the first motel in Ann Arbor, The Stage Stop Motel.
She had to work very hard to keep up with the motel and raise three children.
After many years of profitable work, my great aunt and uncle retired from the motel business.
During the Vietnam War there were many people who wanted peace.
My aunt was one of these people.
During the war she wrote many letters to the editor voicing her opinion about peace.
They were almost always published in the major newspaper in Detroit and Ann Arbor, Michigan.
She even traveled to Washington to join a peace march and attended numerous peace rallies around her area.
My great aunt used her creative mind to develop and market peace note cards, using the profits fordifferent peace causes.
She took many actions that persuaded people to turn toward peace.
In 1986, Aunt Bea published the book Backward, Turn Backward.
Recollections of a Childhood in Northern Michigan.
It is an autobiography/collective biography about herself, her parents and five siblings as they grew up in Petoskey, Michigan.
All of the stories reflect her personal feelings about family and world experiences from her point of view.
"I hate it when people get a lot for a little bit of work" was a phrase she recited many times.
She became so frustrated at Scrabble that she created and marketed her own game called "Worthy Words."
In this game, "An E is worth no more that a Q or Z..."
This makes the players think of longer words instead of a short word with an X in it.
This game also doesn't have triple/double word/letter squares on the board, so big points only come from big words.
Beatrice Smith Henshaw never stopped short and hoped for the best, she always gave it her all.
16
