U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Off ice of Native American Programs and Boys 
HOT NEWS From Indian Country Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe Onamia, Minnesota
NOTES Spring 2000 After in the Fitness Program Physical Enrichment School
Club
Newsletter for Native Youth
Our goal must be to create a future unlike any that has come beforein which no person is left behind.
Boys 
Andrew Cuomo Secretar y of Housing and Urban Development
The Boys 
The tribes reservation is located in east central part of the state.
The reservation is home to about 1,150 people.
They take pride in their heritage as hunters and rice harvesters, and in their new businesses, which are hotels, resorts, and casinos.
The Boys 
The staff and volunteers want youth at the Club to develop the skills to become responsible citizens, caring adults, and future leaders.
The Club has had a positive impact on the kids who come in, says Executive Director Travis Zimmerman.
Lots of kids werent engaged in anything after school.
Now parents know that their kids are safe.
The Boys 
The Club is near two schools, so members can come right to the Club when school lets out.
Over 100 youth, age 6-18, are proud members of the Club.
Club members enjoy the gym, weight room, arts and crafts room, and game room.
The Clubs after school and summer enrichment program provides tutoring, a drumming group, and physical fitness.
Arts and crafts are always popular.
Club members have learned traditional crafts such as beading, and also other arts such fingerpainting.
To learn more about their Ojibwe heritage, Club members have attended a sugarbush camp, where maple syrup is collected from trees in the fall.
(continued on page 2)
Learning
in the Computer
Lab
1
Three New Boys 
All three Clubs are units of the Boys 
Most of the villagers move ever y summer to fishing camps.
The village opened a Boys 
Before the Club opened, the community lacked options for village youth in the after school hours.
Many kids with working parents were home alone after school.
New Stuyahok, AK
Naknek, AK Dillingham, AK
Katmai Boys 
The Club serves three communities in the area with a combined population of more than 1,000.
Naknek, the original Club location, is separated from South Naknek by the milewide Naknek River, and from King Salmon by 5 miles of road.
The Club is named for nearby Katmai National Park, which is known for its 40 square miles of beautiful rugged wilderness.
The Park has at least 14 active volcanoes! The Clubs home is the Naknek Civic Center, a building with 1,100 square-feet of space.
Club members share the Center with the tribal health service, bingo, and others.
The building includes a full-size
gym, racquetball court, bowling alley, and snack bar.
Among the Clubs 180 members, the most successful programs are summer softball, the Ultimate Journey, summer day camp, basketball camp, and swimming.
The kids are having fun and theyre safe, says one teenage Club member from Naknek.
Hanging out and playing ball is more fun than getting in trouble.
Many groups in the community provide valuable support to the Katmai Boys 
The Sockeye Swim League developed a program to promote recreational swimming, water safety, and competitive swimming for Club members.
A representative from the Bristol Bay Borough Police teaches a popular crafts class once week.
The Alaska Department of Social Services provides anti-drug and alcohol programs.
Other supporters include the Bristol Bay Borough School District, Camai Health
Clinic, the local Suicide Prevention Program, the Bristol Bay Borough government, and local churches.
The Katmai Boys 
In South Naknek, an old elementar y school was remodeled to serve as a club there.
Katmai plans to open a subunit in King Salmon in this year at the King Salmon Air Force Base, which was closed in 1993.
Boys 
Dillingham is located on the north end of Bristol Bay in southwestern Alaska, 330 miles from Anchorage.
It is home to over 2,200 residents, over half of whom are Alaska Natives of Eskimo, Aleut, and Indian heritage.
The city is the economic and transportation center for western Bristol Bay.
Many residents rely on subsistence activities such as trapping, fishing, and berr y harvesting.
The Club opened in August 1998 in a 750-square foot apartment outside of town renovated by the Bristol Bay Housing Authority.
To celebrate, the Club hosted a grand opening ceremony and potluck dinner in Februar y 1999.
Drummers from the Clubs in Tyonek and New Stuyahok proudly provided the entertainment.
The Club is grateful for the space provided by the housing authority.
Approximately 115 youth are involved in Club activities, but staff hope to attract more teens.
To do so, the Club has set aside one room for teens to have a separate space from the younger children.
The Boys 
tions.
The Clubs Advisor y Committee has been ver y active in fundraising.
It recently solicited a donation from Rab Energy Alaska, Inc., and conducted a raffle for a cord of wood, which raised $600.
The firewood raffle was so successful that the Club is planning another, this time to be operated by teen Club members.
The Club has a computer lab with six Internet-access computers, where community volunteers provide tutoring after school.
The Club provides free check-out of hockey equipment to Club members, allowing them to participation in the Dillingham Hockey Association program.
Arts, crafts, and games are also popular activities.
A snack shack program purchases and sells healthy snacks to members and uses the profits to fund activities chosen by the youth.
In partnership with the Bristol Bay Health Corporation and the Cur yung Tribe, the Club plans to sponsor a subsistence camp.
Boys 
The village is home to approximately 450 people, many of whom fish and hunt for their
More than 100 Club members meet in a tribal building.
The Club currently shares space with a wellness program, bingo, and higher education counseling.
To create a space of its own, the Club is working with the tribal administrator on a grant proposal for a new facility.
In the future, the Club plans to develop a junior Native Youth Olympics program, using older youth athletes as coaches for younger members.
It also plans to operate a water safety program in the summer and rekindle the communitys subsistence camp program.
(continued from page 1) During the summer, Club members and youth from the tribes Natural Resources Department planted an acre of strawberries.
When the strawberries were ripe, the youth harvested them to share with elders.
Also this summer, Club kids worked with the Mille Lacs County 4-H program.
Club members attended the county fair, where they helped create a display about the Ojibwe seasons.
The display showed how the tribe harvests birch bark, maple syrup, and wild rice during different seasons.
The display was different than anything else at the county fair!
2
In the next year, the Club wants to focus more on helping kids with their school work.
I will judge the success of the Club by seeing kids start here in first grade and then seeing them graduate from high school, says Zimmerman.
The Mille Lacs Club is also planning another Club in the Reservations District 3.
Tribal Americorps volunteers are helping renovate a building there for a new Club.
Congratulations on your first year and good luck with the second Mille Lacs Club!
3
Native Tongues bad the
y anuarr onth J Iralulle m
Inuit dialect in Bristol Bay region of Alaska
Months of the Year
Kepnerciq cutting time
March
Tengmiir come geese
Aprilvik
Native Youth Olympics: Kayangut coming anutit of eggs
May
A Unique Sport
Kaugun hitting of fish
June
y Februar
frost Kanruyauciq base
Qaariitaarvik masked festivals
October
Cauyarvik time of drumming
November
Ingun molting of birds
July
Tengun flight of birds
August
Amirairvik caribou shed velvet
September
Uivik time of going around
December
To learn what other words and meanings other Native cultures use for the months of the year, visit on the Internet the Indian Moons site (http://members.tripod.com/~PHILKON/moons.html)
Do you know how to sneak up on a seal? People who participate in Alaskas Native Youth Olympics (NYO) do.
Youth, including Boys 
Many schools have NYO as a team sport, just like basketball or volleyball.
balance and strength.
In an event called the seal hop, participants learn a special jump that hunters used to move from iceberg to iceberg while hunting seals or sea otters.
To do the seal hop, get down in pushup position, keep your bottom down, and tr y to hop as far as you can.
Its not easy! Another NYO event is the arm pull.
Two participants sit on the floor.
They both put their right feet over their left feet.
Then they cross their arms and bend them at the elbows.
The participants pull on each other s hands until one straightens out their arms.
The first one to straighten their arms loses.
Other NYO events are the stick pull, Alaskan high kick, wrist carr y, kneel jump, and 1 or 2-foot high kicks.
About 300-350 students participate in a statewide NYO event each year in Anchorage.
After high school, students can continue to compete in the events as adults in the World Eskimo and Indian Olympics.
If you want to learn more about NYO and see pictures of students tr ying out the different events, check out the great Native Youth
Olympics website put together by the students of Mountain View Elementar y School in Kenai, AK in 1998.
Their site is at http://tqjunior.advanced.org/3883/
All Around Finalists of 24th Annual Indian National Finals Rodeo All-Around Cowboy - Jay Crawler and Ed Holyan (co-champions) All-Around Cowgirl - Kakes Tibbits Bull Rider - Hank Bruisedhead Calf Roper - Jay Crawler Saddle Bronc Rider - Philip Whiteman, Jr.
Steer Wrestler - Ed Holyan Club members from Tyonek practice the Alaska high kick.
NYO is ver y different than the Olympics you see on television ever y 4 years.
Instead, the events are based on skills that Native Alaskans needed for hunting, like
Bareback Rider - DC Holeman Barrel Racer - Courtney Ross Break Away Roper - Leslie Spang Team Ropers - Everette Etsitty and Shawn Murphy
4
The 24th Indian National Rodeo Finals was held October 7-10, 1999 in Albuquerque, NM.
For more information, check out this web site: www.infrodeo.com.
5
Canadian Inuit Gain Their Own Territory
COLOR THE DESIGN
It has been a long journey for the Native people of Canadas Northwest Territor y.
The Canadian Inuit have won the right to govern themselves.
The Inuit never signed a treaty with Canada, and have worked hard for 25 years to have a land of their own.
In 1990, the Canadian government finally agreed to create Nunavut as a territor y to be run by the Inuit.
Nunavut officially began operating as its own territor y in spring 1999.
At times, our goal seemed unattainable.....Yet, during this, our dream was unwavering, said the territor ys new Premier, Paul Okalik.
cover the entire territor y.
The land is rocky tundra that is snow-covered most of the year.
The capital city is Iqaluit, on the east coast, to the north of the Canadian province of Quebec.
The most northern Nunavut community, Grise Fiord, has an amazing 24 hours of daylight ever y day in June, and 24 hours of darkness in December! Most of Nunavuts 25,000 human residents are Inuit, but caribou outnumber people by 25 to one.
The Inuit language, Inuktitut, is still spoken by many residents.
The challenge for the new government will be to maintain Inuit traditional ways while making sure that residents have jobs to make a living.
6
Nunavut is ver y large.
It covers 770,000 square miles and two-thirds of Canadas entire coastline.
Only 12 miles of road
Storage chests are large, horizontal, rectangular wooden boxes with lids.
People stored blankets, ceremonial outf its, rattles, masks, and other important possessions in these chests.
To decorate a chest, an artist draws the primary formlines f irst in black.
These broad bands are connected and def ine the design.
After the outline is completed secondary lines and decorative units are put on in red.
Some artists also have the right to use additional colors, including white, green, blue and yellow.
Use the crayons to color in the design, which is a bear.
7
The Coloring Contest Winners! Compliments of the Boys 
Daniel Reyos, age 11
Danelle Amboh, age 8
Lvondra Hereford, age 10
Can You Find the Changes? There are 10 differences in the bottom picture.
Can you find them and circle them all? (The answers are at the bottom of the page.)
NOTES Club Notes
(1) she has a blue shoe buckle (2) she has no headband (3) she has yellow soles on her shoes (4) he has shoelaces (5) he has different shirt stripes (6) the dog has a collar (7) she has a pocket (8) he has no pockets (9) he has yellow striped socks (10) he has short pants
8
Club
Lets hear from YOU! Send us your artwork, letters, articles, and any other interesting Club Stuff to:
c/o Boys 
