1999­2000 CATS ASSESSMENT Open-Response Item Scoring Worksheet Grade 11 ­ Social Studies The academic expectation addressed by the open-response item "Containment" is 2.20 Students understand, analyze, and interpret historical events, conditions, trends, and issues to develop historical perspective.
The core content addressed by this item includes: SS-E-5.2.7 In the twentieth century, the United States has assumed a role in the global community to maintain and restore world peace (e.g., League of Nations, United Nations, Cold War politics, Persian Gulf War).
Containment Following World War II, American foreign policy was described by the word "containment."
Containment means stopping the spread of communist influence in the world.
The following examples were results of this policy:
Truman Doctrine Marshall Plan NATO Korean War Vietnam War Cuban Missile Crisis
a. b. c.
Choose two examples from the list above.
Describe how each resulted from America's desire to contain communism.
Explain whether America was successful in that goal.
Containment ­ 1
SCORING GUIDE Grade 11 Social Studies
Score 4
Description Student chooses two examples and clearly describes how each resulted from America's desire to contain communism.
Response explains whether or not they were successful in that goal.
Historical information is accurate.
Student chooses two examples and generally describes how each resulted from America's desire to contain communism.
Response explains whether or not they were successful in that goal.
Response may contain some minor historical inaccuracies.
OR Student chooses one example and clearly describes how it resulted from America's desire to contain communism.
Response explains whether or not they were successful in that goal.
Historical information is accurate.
Student chooses one example and gives a limited description of how it resulted from America's desire to contain communism.
Response may or may not indicate whether they were successful in that goal.
Response includes a limited amount of accurate historical information.
Student chooses one example and gives a minimal description of how it resulted from America's desire to contain communism or minimally relates it to containment.
Response may or may not indicate whether they were successful, and includes minimal or no accurate historical information.
Response is totally incorrect or irrelevant.
No response.
3
2
1
0 Blank
Truman Doctrine -- On March 12, 1947 President Harry Truman sent a message to Congress requesting money to aid Greece and Turkey.
In this request he also stated that it should be the policy of the United States "to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside pressures."
(Read: "communism").
This policy came to be known as the "Truman Doctrine" and provided the basis for the concept of containment.
It was successful in terms of keeping communism out of most western countries and allowing U.S. presidents to become involved in foreign conflicts from Vietnam to Nicaragua.
Marshall Plan -- a.k.a. the European Recovery Program.
The United States made large financial contributions after World War II to help rebuild the devastated economies of Europe.
Secretary of State George C. Marshall proposed the plan in 1947.
One objective of this plan was to contain the growing influence of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union and other Eastern European countries opposed the plan.
It successfully contributed to the economic recovery of Western Europe.
Containment ­ 2
SCORING GUIDE Grade 11 Social Studies
NATO -- North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
This organization, established in 1949, was an important part of containment policy.
The member nations of Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Great Britain, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, the U.S., Greece, Spain, Turkey, West Germany (now Germany), and France organized to provide collective self-defense against the threat of aggression by the Soviet Union.
It was largely successful in maintaining a cohesive group of nations opposed to the policies of the Soviet Union and caused a Soviet response in the form of the Warsaw Pact (1955).
Korean War -- A war fought between the UN, supported by the United States, and the Communist Democratic People's Republic of Korea (North Korea) from 1950 to 1953.
After World War II Korea was divided at the 38th parallel into Soviet (N. Korea) and U.S. (S. Korea) zones of occupation.
This was a test of the Truman Doctrine to stop the spread of Soviet influence.
The war dragged on for three years before it became apparent that neither side would win.
A truce was signed in 1953.
Korea remains divided.
It was successful in terms of stopping a North Korean takeover of South Korea, although thousands of lives (54,000 American and perhaps half a million North and South Koreans) were lost.
Vietnam War -- Conflict fought between South Vietnam and North Vietnam between 1954 and 1975.
The United States fought on the South Vietnamese side from 1965-1973 (American advisors and troops entered Vietnam in the late 1950s and early 1960s).
The United States fought against communist North Vietnam's attempts to take over South Vietnam.
The conflict was highly controversial among Americans.
Some wholeheartedly supported the war while others protested in mass demonstrations.
The U.S. withdrew in 1973 and South Vietnam was completely taken over by communist North Vietnam in 1975.
Some argue that this war successfully stopped the spread of communism to other neighboring countries; others consider the Vietnam War a failure and an example of the tragedies of containment policy.
Cuban Missile Crisis -- A cold war confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union in 1962 over the presence of ballistic missiles in Cuba.
After the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion the Soviet Union increased its support of Fidel Castro's Cuban regime.
In 1962 Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev secretly installed ballistic missiles in Cuba.
U.S. reconnaissance flights revealed the sites.
President John F. Kennedy denounced the Soviet and Cuban actions, imposed a naval blockade on Cuba, and announced that any missile launched from Cuba would warrant a full-scale military attack against the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev removed the missiles and war was avoided.
This crisis was one of the most dangerous events of the cold war.
Containment ­ 3
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
Sample 4-Point Response of Student Work Student Response a) The containment of communism was one of the highest priorities of the United States during the time period from the end of World War II to the fall of the Soviet Union.
All of the items listed were critical in the fight against the spread of communism.
The two that I have chosen are the Marshall Plan and the Korean War.
b) Following the fall of the Third Reich, Europe was a mass of war-torn countries.
Its cities were in ruin, its economies were in shambles and an entire generation of men had been killed, as well as millions of innocent civilians.
The United States realized that this situation was a breeding ground for communist infestation, and Soviet leader Joseph Stalin had no qualms with telling the West that he would take over Eastern Europe and eventually the rest of it.
The United States responded with the Marshall Plan.
This plan sent billions of U.S. dollars to, in effect, rebuild Europe and thus thwart Stalin's plans.
The planning behind it was that if the countries were in good condition, they wouldn't turn communist.
The Korean War was fought to stop communist aggression in Southeast Asia.
The belief was that if one country fell, many more would follow.
This was called "the Domino Theory," and the United States fought in Korea to keep the communist North from overrunning the South.
Student chooses two of the listed examples of postWorld War II "containment" (i.e., Marshall Plan and Korean War).
Student clearly describes how the Marshall Plan resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "[Europe's] cities were in ruin, its economies were in shambles...The United States realized that this situation was a breeding ground for communist infestation"; "This plan sent billions of U.S. dollars to, in effect, rebuild Europe and thus thwart Stalin's plans").
Student clearly describes how the Korean War resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "The belief was that if one country fell, many more would follow"; "the United States fought in Korea to keep the communist North from overrunning the South").
Continued on next page
Containment ­ 4
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
c) America was successful in its goal to contain communism.
In Europe, Stalin was never able to expand into Western Germany, and, in Asia, North Korea and Vietnam were the only countries besides China to turn communist.
Today, the Soviet Union is no more and China is beginning to open its doors a little more to the United States.
Student clearly explains whether America was successful in its efforts to contain communism (e.g., "Stalin was never able to expand into Western Germany, and, in Asia, North Korea and Vietnam were the only countries besides China to turn communist").
Overall, the student demonstrates a strong understanding of the United States policy of containment and some of the events, conditions, and issues that were a part of Cold War politics.
The student clearly describes how the Marshall Plan and the Korean War resulted from America's desire to contain communism, and clearly explains whether America was successful in achieving its goal.
Containment ­ 5
Science Annotations Template ­ 5
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
Sample 4-Point Response of Student Work Student Response a.
NATO and the Korean War b. NATO, which is an acronym for North Atlantic Treaty Organization, is currently a peacekeeping organization.
However, its role just after World War II ended was to prevent the spread of communism around the world.
After WWII, the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union resulted from the differences in their governments.
The U.S., having a democratic government, disliked communism, and the U.S.S.R., having a communist government, disliked democracy.
The U.S.S.R. attempted to spread communism around the world, especially to states under its control, like the Eastern European states.
The U.S. wanted to practice her policy of containment then, and NATO was immediately formed to make sure the U.S.S.R. would not succeed in spreading communism to Western Europe, and eventually around the world.
When Korea was one country, not divided as it is today, the U.S.S.R. took control of North Korea, attempting to turn the whole country into a communist state eventually.
However, the U.S., again recognizing the attempt to spread communism, decided to practice its containment policy in Korea.
The U.S. sent troops into South Korea to help S. Korea Student chooses two of the listed examples of postWorld War II "containment" (i.e., NATO and Korean War).
Student clearly describes how NATO resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "[America's] role just after World War II ended was to prevent the spread of communism around the world"; "NATO was immediately formed to make sure the U.S.S.R. would not succeed in spreading communism to Western Europe").
Student clearly describes how the Korean War resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "the U.S., again recognizing the attempt to spread communism, decided to practice its containment policy in Korea"; "The U.S. sent troops into South Korea to help S. Korea resist U.S.S.R. troops that wanted to obtain control of the southern part").
Continued on next page
Containment ­ 6
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
resist U.S.S.R. troops that wanted to obtain control of the southern part.
The Korean War started, with N. Korea fighting S. Korea (the Soviets against the U.S.), and this war is an example of a situation that stemmed from America's desire to contain communism.
c. America was successful in the case of NATO, because the Eastern European countries were eventually freed of communism when the U.S.S.R. fell apart, and Russia, the biggest state of the former Soviet Union, turned to democracy under Mikhail Gorbachev.
In Korea, the U.S. was partially successful, because Korea was divided into N. Korea, currently communist, and S. Korea, doing well under democratic government.
Student clearly explains whether America was successful in its efforts to contain communism (e.g., "America was successful in the case of NATO, because the Eastern European countries were eventually freed of communism when the U.S.S.R. fell apart"; "In Korea, the U.S. was partially successful, because Korea was divided into N. Korea, currently communist, and S. Korea, doing well under democratic government").
Overall, the student demonstrates a strong understanding of the United States policy of containment and some of the events, conditions, and issues that were a part of Cold War politics.
The student clearly describes how NATO and the Korean War resulted from America's desire to contain communism, and clearly explains whether America was successful in achieving its goal.
Containment ­ 7
Science Annotations Template ­ 7
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
Sample 3-Point Response of Student Work Student Response A) Vietnam War Cuban Missile Crisis B) The Vietnam War obviously resulted from America's intention of containing communism.
This happened because we knew that North Vietnam was communist, and we, for some reason, tried to prevent their political philosophy from spreading south to South Vietnam.
We later figured out that the South Vietnamese, for the most part, didn't even want to there.
C) This war did nothing but kill our men and hurt our integrity.
B) The Cuban Missile Crisis was also a result of our containment philosophy.
We had been trying to run communism out of Cuba for years, so they automatically hated us for it.
Because of this contempt, Cuba allowed Russia to put nuclear missiles on Cuba, and aim them at us.
Obviously this was a very bad situation.
C) In a manner of speaking, we were successful in that we narrowly avoided ending the world as we know it by means of nuclear warfare.
In my opinion, this was a very unrespectable period for the U.S. Student chooses two of the listed examples of postWorld War II "containment" (i.e., Vietnam War and Cuban Missile Crisis).
Student generally describes how the Vietnam War resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "we, for some reason, tried to prevent [North Vietnam's] political philosophy from spreading south to South Vietnam").
Student generally explains whether America was successful in its effort to contain communism (e.g., "This war did nothing but kill our men").
Student generally describes how the Cuban Missile Crisis resulted from America's desire to contain communism (e.g., "We had been trying to run communism out of Cuba for years, so they automatically hated us for it.
Because of this contempt, Cuba allowed Russia to put nuclear missiles on Cuba, and aim them at us").
Student generally explains whether America was successful in its effort to contain communism (i.e., "we were successful in that we narrowly avoided ending the world as we know it by means of nuclear warfare").
Overall, the student demonstrates a general understanding of the United States policy of containment and some of the events, conditions, and issues that were a part of Cold War politics.
The student generally describes how the Vietnam War and the Cuban Missile Crisis resulted from America's desire to contain communism, and generally explains whether America was successful in achieving its goal.
Containment ­ 8
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
Sample 2-Point Response of Student Work Student Response (A)Vietnam War, Cuban Missile Crisis (B)The Vietnam War resulted from America's dissire the contain comunism because there were several comunist parties in vietnam and we sent troop over there to stop them from taking over vietnam.
The Cuban Missle Crisis resulted from America's disire for contanment because we didn't like the idea of one man having the power to blow us up any time he took a notion to.
(C)I think that we were succesful in containing comunism in vietnam but not in cuba because we didn't really get rid of cuba's communist government.
Student chooses two of the listed examples of postWorld War II "containment" (i.e., Vietnam War and Cuban Missile Crisis).
Student provides a limited description of how the Vietnam War resulted from America's desire to contain communism (i.e., "there were several comunist parties in vietnam and we sent troop over there to stop them from taking over vietnam").
Student provides a limited description of how the Cuban Missile Crisis resulted from America's desire to contain communism (i.e., "we didn't like the idea of one man having the power to blow us up any time he took a notion to").
Student explains whether America was successful in its efforts to contain communism (i.e., "we were succesful in containing comunism in vietnam but not in cuba because we didn't really get rid of cuba's communist government"), but only the part of the explanation referring to Cuba is accurate.
Overall, the student demonstrates some understanding of the United States policy of containment and some of the events, conditions, and issues that were a part of Cold War politics.
The student provides a limited description of how the Vietnam War and the Cuban Missile Crisis resulted from America's desire to contain communism, and correctly explains for one of the examples that America was not successful in achieving its goal.
Containment ­ 9
Science Annotations Template ­ 9
ANNOTATED STUDENT RESPONSE Grade 11 Social Studies
Sample 1-Point Response of Student Work Student Response Student chooses two of the listed examples of postWorld War II "containment" (i.e., Truman Doctrine and Vietnam War).
Student attempts to describe how the Korean War resulted from America's desire to contain communism (i.e., "The Korean war consisted of both North and South Korea fighting each other"), but the description is incomplete.
a. Truman Doctrine; Vietnam War b.
The Truman Doctrine was against communism and the spread of it.
The Korean war consisted of both North and South Korea fighting each other.
Russia was a communist country then. c.
They both ended up successful because they didn't fall to communism.
Student minimally describes the relationship between the Truman Doctrine and America's desire to contain communism (i.e., "The Truman Doctrine was against communism and the spread of it").
Student explains whether America was successful in its efforts to contain communism (i.e., "They both ended up successful because they didn't fall to communism"), but the explanation is unclear and only partially correct.
Overall, the student demonstrates a minimal understanding of the United States policy of containment and some of the events, conditions, and issues that were a part of Cold War politics.
The student minimally describes how the Truman Doctrine related to America's desire to contain communism, and correctly, albeit somewhat unclearly, explains that the Truman Doctrine was successful in the effort to contain communism.
Containment ­ 10
INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGIES Grade 11 Social Studies
The open-response item "Containment" was designed to address students' (1) knowledge of the Cold War period, and (2) ability to understand, analyze, and interpret historical events, conditions, trends, and issues to develop historical perspective.
The instructional strategies below present ideas for helping students explore and master these concepts and skills.
Read non-fiction works about any related event to deepen content knowledge and assist in research.
Provide opportunities for students to work individually, in pairs, in small groups, and/or as a class to complete (with teacher guidance and support) any or all of the following activities: · · · · · Define and research America's foreign policy during the Cold War Era.
Discuss why containment became the focus of America's foreign policy in the period following World War II.
Research political, economic, and social implications of the Truman Doctrine, the Marshall Plan, NATO, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Chart the events listed above; include a description of how each event demonstrated the U.S. policy of Containment and the results of these events/policies.
Evaluate the success of the Containment policy.
Reflect the results on maps or charts comparing democratic versus communist countries in the last five decades.
Write a letter to the U.S. State Department encouraging or discouraging the use of Containment as a foreign policy based on the success or failure of past policies (or based on today's political conditions).
(Students should see sample letters before they write.)
Containment ­ 11
