WAC 296-17-574 Classification 3104.
3104-08 Plaster, whiting, talc, emery powder: Manufacturing Applies to establishments engaged in the manufacture of plaster, whiting, talc or emery powder.
Plaster is a mixture of lime, sand, water, and may include hair or other fibers, that hardens to a smooth solid and is used for coating walls and ceilings.
Plaster can also be manufactured in dry form and sold in bags.
Whiting is a pure white grade of chalk that has been ground and washed for use in paints, ink, and as an extender in pigments, putty or whitewash.
Talc is a fine-grained white, greenish, or gray mineral with a soft soapy texture, which is used in the manufacture of talcum and face powder, as a paper coating, and as a filler for paint and plastics.
Emery is a fine-grained mineral used for grinding and polishing.
This classification is for the production of the powders only.
Machinery includes, but is not limited to, crushing, mixing, grinding, milling and washing and cooking machinery, conveyors and forklifts.
This classification excludes establishments engaged in the manufacture of plaster statuary or ornaments which are to be reported separately in classification 3509; establishments engaged in the manufacture of plasterboard or plaster block which are to be reported separately in classification 3104-55; interior and exterior plastering and stucco work which is to be reported separately in classification 0303; and quarrying operations which are to be reported separately in classification 1704.
3104-52 Asbestos products or mica goods: Manufacturing Applies to establishments engaged in the manufacture of asbestos products and mica goods.
Asbestos products include, but are not limited to, fireproofing, electrical insulation, building materials, brake linings, clutch facings, valve packings, dryer felt, and chemical filters.
Asbestos is a fibrous mineral form combined with impure magnesium silicate.
Flake asbestos can be mixed, spun and woven into cloth; or the flakes can be used as an ingredient in the processing or treatment of paper.
To make molded asbestos products, asbestos is mixed with other ingredients, molded, baked, cut to size, and ground.
Mica is also a mineral form; it is split to desired thickness using hand knives or knives mounted on tables.
The split mica is sent to punch presses which stamp out the various products usually used by the electrical trades.
Mica that is too small to be processed on punch presses may be placed in burling machines, mixed with liquids, then pressed into sheets.
Removal of imperfections is usually done by hand; the sheets are dried, baked in ovens and run through sanders prior to crating and shipping.
This classification excludes establishments engaged in the manufacture of plasterboard or plaster block which are to be reported separately in classification 3104-55; contractors engaged in the installation or removal of asbestos or mica products at the customer's site which are to be reported separately in the classification applicable to the phase of construction being performed; and quarrying operations which are to be reported separately in classification 1704.
3104-53 Soapstone or soapstone products: Manufacturing; marble cutting and polishing; slate milling; stone cutting or polishing, N.O.C.
Applies to establishments engaged in the manufacture of soapstone products, and the cutting, milling, and polishing of marble, slate, or stone such as grindstone, limestone, millstone and lithographic stone (usually sheet zinc), not covered by another classification (N.O.C.).
Soapstone (also called steatite) is a massive white-to-green talc found in extensive mine beds and is used in products such as, but not limited to, insulation, paints, ceramics, decorative accessories, and ornamental objects.
The manufacturing process requires turning, shaping, carving and polishing of the soapstone with a variety of milling equipment.
Finished products of marble, slate or stone include, but are not limited to, decorative accessories, tops for furniture, countertops, floor tiles and other building materials.
Machinery and materials include, but are not limited to, saws, milling machines, grinders and abrasives.
This classification excludes installation of tile, marble or slate building materials which is to be reported separately in the classification applicable to the phase of construction being performed and quarry operations which are to be reported separately in classification 1704.
3104-55 Plasterboard or plaster block: Manufacturing Applies to establishments engaged in the manufacture of plasterboard (wallboard) or plaster block which are used as building materials.
Raw materials include, but are not limited to, plaster, fiberboard, and rolls of paper.
Plasterboard is made by bonding plaster to a thin rigid board or to layers of fiberboard or paper to form a flat board or a block.
Product is dried in ovens, cut to size with slitters or other cutting machinery, and packed for shipment.
This classification includes the mixing of the plaster when done by employees of employers subject to this classification.
This classification excludes establishments operating as plaster mills which are to be reported separately in classification 3104-08; interior and exterior plastering and stucco work which is to be reported separately in classification 0303; and quarrying operations which are to be reported separately in classification 1704.
3104-57 Coating of building materials, N.O.C.
Applies to establishments engaged in the coating of building materials, not covered by another classification (N.O.C.), with preservatives to keep them from decaying when placed into the ground.
These materials include, but are not limited to, dimensional lumber, deck materials, fence posts, landscaping beams, and lattice work.
The coating process may include immersing the lumber in vats of preservative, or cutting or drilling small holes into the lumber and applying preservatives that soak in.
Machinery and materials include, but are not limited to, immersion vats, drills, brushes, or machines to drill holes and apply preservatives.
This classification excludes installation of these products which is to be reported separately in the classification applicable to the work being performed.
3104-58 Monument dealers Applies to establishments engaged in selling monuments, statues, cornerstones, and grave markers to others.
This classification includes the finish cutting, grinding, polishing, engraving, and sandblasting of the stone when done by employees of employers subject to this classification.
Wholesale monument dealers generally receive split, rough cut stone from the mine or quarry.
Materials such as granite and marble are cut to block size, and precast bronze markers may be attached to the stone.
Some blocks are sold without further processing while others are finished with stone polishers and abrasives, then cut into monuments prior to shipment to retail monument dealers.
Retail monument dealers may provide engraving, artwork, lettering, and dates, according to customer specifications, that is usually done with a sandblasting technique.
This classification includes installation of monuments when performed by employees of the monument dealer.
This classification excludes installation of monuments by employees of cemeteries which is to be reported separately in classification 6202; contractors engaged in the installation of monuments which are to be reported separately in the classification applicable to the work being performed; and establishments engaged in providing specialized services, such as, but not limited to, sandblasting which are to be reported separately in the classification applicable to the work being performed.
[Statutory Authority: RCW 51.16.035.
98-18-042, § 296-17-574, filed 8/28/98, effective 10/1/98.
Statutory Authority: RCW 51.04.020(1) and 51.16.035.
93-12-093, § 296-17-574, filed 5/31/93, effective 7/1/93.
Statutory Authority: RCW 51.16.035.
85-24-032 (Order 85-33), § 296-17-574, filed 11/27/85, effective 1/1/86; 82-24-047 (Order 82-38), § 296-17-574, filed 11/29/82, effective 1/1/83; Order 76-36, § 296-17-574, filed 11/30/76; Order 73-22, § 296-17-574, filed 11/9/73, effective 1/1/74.]
