[hd_nwhi_lft.gif] To whom it may concern: Attached below as a MS-Word document and in Rich Text Format (RTF, compatible with most word processing software) are the comments of the Center for Marine Conservation on 65 FR 43205-43207.
These comments are also being faxed to your office at (520) 670-5530.
Please contact our office at your earliest convenience if you have any difficulty with this attachment or if you have any questions or comments.
Thank you for consideration of our view.
Sincerely,
Doug Obegi __________________________________________________________________
August 2, 2000
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conflict Resolution ATTN: Northwestern Hawaiian Islands 110 South Church Avenue Suite 3350 Tucson, AZ 85701
VIA Fax and Email RE: Comments on 65 FR 43205-43207, Protection of the Coral Reef Ecosystem of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
Overview and Vision:
The Center for Marine Conservation, on behalf of our 120,000 members, welcomes this opportunity to comment on the need for, and best management options to achieve, protection of the coral reef ecosystem of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (NWHI).
CMC strongly believes that the wilderness character of this relatively pristine and healthy coral reef ecosystem should be restored and protected for the benefit of present and future generations.
We encourage the adoption of a comprehensive management regime for the entire ecosystem that places the highest priority on wilderness preservation and full protection for key areas and resources.
It should incorporate management of fishing, recreational use, cultural and subsistence use, and opportunities for research and education, as appropriate, secondary to this primary goal.
In particular, fragile nearshore, shallow, and deepwater reefs, and critical habitats for all endangered and threatened species should be full protected from human impacts.
A key part of this management regime must be the creation of substantial "no-take" marine reserves that permanently protect such areas from human impacts.
CMC believes that a marine zoning plan based upon this ecosystem approach will best protect and conserve the endangered and threatened wildlife, the federally protected bird populations, the marine fish populations, and sustainable human use and enjoyment of this remote archipelago.
CMC further believes that the cooperation of federal and state agencies with communities, non-governmental organizations, and other public interests, will be critical to the long-term success of this approach, and we commend the Administration and Senator Inouye, in particular, for providing this opportunity for stakeholder involvement and comment.
We hope that public participation and involvement will continue to play a key role in the long-term protection and management of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.
The long-term protection of the NWHI will ultimately depend upon the participation and cooperation of several federal, state, native Hawaiian and nongovernmental partners.
The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are a wild area of national importance, and the values, services and functions provided by the region's ecosystem are much broader in scope than just fisheries production.
Accordingly, CMC believes that a mixture of precautionary fisheries management along with more comprehensive protection for key resources and areas from all human impacts is most appropriate to ensure the permanent protection of this national treasure.
Federal protection of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands began with President Teddy Roosevelt's creation of the Hawaiian Islands Reservation (later renamed the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge) with E.O. 1019 in 1909.
The Center for Marine Conservation urges the President to demonstrate leadership comparable to that which President Roosevelt demonstrated nearly a century ago by exercising his Administration's existing authorities to build upon this conservation legacy and develop meaningful, concrete protections for the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands this year.
The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are a national treasure that we should all cherish.
But we must recognize that humans can love something to death, and that protecting the coral reefs, marine mammals, and fish means protecting them from ourselves.
We hope that the final outcome of this process will provide permanent protection of the area, the recovery of the threatened and endangered species living there, and opportunities for human enjoyment and understanding of the area - so long as such pursuits do not compromise the area's long-term integrity - for future generations.
Our ultimate hope is that one hundred years from now, when our children's children look back upon the President's actions, they will see a wilderness in and around the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, with intact and functioning ecosystems and conserved biodiversity - with abundant and healthy monk seals frolicking in the seas, albatross and other sea birds flying overhead, and beautiful, myriad fish swimming in and around the brightly colored coral reefs.
And they will thank this Administration for its bold leadership and our generation for the many human benefits they enjoy as a result of the actions we take now.
In the pages to follow, we have enclosed specific comments in response to and following the format of the Federal Register notice (65 FR 43205-43207).
CMC is greatly encouraged by this process, and we look forward to working with the Administration, the State of Hawaii, its Congressional members, and other stakeholders to help protect and conserve this national treasure.
Thank you for consideration of our views.
Please feel free to contact us at your convenience to discuss these comments in further detail or to answer any questions.
1.
Those qualities of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands coral reef ecosystem that are most important to be preserved through new, strong and lasting protections
The Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (NWHI) are a remote archipelago of islands, emergent reefs, and atolls over 1,200 miles long and several hundred miles wide, including Nihoa Island, Necker Island, French Frigate Shoals, Gardner Pinnacles, Maro Reef, Laysan Island, Lisianski Island, Pearl and Hermes Reefs, Midway Island, and Kure Atoll.
By some accounts, up to 70% of the nation's coral reefs may reside in the NWHI. 1The existing high quality of these reef ecosystems and their associated biological communities and the potential to restore and protect them to a true wilderness quality as fully-functioning, pristine, and intact systems have the greatest value to the nation.
These existing and future qualities are the most critical to preserve and ensure through new, strong, and lasting protection.
What makes the coral reef ecosystems of the NWHI most special are their remote location, large spatial extent, and the potential for preservation of extensive wilderness quality coral reef systems within U.S. waters.
The relatively pristine and untrammeled character of these islands, atolls, and marine waters is unlike any other found in the United States.
Human use of the NWHI, while never extensive, has continued for some time, caused significant impacts, and poses additional future threats.
However, the potential for restoring and preserving the wilderness quality of the NWHI provides an opportunity for the continuation and restoration of ecosystem functions critical to the long-term health of the entire ecosystem.
Preserving and restoring this wilderness quality requires a high level of protection for the living components of the NWHI ecosystem.
Protecting the NWHI ecosystem itself should be a priority for the Administration.
Within the NWHI there are approximately 2,430 km2 of coral reef habitat located from 0-3 nautical miles from land, and an additional 9,124 km2 located from 3-200 nautical miles offshore.
The Western Pacific Fishery Management Council's (WPRFMC's) Draft Coral Reef Ecosystem Fishery Management Plan (DCRE-FMP) defines coral reef habitat as primarily confined to a depth range of 0-50 fathoms, limiting this definition to shallow-water reef systems.2 However, WESPAC's website also estimates the bathymetric range for other deep water and precious coral habitats as extending from 300 down to 1500 meters.
Permanent protection of the extensive and relatively healthy shallow and deep-water coral reefs would greatly advance the conservation and management of the United State's coral reefs, as outlined in the Coral Reef Task Force's National Action Plan to Conserve Coral Reefs.
The existing high quality and potential wilderness qualities of both shallow and deep water coral reef systems surrounding the NWHI down to a depth of 1500 meters are among the most critical to preserve and ensure through new, strong, and lasting protection
Comprehensive ecosystem protection should also help to protect the individual species of the area.
The wildlife of the area depend to a large degree on marine resources for their food supply.
Seabirds feed mainly on fish and squid, the green sea turtle grazes on marine algae and the Hawaiian monk seal feeds on octopus, squid and lobster.3 As noted by Yamase,
"The complex interdependencies of the birds, seals and turtles with the marine environment and organisms creates a very vulnerable ecosystem.
Exploitation of the natural resources in the oceans of the refuge area may have deleterious effects upon the terrestrial environment and upon the wildlife of the islands.
These are important policy reasons for protecting the lands and waters together as a single entity."4
Food supply (including fish, crustaceans, and mollusks) for seabirds, monk seals, and other wildlife, especially endangered and threatened species, is another of the most critical qualities of the NWHI to be preserves through new, strong, and lasting protection.
The NWHI are home to several federally protected, coral reef dependent marine species which require enhanced protection, including the Endangered Hawaiian monk seal (Monachus schauinslandi), the threatened green sea turtle (Chelonia mydas), the endangered hawksbill turtle (Eretmochelys imbricata), and the endangered leatherback sea turtle (Dermochelys coriacea).
The last important Green Sea Turtle nesting site in the North Central Pacific exists at French Frigate Shoals.5 Nearly the entire world population of the Hawaiian monk seals is found in the NWHI, and critical habitat under the Endangered Species Act for the Hawaiian monk seals includes all beach areas and land, lagoon waters, inner reef waters, and ocean waters out to 20 fathoms around the following: Kure Atoll, Midway Atoll, Pearl 
The threatened and endangered species discussed above, along with those habitats on which they depend, including their designated critical habitats are among the most important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection.
Numerous other species of marine mammals are also likely found in the NWHI including the rough-toothed dolphin (Steno bredanensis), Risso's dolphin (Grampus griseus), bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncates), pantropical spotted dolphins (Stenella attenuata), spinner dolphins (Stenella longirostris), striped dolphins (Stenella coeruleoalba), melon-headed whale (Peponocephala electra), pygmy killer whale, (Feresa attenuata), false killer whale (Pseudorca crassidens), killer whale (Orcinus orca), short-finned pilot whale (Globicephala macrorhynchus), Blainville's beaked whale (Mesoplodon densirostris), Cuvier's beaked whale (Ziphius cavirostris), pygmy sperm whale (Kogia breviceps), dwarf sperm whale (Kogia simus), sperm whale (Physeter macrocephalus), blue whale (Balenoptera musculus), fin whale (Balaenoptera physalus), and Bryde's whale (Balaenoptera edeni).9 Very little is known about the population abundance of these marine mammal species or the threat facing them.
Moreover, the NWHI are home to a great variety and abundance of birds.
The islands and reefs of the NWHI are nesting and breeding grounds for more than ten million seabirds from at least 18 species, including 2 species of albatross, 2 species of shearwaters, three species each of petrels and boobies, six species of terns and one species each of frigate and tropic birds.10 Many of these bird species range far from the islands to forage.
The islands are also home to four endemic land birds found nowhere else in the world: the Laysan finch, Nihoa finch, Nihoa millerbird, and Laysan teal, which is perhaps the world's rarest duck.11 The NWHI's seabirds and their food supply (previously discussed) are among the most important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection.
The islands and reefs also support numerous coral reef dependent marine fish and invertebrate species.
These include jacks, mackerels, threadfins (moi), parrotfish, rudderfish, mullets, squirrelfish, surgeonfish, flag-tail fish, wrass, and goatfish.12 Important bottomfish species found in the NWHI include opakapaka, ehu, onaga, kalekale, gindai, butaguchi, kahala, and hapu'upu'u.13 A number of fish species are endemic to the NWHI, which also has high rates of endemism for other taxes as well, due to its remote location.
In addition to known endemics, there are likely yet-to-be-discovered endemics, especially in lesser-studied taxes.
Coral reef-dependent fish and invertebrate species, including endemics are among the most important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection.
Bottomfish and seamount groundfish including large snappers, jacks, and grouper are found on deep slopes from 30-150 fathoms deep.14 Onaga and ehu, two commercially and socially important groundfish species, are generally found at depths between 100-150 fathoms.15 For adult and juvenile stages of bottomfish species, the water column and all bottom habitat from the shorelines of all islands to a depth of 400 meters are designated essential fish habitat (EFH).
Slopes and escarpments at depths of 40 to 280 meters and three areas of juvenile bottomfish habitat are designated habitat areas of particular concern (HAPC).
The EFH and HAPC designations also demonstrates the connection between shallower coral reef habitats and associated deeper reef habitats and the need to protect these consistent with the Coral Reef Executive Order.
EFH and HAPC for all life stages of all coral reef associated fish, including bottomfish and seamount groundfish, down to a depth of at least 400 meters are among the most important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection.
Among invertebrates, spiny lobsters (Panulirus marginatus), slipper lobsters, and other crustaceans are especially important components of coral reefs in their own right, as a food source for other organisms, and for the important roles they can play in structuring benthic communities, including coral reef systems.
Under the Crustacean FMP, EFH for crustacean larvae is listed as the area from the shoreline to the outer limit of the EEZ to a depth of 150 meters.
For adult and juvenile crustaceans, EFH extends to a depth of 100 meters.
Maro Reef, Necker Island, Gardner Pinnacles and all other banks in the NWHI with summits that reach within 30 meters of the surface are HAPC for crustaceans.
Spiny lobster, slipper lobsters, and other crustacean populations and their EFH down to at least 100 meters are among the most important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection
In addition, many coastal pelagic species and true pelagic fish species are found in the NWHI for at least part of their life history.16 Under the Pelagics FMP, all seamounts and banks around islands from the shoreline to the outer limit of the EEZ down to 2,000 meters are designated as HAPC.
These species are important in their own right, as food sources for other species, and through their interactions with resident coral reef components.
For these reasons, pelagic fish and their designated EFH and HAPC down to 2000 meters around the NWHI are also important qualities of the NWHI to restore and preserve through new, strong, and lasting protection
Because human use of the NWHI may be increasing, affording this area permanent protection before increased human use impacts the living organisms of the area should provide the best means of ensuring the long-term sustainability and health of the coral reef ecosystem of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands.
Aldo Leopold once wrote,
"The last word in ignorance is the man who says of an animal or plant, 'What good is it?' If the land mechanism as a whole is good, then every part is good, whether we understand it or not.
If the biota, in the course of aeons, has built something we like but do not understand, then who but a fool would discard seemingly useless parts? To keep every cog and wheel is the first precaution of intelligent tinkering."
CMC believes this kind of thinking is important to keep in mind as we seek to protect the NWHI.
2.
The current threats to the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands coral reef ecosystem
Fishing activities pose the clearest and most critical current threat to the coral reef ecosystems of the NWHI, their associated biological communities, and the qualities identified in section 1 above as most critical to protect.
The potential to restore and protect these coral reef ecosystems to a true wilderness quality as fully-functioning, pristine, and intact systems have the greatest value to the nation.
With respect to protecting these qualities, it is important to note that simply avoiding "overfishing" is not sufficient.
Overfishing in the lobster fishery is an important current threat, but even if overfishing was not occurring in this fishery, both it and the relatively well-managed reef fish fisheries would still constitute important current threats to these ecosystems and the identified priority qualities.
Current threats to the living marine resources of the NWHI stem from the negative impacts of derelict fishing gear on marine wildlife, coral reefs, sea birds and fish populations, as well as from the harvesting and overharvesting of spiny lobsters and other crustaceans and its subsequent effect on the Hawaiian monk seal population.
These threats have impacted and continue to threaten the NWHI.
It is also important to note that the Hawaiian monk seal population is so threatened that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service have undertaken proactive management measures to reduce natural sources of mortality to help ensure the species' long-term existence.
Lastly, impacts from vessel groundings and anchoring on the reefs and atolls of the NWHI may also threaten the ecosystem.
Entanglement of Hawaiian monk seals in marine debris is a significant current threat.
During 1996-1998 debris survey and removal efforts, 11,000 kg of derelict gear was removed from coral reefs at French Frigate Shoals and at Pearl and Hermes Reefs.
Since 1982, nine fishery-related deaths have been recorded and 172 cases of seals entangled in fishing gear or other debris have been observed through 1998.18 Derelict fishing gear impacts the sea turtles, sea birds and coral reefs of the NWHI as well, although it is unclear to what degree these impacts are significant.
It appears that derelict gear is having a significant impact on albatrosses on Midway Atoll, as numerous dead chicks have been found in the vicinity of a pile of plastic items, including fishing gear, disposable cigarette lighters, and other items.19 Certainly the potential for damage is significant as it is elsewhere on coral reefs.
There are four main categories of detrimental fishery interactions which may significantly impact the Hawaiian monk seal population: operations/gear conflicts; entanglement in fisheries debris (most of which likely originates outside of the NWHI); seal consumption of potentially toxic discards; and prey depletion.20 Prey depletion in particular may be important, even when overfishing is not occurring.
These impacts likely also affect other marine wildlife and seabirds to varying degrees.
There are currently four fisheries that interact with the Hawaiian monk seal:21 * Lobster fishery - This fishery was shut down in 1993 because of low spawning stock biomass of spiny lobster, and it was shut down again in 1999 under an emergency rule by the Secretary of Commerce because of evidence of overfishing.
Management of the crustacean fishery under the FMP failed to prevent overfishing of the lobster species.
Effort and landings have been concentrated at Gardner Pinnacles, Maro Reef, Necker Island, and St. Rogatien Bank - all locations where monk seal subpopulations occur.22 There was one direct mortality of a Hawaiian monk seal documented in 1986 when a seal was entangled in the bridle rope of a lobster trap.
* Bottomfish fishery - There is insufficient information on interactions between this fishery and the Hawaiian monk seal.
Interactions with this fishery include seals damaging and removing hooked catch, seals being hooked in the process, and seals consuming discarded fish, which may contain high levels of ciguatoxin or other biotoxins.
There is also the potential for Hawaiian monk seal injury or mortality if fishermen attempt to protect their catches from them.
Mortality rates resulting from hooking or consumption of toxic discards cannot be estimated from available data.
* Pelagic longline fishery - Because of the longline exclusion zone that extends to at least 50 nautical miles around all of the NWHI, since 1991 there has been no observed or reported interactions with monk seals.
The longline exclusion zone around each of the islands of the NWHI is an important conservation tool for the Hawaiian monk seal and other endangered marine species, as it greatly reduces bycatch of animals where the rule is in effect.
* Recreational fishing - The recent establishment of sport fishing at Midway clearly increases the potential for monk seals to be harmed by hooks at that site.
In addition, two Precious Corals beds have been identified in the NWHI.
These beds were discovered by researchers studying Hawaiian monk seal foraging around French Frigate Shoals, and are now off-limits to precious coral collection.
The primary causes for the decline of HI Monk Seals are "human disturbance, entanglement in derelict fishing gear, reduced prey availability, shark predation, natural environmental perturbations, attacks by aggressive male monk seals on females and immature seals of both sexes (called 'mobbing'), and possibly disease."23 Because of the other management measures put in place, the most important current impact of fishing activity on the Hawaiian monk seal, especially at French Frigate Shoals, is likely the depletion of available food sources.
Beginning in 1994, the Marine Mammal Commission began requesting NOAA/NMFS shut down commercial fisheries around French Frigate Shoals, to help reduce the starvation of monk seals in the area.
The catastrophic decline of the Hawaiian monk seal population at French Frigate Shoals may be related to lack of available prey and subsequent emaciation and starvation.
While not currently considered a leading hypothesis for this starvation according to NOAA (the leading hypotheses are that Hawaiian monk seals reached carrying capacity at this location, or that unfavorable oceanographic conditions depleted food sources), the NWHI lobster fishery appears to be contributing to reduced available prey.
Monk Seals forage at 4 main banks where the fishery operates: Maro Reef, Gardiner Pinnacles, St. Rogatien Bank, and Necker Island.24 In 1998, the fishery expanded into areas where monk seal breeding populations are concentrated within the fishery's Area 4.
NMFS is investigating the issue of prey competition in an attempt to determine to what extent and the importance of lobster as a component of the monk seal diet.25
However, the population of Hawaiian monk seals is so threatened that the National Marine Fisheries Service has undertaken proactive management measures to reduce natural sources of mortality and to repopulate several of the islands and atolls of the NWHI.
While these actions have had unintended impacts on individual monk seals (including several mortalities and cases of blindness), these proactive management measures are important for the long-term existence of the species.
Between 1958 and 1998, the total of mean non-pup beach counts at the main reproductive populations declined by 60%.26 From 1985 to 1998, the rate of decline was 3% per year, although there has been little change since 1993.27
Under the 1983 recovery plan, major work focuses on recovering populations in the Western islands, reducing mobbing mortality, and monitoring populations at the 5 major breeding locations: French Frigate Shoals, Laysan Is., Lisianski Is., Pearl and Hermes Reef, and Kure Atoll.28 Pearl and Hermes Reefs are the only sites where numbers of HI Monk Seals are increasing without management intervention, having grown at approximately 7% per year since 1983.29 From 1981-1991, NMFS ran a Head Start program to rebuild breeding populations at Kure Atoll, moving 33 pups, 21 of which were alive in 1993.30 The population at Kure Atoll has grown at 5% per year since 1983, largely due to decreased human disturbance and the head start program.
At Lisianski and Laysan Islands, high mortality of females due to male mobbing behavior, where multiple males simultaneously attempt to mate with a single female, was a significant problem.
Since 1982, 64 seals have died or disappeared as a result of mobbing behavior.
Efforts were undertaken to reverse this trend through rehabilitation of undernourished juvenile females at French Frigate Shoals and elimination of mobbing-related mortality through translocation of male seals.
In 1994, 22 adult males were removed from Laysan Island, and only one seal is thought to have died from mobbing at this site since their removal (1995-1997).31 Populations at Laysan and Lisianski Islands have not grown, but have remained relatively stable since approximately 1990.
Lastly, there are currently threats to the ecosystem from vessel groundings on the coral reefs and subsequent spillage of oil and fishing gear.
While this has not proven to be a substantial impact in the past, vessel groundings do infrequently occur and may impact the ecosystem.
This would be particularly true if a large vessel grounded on French Frigate Shoals, which provides breeding grounds and beaches for endangered wildlife.
3.
The future threats to the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands coral reef ecosystem
While the remote location of the NWHI has helped preserve the health of the coral reef ecosystem, the status of the monk seal population and the emergency closure of the crustacean fishery indicate that the NWHI ecosystem has already been substantially impacted.
There are several emerging and potential threats that warrant management attention, including those current threats identified in Section 2.
Current management efforts to reduce or eliminate these threats have not thus far proven successful, and there is no indication that ongoing management efforts will substantially address these threats.
Fishing activity below the levels of overfishing can have a significant impact upon the ecosystem, and the cumulative impacts from a number of other activities may pose a substantial threat.
In general, expansion of human activities in the NWHI will likely impact the coral reefs, wildlife, and fish of the region.32 CMC has identified four categories of potential / future threats: impacts from fishing on fish populations and coral reefs; impacts from fishing on other marine wildlife; impacts of expanded tourism on the ecosystem; and local depletions and overexploitation from biotechnological and aquarium collecting.
Current fisheries management in the NWHI, under plans developed by the Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council, has had mixed results.
Stocks managed under the Bottomfish and Seamount Groundfish Fishery Management Plan are generally far healthier at the NWHI than at the Main Hawaiian Islands, where bottomfish are in poor condition.33 This is particularly true for onaga 
Catch rates of onaga and ehu have declined steadily since the early 1950s, and have dropped even more steeply in the last 10-15 years.34 Although the Bottomfish fishery is a limited entry fishery, the depletion of stocks at the main Hawaiian Islands may lead to increased fishing effort by permitted vessels in the NWHI.
However, even in the absence of overfishing, the impacts of fishing on coral reefs and coral reef ecosystems can be significant (for instance, by altering the community composition of species).
The relative distance of the NWHI from the MHI has almost certainly contributed to the relative health of bottomfish stocks there.
This distance has also contributed to a lack of knowledge on the effects of fishing in the NWHI.
The closure of the NWHI Crustacean fishery under emergency rules promulgated by the Secretary of Commerce alleviates the short-term impact of this fishery upon the lobster populations and cascading effects upon Hawaiian monk seals.
However, such a closure is unlikely to be permanent in nature, and the re-opening of the lobster fishery in the NWHI may prove to be a significant impact on the ecosystem.
The lobster stocks of the NWHI appear to be overfished, and the recovery of this species may take decades to achieve.
The Precious Corals fishery has not developed any beds in the NWHI to date, primarily because the area has not been fully explored for precious corals.
The two beds previously discovered were not developed because of monk seal foraging behavior in the vicinity.
However, the Precious Corals FMP does not permanently exclude the NWHI from harvesting, and the discovery of new beds in the NWHI could create pressure on WPRFMC to open them for harvesting.
In fact, the one permit holder has recently petitioned for an increased quota of precious corals from experimental beds, and the NWHI is one area they indicate an interest in targeting.
Providing permanent protection for these coral species, where monk seals forage, should be undertaken to eliminate this threat.
In addition, the State of Hawaii is currently developing administrative rules to manage fishing and other activities in the NWHI because of pressure from fishing and ecotourism interests to increase activities in the NWHI.35 Increasing fishing pressure in the waters from 0-3 nautical miles around the islands could significantly impact the ecosystem, affecting the targeted fish populations, incidentally caught fish populations and sea birds, and cascading effects of the fishery on higher tropic level species, such as monk seals and sea birds.
In addition, the expansion of recreational activities also has the potential to significantly impact the NWHI.
Recreational fishing opportunities are offered and advertised at the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge.
Correspondence from the WPRFMC has indicated that such recreational fishing may impact bottomfish.
Recreational fishing has the potential to significantly impact fish stocks.
Catch-and-release fishing for some deepwater species may not alleviate this impact because these species do not frequently survive being brought to the surface.
Equally important is the effect of increased tourism and recreation on water quality and habitat.
Coral reefs are particularly sensitive to water quality changes, and increased sewage dumping could harm the coral reefs and wildlife of the NWHI.
This could come from large cruise ships, small boats, or from land-based sources.
Land-based sources of pollution are currently minimal in the NWHI because there is little development (being limited to USFWS field stations at Tern Island and French Frigate Shoals and the buildings at Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge), but any increased development on the islands would likely cause water quality impairments that would affect the reefs.
Similarly, even non-consumptive forms of tourism can pose a significant impact from human disturbance of corals and coral reefs, if large enough numbers of visitors are handling and stepping upon the coral reefs or disturbing wildlife.
In addition, the threat of impact from invasive, exotic species should not be underestimated.
Whether introduced through the ballast water exchange of ships, larvae associated with floating derelict fishing gear, or by other means, invasive species can reduce native populations through competition or predation.
Invasive species are most commonly a problem in estuarine systems, but can also impact open marine ecosystems, as indicated by the spread of the harmful mat algae Caulerpa taxifolia.
Lastly, biotechnology collecting and aquarium collecting both can lead to extraction of key ecosystem components, overexploitation, habitat damage, and localized depletions.
Coral reef ecosystems are particularly targeted by both of these types of collecting.
Although not currently undertaken in the NWHI to our knowledge, future pressure to allow these activities could lead to significant impacts.
4.
The types of activities and uses (including culturally significant uses) that are appropriate in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
The coral reef ecosystems around the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are unique and have historically been subjected to relatively limited human use.
The remoteness and isolation of the islands, reefs, and atolls of the NWHI have almost certainly significantly contributed to the health of these ecosystems.
Despite this remoteness, the historical record of the islands is filled with anecdotes of severe human-caused disturbances of the ecosystem, including the introduction of exotic species and the extinction of species.37 Fishing activities over the past century have caused significant impacts, whether from the depletion and overfishing of individual species or from the effects of fishing on non-targeted species.
As such, any human uses of the area should be limited in order to conserve and protect these fragile ecosystems and their wild character.
The guiding principle for allowable human use in the NWHI should be the mandate of E.O. 13089, broadened to apply to any activity permitted by a federal agency within the caveats of that executive order: "to the extent permitted by law, ensure that any actions they authorize, fund, or carry out will not degrade the conditions of such ecosystems".38
Use of the NWHI as a natural refugia for the seabirds, fish species, and marine wildlife that are the components of the NWHI coral reef ecosystem should be the highest priority use of the area.
Such use, which allows for the continuation of ecosystem functions and the continued existence of the various plant and animal species encountered in the NWHI, conveys significant existence values to the general public.
While not actively "using" the NWHI in the same sense as tourists or fishermen/women, this use of the NWHI confers great benefits upon the entire nation, rather than a few individuals, and as such it should be strongly considered as the priority use for the NWHI ecosystem.
Another promising use for the area would be for research purposes.
Such research should be focused on the effectiveness of marine reserves in protecting coral reefs and resident species, the status of ESA-listed marine species and fish stocks, or other projects that pursue the better management of the NWHI and other coral reef ecosystems.
Additional research, including bioprospecting and other investigations not directly related to effective management, should also be permitted, but only in zones where other extractive activities are appropriate and permitted.
CMC believes that nonconsumptive recreational use (including Scuba diving and wildlife viewing) should be a priority for human uses of the area.
However, such use must avoid the potential threats of tourism activities listed above, and any such recreational use must not impact the Hawaiian monk seal populations, which can be significantly stressed by coming in close proximity to humans, or other wildlife of the NWHI.
The existing infrastructure at Midway NWR should help to provide these opportunities.
In addition, commercial and recreational fishing should be permitted only in areas where such uses will not significantly impact the coral reef ecosystem, and even in such areas, fishing must be done in a manner that is sustainable.
Gear restrictions, marine zoning, and other traditional fisheries management tools must be carefully utilized to protect this fragile ecosystem from fisheries impacts.
Cultural and subsistence uses of the greater NWHI area should also be permitted, in areas where and in a manner that does not degrade the coral reef ecosystem or the population of any individual species.
In addition, any such subsistence use must meet the legal mandates of both the Endangered Species Act and the Marine Mammal Protection Act, and such use must also be for noncommercial purposes.
Most importantly, while uses of the NWHI may be compatible in some areas, a zoning plan should establish no-take marine reserves where extractive activities and other impacts are prohibited if they are likely to have a significant impact on the ecosystem or a component species.
Within the zoning plan, the most strictly protected areas should be reserved for research directly related to the management of the NWHI ecosystems, and should allow no other non-emergency uses.
Different areas zoned for non-consumptive recreational uses or for cultural and subsistence uses will be similarly, but less stringently, protected, because these activities will have an impact on these areas.
5.
The types of activities and uses that are inappropriate in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands
In order to conserve the coral reef ecosystem and marine life of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands, CMC believes that any and all human activities should meet the mandate of E.O. 13089 as modified above.
The activities below are not an all-inclusive list; rather, they are activities that seem to clearly contradict the executive order's directive and the conservation of the NWHI.
We strongly urge the adoption of regulations prohibiting these activities below, and we encourage the management of the NWHI to be flexible and adaptive to new information about the impact of other human activities and uses on the coral reefs and marine life of the NWHI.
There are several activities that CMC believes should be prohibited outright from the greater NWHI area.
These include: oil and gas/mineral development; military training activities that degrade the coral reef ecosystem (such as those being undertaken at Vieques, Puerto Rico); the collection of corals and live rock; dumping of waste; dredging; and any additional development on the islands and atolls of the NWHI.
Such activities are inappropriate given the conservation mission of the NWHI area, because these activities are likely to significantly degrade the coral reef ecosystem of the NWHI.
Undertaking these activities could also violate federal and international laws and treaties regarding ESA-listed marine mammals and internationally protected birds.
Anchoring on coral reefs is a significant impact which can be avoided by the installation and maintenance of moorings in areas where human use is likely to be concentrated.
As such, CMC believes that anchoring in non-emergency situations should be prohibited in areas of the NWHI where coral reefs or other complex habitats are located.
Similarly, destructive practices such as reef dredging, blast fishing, the use of cyanide or other poisons, and pelagic longlining should be prohibited from the NWHI.
The WPRFMC has or is developing similar regulations through the Pelagics FMP and the CRE-FMP, and any Administration effort to protect the NWHI should complement these efforts.
Fishing in areas that will impact the coral reefs and the marine wildlife dependent upon them (including monk seals) is an inappropriate use and should be prohibited.
Lastly, maintaining pristine water quality in the NWHI should be a guiding principle for the regulation of human activities.
Any activity that threatens or degrades water quality should be considered inappropriate.
Any and all permitted activities in the NWHI should be consistent with state and federal water quality laws, including MARPOL.
In particular, CMC urges the adoption of regulations that protect water quality from the impacts from tourism, including offshore dumping of marine debris, invasive species introduced through ballast water exchange, and improperly treated waste from cruise ships and other vessels.
6.
The types of management tools, actions, and approaches that should be used to ensure strong and lasting protection of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands coral reef ecosystem.
There are several fundamental principles or approaches that should underlie the process and management approach to protecting the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands coral reef ecosystem:
(1) Dedication to permanent and comprehensive protection and restoration of this fragile system, its wilderness qualities, its ecological functions, and the natural abundance and diversity of all its marine fish and wildlife.
(2) Public participation in the process of protecting and managing the NWHI will be a critical component.
CMC is encouraged by the "visioning process" and we strongly urge the Administration to continue stakeholder involvement into the future.
(3) Management of the NWHI must be based on the best available science, adaptive to new findings and new approaches, but it must also be based on a precautionary approach that ensures caution with respect to scientific uncertainty.
(4) Commitment to an ecosystem approach including multi-agency cooperation, respect, and utilization of all available authorities to maximize the protection and management that the NWHI coral reef ecosystems require.
In applying these principles and approaches, CMC recommends the following tools and actions to ensure strong and lasting protection for the NWHI coral reef ecosystem:
(1) Employ a comprehensive, integrated, ecosystem approach to managing the greater NWHI coral reef ecosystem at the appropriate spatial scale, which CMC suggests should be at the scale of the existing WPRFMC Protected Species Zone/Closure that extends to 50 nautical miles around the entire NWHI Archipelago.
(2) Apply marine zoning, including substantial "no-take" areas, to the greater NWHI ecosystem defined in (1) above, using appropriate, existing, agency authorities and new ones, if needed, within portions of it.
Named, discrete no-take zones (that is, areas that have specific geographic boundaries) are critical for effective enforcement of these areas.
CMC understands that the U.S. Coast Guard does not enforce boundaries based on depths, and as such, it becomes even more important for the boundaries of the marine zoning regime and no-take areas be identified by geographic coordinates, as they reflect the biological, geological, and other factors upon which the marine zoning system is based.
(3) Define and clarify the management area for the Hawaiian Islands National Wildlife Refuge (HINWR) and develop and implement a Comprehensive Conservation Plan (CCP) for it.
CMC recommends that the management area should be defined at a minimum by the normal range or critical habitat of the critically endangered Hawaiian Monk Seal and that one of the goals of the CCP should be to fully protect it from all human impacts.
However, CMC also believes that commercial, extractive uses of this national wildlife refuge are incompatible with the refuge's purpose and with the purpose of the national wildlife refuge system.
Thus, any clarification of the management area of the refuge should not include areas that will continue to be used for commercial extractive purposes (such as commercial fishing for corals, lobsters, bottomfish, or other species).
Rather, the HINWR should be considered as a strong conservation tool for comprehensive management and protection of the coral reef ecosystems within its management area, in keeping with the refuge system's mission.39
(4) Develop and implement alternative mechanisms to protect the Hawaiian Monk seal throughout its normal range, if legal constraints prevent the HINWR and its CCP from fully-protecting the monk seal throughout its range.
(5) A "core area" should be identified within the greater NWHI coral reef ecosystem suggested in (1) above that would include the management area defined for the HINWR, all critical habitat for the Hawaiian Monk Seal and green sea turtle, shallow and deep water coral reefs including anticipated precious coral beds, reef fish and lobster EFH, and pelagic fish HAPC.
Such a "core area" would likely extend to 2000 meters in depth and should receive more attention and a higher level of protection than areas outside it, including a substantial portion in "no-take" status.
An appropriate management designation, such as a national marine sanctuary, national monument, or other designation, should be considered for portions of this "core area" outside of the HINWR management area.
(6) Review and expand Hawaiian Monk Seal Critical Habitat designation, if appropriate, based on recent research.
(7) Effective monitoring, permitting, and enforcement systems should be employed by the management regime(s).
Successful management of the NWHI will depend upon adequate monitoring and assessment to provide the scientific indicators for sound management decisions, but it will also depend on the management system providing an appropriate consideration of risk of ecological problems that may arise.
In addition, CMC believes that a system of permitting and regulating allowable uses by the management agency(ies) must be utilized to achieve this level of protection.
A requirement for all vessels entering into the area to carry Vessel Monitoring Systems (VMS) would greatly strengthen enforcement capabilities for the responsible agency(ies).
Finally, CMC encourages the Administration to consider a fee-based entry system for recreational and commercial uses of the area.
Such a fee could be levied on vessels to require that entry to the area be contingent upon adherence to all regulations, including regulations to protect water quality.
(8) Provide for public and stakeholder involvement in the long-term management of the NWHI ecosystem.
CMC encourages the Administration to consider establishment of an advisory body for the managing designation, such as a Sanctuary Advisory Council (SAC) or similar advisory council.
While CMC has not argued for a specific numerical target for the percentage of the coral reef ecosystem to be set aside in no-take marine reserves, we believe that because of their location, level and history of use, and general health, a substantial portion of this ecosystem should be protected in such a manner.
The Coral Reef Task Force's National Action Plan to Conserve Coral Reefs set a target of protecting at least 20% of the nation's coral reefs in the next decade.
Setting aside more than 20% of this region, where nearly 70% of the nation's coral reefs are found, would be a substantial step towards achieving this goal.
Protecting substantially greater percentages of the area as no-take marine reserves and providing additional protections may indeed be necessary in order to adequately protect the other components of the NWHI ecosystem, particularly the endangered and threatened species therein.
Regardless of the target chosen, these no-take areas must prohibit any and all consumptive and commercial uses, and tightly control recreational use to ensure minimal impact.
Thank you for consideration of our view.
Sincerely, Jack Sobel Director of Ecosystem Program Center for Marine Conservation Doug Obegi Pacific Region Outreach Manager Center for Marine Conservation
Bibliography
Forney, K.A., Muto, M.M., and J. Baker.
1999.
U.S. Pacific Marine Mammal Stock Assessments: 1999.
U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.
NMFS-SWFSC-282.
Forney, K.A. et al. 2000.
DRAFT U.S. Pacific Marine Mammal Stock Assessments: 2000.
U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.
Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources.
"Hawai'i's Bottomfish" http://www.state.hi.us/dlnr/dar/bottomfish.html.
(Unpublished - April 7, 2000)
Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources.
February 25, 2000.
"Land Board Approves Request for Public Hearing to Establish Fishery Management Area in Northwest Hawaiian Islands."
(Press Release)
Marine Mammal Commission.
1999.
"1998 U.S. Marine Mammal Commission Annual Report to Congress".
Mundy, Bruce.
"Hawaiian Monk Seal."
June 2, 2000.
National Marine Fisheries Service.
Honolulu Laboratory, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(Unpublished: http://www.biology.usgs.gov/s+t/SNT/noframe/mr194.htm)
National Marine Fisheries Service.
"Hawaiian Monk Seal Recovery Efforts".
(Unpublished: http://www.nmfs.gov/prot_res/pinniped/hawairec.html June 21, 2000).
Simonds, Kitty.
October 14, 1999.
Letter to Mr. Robert Smith, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1999.
DRAFT Coral Reef Ecosystem Fishery Management Plan.
Honolulu, Hawaii.
Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1996.
Bottomfish Fisheries of the WesPac Region 1995 Annual Report.
Honolulu, Hawaii.
Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1999.
Bottomfish Fisheries of the Western Pacific Region 1998 Annual Report.
Honolulu, Hawaii.
NA97FC0024
Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1999.
DRAFT Bottomfish and Seamount Groundfish Fisheries of the Western pacific Region: 1998 Annual Report.
Honolulu, Hawaii.
U.S. Coral Reef Task Force, 2000.
"National Action Plan to Conserve Coral Reefs."
Washington, D.C.
Yamase, Dennis.
"State-Federal Jurisdictional Conflict Over the Internal Waters and Submerged Lands of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands."
University of Hawaii Law Review, Volume 4 Number 1, 1982.
Pp. 139-180.
__________________________________________________________________
1 U.S. Coral Reef Task Force, 2000.
"National Action Plan to Conserve Coral Reefs."
Washington, D.C. 2 Western pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1999.
DRAFT Coral Reef Ecosystem Fishery Management Plan.
Honolulu, HI. 3 Yamase, Dennis.
"State-Federal Jurisdictional Conflict Over the Internal Waters and Submerged Lands of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands."
University of Hawaii Law Review, Volume 4 Number 1, 1982.
Pg. 147.
4 Yamase, pg. 175.
5 Yamase, pg. 148.
6 50 CFR 226.201 7 Stewart, Brent.
Personal Communication.
8 Forney, K.A. et al. 2000.
DRAFT U.S. Pacific Marine Mammal Stock Assessments: 2000.
U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.
9 Ibid. 10 Yamase, pg. 147.
11 Yamase, pg. 147.
12 Yamase, pg. 149.
13 Yamase, pg. 150.
14 Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council.
1996.
Bottomfish Fisheries of the WesPac Region 1995 Annual Report.
Honolulu, Hawai'i.
15 Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources.
"Hawai'i's Bottomfish" http://www.state.hi.us/dlnr/dar/bottomfish.html. (unpublished - April 7, 2000).
16 Yamase, pg. 150.
17 Leopold, Aldo.
"Round River".
Oxford University Press, New York, 1993, pp. 145-146.
18 Forney et al, 2000.
19 Raney, Dave.
2000.
Personal Communication.
20 Forney, K.A., Muto, M.M., and J. Baker.
1999.
U.S. Pacific Marine Mammal Stock Assessments: 1999.
U.S. Department of Commerce, NOAA Technical Memorandum.
NMFS-SWFSC-282.
21 Forney, et al, 1999.
22 Ibid. 23 Marine Mammal Commission.
1999.
"1998 U.S. Marine Mammal Commission Annual Report to Congress".
24 Forney, et al, 1999.
25 Forney, et al, 2000.
26 Ibid. 27 Ibid. 28 National Marine Fisheries Service.
"Hawaiian monk seal Recovery Efforts".
(Unpublished: http://www.nmfs.gov/prot_res/pinniped/hawairec.html June 21, 2000).
29 Mundy, Bruce.
"Hawaiian Monk Seal."
June 2, 2000.
National Marine Fisheries Service.
Honolulu Laboratory, Honolulu, Hawaii.
(Unpublished: http://www.biology.usgs.gov/s+t/SNT/noframe/mr194.htm) 30 National Marine Fisheries Service, 2000.
31 Forney, et al, 1999.
32 Yamase, pg. 175.
33 Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council, 1996.
34 Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources.
"Hawai'i's Bottomfish" http://www.state.hi.us/dlnr/dar/bottomfish.html.
(Unpublished - April 7, 2000) 35 Hawaii Division of Aquatic Resources.
February 25, 2000.
"Land Board Approves Request for Public Hearing to Establish Fishery Management Area in Northwest Hawaiian Islands."
(Press Release) 36 Simonds, Kitty.
October 14, 1999.
Letter to Mr. Robert Smith, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
37 Yamase, pp. 146-148.
38 Executive Order 13089, 2 (c).
39 16 USC 668dd (a) (2)
cleardot.gif (35 bytes) | Background Information | Presidential Memorandum | Upcoming Public Meetings | | U.S. Institute |
U.S. Institute for Environmental Conflict Resolution Suite 3350, 110 S. Church Ave. o Tucson, AZ 85701 o Tel. (520) 670-5299 Fax (520) 670-5530
