navigation bar Sammy (Mascot) U.S. Government
Introduction | The Constitution | The Executive Branch The Legislative Branch | The Judicial Branch | State Government | Local Government Political Parties | Elections | The Nation's Capital | The Flag | The National Anthem The Great Seal | The Pledge of Allegiance
print version U.S. Government 
wavingusflag E-Texts Celebrate Flag Day Adobe PDF Document The Flag of the United States: The Stars and Stripes Adobe PDF Document Flag Protection: A Brief History and Summary of Recent Supreme Court Decisions and Proposed Constitutional Amendment Adobe PDF Document Guidelines for Display of the Flag Adobe PDF Document The Origin of Flag Day Adobe PDF Document
Our Flag Adobe PDF Document The United States Flag Adobe PDF Document The United States Flag: (CRS Report) Adobe PDF Document
The Stars and Stripes originated as a result of a resolution adopted by the Second Continental Congress at Philadelphia on June 14, 1777.
The resolution read: "Resolved, that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes, alternate red and white; that the union be thirteen stars, white in a blue field representing a new constellation."
The resolution gave no instruction as to how many points the stars should have, nor how the stars should be arranged on the blue union.
Consequently, there were many variations.
During the Revolutionary War, several patriots made flags for the new Nation.
Betsy Ross is the best known of these persons, but there is no proof that she made the first Stars and Stripes.
It was not until April 4, 1818, when President Monroe accepted a bill that prescribed the basic design of the flag which would assure that the growth of the country would be properly symbolized.
It required that the flag of the United States have a union of 20 stars, white on a blue field, and that upon admission of each new State one star be added to the union of the flag on the fourth of July following the date of admission.
The 13 alternating red and white stripes would remain unchanged.
In 1916, President Woodrow Wilson issued a proclamation calling for a nationwide observance of Flag Day on June 14, the birthday of the Stars and Stripes.
It was not until 1949 that Congress made this day a permanent observance.
See also: About the USA 
Abridged from U.S. State Department IIP publications and other U.S. government materials.
Background · The Betsy Ross Homepage (Independence Hall Association) · Facts About the United States Flag (Encyclopedia Smithsonian) · The Flag of the United States of America (Duane Streufert.
US flag.org) · Die Geschichte der amerikanischen Flagge (MagazinUSA.com) Deutsch · National Flag Day Foundation · Our Flag (American Legion) · Our Flag (Federal Citizen Information Center) · The Star-Spangled Banner.
The Flag that Inspired the National Anthem (Smithsonian) · Today in History: June 14 - Flag Day (American Memory.
Library of Congress) · Unoffical American Flag Homepage (Dick Grogan) · USA Flag Site
Original Documents · Federal Flag Code (Baltimore County Public Library) · U.S. Flag Code (Legal Information Institute.
Cornell University Law School)
Exhibits - Digital Images · Betsy Ross House (Indepedence Hall Association) · Fort McHenry (The Patriots of Fort McHenry) · Fort McHenry National Monument and Historic Shrine (National Park Service) · The Star-Spangled Banner (National Museum of American History) · Star-Spangled Banner Flag House and War of 1812 Museum.
Baltimore, MD For High School Students · The American Flag (Chris Witten.
FoundingFathers.info) · Educational Materials (National Flag Day Foundation) · The History of the U.S. Flag (Fact Monster) · Symbols of U.S. Government: The Flag (Ben's Guide to U.S. Government for Kids) · The United States Flag - Symbol of Our Freedom (C. Douglas Sterner.
Home of Heroes.com ) Teacher Resources · Lesson Plans Flag Day (Education World) · Mary Pickersgill and the Making of the Star-Spangled Banner (National Flag Day Foundation) · Oh Say, Can You See -What the Star-Spangled Banner Means? (Edsitement) · Save our History: The Star-Spangled Banner Project (History Channel) · Stars and Stripes Forever: Flag Facts for Flag Day (EdSitement)
Link Lists · The American Flag.
Link List (The Electric Teacher Pages) · National Symbols 
Adobe PDF Document Download FREE Adobe Acrobat© Reader to view PDF files on this site.
Adobe PDF Conversion by Simple Form
DISCLAIMER Any reference obtained from this server to a specific commercial product, process, or service does not constitute or imply an endorsement by the United States Government of the product, process, or service, or its producer or provider.
The views and opinions expressed in any referenced document do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government.
U.S. Diplomatic Mission to Germany /Public Affairs/ Information Resource Centers Updated: September 2003
