Puerto Rico Perspectives Home Page __________________________________________________________________ clickable image By Marisabel Brás * Documenting a Puerto Rican Identity * Radicalism and Repression * Society and the Economy in Early-Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico * Political Trends in the Nineteenth Century * The Grito de Lares: The Rebellion of 1868 * A Puerto Rican Literature * Politics and Reform in the Later Nineteenth Century * Party Consolidation and Civil Crisis * Autonomy and War * Puerto Rico and the United States * American Perceptions, Puerto Rican Realities Documenting a Puerto Rican Identity Back To Top clickable image Of all the former Spanish colonies in the Americas, Puerto Rico, the smallest island of the Greater Antilles in the Caribbean Sea, was the only territory that never gained its political independence.
The years between 1800 and 1930, however, paved the way for the formation and development of its political institutions and national identity.
The keys to the internal dynamics and the dramatic socio-economic transformation that the island experienced throughout this period were the political and economic struggles of a decaying Spanish Empire and the formal transfer of the island to the United States at the end of the 1898 Spanish-American War.
It is in this context that Puerto Rico's traditions, political institutions, and economic system evolved so that it may be considered a "modern" nation.
This essay highlights some of the most important historical events, beginning in the 1800s, that contributed to the definition of Puerto Rico's historical and cultural identity.
The introduction of the printing press to Puerto Rico in 1806 permitted the publication of a wealth of historical and political material throughout the 1800s.
The result was the development of a national political discourse and the definition of a Puerto Rican cultural identity.
Publications from the nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth century, including chronicles, historical essays, political debates, memoirs, government records, and newspaper articles, document the socio-political dynamics on the island during the last century of Spanish rule and the early period of colonial government under the United States.
Puerto Rico at the Dawn of the Modern Age: Nineteenth- and Early-Twentieth-Century Perspectives includes a wide range of publications from the early 1800s through the 1930s, revealing the richness and complexity of Puerto Rico's political and socio-economic realities during a critical historical period and the steady progression of a national project that has defined Puerto Ricans as a people.
Radicalism and Repression Back To Top clickable image
Throughout most of the nineteenth century, Puerto Rico and Cuba remained the last two Spanish colonies in the Americas.
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, both islands had served as military posts in numerous wars between Spain and the other European powers for control of the region, and both served during the early 1800s as the final outposts in Spain's military strategies to regain control of its once vast empire in the Western Hemisphere.
By 1825, however, because all other former Spanish possessions on the American continents had gained their independence, Spain began to increase its political and economic control over Puerto Rico and Cuba in order to suppress any threats to Spanish authority.
During the 1830s, Spain decreed that its overseas possessions be governed by Leyes Especiales, or special decrees, which local authorities, with few exceptions, used to rule at will.
At the same time, Spain's own political instability reinforced local authorities' perception of the threat of rebellion in Puerto Rico.
The result was a massive military build-up on the island, with high levels of repression, press censorship, and suspension of civil rights throughout most of the last century of Spanish rule.
In addition, Spain imposed high tariffs and taxes on imports and exports to finance and sustain its decaying Armada.
Among the most repressive governors of Puerto Rico during this time were Juan Prim y Prats (1847-1848), who was impeached by the Spanish Cortes (parliament) in 1848 for abuse of power; and Romualdo Palacio González (1887), whose tenure as governor supported the practice known as compontes whereby many anti-Spanish leaders and their followers were tortured and imprisoned by the Spanish Civil Guard (Guardia Civil).
Another form of intimidation for dissidents, used mostly during the second half of the nineteenth century, was exile.
Among the many Puerto Ricans who spent years in exile were Dr. Ramón Emeterio Betances and Eugenio María de Hostos.
Because they espoused ideas deemed radical at the time--including independence from Spain, abolition of slavery, and Hostos's call for an Antillian Federation--both these Puerto Rican leaders were forced to spend most of their adult lives in exile.
In general, Spanish authorities increased their repressive policies in Puerto Rico during the latter half of the nineteenth century.
In this they were influenced by growing concern among conservative groups (mostly Spanish-born residents on the island known as peninsulares), rebellions against other colonial powers in the region, and--especially--the Cuban War of Independence.
Society and the Economy in Early-Nineteenth-Century Puerto Rico Back To Top clickable image
The first half of the 1800s witnessed unprecedented population growth in Puerto Rico.
Most of the growth resulted from Spanish immigration as a Spanish subjects from other parts of the hemisphere--including troops and other peninsulares from former Spanish possessions that had recently achieved their independence--and refugees from adjacent Caribbean islands came to Puerto Rico.
While Puerto Rico had approximately 183,000 inhabitants in 1812, it is estimated that by mid-1800s the population had increased to approximately half a million.
Increased sugarcane production was a second major trend that shaped Puerto Rican life between 1800 and mid-century.
During the last decades of the eighteenth century and throughout most of the nineteenth, Spain promoted an export-based agrarian Puerto Rican economy, centering on the production of sugarcane, coffee, and tobacco, that served to finance and support its military troops on the island.
Few, if any, funds were ever allocated to improve the island's infrastructure (roads, railroads, ports) or social conditions.
Trade was tightly controlled by Spanish authorities, who directed it through three main ports, each with its own customs for tax collection.
Most imported goods reached the island through the port of San Juan , the capital city, where a strong merchant elite of peninsulares controlled their sale and distribution.
And as the interior and the southwestern coastal regions became the centers of local agricultural production, proximity dictated that export goods be shipped mainly from the port cities of Ponce and Mayagüez.
The result of the population increase and Spain's economic policies was a division in Puerto Rican life between the official government of the Spanish colonial authorities centered in San Juan and the popular culture emerging on the rest of the island.
A strong local criollo elite--composed, that is, of people of Spanish descent who had been born on the island--evolved around the centers of agricultural production, and with it, popular traditions and popular ideas emerged.
Indeed, the city of Ponce has been called by some historians the cradle of Puerto Rican national values and traditions.
Ponce and Mayagüez also became strong centers of political dissent where anti-Spanish and secessionist ideas flourished among the most educated men.
Antislavery and pro-independence activities grew during the 1850s and 1860s, particularly in Mayagüez, under the leadership of Dr. Ramón Emeterio Betances, José Francisco Basora, and Segundo Ruiz Belvis.
Political Trends in the Nineteenth Century Back To Top clickable image
Amidst long periods of Spanish control and repression, there were brief times--largely coinciding with the ascendance of liberal governments in Spain--that brought liberal reforms to Puerto Rico.
Most political reforms on the island took place between 1812 and 1814 and between 1869 and 1873.
Local political leaders were highly influenced by the liberal ideas of the American Revolution (1776), the French Revolution (1789), and the wars of independence throughout Spanish America (1800-1825).
They therefore supported ideas such as individual freedom, representative government, democratic elections, and open trade.
A national political discourse first emerged on the island under the liberal Spanish Constitution of 1812, which gave Puerto Rico the status of a Spanish province.
The first elections in Puerto Rico under the 1812 constitution were held in mid-October of that year.
Yet this first attempt at liberal rule was short lived: in 1814, an absolutist monarchy replaced the constitutional-monarchic government in Spain, bringing an end to the possibility of further reforms in Puerto Rico.
Although national political parties were not formally organized until the 1870s, two well-defined Puerto Rican political groups emerged during the early part of the nineteenth century: the liberals and the conservatives.
At the time, they served as pressure groups within a highly repressive society whose government felt threatened by liberal ideas and the possibility of rebellion.
Liberals, also known as reformists, supported civil rights, the abolition of slavery, and increasing trade relations with other countries.
During the first half of the 1800s, they were divided between those who favored total independence from Spain and those who wanted political assimilation as an "overseas" Spanish province.
Conservatives, on the other hand, supported the status-quo represented by Spanish authority on the island, promoted the preservation of the existing mercantilist economic system, and opposed the abolition of slavery.
Conservatives considered freedoms such as individual rights and freedom of the press to be threats to the established order.
The Grito de Lares: The Rebellion of 1868 Back To Top clickable image
Frustrated by the lack of political and economic freedom, and enraged by the continuing repression on the island, Puerto Rico's pro-independence movement staged an armed rebellion in 1868.
Known as the Grito de Lares (the "Cry of Lares"), the rebellion broke out on September 23, 1868.
It was planned by a group led by Dr. Ramón Emeterio Betances and Segundo Ruiz Belvis, who on January 6, 1868, founded the Comité Revolucionario de Puerto Rico (Revolutionary Committee of Puerto Rico) from their exile in the Dominican Republic.
Betances authored several proclamas, or statements, attacking the exploitation of the Puerto Ricans by the Spanish colonial system and called for immediate insurrection.
The proclamas soon circulated throughout the island as local dissident groups began organizing.
Secret cells of the Revolutionary Committee were established involving members from all sectors of society, including landowners, merchants, professionals, peasants, and slaves.
Although plans originally called for the insurrection to begin on September 29, their discovery by Spanish authorities forced the rebels to move the date up.
They agreed to strike first at the town of Lares on September 23.
On that day, some four to six hundred rebels gathered in the hacienda of Manuel Rojas, located in the vicinity of Pezuela, on the outskirts of Lares.
Poorly trained and armed, the rebels reached the town by horse and foot around midnight.
They looted local stores and offices owned by peninsulares and took over the city hall, proclaiming the new Republic of Puerto Rico.
Spanish merchants and local government authorities, considered by the rebels to be enemies of the fatherland, were taken prisoner.
The following day, September 24, the republic was proclaimed under the presidency of Francisco Ramírez.
All slaves who had joined the uprising were declared free citizens.
The rebel forces then departed from Lares to take over the next town, San Sebastián del Pepino.
The Spanish militia, however, surprised the group with strong resistance and caused the rebels to retreat back to Lares under the leadership of Manuel Rojas.
Upon an order from Governor Julián Pavía, the Spanish militia quickly rounded up the rebels and brought the insurrection to an end.
Some 475 rebels were imprisoned, Manuel Rojas among them.
On November 17, a military court imposed the death penalty for treason and sedition on all prisoners.
Nevertheless, in an effort to ameliorate the tense atmosphere on the island, the incoming governor, José Laureano Sanz, dictated a general amnesty early in 1869 and all prisoners were released.
The first formal account of the Grito de Lares was written by a Spanish resident of Puerto Rico, José Pérez Moris, with collaboration from Luis Cueto.
It was published in 1872 as Historia de la Insurrección de Lares and appears in this online collection.
Its main purpose was to present a strong case for the conservative cause on the island by showing that separatist forces were strong in Puerto Rico and thus a serious threat to the established order.
A Puerto Rican Literature Back To Top clickable image
The period between 1868 and 1898 was crucial to the development of Puerto Rican political institutions: it witnessed a pro-independence rebellion, colonial reform, the establishment of the first national political parties, the abolition of slavery (in 1873), and a short-lived experiment in autonomy under Spanish rule.
These events occurred at a time when Puerto Rico had become a heterogeneous society with a well-established national culture manifested in vernacular language, music, architecture, and other arts.
The majority of its approximately seven hundred thousand inhabitants lived in extreme poverty, and agriculture--the island's main source of income--was severely limited by poor infrastructure (lack of adequate roads, railroads, and seaport facilities) along with lack of modern equipment and machinery to support the sugarcane industry.
While some 85 percent of the population remained illiterate, the intellectual minority was relatively active within the limitations imposed by the local Spanish authorities.
Puerto Rican writers made significant contributions in journalism and other literary genres throughout the second half of the 1800s, creating works that have become part of Puerto Rico's national cultural endowment.
They particularly cultivated poetry; the novel; and political, economic, and historical essays emphasizing the Puerto Rican national character and Puerto Rican traditions.
Manuel Alonso's El Gíbaro (1849) and Manuel Zeno Gandía's La Charca (1894) are among the most important novels to emerge from Puerto Rico in the nineteenth century.
Other important nineteenth-century contributions to the corpus of Puerto Rican letters came from writers such as Alejandro Tapia y Rivera (1862-1882), José Gautier Benítez (1851-1880), Lola Rodríguez de Tió (1843-1924), José Julián Acosta (1825-1892), and Salvador Brau (1842-1912).
Major works by Acosta and Brau are part of Puerto Rico at the Dawn of the Modern Age.
The collection includes an annotated edition Acosta published in 1866 of the first history of the island, Fray Iñigo Abbad's 1782 work Historia Geográfica, Civil y Natural de la Isla de San Juan Bautista de Puerto Rico.
Brau, who led the liberal political party (the Partido Autonomista Puertorriqueño) during the 1890s, is best known for the political essays he published in local newspapers.
Of these the collection includes a broad selection, published in Ecos de la Batalla, Artículos Periodísticos and Lo Que Dice la Historia.
However, Brau's major contribution to the study of Puerto Rican history is his Puerto Rico y Su Historia, written in 1888 and published in 1894, which also appears in this online collection.
The collection also includes Brau's classic historical study La Colonización de Puerto Rico (1907) and Acosta's 1875 work Los Partidos Políticos.
Politics and Reform in the Later Nineteenth Century Back To Top clickable image
Between 1869 and 1873, a liberal government in Spain extended ample liberties to the Caribbean, including the rights of Cubans and Puerto Ricans to send representatives to the Spanish Cortes (parliament).
Puerto Rico was given the status of Diputación Provincial (making the island a province of Spain) and the way was paved for the establishment of the first national political parties.
In 1870 the Spanish government approved the Ley Moret, a decree that gave freedom to all slaves who were sixty or older and all slaves belonging to the state.
It also banned corporal punishment in both Cuba and Puerto Rico.
In Puerto Rico, some ten thousand slaves were freed out of a total slave population of approximately forty thousand.
According to a speech given by Rafael María de Labra, Cuban representative in the Spanish parliament, this law was never enforced in Cuba, where the proportion of slaves was much larger than in Puerto Rico (an estimated 370,000 slaves out of a total population of approximately 950,000) and sugarcane production was more dependent on slave labor.
While Puerto Rico's pro-independence movement remained disbanded and most of its leadership was still in exile in 1869, conservative and liberal factions took power in the local political arena, initiating a more open debate on the island's political status and the social demands of the times.
The conservative faction, represented chiefly by peninsulares, continued to support the status quo, favoring slavery and all the privileges granted to the predominantly Spanish ruling class.
The liberal faction, on the other hand, called for the total integration of Puerto Rico as a province of Spain, which would have extended to the island and all its citizens all the privileges of the then-liberal Spanish regime.
Liberals also continued to support the abolition of slavery and political reforms at the local (municipal) level.
In November 1870, the liberals founded the Partido Liberal Reformista (Liberal Reform Party), led by Román Baldorioty de Castro, José Julián Acosta, José Celis Aguilera, and Pedro Gerónimo Goico, among others.
Its leadership, however, was divided into two factions.
One supported total assimilation with Spain, while the other, the autonomistas, called for self-government under the Spanish flag in a political arrangement similar to that between Britain and Canada.
The newspaper El Progreso served as a vehicle for public expression and debate of the liberals' views.
Soon thereafter, the conservatives founded the Partido Liberal and purchased the newspaper Boletín Mercantil to become the party's official organ for disseminating its conservative views.
Under the leadership of José Pérez Moris, José Ramón Fernández, and Pablo Ubarri, the party changed its name first to Partido Español Incondicional (Spanish Unconditional Party) and then in 1880 to Partido Republicano Español (Spanish Republican Party).
Although Puerto Rican representatives to the Spanish parliament succeeded in obtaining political reforms during this period, in practice local Spanish authorities kept a tight grip on the island under the threat of rumors from abroad about secessionist plots and potential insurrections.
Censorship of the press, government repression, and political persecution were particularly effective in silencing the liberal camp.
Spanish authorities on the island believed that newspapers contributed to the spread of new ideas that could seriously threaten the established order.
In 1873, the Spanish constitutional monarchy was replaced by a republican government.
Although short-lived, the new Spanish Republic approved the abolition of slavery on the island in March 22, 1873.
While the new law was considered a step forward by Puerto Rican liberals, it did not provide for immediate and total freedom of the island's black population.
Efforts for further liberal reforms on the island were aborted in 1874, when the Spanish Republic fell as the result of a military coup, leading to the return of the Spanish monarchy.
Spanish authorities once again appointed as governor José Laureano Sanz, who immediately overturned all established democratic practices.
Thus, Puerto Rico returned to its colonial status, ruled by special laws dictated by a repressive ruler.
Party Consolidation and Civil Crisis Back To Top clickable image
Between 1876 and 1898, the two liberal factions united around the goal of political autonomy for Puerto Rico, abandoning that of assimilation with Spain.
During the mid-1880s, they developed a party platform calling for self-government and renamed their party the Partido Autonomista Puertorriqueño (Autonomous Puerto Rican Party).
Meanwhile, in exile, the pro-independence movement planned several invasions which never materialized for lack of funds and support.
Towards the end of the 1880s, Puerto Ricans suffered a severe economic crisis.
The local monopoly enjoyed by Spanish merchants fueled resentment and led to the establishment of secret societies promoting the boycott of Spanish merchants and greater support for local business.
Many incidents of looting, arson, and other forms of violence were directed against Spanish commercial establishments.
The government and the Spanish Civil Guard responded with a series of raids and imprisonment, applying the severe measures of torture known as compontes.
Social conditions on the island were also in crisis during this period.
In addition to the lack of civil liberties, approximately 85 percent of the population remained illiterate, and malnutrition and extreme poverty were widespread throughout most of the countryside.
Autonomy and War Back To Top clickable image
In 1897, in a desperate effort to hold on to its last two possessions in the Americas, Spain granted Cuba and Puerto Rico a broad array of rights including those under Title I of the Spanish Constitution, which bestowed all the rights of Spanish citizens and gave universal suffrage to all males more than twenty-five years old.
Then on November 25, 1897, Spain approved the Carta Autonómica, also known as Constitución Autonómica, which gave Puerto Rico the right of self-government.
The first elections under this new political arrangement were held in March 1898.
At that time the Liberal Party, then led by Luis Muñoz Rivera, received most of the votes.
However, tensions were already building between Spain and the United States, and Puerto Rico's short-lived experiment in self-government came to an abrupt end with the advent of the Spanish-American War.
In April 1898 the United States declared war on Spain and on July 25 U.S. troops invaded Puerto Rico in the course of the war's final campaign.
Military operations on the island lasted approximately three weeks.
October 18, 1898, when the last Spanish troops left Puerto Rico and the American flag floated atop most public buildings, marked the end of four centuries of Spanish Imperial occupation and the beginning of U.S. sovereignty at the dawn of what has been called the American Century.
Puerto Rico and the United States Back To Top clickable image
Although Puerto Rico had just begun its experiment with self-government granted by the Spanish rulers in 1897, its citizens initially greeted the transfer of ultimate authority from Spain to the United States in 1898 with much enthusiasm because of the promise of the expansion of American democratic values and economic development.
However, while the transfer led to dramatic socioeconomic transformation, Puerto Ricans' dreams of political and economic development faded during the first three decades of the twentieth century.
The promises of self-government and better conditions for Puerto Rico had to wait almost fifty years.
In the first years of U.S. military occupation, political and economic power centered in San Juan and all former Spanish administrative bodies were dismantled.
Most local landowners lost their economic power to North American companies which came to own the principal centers of sugarcane production.
Following two years of U.S. military occupation (1898-1900), a civilian government was established in 1900 by the Foraker Law (April 12, 1900) imposing trade tariffs, denying American citizenship, and creating a local government led by a governor, an Executive Council, and a judiciary appointed by the president of the United States.
Nevertheless, local politics flourished as Puerto Ricans were given the right to elect the lower chamber of the legislature.
In that forum, the local elite continued their demands for a more open and democratic political arrangement between Puerto Rico and the United States.
Thus began Puerto Rico's political struggle for a definition of its status, a struggle that has lasted into the twenty-first century.
And thus the national political parties came to divide around three fundamental alternatives: statehood, self-government, and independence.
In 1917, the U.S. Congress passed the Jones Act, which brought Puerto Rico the first significant political changes under U.S. colonial rule.
With this law, Congress established a popularly elected legislative branch (a Senate and a House of Representatives) and extended American citizenship to Puerto Rican citizens.
At about the same time, the island's economy experienced its first radical change.
Although it continued to have an agrarian base centered in sugar production, it changed from a mercantilist system under Spain to a capitalist system under the United States.
Increasing American investments in the sugar and tobacco industries led to unprecedented economic growth but failed to bring social change.
Poverty, malnutrition, illiteracy, and disease permeated the population.
Such social stresses induced a wave of low-income Puerto Rican workers to migrate to the United States, particularly during the 1930s when unemployment on the island was approximately 65 percent.
American Perceptions, Puerto Rican Realities Back To Top clickable image
Between 1900 and 1930, mutual misperceptions and negative stereotypes took deep root both in Puerto Rico and in the United States.
While the local Puerto Rican elite began to embrace American culture, American efforts to impose the English language in local schools met strong resistance, and the insensitivity and inconsiderateness Puerto Ricans experienced from the military and civilian authorities appointed to govern the island provoked much resentment.
For their part, American authorities sought to bring order to what was perceived as a less-developed and inferior society.
Their objective was to bring "modernity" to a foreign people in a foreign land.
American journalists and photographers commissioned by U.S. authorities produced graphic reports of a people incapable of ruling themselves, creating a picture of Puerto Ricans as foreign that lives still in the minds of many mainland Americans.
Puerto Rico's Spanish language, its food, its Spanish traditions and paradise-like scenery reinforced American perceptions that this land and its people were exotic, foreign, and different.
Such misperceptions about Puerto Rico and its people during the early 1900s are captured in works such as A Little Journey to Puerto Rico for Intermediate and Upper Grades in this online collection.
After all Puerto Ricans were granted U.S. citizenship under the Jones Act in 1917, Puerto Rican males became eligible for the American military draft in June of the same year.
Puerto Rico also received non-voting representation in the U.S. Congress.
A century after its affiliation with the United States, Puerto Rico remains a hybrid society, with a unique ethnic composition and cultural traditions quite distinct from mainstream American culture yet very much attuned to the "American way of life."
Puerto Rico at the Dawn of the Modern Age offers a portrait of the island in a pivotal era against the background of its historical and cultural past.
decoration
About the Author Back To Top Marisabel Brás, a Senior Analyst at the Department of Defense and formerly a member of the Department of Social Sciences at the University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez, is the author of numerous articles on the history and politics of Puerto Rico and other areas of Latin America and the Caribbean.
