Skip standard sub page navigations FEMA.gov - Federal Emergency Management Agency Image of an American Flag Disaster tab Emergency tab Education tab Media Regions Hazards white dots Assistance white dots Flood Maps white dots NPSC white dots Preparedness white dots Disaster Fact Sheets white dots Declared Disasters First Responder white dots Situation Reports white dots Training white dots Publications white dots CERT Kids white dots Teacher Resources white dots Conferences white dots NFA 
Public comments by too many politicians here are intended to stir the political pot, not contribute to the recovery of Puerto Rico following Hurricane Georges.
The remarks are pointedly political and an attempt to use the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to strike at the U.S. government and the political oppositions without taking into account the facts of the response and recovery operation.
FEMA is not in Puerto Rico to play political games.
We have no political agenda.
Our only agenda is to help the people of Puerto Rico and the island recover from the devastation caused by Hurricane Georges.
I would hate to see people give up and not even apply for aid, because of public misconceptions concerning our ability to help them.
Let me tell you where we are in the response and recovery process.
We have three priorities.
One of them is to get the critical infrastructure working.
This includes things like water, power and sanitation.
Until that happens, we will continue to bring in emergency supplies by air and sea.
To date, we've committed more than $900 million to get food, water, ice, generators, electric equipment, debris removal equipment and other material to Puerto Rico.
Hurricane Georges will go down in history as one of FEMA's largest-ever response to a natural disaster.
Equally important is seeing to it that people are living in safe and sanitary conditions.
Our emergency roofing program is a top priority.
Hundreds of local volunteers, National Guard troops, all 78 municipalities, Civil Defense workers, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and FEMA are involved in this effort.
Our goal is to cover 2,000 roofs a day.
We have not reached that goal yet, but we're getting close.
At the same time we must get people the financial assistance they need to begin rebuilding their lives.
This assistance is in the form of grants and loans.
More than 167,000 people have begun that process by registering with FEMA.
We expect that number to more than triple.
Checks from FEMA totaling more than $48 million in emergency housing assistance have been already issued and that number continues to increase daily.
Now let me address the main concerns expressed by many:
1.
The people of Puerto Rico are entitled to FEMA aid.
Of course the people of Puerto Rico are entitled to FEMA aid, and as quickly as possible.
Furthermore, it is our goal that this aid is delivered with compassion and the people who receive it are treated with dignity and respect by the employees of FEMA.
However, any assertion that Puerto Rico mortgages are footing the bill for this FEMA aid is completely erroneous.
FEMA funding is from the President's disaster fund, which is funded directly through tax dollars.
2.
There are FEMA people who don't speak Spanish.
We have hired more than 1,500 people here in Puerto Rico.
In fact, about 70 percent of the total number of FEMA employees here speak Spanish, and many of them were personally affected by Hurricane Georges.
It is true that there are FEMA people here who don't speak Spanish.
And it is also true that we are glad they are here.
Last year when devastating floods destroyed homes in North Dakota, Minnesota and Colorado, FEMA employees from Puerto Rico went to those states to help.
Now that the disaster is here in Puerto Rico, FEMA employees from all over the U.S. have arrived to lend a hand.
Many are here because when disaster struck in their states, people from Puerto Rico helped them.
3.
There were problems with the FEMA teleregistration.
Yes, this is true.
We have problems.
And it's not surprising that we've had problems, hundreds of thousands of people have been affected by Hurricane Georges.
This is a catastrophic disaster.
It takes time to respond to a disaster of this scale.
The damage is island-wide, as well as to the Gulf states on the mainland.
But despite the problems, here in Puerto Rico we have registered more people in less time than in any disaster in U.S. history except for the 1994 Los Angeles Earthquake -- and our registration numbers are almost neck-and-neck with the two-week total for that disaster.
Not only were FEMA personnel on the island before Hurricane Georges struck, we were busy staffing up the Puerto Rico National Teleregistration Center that has been in Puerto Rico since Hurricane Marilyn in 1995.
On the day of the disaster declaration, we had 100 Spanish-speaking operators handling registration calls in Puerto Rico.
Five days after Hurricane Georges, our 300 local Puerto Rico operators had taken 40,000 applications for assistance from victims in Puerto Rico.
Now we have 450 Spanish-speaking operators working in two shifts per day at the Puerto Rico National Teleregistration Center.
An additional 234 people are helping to process the applications taken over the telephone and at the Disaster Recovery Centers.
The next phase was to begin opening Disaster Recovery Centers, not because we "surrendered" but because that's what we do in a disaster if it is needed.
Centers also were opened during Hurricane Marilyn and Hurricane Hortense for application registration.
We never intended to depend only on teleregistration, but that is the first thing that goes into operation.
Setting up recovery centers takes time.
By the end of this week we will have 24 centers operating.
In weeks to come, we will have 50 Disaster Recovery Centers across the island.
Recovery can never be fast enough when your home has been destroyed and all your possessions lost.
And while much has already been done, there is still much more to do.
Despite the tremendous effort of the mayors, local responders, civil defense, Government of Puerto Rico and the federal agencies, all of us know that many, many people are suffering and difficult times lie ahead.
We have hundreds of thousands of people who will need grants and loans to help rebuild their homes.
Everyone who needs to register for aid with FEMA will be able to do so.
Yet as we face these challenges, I am reminded of something people here often tell me: It is not the buildings that make up a community, it is the spirit of the people.
A hurricane cannot blow that away and if you do not give it away you can come back stronger than ever.
And we will be with you every step of the way.
Last Updated: Wednesday, 12-Feb-2003 11:37:50 EST
footer graphic Español | Privacy Policy | Accessibility | Site Help | Site Index | Contact Us | FEMA Home footer graphic FEMA 500 C Street, SW Washington, D.C. 20472 Phone: (202) 566-1600
