Regional CQI Team 6/5/03 Meeting Notes Attending: Kathy K., Kathy H., Brian, Alex, Don, Malinda B. and Gary
AGENDA
I. CQI Schedule - Timing of Report Development
II.
Report Format
III.
Draft Leadership Report
IV.
Mystery Shopper
a.
Review Latest
b. Draft Follow Up Form Response
c. Continue Discussion from 5/15/03
V. Review Problem Resolution Grid
VI. Data Display Update
VII.
Additional Data Sources Discussion continued from 5/1/03
A. Performance Data from Web
B. Training Results Focus Group Report
VIII.
Other
IX.
Next Agenda
1.
CQI Schedule - Timing of Report Development
Kathy H handed out a report schedule for the balance of 2 0 0 3.
Noted that leadership meeting has been postponed--new meeting time prospectively 7/17/ 0 3 .
It was noted that DAIT facilitators do not have a CQI report scheduled for the next DAIT meeting.
At July 3^rd meeting must have a draft leadership report.
July 3^rd need to develop report out for quality assurance committee.
CQI Dates
Leadership
QAC
DAIT
CQI Task
6/5/03
Nothing to prep.
6/12/03
6/19/03
Data meeting
7/3/03
Draft leadership and QAC report.
7/17/03
Data meeting
7/30/03
Presentation to QAC.
8/7/03
8/21/03
9/4/03
9/11/03
9/18/03
Data meeting
10/2/03
Prep leadership/QAC reports.
10/9/03
10/16/03
Data meeting
10/29/03
11/6/03
11/20/03
Data meeting
12/4/03
Prep for DAIT and annual report.
12/11/03
12/18/03
Data meeting
To do: develop a more comprehensive overarching schedule that includes all the work--not just reports.
We had a conversation regarding limited participation in CQI meetings.
Noted that at Mount Vernon meetings our agenda is to review data and make decisions, but the attendance is continually low.
2.
Report Format -- we need to develop a template for the QAC report.
Noted that QAC reports need to be completed and mailed one week prior to the meeting (necessary for review).
It was thought that we could use the Leadership team format:
1.
Actions needing your attention (give us what we need)
2.
Narrative on above
3.
Things we accomplished (this might not be of value for our audience)
The team reports to three groups now: Leadership, DAIT and QAC.
The "What we want to happen" statements are different for all three groups.
For the report to the Quality Assurance Committee we need to move away from our focus on process.
QAC will want one-liners with a description of what this means.
When we fix a problem it will be important to note how this was done and how it may apply to something else.
We will need to note systematic things (political thing for the council to take action on... write a letter to someone e.g.)
Some good ideas for our reports:
1^st - what we continue to monitor--these are the high performing.
(Doing well as measured by comment cards, DOL.. (data sources)
2^nd - things we are watching closely or taking action on (non -high performers).
3^rd - action requested from another group/team.
At the top in the narrative include the data reviewed during the time period.
Give information in relation to a longitudinal comparison.
This is a clear directive from QAC -- trend line is wanted in context.
Tag on the most recent data compared to the aggregate of previous data --outlining what that means.
Referenced Mike's report out at last DAIT--this would shape our third Thursday meetings re: how we look at data.
"Data reviewed this period was... here are our findings on it".
NOTE: Our comment cards continue to be our real time measures of customer satisfaction.
Think it's important that annually we do a direct correlation of the results of the 3 ASC Q's on our comment cards with the ACSI survey -- we think comment card data is valid and not a biased sample.
Our results compared to their results.
Noted ACSI is on the web -- we all need to access this information.
Alex recommendation above.
Brian pointed out that an exit survey comparison (validating comment cards) should be done and analyzed annually.
The team agreed to do an Exit Survey.
It is scheduled for:
Whidbey: Tuesday October 14(?)
Staffed by: Don, Malinda, Kathy H.
Summary: our reports are to be tight, small, to the point.
All our customers what information in this format -- "just give it to me".
The report IS the summary.
Noted that there is a fair amount of data out there--manage this prior to creating more data.
3.
Draft Leadership Report.
This will be covered at our next meeting.
4.
Mystery Shopper * Review Latest * Draft Follow Up Form Response * Continue Discussion from 5/15/03
The results from this last quarter show low ratings in telephone shops.
It was noted that other WDAs are performing high although they also have low samples.
We cannot disregard data because we have low samples.
It was noted that Gay is coming back with the specific report on our sample shops.
For the last quarter there was one in-person and two telephone shops.
Mystery Shopper Report can be reviewed in full on the "What's New" section on the web.
Gary ordered a large poster of GREAT for each center.
(Greet, Respect, Evaluate, Adjust, Thank)
Here is the hyperlink for the GREAT poster:
http://insideesd/quality/customer_service/2081-Desk%20Ref.pdf
Telephone Mystery Shopper report analysis:
§ Offer name in greeting.
a
§ Only small number of callers gets through to a live person in less than 30 seconds.
§ Not asking enough questions to determine the needs of the caller.
a
§ Standardized greeting.
a
§ Implementation of quality questions.
a
NOTE: ALL phone measures need to be attended to.
Recommendations:
§ There is a system protocol of how a phone is answered--minimum standards: salutation, site, and name has worked well and was implemented easily in Whatcom.
ACTION: Kathy K. to forward this recommendation from CQI to Skagit and Whidbey staff.
Notify everyone in writing, reinforce in staff meetings.
Noted: the greeting needs to be spoken clearly and with a smile in your voice.
§ Continue our emphasis of our primary quality Q's, "Have I answered all your questions, do you know what your next steps are?" Make sure this is happening to all phone customers.
Reminders of this protocol to be on staff agendas regularly.
§ Make the phone service feel like you're taking a personal interest by saying the callers name back.
§ Responding to phone non-English speaking customer's access.
This has been forwarded to Partnership Coordinators to facilitate a CUT summit to address non-English speaking folks accessing the system.
§ Internet Shops -- Kathy and Gary have noted that they do reply to all e-mails as their addresses are posted on the web and do so in a reasonable time frame.
§ Ask phone customer probing questions to ensure you understand their situation.
This will be agenda item in agency staff meetings, resource lobby staff meetings, and all staff meetings.
Supervisors are responsible for sending the message to those who can not attend staff meetings.
§ Signs visible in non-English language.
Find out what type of signs the Mystery Shoppers are looking for.
Move this item forward to next CUT summit.
§ Always use the customer's name -- both in-person and phone shops.
§ Continue with our Northwest "flow"-- reception triage questions, membership with additional questions, Tour of Services.
Sticking to this flow will ensure high scores in the measure of introduction to additional services.
§ THANK YOU to our customers.
§ Offer assistance if needed to access self-services.
Inform customer how to ask for additional help.
§ "GREAT" poster to CUT and staff agendas -- put it on Inside Northwest.
Noted that in our partnership this is not a culture we have developed (results from Mystery Shopper).
There is a follow-up training on Customer Service (Magical Moments) through Employment Security.
This training may have some benefit to staff.
Mystery Shopper Follow Up Report: Deadline for completion is 6/16/03 --goes off to management first.
Team started developing the Action plan (following).
PLUSES DELTA ACTION PLAN Date/status
§ Telephone customers
§ Ask probing questions
§ Names--yours and theirs.
§ GREAT poster on Inside Northwest, staff agendas, CUT's agendas
§ Post Shop Results
§ Direct 
§ Show what it is and why this is the right stuff to do with customers.
5.
Review Problem Resolution Grid
Not addressed at this meeting.
ACTION: team members review attached grid Kathy K--e-mail Malinda grid for the notes.
See Attachment for the Grid.
6.
Data Display Update.
Noted that we have some anecdotal data -- Brian and Kathy reported that signage in the center has solicited customer feedback.
7.
Additional Data Sources Discussion continued from 5/1/03
a.
Performance Data from Web
b. Training Results Focus Group Report
ACTION: All team members go to the web and view the performance data
The web address is www.heldrich.rutgers.edu.
Click on project login on the red line to get to the user specific page view.
Then write WDC in the username and use Washington as the password.
Please note the additional information on the website in the Links Notes and Disclaimers section.
As you try to connect to this website your colleagues at the other regions maybe trying also in case you can not connect please try again in a couple of hours.
Following is the direct link.
Please note message above in case it doesn't work.
http://www.heldrich.rutgers.edu/EVProjects/ProjectPage.asp?Mode=1
8.
Other
NEXT MEETING CHANGED-- Wednesday, 6/18 WorkSource Skagit
