Skip to Main Content [Home] [Contact]
Navigate the Site by Topic:
[ Press ] [ Biography ]
Press: News Releases and Statements
Seeking Justice In Cambodia: Senate Foreign Operations Appropriations Subcommittee
April 22, 1998
Last week, one of this centurys most brutal and repressive dictators died.
Pol Pot, founder and leader of the Khmer Rouge, architect of the grisly genocide which claimed at least one million Cambodians between 1975 and 1979, died at the age of 73.
While some may see Pol Pots death as final closure on one of the most shockingly brutal and despotic reigns in history, his death should not absolve the international community from seeking full justice for the people of Cambodia.
The scars from Pol Pots four-year reign of terror remain in Cambodia, an on the face of humanity.
History will ask about us, Did they do enough? Did they do what they could? Did they really care? If those assessments were written today, the community of nations of this would be found wanting.
When Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge captured the Cambodian capitol of Phnom Penh in April 1975, he and his lieutenants began a barbaric campaign to exterminate intellectuals, foreigners, bureaucrats, merchants, and countless others who did not fit Pol Pots vision of a "pure" Cambodia.
Thousands more were forced into slave labor camps, many eventually dying from starvation, torture, and disease.
Four years later in 1979, when Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge were forced from power, left behind was a ghastly swath of death and carnage that counted at least one million Cambodians dead and a country still trying to cope with the ghosts of that era.
Virtually every Cambodian knows or is related to someone whose life was extinguished.
Though Pol Post was the of the killing fields of Cambodia, those in his inner circle were responsible for carrying out his commands.
Many of Pol Pots chief lieutenants still roam the Cambodian countryside, reportedly along the Thai border.
Men like Khieu Samphan, former president of Kampuchea, Nuon Chea, former second in command and someone described as Pol Pots "alter ego, and Ta Mok, a Khmer Rouge leader whose portfolio included killing Cambodians who had worked for the old Lon Nol government.
Ta Mok was nicknamed "the Butcher."
The wanton killing did not end decades ago.
In 1996 British mine clearer Christopher Howes and his interpreter, Houn Hourth, were abducted by Khmer Rouge henchman and later led to a field and shot in back.
According to recent reports of interviews with Khmer Rouge officials, aides close to Pol Pot ordered the killing.
Mr. Howes posed no threat to Pol Pot or the Khmer Rouge.
Howes was in Cambodia working to make the countrys fields safer for the Cambodian people by helping remove one-by-one the millions of landmines sown in the fields.
I am encouraged that the Administration appears ready to seek some formal structure to bring to justice key members of Pol Pots inner circle.
A number of credible ideas have already been suggested, including a war crimes tribunal for Cambodia, similar to the existing tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, or perhaps an extension of that Yugoslavian tribunal to Cambodia.
These ideas and others merit further discussion as we examine appropriate forums to seek justice for the Cambodian people.
The United Nations has also named a three-person team to investigate the remaining Khmer Rouge leaders.
This too, is an encouraging sign.
We must not let Pol Pots death diminish our resolve to apprehend and bring to justice those members of Pol Pots inner circle who are equally guilty of crimes against humanity.
History will judge us harshly we fail in this critical task.
Return to previous page
If you do not have a Return to previous page link above, please use your browsers back button or our sitemap to return to your previous location.
