Commandant United States Coast Guard 2100 Second Street, S.W. Washington, DC 20593-0001 Staff Symbol: G-ICA Phone: (202) 366-4280 FAX: (202) 366-7124
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD
STATEMENT OF
REAR ADMIRAL HARVEY E. JOHNSON
ON THE
MARITIME DISASTER FAMILY ASSISTANCE ACT OF 2001
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JUNE 12, 2002
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
UNITED STATES COAST GUARD
STATEMENT OF
REAR ADMIRAL HARVEY E. JOHNSON
ON THE
MARITIME DISASTER FAMILY ASSISTANCE ACT OF 2001
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
JUNE 12, 2002
Good morning Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
I am pleased to have this opportunity to appear before you today to discuss the Maritime Disaster Family Assistance Act of 2001, H.R. 2228.
During the Coast Guard's long, distinguished history, search and rescue has been our primary mission; Coast Guard personnel are very proud of their heritage as the nation's "lifesavers."
The Coast Guard responds to approximately 40,000 search and rescue calls every year, rescuing 3,500 mariners in distress and assisting over 60,000 more.
The primary goal of the Search and Rescue Program is to minimize loss of life, personal injury, and property loss and damage in the maritime environment.
The Coast Guard's search and rescue program is the product of decades of experience as the nation's maritime emergency response service.
Our search and rescue policies and procedures have been designed to maximize the effective employment of scarce operational resources to save lives and property at sea.
Our involvement doesn't stop there.
We offer a variety of services to ensure that those affected by accidents and tragedies at sea are provided information and assistance in managing traumatic situations.
We also conduct marine casualty investigations and analyses, which provide a mechanism to determine the cause of tragedies.
In this way, the Coast Guard can develop and implement effective measures to reduce hazards at sea and prevent future tragedies.
Family Services
The Coast Guard recognizes the importance of family support services.
We have established and effective procedures to provide for the needs of next of kin during search and rescue cases.
Each District Commander is responsible for ensuring the greatest possible sensitivity in interacting with family and friends of the victims during search and rescue cases where the Coast Guard is the lead agency.
Group and Activity Commanders personally ensure that notifications are made and interaction established with the next of kin at the earliest possible opportunity.
The initial notification by the Group/Activity Commander, or their designated representative, includes a summary of the search efforts and plans for future search activities.
Additionally, a Coast Guard point of contact is assigned and maintains daily contact with the next of kin, providing them with updates of search efforts and answering questions.
Family members are given the opportunity to visit the District Command Center or Group/Activity Operations Center, as applicable, to review details of the case.
The service's designated point of contact accompanies the family when visiting the Command Center.
Additionally, the Coast Guard works closely with non-profit organizations such as the American Red Cross for additional family support.
Search Decisions
The statutory authority for the Coast Guard Search and Rescue Program as contained in Title 14, Section 2, 88 and 141 of the U.S. Code is discretionary in nature.
The Coast Guard takes into consideration numerous factors when determining its response in a search and rescue case.
Determining the appropriate level of effort to dedicate to any search is dependent upon a variety of factors, including the availability of search resources and competing demands for assets.
Similarly, the Search and Rescue Mission Coordinator must analyze many factors, including the totality of the search effort, on scene conditions, available survival equipment and resource availability when making the decision to recommend suspending a search.
The Coast Guard Search and Rescue Mission Coordinators are highly trained professionals with extensive backgrounds in search planning, risk management and resource allocation.
The Coast Guard has found that the Search and Rescue Mission Coordinators have the best picture of the operational conditions affecting the continued efficacy of search efforts.
Our operational commanders are best suited to make recommendations regarding suspension determinations up their chain of command.
For all cases, Search and Rescue coordinators - our District Commanders - have the authority to delegate suspension authority to our field unit commanders at the Group/Activity level.
Recovery Operations
Unfortunately, the Coast Guard is not able to successfully resolve all search and rescue cases.
Although we do not possess the resources, equipment and expertise to perform anything more than rudimentary salvage operations, the Coast Guard does work closely with federal, state and local agencies that have the capability to assist with search and rescue, and salvage as appropriate.
In those few cases in which the Coast Guard has undertaken recovery operations, the service relies on commercial or Department of Defense recovery assets for salvage assistance.
Guidance regarding Coast Guard recovery operations is currently taken from the United States National Search and Rescue Plan of 1999, which states that civil search and rescue does not include salvage operations.
Summary
While we understand the intent of the proposed legislation, I hope I have adequately described how the Coast Guard's current actions support that intent.
However, when weighing the application of scarce resources against the potential gains, the Coast Guard does not support this legislation, as it places unnecessary requirements on our Search and Rescue system that could consume our limited resources, but more importantly, possibly endanger the lives of Coast Guard SAR personnel.
The Coast Guard is committed to providing timely and effective response as a world leader in maritime search and rescue.
We constantly analyze our procedures and policies to ensure that we provide the best service to the mariner and the public.
We will continue to provide support services - both internally and by partnering with other agencies - for those affected by maritime disasters as an integral part of answering the myriad of search and rescue calls that the Coast Guard receives each day.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important issue today.
I will be happy to answer any questions you may have.
