Changes in Habitat About this Lesson This lesson is designed to teach students about animal habitat and adaptations animals make as their habitat changes due to urban development.
Grades: 3-4 Time Estimation: One class period approximately 40-50 minutes.
Objectives:
Students will:
* Discover the habitats of common animals found in an urban, suburban and rural environment.
* Identify habitat changes over time as an environment is developed.
* Illustrate a habitat reflecting rural, urban or suburban communities.
Pre-requisite Concepts: Students should know how to draw, recognize different shapes and patterns, and write a descriptive paragraph.
Skills: Students will develop skills in the following areas: Observing, Interpreting, Analyzing, Inferring
Science and Math Standards:
Benchmarks
NCTM
NGS
Materials:
* paper * pencil * colored pencils/crayons * animal overhead * urban overhead * suburban overhead * rural overhead
Set-up
On the board create a chart:
Rural
Suburban
Urban
Make transparencies of the animal, urban, suburban and rural overhead pages.
Engage (5 minutes)
Invite students to share descriptions of where they live.
Is it an urban, suburban or rural setting? List the children
For example: if a child lives in a neighborhood that might be considered Suburban, in a high-rise apartment 
Explain that all land was once rural until towns and cities were developed.
Suburban areas lie outside the urban areas with less development than urban areas but still more commercial and residential developments than rural areas.
Brainstorm with student
Pose some questions to them like: What does where you live look like? What animals live in the wild where you live?
Explore (15-20 minutes)
1.
Look at the chart you have created.
What animals appear in all three columns? 2.
Place the animal transparency on the overhead projector.
Ask the students where would these animals live? Rural, Suburban or urban area? Overhead displays a mouse, rabbit, snake, pigeon, fox, and peregrine falcon.
3.
Be sure the students understand the difference between rural and urban and suburban areas.
4.
Through discussion or storytelling, guide students to identify specifically where animals live in a rural area.
For example: the mouse lives in a whole in the ground of a wheat field.
You may find a rabbit under a bush; the pigeon perched in a small tree, the falcon high in a tall tree.
Use the rural transparency to illustrate where the animals would live.
5.
Continue the discussion or story, 
Guide them to items that are on the suburban transparency.
Ask students what happens to the animals in the area.
Some may leave to find other environments, others will adapt to the new development of their home.
Remove the rural transparency and place the suburban transparency over the animals.
Ask students, What do you observe about the animals and how they have adapted to make new homes in this type of environment? 6.
Continue the discussion or story, as time passes more people move into the area and begin to build what they need.
Guide them to items that are on the urban transparency.
Ask students what happens to the animals in the area.
Some may leave to find other environments, others will adapt to the new development of their home.
Remove the suburban transparency and place the urban transparency over the animals.
Ask students, What do you observe about the animals and how they have adapted to make new homes in this type of environment?
Explain (5 minutes)
Review the definitions of urban, rural, and suburban, i.e.:
* Urban = a city environment * Suburban = the area around a city where houses and small open spaces are mixed * Rural = the country, with farm fields and very few houses
Look back at the transparencies.
What changed? Discuss with the students what major features that change a rural area to a suburban area and to an urban area.
Ask them: What animals are found in that area? Where do they live? Give students a copy of the animal sheet.
Have them draw a habitat for the animals.
Which community is it? Urban, suburban or rural?
Extend (5 minutes)
Have the students write a descriptive paragraph about one of the animals that lived in a home that was changed form Rural to Urban.
Evaluate (5-10 minutes)
Have students share their communities explaining what type of community it is and where each of the animals live.
