NASA Logo Skip all navigation and jump to content Jump to site navigation [shim.gif] [shim.gif]
Mississippi River Flooding in 1993
Before the flood (August 1991) During the flood (August 1993) Mississippi, Illinois, and Missouri River Junction (Before flood) Mississippi, Illinois, and Missouri River Junction (During flood) Countryside around the Mississippi, Illinois, and Missouri Rivers
City of St. Louis (Before flood) City of St. Louis (During flood) The City of St. Loius
Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers (Before flood) Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers (During flood) Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers
Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (Before flood) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (During flood) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers
These scenes show various sections of the Mississippi River near St. Louis before and just after the 1993 floods which peaked in late July/early August.
The images show the area as seen by the LandSat Thematic Mapper (TM) instrument.
The shortwave infrared (TM band 5), infrared (TM band 4), and visible green (TM band 2) channels are displayed in the images as red, green, and blue respectively.
In this combination, barren and/or recently cultivated land appears red to pink, vegetation appears green, water is dark blue, and artificial structures of concrete and asphalt appear dark grey or black.
Reddish areas in the during flood scenes show where water had started to recede, leaving barren land.
The water has not completely receeded back to its banks even two months after the peak of the floods.
The very different land color tone (green in August 1991 and red/pink in November 1993) reflects the dramatic difference in seasons rather than changes due to the flood.
By November, trees have lost their leaves and ground cover and farm fields are lying fallow for the winter.
Images: Countryside around Three River Junction (During flood): GIF (71 k) Countryside around Three River Junction (After flood): GIF (60 k) St. Louis (During flood): GIF (72 k) St. Louis (After flood): GIF (63 k) Three River Junction (During flood): GIF (68 k) Three River Junction (After flood): GIF (74 k) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (During flood): GIF (65 k) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (After flood): GIF (66 k) Countryside around Three River Junction (After flood): JPEG (312 k) St. Louis (During flood): JPEG (322 k) St. Louis (After flood): JPEG (286 k) Three River Junction (During flood): JPEG (315 k) Three River Junction (After flood): JPEG (351 k) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (Before flood): JPEG (298 k) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (After flood): JPEG (289 k) Countryside around Three River Junction (Before flood): Medium resolution JPG Countryside around Three River Junction (During flood): Medium resolution TIFF (4.0 M) Countryside around Three River Junction (After flood): Medium resolution T IFF (3.6 M) St. Louis (Before flood): Medium resolution JPG St. Louis (During flood): Medium resolution TIFF (4.1 M) St. Louis (After flood): Medium resolution TIFF (3.6 M) Three River Junction (Before flood): Medium resolution JPG Three River Junction (During flood): Medium resolution TIFF (3.9 M) Three River Junction (After flood): Medium resolution TIFF (4.1 M) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (Before flood): Medium resolution JPG (20 K) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (During flood): Medium resolution TIFF ( 3.7 M) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (After flood): Medium resolution TIF F (3.6 M) Countryside around Three River Junction (Before flood): High resolution TIFF (13.
7 M) Countryside around Three River Junction (During flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M ) Countryside around Three River Junction (After flood): High resolution TIFF (13.
6 M) St. Louis (Before flood): High resolution TIFF (13.9 M) St. Louis (During flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M) St. Louis (After flood): High resolution TIFF (13.5 M) Three River Junction (Before flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M) Three River Junction (During flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M) Three River Junction (After flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (Before flood): High resolution TIFF (13.3 M) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (During flood): High resolution TIFF (14.7 M) Mississippi and Illinois Rivers (After flood): High resolution TIFF (13.4M)
Technical notes: Rendered: April 1999 Data source: LandSat 5 Thematic Mapper; USGS 3-arcsecond DTED Data date: 14 August 1991; 14 August 1993; 7 November 1993 For: The LandSat Project Team and Goddard Public Affairs Office
