HUD Homes and Communities Photo [space.gif] [space.gif]
CUOMO AWARDS $5,826,420 MILLION IN GRANTS TO FIGHT DRUGS AND CRIME IN PUBLIC AND ASSISTED HOUSING IN CONNECTICUT, INCLUDING ALMOST $600,000 FOR HARTFORD
Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo today awarded $5,826,420 million in grants to fight drug abuse and other crimes in public housing and HUD-assisted housing in Connecticut, including almost $600,000 for Hartford.
The grants were announced today by Hartford Mayor Mike Peters and HUD General Counsel Gail Laster.
Joining Peters and Laster for the announcement was John Wardlaw, executive director of the Hartford Housing Authority.
Connecticut's grants will be distributed to housing authorities and owners of HUD-subsidized housing for low-income families in the following cities:
* Ansonia................................$76,500 * Bridgeport............................$1,224,500 * Danbury$125,100 * East Hartford$177,300 * Greenwich.$98,100 * Hartford$594,500 * Manchester$95,400 * Meriden.$145,500 * Middletown$339,800 * New Britain$484,000 * New Haven.$871,520 * S. Norwalk..$372,200 * Norwich..$53,100 * Stamford.$252,000 * Stratford.$89,100 * Waterbury..$207,600 * West Haven.$370,200 * Willimantic.$250,000
(PLEASE SEE ATTACHMENT FOR MORE DETAILED DESCRIPTIONS OF GRANTS IN EACH CITY).
"These grants are good news for some of the poorest families in Connecticut and bad news for drug dealers who terrorize them," Cuomo said.
"We will fight drug abuse with prevention and treatment programs and with a crackdown on drug dealers and other criminals.
We are telling drug dealers in HUD housing to find another line of work or be sent to another type of subsidized housing - a prison cell."
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said: "Successful public housing demands solid financial commitment with a specific, life-enriching purpose and plan.
These federal funds will support Hartford's Housing Authority in its efforts to revitalize public housing, which is about more than protecting bricks, concrete and asphalt.
It is about building better lives.
It is about building on the work already done to stop drugs and reduce crime, and this grant will empower public housing residents to take the next steps in that fight."
Representative Barbara B. Kennelly said: "All our citizens have the right to grow up in a drug free environment, and these grants are one step in a long fight to free our towns from the scourge of drugs.
As long as one child has to grow up exposed to the drug traffic, this fight must go on."
Mayor Peters said: "HUD's Drug Elimination Grants will allow the City to continue its efforts to reduce crime, not only in public housing areas, but throughout the city.
With great partners like Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo and the HUD staff, we can continue to progress we've made in reducing crime and eliminating drugs on our streets, in our schools, and in our neighborhoods."
Cuomo said the Department's $24.5 billion budget for the 1999 fiscal year, which he called "the best HUD budget in 10 years," will speed the transformation of public and assisted housing.
"HUD is transforming public housing from isolated ghettos of poverty, drugs, despair and crime into safe and economically integrated communities of opportunity," Cuomo said.
Nationwide, HUD is awarding $305.2 million in Drug Elimination Grants this year - more than in any previous year.
The grants will be distributed in the next several weeks in this way: $280.6 million to 749 public housing authorities; $8 million to 39 Indian Tribes; and $16.6 million to 143 privately owned housing developments that receive HUD assistance.
Another 53 privately owned HUD-subsidized low-income housing developments will receive a total of $11.7 million from a similar program called the New Approach Anti-Drug Program.
Vice President Al Gore, Cuomo and Attorney General Janet Reno announced a four-part enforcement and prevention strategy to fight crime and drugs in public housing in June 1997.
The grants announced today are one element of that strategy.
The Drug Elimination Grants are awarded on a competitive basis, based on the seriousness of the drug and crime problem facing a housing authority or assisted housing development, and the strength of local plans to address the problem.
About 900 housing authorities, 60 Indian tribes and 500 privately owned housing developments applied for the grants being awarded this year.
HUD has awarded more than $1.6 billion in Drug Elimination Grants since 1989, including the grants being awarded this year.
In public housing, the Drug Elimination Grants are used for: drug prevention, intervention and treatment programs; reimbursing law enforcement agencies for providing additional security; hiring security guards and investigators; resident anti-crime patrols; and physical improvements to housing developments to enhance security - such as fencing, lighting and improved locks.
In assisted housing, the Drug Elimination Grants are used for: drug prevention and education programs; referrals to drug treatment and counseling; and physical improvements to developments to enhance security.
Individual grants for assisted housing developments are limited to a maximum of $125,000.
The New Approach Anti-Drug Program (formerly known as the Safe Neighborhoods Grant Program) provides funds for improving security at HUD-assisted developments and in surrounding neighborhoods by: hiring security guards, paying for extra police patrols, assisting in the investigation and prosecution of drug-related criminal activity, and implementing security-related physical improvements.
HUD's budget for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1 increases funding for HUD's key programs and renewals of Section 8 rental assistance by a total of more than $2 billion in the budget over 1998 levels.
Spending was increased on most HUD programs and wasn't cut in any programs.
Legislation passed in the same bill as HUD's budget, and signed by the President, will:
Legislation passed in the same bill as HUD's budget will:
* Transform public housing by reducing segregation by race and income, encouraging and rewarding work, bringing more working families into public housing, and increasing the availability of subsidized housing for very poor families.
In addition, the bill improves living conditions in public housing, gives the poorest families neighbors who will be role models of working families, and reduces crime.
The bill also allows HUD to continue to tear down the largest failed public housing projects and replace them with new townhouse-style developments.
* Expand the supply of affordable housing by enabling 90,000 more families to get Section 8 rental assistance vouchers that will subsidize their rents in privately owned apartments - the first increase in vouchers in four years.
* Increase homeownership by raising the limit on home mortgages insured by the Federal Housing Administration from the current range of $86,317 in low-cost housing areas to $170,362 in high-cost areas.
The bill increases the loan limits to a range of $109,032 in low-cost areas to $197,621 in high-cost areas.
The higher ceiling on FHA-insured home mortgages opens the door of homeownership to thousands of families needing FHA insurance to get mortgages, but locked out now because the current loan limits have not kept pace with rising home prices.
HUD ANTI-DRUG ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITIES IN CONNECTICUT
Ansonia
$76,500 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Ansonia Housing Authority for programs designed to reduce drug use in and around Riverside Apartment complex.
Bridgeport
$1,224,500 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Bridgeport Housing Authority to continue unarmed security patrols in an effort to reduce physical damage and drug use in its developments, and install proximity card readers in the Charles F. Green complex.
Funds also will be used to establish five computer learning centers, an after school drop-out prevention and pre-employment and training program for youth between 15 and 17 years old, and a drug prevention program.
Danbury
$125,100 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Danbury Housing Authority to eliminate drugs and prevent crime through comprehensive programs that combine community policing methods and a variety of resident educational enrichment, job readiness and retention, family counseling, computer skills training, youth tutorial, life skills training, and health education programs.
East Hartford
$177,300 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the East Hartford Housing Authority to continue and expand Project C.A.R.I.N.G.
(Cooperative Action Resulting in the Neighborhood Greatness), a comprehensive initiative that includes drug prevention and education, youth sports, career development, drug abuse counseling, health awareness, drug crime investigation, and community policing activities.
Greenwich
$98,100 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Greenwich Housing Authority to fund drug prevention activities that include additional local law enforcement, volunteer resident patrols, career development, and youth sports and computer education programs.
Hartford
$469,500 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Hartford Housing Authority to provide drug prevention activities, including safe neighborhood education, employment, training, sports, and family programs, and administer grant referrals.
Funds also will be used to continue working relationships with federal, state, and local organizations and law enforcement agencies, empower residents, and improve the quality of life for residents, the community, and surrounding neighborhoods.
$125,000 will be used to enhance security, prevent drug use, and improve physical conditions at M.D. Fox Manor, a Hartford multifamily housing development.
Particular goals include reducing drug-related arrests and calls to police by 50 percent in the first year, building a network of site-based drug prevention programs, and establishing a community task force with a minimum of 10 community-based organizations.
Manchester
$95,400 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Manchester Housing Authority to reduce and eventually eliminate drug-related crime in and around complexes managed by the Authority through programs that expand its relationship with the Manchester Police Department and the Tri-Town Narcotics Task Force, increase resident input into drug elimination activities, eliminate environmental and physical conditions that encourage crime, and provide targeted drug prevention and referral services.
Meriden
$145,500 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Meriden Housing Authority to provide police foot patrols in targeted developments, and support drug prevention programs that have successful track records, education mentoring services, a computer learning center, a recreation program, and a resource center.
Middletown
$339,800 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Middletown Housing Authority to provide activities for youth, teenagers and adults that incorporate drug intervention, prevention, and reimbursement of law enforcement officers for services above those that are normally provided.
New Britain
$242,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the New Britain Housing Authority to combat drug-related crime and activities in the Authority's complexes through programs targeted to youth, residential involvement, increased partnerships with law enforcement, and community building.
Another $242,000 from the New Approach Anti-Drug program will go to private landlords of subsidized housing to support an array of programs to combat drug-related activities.
Specific activities will focus on drug prevention and adding more patrol support and surveillance.
New Haven
$871,520 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the New Haven Housing Authority to implement drug supply and demand reduction strategies, including community-based policing enhancement, resident safety programs, and rescue patrols.
Other activities funded by the grants will include graffiti removal, a groundskeeper work experience program, job self-sufficiency programs, educational scholarships, youth summer programs, a truancy reduction program, community learning centers, and leadership, education and athletics partnerships.
South Norwalk
$247,200 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Norwalk Housing Authority to reduce drug-related crime in Roodner Court and Meadow Gardens.
The funds also will be used to continue successful programs currently underway, including investigative police services and a Campus of Learners Computer Center that features 23 up-to-date computer stations.
$125,000 will be used for drug prevention and intervention programs in and around Colonial Village, a Norwalk multifamily housing development.
Particular activities will focus on prevention and long-term activities to increase community health, a Welfare to Work Program, and community policing programs, including Operation Safe Home, Weed 
Other drug prevention efforts will involve Norwalk Community Technical College, community development block grant funds, the Safe Neighborhoods Program, and the local Community Action Agency.
Norwich
$53,100 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Public Housing Authority of Norwich to combat drug abuse through a holistic approach that involves the active participation of numerous local agencies, enhanced police services, and education programs and employment opportunities for residents.
Stamford
$252,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Public Housing Authority of Stamford to provide residents with increased access to support and other services needed to move to self-sufficiency, increased access to recreation and educational programs, and improve the quality of life for residents.
Current programs that will continue under the grants include a security program at Stamford Manor, an after-school homework club and scholarship program, youth programs, and grant administration.
New programs will include a youth boxing program, the establishment of computer centers at three locations, and the creation of a youth mentoring program.
Stratford
$89,100 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Stratford Housing Authority to continue current drug reduction and intervention programs that involve the cooperative efforts of the Authority, residents, police, and community service departments.
Waterbury
$207,600 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the Waterbury Housing Authority to reduce and eliminate drug use, and protect public housing neighborhoods through the employment of police officers and drug prevention services, including physical improvement to enhance security, programs to reduce drug use, the hiring of Authority security personnel, and the use of voluntary tenant patrols.
West Haven
$370,200 in Drug Elimination Grants will go to the West Haven Housing Authority to hire additional police patrols, particularly during weekends, increase the presence of security guards in elderly developments, hire residents to monitor and report safety and environmental issues, create a computer learning center, and work with the city and other community partners to assist residents in creating a safe and drug-free environment.
Willimantic
$250,000 in Drug Elimination Grants will be used to fund drug prevention and intervention programs in and around Village Heights, a Willimantic multifamily housing development, that include working with community groups, residents, and other community partners to create a healthy community that resists drug-related activity.
