United States Senator Paul S. Sarbanes Kids Page
Kids Page Navigation Bar Chesapeake Bay for Kids
Protecting and improving the Chesapeake Bay, its parks,
[oystersboat.jpg]
An Oysterman surveys his catch.
(Photo courtesy of the U.S. Army Corp of Engineers)
wildlife refuges, natural resources, and other waterways in Maryland has always been one of my most important priorities throughout my time in Congress.
As a child growing up in Salisbury, Maryland, the Chesapeake Bay touched many aspects of my life, and it still does even today.
The Chesapeake Bay is the backbone of the State of Maryland.
That is why it is important that we all work to preserve and protect this national treasure.
Ways You Can Help the Bay
Young people can have a profound effect on helping to improve the quality of the Chesapeake Bay.
There are many simple ways you can help the Chesapeake Bay.
DON'T LITTER.
Loose garbage can end up washing into the Chesapeake Bay.
Garbage hurts the overall water quality in the Bay, and can entangle many of the animals that live in the Chesapeake Bay and its watershed.
Litter many times ends up washing down storm drains that empty directly into the watershed.
Always be sure that you or your friends never throw garbage into storm drains.
RECYCLE AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
The trash that you throw away ends up in landfills, which can be expensive to construct and maintain.
The runoff from landfills ends up polluting the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Participate in local curbside recycling programs.
Buy recycled and recyclable products whenever possible.
Look for products with a high post-consumer recycled material content.
CONSERVE WATER WHENEVER POSSIBLE.
Make sure that your faucets and toilets don't leak.
A dripping faucet can waste 20 gallons of water a day, while a leaking toilet can waste 200 gallons of water per day.
Try to take short showers instead of baths.
Turn off the faucet while you are brushing your teeth.
Use a bucket to catch "warm up" water from the sink or the shower, and use this extra water to water house plants or fill up water bowls for your pets.
Always run full loads of laundry and dishes.
Don't throw garbage into the toilet.
PLANT TREES.
Trees are not only pretty, but they provide numerous benefits for the Chesapeake Bay.
Students planting trees.
Students plant trees as part of their celebration of EarthDay.
(Photo: Courtesy of the U.S. Corp of Engineers)
Trees reduce soil erosion and control run-off from your yard.
Reducing run-off in turn will reduce sediments, nutrients, and toxic chemicals from entering streams, creeks, rivers, and the Chesapeake Bay.
GET INVOLVED.
Join an organization that works to improve the Chesapeake Bay.
Becoming personally involved in saving the Chesapeake Bay is one of the best ways you can help.
The following is a list of links to such groups: Student Baysavers , from the The Chesapeake Bay Foundation, participate in a wide range of projects ranging from oyster gardening to tree planting, and are encouraged to attend workshops and seminars that motivate them to become Bay stewards.
Maryland Stream Waders, from the Maryland Department of Natural Resources, is a volunteer stream sampling program.
Their goal is to fill in the information gaps that currently exist concerning the quality of Maryland's streams.
Adopt-a-Stream, a partnership between the Maryland Department of Natural Resources and Maryland Save Our Streams, teaches hands-on methods to protect the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
Stream Doctor , a program from Save Our Streams is a unique stream restoration project that teaches people to create a plan to improve the health of local streams in their communities.
Chesapeake Bay Restoration Projects are suggestions for students from the Chesapeake Bay Trust.
This site contains project ideas that help restore the Chesapeake Bay and provide opportunities to gain knowledge about the Bay and the environment.
The Chesapeake Bay is Maryland's most treasured natural resource, and our Nation's most important estuary.
I encourage you to explore these additional Chesapeake Bay web sites to learn more about the Bay and how you can help in Bay clean-up efforts.
You are part of the Bay's future.
* Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay * Chesapeake Bay Commission * Chesapeake Bay Foundation * Chesapeake Gateways 
Home| Biography| What's News| Working for MD| Services| Explore| Resources| Visit D.C.| Contact
