Back to Main Page Treatment Wetlands Because of growing concerns regarding the implications of dissolved organic matter (DOM) on water reuse in the western United States, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and the United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) initiated a cooperative effort to evaluate the nature and transformation of DOM in treatment wetlands and aquatic systems.
The limited water resources in arid regions of the western United States often result in the need for water conservation, wastewater reclamation and reuse, and conjunctive methods to meet water demands and protect valuable environmental resources.
The assimilation capacity and transformation characteristics of wetland and aquatic systems can be used to better manage water resources, to protect human health, and to sustain valuable ecosystem functions.
Wetlands are highly productive ecosystems with significant input of organic matter from plants, waterfowl, fish, insects, and other macro- and microorganisms.
Water supplies are limited and under severe pressures to meet competing demands in many arid areas of the western United States.
Under these conditions, all water sources, including treated wastewater can be considered a valuable resource.
It is often difficult to separate water sources due to the common occurrence of "effluent-dependent" streams and co-mingling of wastewater sources.
These trends have posed significant challenges to managing water resources while protecting human health and important environmental resources.
In recent years, there has been greater interest in conjunctive methods to manage water resources in arid areas.
The integration of "natural" components or functions into water management plans has increased as a means to extend water resources without high costs or energy use.
Examples include soil-aquifer treatment processes, constructed wetland treatment systems, and establishing water quality standards to address the assimilation characteristics of effluent-dependent streams.
Constructed wetlands can be multi-purpose and provide public use benefits as tools for education on water reuse issues and for passive recreation opportunities such as bird watching.
In fact, certain free-water surface constructed wetlands in the United States have become public attractions because of their abundance of waterfowl and wildlife.
There are many issues to consider when developing constructed wetlands for wastewater treatment including water balance, treatment performance, wildlife habitat quality, education and recreation opportunities, nuisance potential, and construction and operation costs.
The focus of this report is the nature and transformation of DOM, and the many factors critical to wetland design and operation will not be presented.
DOM is important in natural and constructed wetlands.
Although the total concentration of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) has been measured in many aquatic systems, less is known about the composition and behavior of DOM or the chemical transformations that control its fate in wetlands.
In this investigation we examined the occurrence, character, and transformations of DOM at six different constructed and natural wetland sites located in the western United States.
Several observations were made regarding the nature of DOM in wetlands.
The nature of the source water and the degree of treatment have a major influence on the biogeochemical transformations that occur.
Climate factors including temperature, precipitation, and sunlight intensity also can have a significant effect on DOM. Wetlands receiving treated wastewater typically have a net production of DOM although specific organic contaminants may be removed from the water column.
Finally, an effective analytical scheme is essential to measure subtle changes in DOM composition.
Field study sites in the Western United States were selected to evaluate the effects of climate and hydrology conditions, wastewater DOM characteristics, inflow loading rates, and operating conditions on the nature, fate, and removal of DOM in wetlands and aquatic systems.
[map.gif]
The focus of this study was comprehensive chemical analysis of water samples collected during a series of synoptic field samplings at a variety of wetland sites.
The analytical measurements provide data on the total concentrations and molecular characteristics of the DOM.
These data can be used to monitor changes that occur during passage through a treatment wetland, and provide insight into the environmental processes controlling the fate (production, transformation, removal) of DOM in treatment wetlands.
To address site-specific relationships between wetland treatment performance and operating/climatic conditions requires controlled field experiments.
As part of this investigation, a tracer experiment was conducted to evaluate the hydrological characteristics of a pilot scale treatment wetland and short-term transformations of a wastewater-derived organic chemical.
As transitional ecosystems, diverse interactions occur in wetlands between water, soils, vegetation, sunlight, atmosphere, and biological activity.
These interactions provide the substrate, transport medium, and energy base required to support the transformation mechanisms that effect water quality.
Constructed treatment wetlands are designed to take advantage of these "natural" processes to achieve water quality objectives.
Free water surface, subsurface flow, and aquatic plant systems have been used for wastewater treatment.
Typical free water surface wetland systems consists of a semi-aquatic emergent marsh with a very diverse biota that can support a variety of biological, chemical, and physical mechanisms, and are designed and operated to improve water quality.
In addition to improving water quality, wetlands can produce other recognized factors such as aquatic habitat enhancement, erosion control, primary production, groundwater recharge, and species diversity.
[diagram1.gif]
There are at least three reasons that DOM is important in wetlands and aquatic systems.
First, DOM plays a major role in biogeochemical processes, nutrient cycling, primary production, and other responsive biological activity, and is produced and consumed in treatment wetlands.
Second, DOM can influence the transport, chemical interactions, biological availability, and toxicity of a variety of trace elements and synthetic organic compounds.
Finally, the understanding of potential adverse human health or environmental impacts could have direct implications on the appropriate direction of planning for wastewater treatment and water reuse activities.
The transformation of DOM in treatment wetlands is important to consider both from the point of organic contaminant removal as well as production of DOM from biological activity within the wetland.
In contrast to nutrients, BOD, COD, and total suspended solids (TSS) which have been extensively studied, little is known about DOM loading and transformations in constructed wetlands.
Wastewater investigations typically evaluate DOM using BOD or COD, which are aggregate measurements of the oxygen consumption capacity; however, they do not provide information on the actual quantity or the characteristics of the organic matter.
Organic matter in natural water, wastewater, and wetland effluents consists of thousands of components and is a continuum of macroscopic particles, colloids, dissolved macromolecules, and specific compounds.
The complex character of natural and synthetic organic compounds can be used as inherent chemical tracers of processes occurring in wetlands.
In addition, many organic chemicals in treated wastewater may have toxic or other detrimental properties for humans and aquatic organisms.
Plant derived DOM is a precursor in the formation of disinfection byproducts produced during the treatment of drinking water and DOM concentrations and character are becoming regulatory issues.
Cycling of organic matter through wetlands is regulated by the source water (natural, wastewater, etc.), transformation and removal processes, and in situ production from biomass growth and decomposition.
Factors controlling DOM removal include the chemical nature of the DOM, temperature, oxidation-state of the system, microbial populations, availability of electron acceptors and donors, and availability of nutrients (labile carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, trace elements).
Factors controlling DOM production include the type and amount of vegetation, the fauna biomass, the carbon content of the biomass and its exudates, biodegradation rates, and oxidation states.
Depending on the nature of the source water, DOM can be labile or refractory in nature.
For example, the level of treatment of domestic wastewater prior to discharge to constructed wetlands affects DOM loading.
Primary wastewater undergoes little treatment and has relatively high levels of biodegradable organic compounds.
Secondary treatment removes the biodegradable and sorbable component of sewage effluent; as a result, the DOM consists of relatively recalcitrant compounds.
Although secondary-treated wastewater has lower DOM loading than primary effluent, the wetland removal efficiency also may be lower.
Organic matter can undergo transformation and removal during residence in a treatment wetland.
Biodegradation is a primary removal process that can result in the formation of stable metabolites or complete degradation to carbon dioxide (CO2) and other inorganic compounds.
Some organic compounds are rapidly degraded (half-lives of hours), whereas others are more slowly degraded (half-lives of years) or form stable metabolites and can persist in the environment.
Biodegradation is a function of dissolved oxygen concentrations; some compounds undergo rapid degradation under aerobic conditions but are stable under anaerobic conditions.
The characteristics of DOM can change as wastewater passes through treatment wetlands, although the changes typically are rather subtle and are affected by operational conditions such as vegetation density and hydraulic retention time.
The transformations result from an exchange of DOM within the wetland in addition to conversion of inflow molecules into breakdown products.
A variety of processes can modify the composition of wastewater DOM as it passes through a wetland system including sorption, biodegradation, photolysis, and volatilization.
Because certain classes of organic compounds are selectively removed during wetland treatment, there is a change in the character of the DOM with it generally becoming more hydrophilic in nature.
However, these changes affect only a small fraction of the bulk DOM, most of which undergoes little degradation in treatment wetlands.
This is attributed to readily degradable and sorptive DOM being removed during pretreatment of the wastewater, and relatively short (typically 
The composition of the wetland effluent DOM is the net result of simultaneous production and degradation processes, and is influenced by the input of DOM derived from biological activity in the wetland, in particular, internal loading from plant material.
When performing properly, wetland effluent consists of recalcitrant DOM derived from inflow and internal loading sources.
Exceptions occur when internal loading exceeds removal capacity in highly productive systems, or under low oxygen conditions when aerobic biodegradation is not an effective removal mechanism and the effluent DOM is only partially degraded.
Biodegradation is an important mechanism for removal of labile DOM in wetlands.
The complex microbial ecology of wetland systems can effectively remove many organic compounds such as sugars, hydrocarbons, and sulfonated aromatic anionic surfactants by ultimately converting the labile DOM into end products such as carbon dioxide.
The net effect of biodegradation is to shift the DOM composition to more biologically recalcitrant compounds, resulting in an effluent that undergoes little additional biodegradation.
In many instances biodegradation produces stable metabolites that persist through the treatment wetlands.
Manipulating the geochemical environment can be used to enhance the ultimate biodegradability of DOM.
For example, alternating the environment between aerobic and anaerobic conditions, or maximizing the potential for photolysis and volatilization are factors that can be addressed through design or operations.
Sorption of hydrophobic organic compounds to plant material and sediments also is an important removal mechanism.
However, because sorption is a storage process, it may not ultimately remove organic compounds from a wetland.
In fact, many compounds are less susceptible to biodegradation in the sorbed state.
In some cases, sorption has a finite capacity and a wetland will develop a steady state between sorbed and dissolved concentrations.
It is possible that materials sorbed to sediments and biota can be remobilized by a shift in biological or geochemical conditions, resulting in release of concentrated pulses of organic compounds.
Because of the large surface area of treatment wetlands, photolysis can be an important mechanism for removal and transformation of organic compounds, particularly in the arid southwestern United States.
Photolysis can be enhanced by the presence of relatively high concentrations of DOM.
Exposure to sunlight is a function of the emergent vegetation/open water ratio of the wetland, the extent of plant coverage on the open water, and the turbidity of the wastewater.
Geographic location also influences the amount of photolysis that is likely to occur.
Additional processes such as volatilization and hydrolysis, although very efficient at removal of certain classes of compounds, are probably of secondary importance in wetland treatment.
This is largely because readily volatilized and hydrolyzed compounds are removed during pretreatment.
However, it is likely that there is in situ production of volatile chlorinated hydrocarbons such as chloroform from the reaction of chlorine with wetland derived DOM.
Many factors including operating conditions and climate play a role in the transformation of DOM in treatment wetlands.
In the arid southwest United States, evapotranspiration and water loss result in an increase in DOM (as well as other parameters such as specific conductance) due to concentrating effects.
In contrast, humid climates such as northern California and Oregon have large amounts of precipitation that can significantly dilute wastewater during residence in a wetland.
The findings from this study provide information on the organic geochemistry of treatment wetlands and indicate the complexity of DOM.
Dissolved organic matter consists of thousands of components ranging from discrete simple compounds to complex macromolecules.
The different compounds and compound classes have different environmental fates.
Further research is necessary to better understand the relations between DOM transformation in treatment wetlands and wetland operational conditions.
Back to Main Page
