Office of Congressman Steve Israel Home Contact Us Biography Photo Album E-Mail Updates FAQs Search [spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Israels Statement on Adm. John Poindexters Resignation
After Calling for Poindexters Resignation Tuesday, Armed Services Committee Member Responds to Todays Announcement
HAUPPAUGE NY, July 31st - Responding to the announcement that Admiral John Poindexter will resign, Congressman Steve Israel (D-Huntington) said today, Yesterday four of my house colleagues joined in my demand that John Poindexter resign his position because of reckless and irresponsible conduct.
Today, he listened.
However, John Poindexter is a symptom of a bigger problem within the administration.
And that is stocking federal offices and even the federal judiciary with right ideologues who propose and implement reckless policies like the terrorism futures market.
Its time for the administration to start cleaning House to replace more of these irresponsible extremists with voices of moderation.
Earlier this week, Israel initiated a letter to call for Poindexters resignation, saying, My Congressional District lost 200 people on 9/11.
To allow prospectors to bet for or against terrorism goes beyond the pail and is an affront to their memory.
Nothing less than John Poindexters resignation is acceptable.
Poindexter stepped down today amid controversy over a terrorism futures market.
The scheme, known as the Policy Analysis Market (PAM), is joint venture between DARPA; the Economist Intelligence Unit, the business information arm of The Economist Group, publisher of The Economist; and Net Exchange, which is responsible for design, development and operation of the PAM trading system.
PAM would work like other financial markets, allowing investors to buy shares in events they think likely and sell others they think unlikely to occur, profiting from shares they own if the event actually happens.
Thus, a terrorist planning an attack could profit from his own terrible action.
Congressman Israel, a moderate Democratic member of the Armed Services Committee, with a good working relationship with the Pentagon, circulated a letter to his colleagues in the House calling for Poindexters resignation.
Poindexter, well known for his role in the Iran-Contra scandal, faced criticism earlier this year for DARPAs Total Information Awareness program, which would develop computer software to monitor databases of commercial transactions and personal data for clues of terrorist activity.
[headshot_flag.jpg]
Latest News
Press Releases
News Clippings
E-mail Updates
Local News
