Cancer.gov National Cancer Institute Cancer Control 
One recent report examined racial and ethnic differences among men who developed advanced prostate cancer.
Researchers found that African American men have the greatest risk of developing advanced disease (12.3%).
This rate is higher than that of Hispanic men (10.5%) and about twice that of non-Hispanic Whites (6.3%).
Differences in socioeconomic status, symptoms, and tumor characteristics seem to account for the differences between non- Hispanic Whites and Hispanics, but do not explain a significant portion of African American disparities.
Further research on biologic markers, genetic susceptibility factors, and additional socioeconomic factors such as use of health care systems, distance from health care, diet, literacy, and health beliefs is needed to sufficiently describe these disparities.
Hoffman RM, Gilliland FD, Eley JW, Harlan LC, Stephenson RA, Stanford JL, Albertson PC, Hamilton AS, Hunt WC, Potosky AL. Racial and ethnic differences in advanced-stage prostate cancer (APC): the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study (PCOS).
J Natl Cancer Inst 2001; 93(5):388-95.
options.
Baseline Disease-Related Function, Nonclinical Variables, and Marital Status Are Important Determinants of Treatment of Clinically Localized Prostate Cancer Because of the lack of results from randomized clinical trials comparing the efficacy of aggressive therapies with that of more conservative therapies for clinically localized prostate cancer, men and their physicians may select treatments based on other criteria.
The authors examined 3,073 participants of the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study to determine the association of sociodemographic and clinical characteristics with four management options: radical prostatectomy, radiation therapy, hormonal therapy, and watchful waiting.
In addition to prognostic factors such as age and PSA value, baseline disease-related function, nonclinical variables, and marital status are important determinants of treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer.
The association of nonclinical factors with treatment suggests that, in the absence of definitive information regarding treatment effectiveness, men diagnosed with prostate cancer should be better informed of the risks and benefits of all treatment options.
Harlan LC, Potosky, A, Gilliland FD, Hoffman R, Albertsen PC, Hamilton AS, Eley JW, Stanford JL, Stephenson RA.
Factors associated with initial therapy for clinically localized prostate cancer: Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2001; 93(24):1864-71.
Emerging Trends
Picture of SEER Logo Annual Report to the Nation Each year, the Annual Report to the Nation is released through a collaborative effort of NCI, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Center for Health Statistics, the American Cancer Society, and the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries.
The results of the most recent report show that overall cancer incidence and death rates continue to decline in the U.S.
Although this is encouraging, measures to sustain this progress must incorporate the entire spectrum of prevention, early detection, improved treatment, and efforts to improve quality of life.
They must be aimed at reducing mortality among all populations.
In particular, the results suggest that the single most critical determinant of future cancer incidence and mortality rates will be the ability to reduce tobacco use in all segments of the population.
Howe H, Wingo P, Thun M, Ries L, Rosenberg H, Feigal E, Edwards B. Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of Cancer (1973 Through 1998), Featuring Cancers With Recent Increasing Trends (2001).
J Natl Cancer Inst 2001; 93(11) 824-42.
Top
Tobacco
Picture of Preventive Medicine Book Cigarette Promotions Influence Smoking Among Youth In a study of about 500 elementary and high school students in Vermont, researchers explored whether promotional activities for tobacco influence the smoking behaviors and beliefs of adolescents.
Results suggest that exposure to tobacco marketing influences youthful attitudes and beliefs about smoking.
The likelihood that adolescents will start smoking increases after they acquire cigarette promotional items such as hats or t-shirts with tobacco company logos.
These findings emphasize the harmful effects of tobacco advertising to adolescents and suggest that eliminating cigarette promotional campaigns could reduce adolescent smoking.
Sargent JD, Dalton M, Beach M, Bernhardt A, Heatherton T, Stevens M. Effect of cigarette promotions on smoking uptake among adolescents.
Prev Med 2000; 30(4):320-7.
Personality Variables Predict Adolescent Smoking Better understanding the personality characteristics of adolescents who become smokers could provide key insights for designing effective prevention strategies.
The authors followed more than 3,000 fifth graders for factors such as a propensity toward rebelliousness, risktaking behavior, problem-solving abilities, and susceptibility to peer compliance and approval.
Following up with the students at the end of high school, they found that rebelliousness and risk taking had the strongest predictive value for future smoking behavior.
In light of these findings, the authors suggested that smoking prevention programs should address the needs and expectations of rebellious and risk-taking youth and should begin no later than fifth grade.
Burt RD, Dinh KT, Peterson AV, Sarason IG.
Predicting adolescent smoking: a prospective study of personality variables.
Prev Med 2000; 30(2):115-25.
Smokeless Tobacco Use is a Gateway for Smoking Initiation in Young Adult Males A cohort of 7,865 U.S. Air Force recruits who reported never smoking cigarettes was followed prospectively for one year.
Among that group of nonsmokers, 403 reported that they were current users of smokeless tobacco and 198 reported that they were past users of smokeless tobacco.
After one year, the current smokeless tobacco users were 233 percent more likely to have initiated smoking than nonusers.
Similarly, those who reported past smokeless tobacco use were 227 percent more likely to begin smoking than nonusers.
Thus, both current and former smokeless tobacco users were more than twice as likely to initiate smoking than those who had never used smokeless tobacco.
The gateway role of smokeless tobacco products is an important new finding.
Smokeless tobacco use is an important predictor of smoking initiation among young adult males.
Smoking prevention and cessation programs should include strategies to prevent smokeless tobacco use or to help users quit.
Haddock CK, Weg MV, DeBon M, Klesges RC, Talcott GW, Lando H, Peterson A. Evidence that smokeless tobacco use is a gateway for smoking initiation in young adult males.
Prev Med 2001; 32(3):262-7.
Picture of Molecular Psychiatry Book Interacting Effects of the Serotonin Transporter Gene and Neuroticism in Smoking Practices and Nicotine Dependence Individual differences in propensity to nicotine dependence appear to be mediated, in part, by genetic factors.
Previous studies have linked smoking behavior with genes involved in the regulation of dopamine.
The serotonin transporter gene has a functional polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) that modulates gene transcription and reuptake.
A possible role in nicotine dependence is suggested by a link between 5-HTTLPR and neuroticism, a personality trait that has been related to smoking practices.
The results of a cross-sectional study of 185 smokers suggest that neuroticism is positively associated with nicotine dependence, smoking to reduce negative mood, and smoking for stimulation among smokers with 5-HTTLPR S (small) genotypes, but not the L (large) genotype.
The 5-HTTLPR may modify the effects of neuroticism on smoking motivations and nicotine dependence.
Assessment of 5-HTTLPR genotype and neuroticism may help to identify smokers who are more responsive to psychotropic medications that are being used in smoking cessation treatment.
This research sheds new light on the characteristics of people, both genetic and personality, that may predispose to addiction.
Lerman C, Caporaso NE, Audrain J, Main D, Boyd NR, Shields PG.
Interacting effects of the serotonin transporter gene and neuroticism in smoking practices and nicotine dependence.
Mol Psychiatry 2000; 5(2):189-92.
Top
Quality of Care
Picture of the Cover of Journal Breast-Conserving Therapy Is At Least As Cost Effective as Mastectomy The choice of treatment for breast cancer depends on many factors, including the size and stage of the tumor, a womans age, other medical conditions, and costs.
In a study of nearly 1,700 breast cancer patients 35 and older with early-stage breast cancer, researchers compared the cost of care of mastectomy with that of breast-conserving therapy (BCT).
At six months after diagnosis, the medical care costs associated with BCT were higher than for mastectomy.
The cost difference disappeared over time.
By five years after surgery, the medical care costs of BCT were less than those for mastectomy, possibly due to the expenses associated with the higher complication rates of mastectomy or later surgical reconstruction of the breast.
This study suggests that breast conserving therapy is at least as cost-effective as mastectomy and should be weighed equally in treatment considerations about cost.
The larger lesson, however, is that short-term and longer-term expenses associated with cancer care may be quite different, and that both considerations should inform health care policy decisions.
Barlow WE, Taplin SH, Yoshida CK, Buist DS, Seger D, Brown M. Cost comparison of mastectomy vs. breast-conserving therapy for early stage breast cancer.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2001; 93(6):447-55.
Top
Genes and the Environment
Cover of The American Journal of Human Genetics Prevalence and Penetrance of Germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutations in Women with Ovarian Cancer Past studies may have underestimated the contribution of BRCA2 to ovarian cancer because mutations in the gene cause predominately lateonset cancer, and previous work has focused more on early-onset disease.
The results of a much larger DCCPS-funded study show that BRCA2 mutations clearly account for an appreciable fraction of hereditary cases of ovarian cancer.
The study of 649 unselected cases of ovarian cancer is the largest population-based series to date and is representative of all incident ovarian cancers, both borderline and invasive, arising in an area of North America.
Risch HA, McLaughlin JR, Cole DEC, Rosen B, Bradley L, Kwan E, Jack E, Vesprini DJ, et al.
Prevalence and penetrance of germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in a population series of 649 women with ovarian cancer.
Am J Hum Genet 2001; 68:700-10.
Cover of Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology Women From High-Risk Breast and Ovarian Cancer Families Do Not Have Increased Psychological Distress A DCCPS-funded study assessed psychological distress and psychiatric disorders in 464 high-risk women enrolled in a hereditary breast and ovarian cancer registry to determine whether their decision-making about genetic testing was impaired by their psychological state.
Only 23 percent of the high-risk women scored in the clinically distressed range.
Despite their increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer, as well as their repeated exposure to cancer either in themselves or their relatives, these women compared well with women drawn from primary care and community settings.
High-risk women were no more distressed than women in relevant comparison populations.
The results suggest a need to develop more appropriate, cost-effective education and counseling interventions to meet the needs of women undergoing counseling.
Coyne JA, Benazon NR, Gaba CG, Calzone K, Weber BL. Distress and psychiatric morbidity among women from high-risk breast and ovarian cancer families.
J Consult Clin Psychol 2000;68(5):864-74.
Top
Cancer Survivorship
Cover of Cancer Investigation Patients Who Receive Standard-Dose Chemotherapy Experience Changes in Cognitive Function Increasing evidence supports the hypothesis that standard-dose chemotherapy produces cognitive deficits in a subgroup of adult cancer survivors.
Although these cognitive changes tend to be subtle deficits in memory, concentration, and the ability to remain focused or organized, these alterations in cognitive ability can affect quality of life.
The authors noted that no research has examined the impact of various genetic factors like apolipoprotein E (APOE) on response to chemotherapy as well as medications like estrogen.
Estrogen is especially important in verbal memory.
Improved understanding of the impact of systemic chemotherapy on cognitive functioning is important because hundreds of thousands of people receive standard-dose chemotherapy for treatment of their cancer every year.
Cognitive problems can have a major impact on survivors educational and career decisions and general quality of life.
With 8.9 million cancer survivors in the U.S., approaches are needed to prevent or reduce the likelihood of the development of cognitive deficits, while still maintaining treatment efficacy.
Ahles et al.
Cognitive effects of standard-dose chemotherapy in patients with cancer.
Cancer Investigation, in press.
Long-Term, Disease-Free Breast Cancer Survivors Report High Levels of Functioning and Quality of Life Many Years After Primary Treatment.
Systemic Adjuvant Therapy Related to Poorer Quality of Life.
Women with breast cancer are the largest group of female survivors of cancer.
A group of 763 disease-free survivors who had been diagnosed an average of 6.3 years earlier reported that their physical and emotional well-being were excellent and that their energy levels and social functioning were unchanged.
However, survivors with no past systemic adjuvant therapy had a better quality of life than those who had received systemic adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy, tamoxifen, or both together).
In a multivariate analysis, past chemotherapy was a statistically significant predictor of a poorer current quality of life.
This information may be useful to patients and physicians in discussions about the risks and benefits of systemic adjuvant therapy.
Ganz P, Desmond K, Leedham B, Rowland J, Meyerowitz B, Belin T. Quality of life in longterm, disease-free survivors of breast cancer: a follow-up study.
J Natl Cancer Inst 2002;94(1):39-49.
Top
Cancer Control and Population Sciences Home | Search | Contact Us | Accessibility
Cancer.gov National Institutes of Health Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov.gov
