Robeson County Enterprise Community (NC) _________________________________________________________________ Lumbee Fall Powwow The Lumbee Fall Powwow offers visitors the opportunity to learn about the Lumbee Native American culture through participation in a variety of cultural activities.
The event is held in early September and is located two miles east of HW 74, offI-95, exit 14.
Admission is free.
Call 910-521-0647 for further information.
North Carolina Folk Arts Festival
The North Carolina Folk Arts Festival features local and regional arts and crafts and three stages offering dancing and musical performances.
Over one hundred exhibits showcase "living history" demonstrations, including blacksmithing, quilting and soap-making.
The festival celebrates the diverse cultures of the area and features demonstrations by groups dedicated to preserving Scottish-American, African-American, Native American and Hispanic American cultures.
War re-enactments from the Civil War and World War I and II are also featured.
The Festival takes place on and around Armfield Street , just north of Main Street (HW 20) off I-95, exit 31 in St. Paul .
It is annual event held the first Saturday in May.
For more information call Paul Terry at 910-865-4179.
Lunchtime on the Plaza
Enjoy your lunch in the sunshine as local bands play a variety of music.
Lunchtime in the Plaza takes place at Lumberton Plaza on Elm Street in downtown Lumberton from noon until 3pm , every Friday in June.
Musical entertainment is free and lunches are available for purchase.
Lumbee Indian Homecoming
This weeklong festival recognizes the heritage of the Lumbee people in Robeson County .
It features a parade, beauty pageants, an automobile show, fireworks, an Elders Dinner, a bike rally and basket making.
Also included in the celebration is an art show and display with prizes awarded in various categories.
A 5K race through Pembroke takes place near the end of the festival.
The public is also invited to the Coronation Ball and the end-of-the-Festival Dance.
The event takes place the week of the 4^th of July each year.
Most activities are free, but there are entry fees required for contests and food is available at a cost.
Take I-95 to exit 17, then west on HW 711 to downtown Pembroke.
For further information call 910-521-8602 or online at www.lumbee.org.
Strike at the Wind Outdoor Drama
This outdoor dramatic performance tells the story of North Carolina 's most celebrated and notorious Native American, Henry Berry Lowrie.
Lowrie played a key role in shaping Robeson County 's future with his actions during and around the Civil War.
Performances are at 8pm on Friday and Saturday nights throughout July and August.
Adults are $10.
Senior and student tickets are discounted.
Take exit 14 off I-95 west towards Pembroke.
Stay on HW 74 approximately 8 miles and follow signs.
Call 910-736-0516 for more information.
Fairmont Farmers Festival
The festival recognizes and celebrates Fairmont farmers' contribution to the local economy and culture.
First held in the 1950s to celebrate tobacco farmers' contributions to Fairmont , the festival in its current form has been held for more than ten years.
It features Gospel and Country music, with cloggers and square dancers.
Local arts and crafts are also on display, along with automobiles participating in the Automobile Show.
The Festival is capped off with a dance at night.
It takes place the 3^rd Saturday in October.
Admission is free.
From I-95, take exit 10 to HW 41 to downtown Fairmont .
For further information call Mickey Williamson at 910-628-9766.
Robeson County Fair
The Robeson County Fair is one of the largest county fairs in the state, and was voted the #1 county fair in North Carolina in 2000.
The Fair features rides, animals on display, and other special attractions.
It is held each October.
Admission is free.
From I-95, take exit 10, then HW 41 North to the fairgrounds.
For more information call 910-738-2126.
Flora McDonald Scottish Highland Games
This three-day annual festival highlights authentic Scottish arts and crafts, food, booths, and a Highland Dance Competition.
Entertainment includes pipe bands, a sheepdog demonstration, and musical entertainment throughout the day.
Attendees will also enjoy cheering for participants in Scottish athletic contests, including caber-throwing, tossing a 120+ pound pole as far as possible.
The festival takes place the first full weekend in October at the Flora McDonald Campus in Red Springs; exit 20 off I-95, west on HW 211, then right on College Street to the campus.
Adults are $8 and children are $5.
For more information call Tommy Ammounds at 910-843-5575 or go to www.capefearscots.com.
Givens Performing Arts Center
The 1678 seat auditorium located on UNCP's campus hosts plays, musical entertainment, musicals, speakers, On Stage for Youth performances, nostalgia performances, and other entertainment and cultural activities.
Recent speakers include Ralf Nader and Maya Angelou.
Performances are primarily in the evening throughout the academic school year.
On Stage for Youth performances are matinees and in the summer the Center is rented out to local organizations for pageants and events.
Call 1-800-367-0778 for pricing and other information.
Carolina Civic Center
Carolina Civic Center hosts theatrical and musical performances by local actors and musicians.
Performances are held throughout the year, evening shows at 7:30pm and matinees at 2:30pm .
The Center is located on Chestnut Street near Lumberton Plaza in downtown Lumberton .
The Civic Center Theatre opened in 1928 and is on the National Historic Register.
Tours of the theatre are free.
Call 910-738-4339 for show prices and other information.
Robeson Planetarium and Science Center
The Planetarium and Science Center , a part of the Robeson County School System, features a variety of educational programs for all age groups.
Science program include astronomical, planetary and light-and -energy-based classes and feature presentations.
Historical programs focus on African American and Native American cultures.
Special programs include the annual Christmas show.
The Center is open Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm .
Admission is $1.50 for students and $2 for adults.
I-95, exit 17.
For more information call Mathew Perkins at 910-671-6015.
Battle of Averasboro re-enactment and Museum
The Battle of Averasboro that preceded and led to the Battle of Bentonville of the Civil War is re-enacted each year.
The Battle was a strategic engagement ordered by General Joseph E. Johnston, commander of the Confederate Army of the South.
The Battle delayed Union general Sherman 's progress, allowing the Confederate Army to position its forces at Bentonville.
The Averasboro Battlefield Museum is located on NC 82 3 miles south of Erwin , NC .
For more information call Greg Price at 910-738-6277 or 910-739-9999.
Rowland Depot and Museum
The Rowland Depot and Museum contains items of historical interest from the community.
Featured is memorabilia from the Rowland Railroad Depot.
The Rowland Depot is on the National Registry of Historic Places.
The Museum is located at 101 West Main Street in Rowland and admission is free.
For more information call 910-422-3333.
Native American Resource Center
The Museum has artwork and artifacts of Native Americans from throughout the United States , Canada , Mexico , and South America .
A special exhibit features Lumbee art and artifacts.
It is open Monday through Friday from 8am to 5pm , closed noon to 1pm daily.
Admission is free.
The museum is located on the campus of UNC-Pembroke, in the Old Main Building .
For more information call 910-521-6282.
African American Culture Center
The African American Culture Center features art, books, and other cultural items celebrating African American culture.
The center is also available for weddings, graduation parties and other special events.
The Center is open Monday through Friday 8:30am to 3pm and admission is free.
It is located on 123 West 3^rd Street in downtown Lumberton .
For more information call 910-739-0817.
Exploration Station
Exploration Station offers family-based education and entertainment.
Classes and displays are hands-on, with summer classes and activities focusing on art, while classes during the year focus on social studies and science.
Summer camps run throughout the summer and special events celebrate the Station's birthday, Halloween and Christmas.
The Station is open Monday, Wednesday, and Friday 9am to 5pm , Tuesday and Thursday 9am to 8pm and Saturday 10am to 4pm .
It is located at 104 Chestnut Street in Lumberton , across from the Robeson County Library.
Adults are $3, children $1.
For further information call 910-738-1326.
Southeastern Carolina Farmers' Market
The Southeastern North Carolina Farmers' Market features fresh locally grown produce at wholesale prices.
The market features a 7,700 square foot meeting center.
Festivals and competitions take place regularly at the market.
It is open daily and admission is free.
Located 1 mile east of I-95 on HW 74.
For further information call 910-618-5699.
Ashpole Presbyterian Church
The Ashpole Presbyterian Church is one of the oldest buildings in the area and is listed on the National Registry.
The Church is located at Ashpole Church Road .
Admission is free.
Call 910-739-6670 for more information.
Humphrey Williams Plantation Farm
Humphrey Williams Plantation Farm displays items of historical interest from the community and is listed on the National Registry of Historic Places.
For more information call 910-739-6670.
Return to NC Tourism Page
