Skip Navigation National Cancer Institute Progress Review Groups [USEMAP:prg_uninav.gif] Prostate Cancer Home Final Report PRG Charge Roster Research Portfolio Initiatives Member Info ____________________ Search Executive Summary Prostate cancer is the most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death among men in the United States.
In 1997, an estimated 209,900 new cases of prostate cancer were diagnosed, and 42,000 men died of the disease.
Despite significant advances in diagnosis and treatment, many patients still suffer from the sequelae of unresectable disease, including debilitation, pain, and premature death.
The continuing challenge to the scientific and medical communities, therefore, is to develop successful preventive strategies to reduce the overall incidence of prostate cancer and to develop effective early detection strategies for all men and appropriate treatment strategies for men with prostate cancer, especially those with advanced lesions.
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has supported a wide range of basic, clinical, and population-based research projects to elucidate the causes and biology of prostate cancer and to develop strategies and technologies for preventing, detecting, diagnosing, and treating prostate cancer.
New data suggest that the application of these research results may save lives, as evidenced by the declining mortality rate for prostate cancer among some populations.
This ongoing research effort has provided a wealth of new scientific opportunities that if pursued may further advance our understanding of prostate cancer and our ability to care for men with this disease and those at risk of it.
However, because research needs are growing, the limited resources available must be used optimally.
This is an opportune time to reassess NCI's prostate cancer research portfolio and plan a research agenda for prostate cancer that will guide the field into the next decade.
The Prostate Cancer Progress Review Group is one of two pilot Progress Review Groups NCI has established to help sharpen the focus of its large, site-specific research programs.
The Review Group's mission is to help NCI define and prioritize the national research agenda for prostate cancer by identifying new or unmet scientific opportunities; using an NCI analysis of its current research program and the ongoing activities as a baseline, providing expert opinions on how to address the opportunities and hasten progress against the disease.
After reviewing the portfolio of grants funded by NCI in 1997, the Review Group estimated that there are between 490 to 520 projects, totaling over $87 million, supporting research in prostate cancer (see Table 1).
While the process of attribution of many scientific projects was difficult--since funded research projects often address diverse research topics as well as cancers in multiple tissues--the Review Group was able to identify the major focus of most projects and sort them according to the major research areas discussed in this report.
Table 1: Estimated NCI Support of Prostate Cancer Research
Approximate Estimated
Topic Area Level of Support No.
Projects
Biology
$11,500,000
70-75
Etiology/Prevention
$25,000,000
110-115
Detection/Diagnosis/Prognosis
$13,500,000
40-45
Systemic/Local Therapy
$18,500,000
135-140
Outcomes
$ 10,000,000
20-25
Resources
$ 8,500,000
115-120
TOTAL
$87,000,000
490-520
It is important to note that some projects overlap topic areas and are found in two or more categories.
It is estimated that 25-30 of the projects identified did overlap in this manner and were relevant to more than one research topic area.
It is estimated that there were 460 individual projects which, in part or whole, were relevant to prostate cancer.
It should also be noted that the Models topic area is missing from Table 1.
This was necessary because funding for models is distributed across many of the topic areas and could not be extracted from the database as a specific entity.
While the dollar amount and number of grants attests to a substantial commitment of NCI to research in prostate cancer, the Review Group nonetheless identified key gaps in the research agenda and major new opportunities that, if supported, could move the pace of research in prostate cancer forward over the coming decade.
The Review Group examined the research portfolio and developed a ranked listing of priorities for research and the resources needed to support an expanded program of research.
This report describes the research challenges and opportunities in each area and provides a hierarchy of research questions that should be addressed to advance the status of prevention, detection, diagnosis, and treatment of prostate cancer.
Biology, Progression, and Metastasis
Prostate cancer growth and development represents a continuum of biological processes, originating from early embryonic development, through growth and maturation, to aging and neoplastic transformation.
To improve diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of prostate cancer, it is crucial to focus future research on the molecular, cellular, physiological, and pathological events that lead to uncontrolled growth and metastasis.
To define the molecular and cellular alterations associated with prostate gland growth and development requires knowledge of specific genes that may be switched on and off temporally at various stages of the organism's development.
Because androgens have been recognized as key regulatory molecules that promote prostate growth, development, and differentiation, understanding androgen action in the prostate and the actions of other signals is essential.
To understand the function of key molecules, such as nuclear receptors and steroid-metabolizing enzymes, it is critical to determine the structure of these molecules.
In addition, increased efforts are needed to identify and characterize partners of nuclear receptors that may function together either alone or together with other cell signaling pathways to control proliferative and differentiative signals in cells.
The process of prostate cancer metastasis is poorly understood.
While prostate cancer is known to metastasize to the skeleton with very few exceptions, this natural history is not recapitulated in the established animal models.
Key molecular determinants associated with increasing metastatic potential are unknown.
Studies are needed to define metastasis-associated genes and their expressions in rodent and human cell or tissue models and validate such findings by correlation with prostate cancer in humans.
Prostate gland development, maturation, aging, and senescence in mammalian species are complex.
In order to understand this process it is critical that we define the biochemical and molecular events which govern the continuation of prostate development from early embryogenesis to the onset of adulthood, through maturation, aging, and death.
At the levels of tissue organization and cell architecture and morphology, it is important to define the differentiative and proliferative potential of prostatic stem cells and to understand the biochemical and molecular mechanisms that guide cellular interactions governing normal and pathological prostate development.
In addition, cell-cell interactions, which are crucial for orchestrating the ultimate outcome of organogenesis, morphogenesis, and functional differentiation of the tissues, need to be defined.
Etiology and Primary Prevention
It is important to understand what genes are important in the etiology of prostate cancer (e.g., inherited susceptibility genes and polymorphisms), as well as their etiologic role and function.
NCI should support an infrastructure for more extensive collection of biological samples and clinical information obtained from families with apparently hereditary prostate cancer.
When candidate genes are identified, NCI should support the development of "knock-out" animal models to investigate the function of such genes.
The prevention of prostate cancer is one of the most important goals of prostate cancer research.
Prevention research stands to benefit greatly as more knowledge is gained about the molecular and cellular events underlying prostate cancer and how these events can be interrupted.
It is important to determine which dietary elements correlate with altered risk of prostate cancer, and how risk may be reduced through chemoprevention.
NCI should support more epidemiologic studies that include detailed prospective dietary studies coupled with extensive clinical databases.
To better understand the etiology of prostate cancer it is important to be able to identify men at increased risk for this disease, how environment and lifestyle influences this risk, and what chemopreventive measures may reduce risk.
NCI should support targeted research and development of new technology to identify risk factors and how the environment modifies those predisposing risks.
An understanding of the interaction of genetic and environmental risk factors that determine incidence in high risk (e.g., African American) and low-risk (e.g., Asian) populations is also important.
Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Prognosis
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing has greatly facilitated the diagnosis of prostate cancer.
But it has not been demonstrated that PSA screening actually reduces morbidity or mortality from this disease.
One of the most perplexing aspects of prostate cancer is that more cancers develop in men over age 50 than ever become clinically apparent or prove lethal.
Consequently, men face a serious dilemma: if their cancer goes undetected, they could develop a debilitating, potentially lethal disease; however, if their tumor would have remained quiescent for the rest of their natural life, detection could lead to the adverse consequences of unnecessary treatment.
Fortunately, screening seldom detects the small, clinically unimportant tumors.
Progress in early detection requires that tests used for detection be refined to ensure that, whenever possible, the cancers detected are clinically important, that is, to detect only those cancers with the potential to kill their host if left untreated without missing any clinically important cancers.
In addition, prognostic "markers" must be further refined to accurately measure the biologic potential of a cancer, allowing therapy to be tailored to the risk posed by the individual cancer.
NCI should place major emphasis on the development, validation and application of biologic markers or determinants that can provide reliable prognostic information.
This effort will likely require the formation of a new, dedicated multidisciplinary prostate cancer marker consortium involving multiple institutions committed to translational research in prostate cancer.
Since no single marker is likely to prove sufficiently predictive, panels of multiple markers will be required, analyzed with the sophisticated tools of modern medical informatics.
At the same time, NCI should continue to support clinical trials to determine whether screening for prostate cancer reduces the risk of dying from this disease and should substantially expand studies of the effects of early detection on morbidity and quality of life.
Laboratory and Clinical Models
Laboratory and clinical models are critical for defining the mechanisms of prostate cancer progression and for testing preventive and therapeutic regimens.
Yet only a few laboratory and clinical models have been developed, all of which are encumbered by insufficient biological knowledge of the human cancer they strive to simulate.
Better understanding of the basic biology of human prostate cancer will accelerate and refine the process of model development.
A laboratory model ideally simulates all of the properties of prostate cancer in humans; however, such a model is difficult to achieve in practice.
A constellation of models (xenograft, transgenic, reconstitution, animal, in vitro, and mathematical) must be developed to mimic distinct characteristics of human prostate cancer.
Moreover, additional prostate cancer cell lines need to be developed.
Each model then must be validated to permit a predictable level of extrapolation to humans.
The availability of new models will provide the means for testing new modalities of both prevention and progression of prostate cancer as well as methods of testing both chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agents.
Moreover, novel therapeutic protocols, such as gene therapy and immunotherapy, can be tested through such models.
Staging and Treatment of Localized Prostate Cancer
Today, with systematic screening, we have the ability to detect almost all prostate cancers before they progress to become locally advanced or metastatic.
What we do not have is the ability to determine reliably which cancers poses so little threat that active treatment can be deferred indefinitely.
When treatment is indicated, it is generally safe and often effective.
But each form of therapy--whether radical prostatectomy, external beam irradiation or interstitial seed implants--fails to cure some patients and each produces some undesirable side effects.
Given the absence of results from randomized clinical trials, we have insufficient evidence that any one of these treatments is superior to another.
We do not know how to predict how a given cancer will respond to a particular type of therapy, or how to select the most beneficial, least risky therapy for an individual cancer.
Major progress against clinically localized prostate cancer will require new approaches.
Treatment may fail to control an apparently localized cancer either because malignant cells have already spread to distant sites or because some cells within the local tumor are not destroyed.
Staging tests available today are not sufficiently sensitive to detect occult micrometastases in many patients.
New techniques are urgently needed to detect metastatic cells and to determine their clinical significance.
Even in the absence of such metastases, local treatment may fail because the cancer extends beyond the margins of surgical resection or because cells within the treated (e.g., irradiated) fields are not sufficiently damaged.
Better indicators are needed to predict the response of individual cancers to different forms and intensities of therapy so that therapeutic options can be selected that are more appropriate to the characteristics of individual cancers.
In addition, new therapeutic approaches need to be developed which improve cancer control or diminish the morbidity of treatment.
Prostate cancer, among the solid tumors, seems to be particularly suitable for gene therapy, since the organ is expendable, the primary tumor is accessible, and a circulating marker of response is readily available.
Gene therapy has thus far been associated with low morbidity and could be applied repeatedly to palliate these slow growing cancers long enough for patients to live out their natural lives even if the cancer is not completely eradicated.
In addition, occult micrometastases may be particularly susceptible to gene therapy strategies that augment the immunogenecity of tumor cells.
Successful introduction of such novel approaches will require support for a special clinical trials consortium, since gene therapy requires active collaboration of basic and clinical investigators incorporating multiple approaches and should emphasize mechanistic questions rather than simply documentation of response.
Systemic Therapies
Systemic therapies are required for tumors that can no longer be cured by local treatments, such as surgery or radiation therapy alone.
Although prostate cancers represent a spectrum of diseases with a range of prognoses, defining optimal systemic treatments depends on understanding the natural history of the disease, and, ideally, on knowledge of the biologic determinants of the development and progression of disease in the individual patient.
Although hormonal therapy presently is the only recognized systemic treatment for advanced disease, there are indications that systemic chemotherapy is active against prostate cancer and in patients with early-stage, poor-prognosis cancers.
A critical issue in developing systemic approaches is the design of clinical trials for prostate cancers.
Clinical trial questions require specific endpoints designed to assess whether a particular approach should be continued.
Trials for different disease states that address different questions require different outcome measures.
Relevant endpoints include measures such as disease-specific survival, or in certain Phase I and II studies, the demonstration that a specific gene or gene product is inhibited.
Selection of an appropriate homogeneous patient population is essential for the success of a given clinical trial.
Patient factors, such as comorbid conditions, the genetic background of the host, diet, and concomitant medications could affect immune function or influence the choice of treatments.
As our knowledge of the events associated with the development and progression of prostate cancer increases--in particular the events associated with the lethal hormone-independent variant of the disease--a number of promising mechanism-based approaches worthy of clinical testing have been identified.
These include, among others, inhibiting signal transduction or specific steps in the cell cycle, blocking angiogenesis and other specific steps in the metastatic cascade, promoting apoptosis, inducing differentiation, as well as a variety of immunotherapeutic approaches.
In addition, a number of chemotherapeutic agents have recently been evaluated and shown to produce efficacy in a significant proportion of patients.
The combining of these approaches also is a critical area for investigation, but it will require substantial and sustained investment in the infrastructure needed to support clinical trials, develop clear endpoints, and follow up on treatment outcomes.
Outcomes Research
"Outcomes" includes both disease-specific and patient-focused endpoints used to describe the results of various interventions in the management of prostate cancer.
Patient-focused outcomes include quality of life, treatment- and disease-related morbidity, economic impacts of care, and quality of and access to care.
Methods to measure patient-focused outcomes quantitatively have been developed, but there are few validated instruments appropriate for patients with prostate cancer and few adequate studies of the effects of the disease or its treatment on quality of life.
Outcome measures are being used yet their meaningfulness may vary depending on the perspective by which the outcomes are measured--the patient's, the clinician's, the third party payer's, or society's.
More data about all aspects of quality of life are needed to provide a more comprehensive perspective on the needs of the long-term cancer survivor.
Research is needed to develop better quality-of-life instruments to assess more accurately the impact of treatment and of the disease itself on patient-focused outcomes, how these may differ among different providers (for example, the community versus centers of excellence).
Quantitative measurements are needed to measure how patients value tradeoffs between length of survival and quality of life.
NCI should support efforts to standardize quality-of-life measurements within clinical trials, including screening and treatment trials.
In addition, NCI should support the development of quantitative measures to describe and compare outcomes after different interventions.
Resources Needed
Progress in prostate cancer is severely impeded by limitations in research funding, policies, and practices.
Several major areas critically require investment and leadership: training and career development; an informatics network linking repositories and databases; clinical trials; translational research; laboratory and clinical models; new technology; and patient education.
The Review Group unanimously agreed that the education and training of investigators who will pursue research in prostate cancer should receive top priority.
Training of young investigators will provide the foundation on which to build new research initiatives in the future.
There is a lack of databases serving the burgeoning needs of basic, clinical, and epidemiological researchers.
The Review Group recommends that NCI support the development of new prostate cancer databases and bioinformatics to ensure that the vast amount of information that becomes available can be assimilated and exploited.
Prostate cancer research is hampered by an inadequate infrastructure for tissue acquisition, storage, and use.
The limited tissue repositories available are not closely linked with appropriate clinical, pathological and epidemiological information.
NCI should undertake or encourage the establishment of a National Prostate Cancer Repository to procure and distribute well-characterized tissue from prostate cancer patients, including samples obtained from autopsies and from patients in clinical trials.
The Review Group recommends the development and dissemination of new cell lines from human prostate cancer and new animal models.
Research efforts should be supported to identify and characterize additional prostate cell-specific promoters in order to stimulate the further development of in vivo animal models that more accurately mimic human prostate cancer.
There is a lack of funding for the development and dissemination of new technologies for research in prostate cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.
The Review Group recommends that NCI facilitate the development and dissemination of reagents and data related to gene expression patterns from microarrays.
Also, NCI should support regional centers that provide access to microarray/ chip technology.
Finally, the Review Group recommends that NCI play a leadership role in the design of clinical trials (prevention, early detection, and treatment), establishing standardized systems for assessing prognostic markers, determining appropriate endpoints, and identifying response criteria.
Also, NCI should develop a special prostate cancer trials consortium.
This consortium should include institutions engaged in prostate cancer treatment and research.
These resources will provide the essential infrastructure to facilitate a multidisciplinary research agenda in prostate cancer and are common to many of the recommendations made throughout the report.
Conclusions
We have an unprecedented opportunity to make substantial strides in the treatment of prostate cancer.
Recent advances in the understanding of biology of the disease will translate into new molecular targets.
These, combined with improved throughput of compounds in the drug-screening process and better understanding of pharmacological activity of those compounds through array technology, should result in improved clinical activity of agents in the near future.
Obviously, the challenge of moving compounds from pre-clinical to clinical status remains, as does the traditionally problematic process of interpreting clinical results.
However, through a concerted effort on the part of the scientific community focusing on this disease, we should be able to overcome those barriers, discover the basic etiology of prostate cancer, understand its development and progression, design appropriate clinical trials, and develop regimens that have a positive impact on the lives of patients with prostate cancer.
Our nation will witness, in fact, lead a revolution in biology and medicine over the next generation that could provide the tools to allow mankind to control for the first time the complex constellation of diseases called cancer.
More Americans die each year of cancer than have died in all the wars in our nation's history.
An investment in biomedical research at this crucial period could bring the forces of modern biological and clinical sciences to the control of prostate cancer.
It is our generation's responsibility to see that our children, and certainly our grandchildren, as they reach their golden years and wish to enjoy the fruits of a long life, will not have their lives cut short by the intractable growth and painful debilitating death from prostate cancer.
Table of Contents
Next Section
Previous Section
NCI Home Page
Comments
Top of Page
Other U.S. Government Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov
Last updated 11.25.01 (dlb)
