[USEMAP:hdr_Seal.gif] [hdr_maricopa.gif]
There's a huge commitment involved - pets need food and water, medical care, and lots of attention.
Unfortunately with all of these responsibilities, many people find that they are in over their head.
The result is a large number of unwanted pets.
That's where AC
We do what we do because 65,000 animals in Maricopa County need us each year!
AC
We strive to be proactive and offer programs to prevent problems before they occur.
For example, The Big Fix, (spay/neuter) and Project Safety Net, help reduce the unwanted pet population and educate people on responsibile pet guardianship.
Mission Our mission is to promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of pets and people in Maricopa County.
Vision We envision the day when: · Maricopa County citizens, their property, and neighborhoods will be safe from the dangers and nuisances of irresponsible pet guardianship.
· Animals will not suffer due to abuse, neglect, ignorance; and every pet born will be assured of a good home and care during its natural life.
Values We value the integrity of each employee, volunteer, and partner who contributes to the professional delivery of excellent customer service and the humane treatment of animals, in an atmosphere of open, honest communication predicated on our trust in and respect for each other.
AC
AC
For a great overview of AC
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] About our Centers
AC
Our Animal Care Centers offer shelter for lost and stray animals, adoption services, animal licensing, and more.
In 2000 we built a No-Kill Pet Adoption Center in Phoenix.
The facility features adoption counseling services, kennels, a get acquainted park, dog-training arena, and much more.
During the first year of operation, adoptions increased 23%, euthanasia rates dropped 8%, and the adoption revenue generated made the Center self-sustaining.
For more information about AC
We hope to duplicate this phenomenal success by opening a second No-Kill Pet Adoption Center in the East Valley.
The estimated cost for building a new Center is a one-time investment of $500,000 plus the cost of the land.
After the Center is built, revenues and donations will fund the annual operating costs.
A new Center will enable us to save more than 4,500 animals each year and provide the East Valley community with valuable services.
If you would like to help us reach this goal, please see the How you Can Help page.
Here's where you can find us:
West Valley Animal Care Center 2323 S. 35th Avenue Phoenix, AZ 85009 (35th Avenue/Durango) 602-506-PETS Map East Valley Animal Care Center 2630 W. 8th Street Mesa, AZ 85201 (8th Street/Loop 101) 602-506-PETS Map
Pet Adoption Center 5231 N. 35th Avenue Phoenix, AZ 85071 (35th Avenue/Missouri) 602-506-PETS Map Adoption Center Hours of Operation: Monday - Friday 1:00 P.M. - 7:00 P.M. Saturday - Sunday 10:00 A.M. - 4:00 P.M.
Care Center Hours of Operation: Monday - Friday ·Adoptions,lost 
·All other services: 9:00 A.M. - 6:00 P.M. Saturday - All services: 9:00 A.M. - 6:00 P.M. Sunday - All services: 12:00 P.M. - 4:00 P.M. (Guardians may turn in a pet Tuesday - Friday only.
But we encourage you to see our Safety Net options first.
There is a $20 surrender fee.)
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Services and Fees
AC
Although we deeply care about animals and would like to provide other services, there are certain things we are unable to do.
While we continue to expand and improve our services, our resources are limited.
So, we currently do not provide veterinary services to the public, remove dead animals within city limits, investigate complaints of fecal material in yards, handle complaints about barking dogs, or microchip dogs that are not adopted from our Centers (please contact your veterinarian to inquire about microchips).
Adoptions
AC
Our sliding fees range from $20 -$150.
Adoptable animals are given a "status" rating of One - Five.
The animal's status rating determines the adoption fee.
For full details, please see our Adoptions page.
Vaccinations and Medication It's easy to get any of the following vaccines or medication for your pet.
Just stop by any of our Ceners during normal business hours - no appointment is needed.
· Rabies - $10.00 · 3-in-1 (dog or cat) - $10.00 · Frontline (for fleas 
Impounds AC
Our Officers rescue lost and stray animals and pick up animals that have bitten a human.
We encourage all guardians to put an ID tag and license on their pet's collar because a lost pet with an ID has a very good chance of being returned home.
If your pet is turned into our Center, you will be charged a fee based on the services we provide.
Your fee may include impound, boarding, quarantine, or dog license.
Surrendered Pets AC
We will only accept pets that are surrendered by their legal guardian.
There is a $20 surrender fee per animal.
If you are thinking of surrendering your dog or cat, we encourage you to see our Project Safety Net options first you might find a solution that will enable you to keep your pet.
Spay/Neuter Surgery
[big_fix_logo_small.gif]
AC
For more information, see Spay/Neuter Programs.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Frequently Asked Questions
Im interested in adopting a particular type of dog - how can I find out if you have any dogs of that breed in your Centers? AC
If you are looking for a particular breed of dog, we recommend that you visit our Centers or search the web sites listed on our Adoptions page.
Unfortunately, we are unable to provide specific information over the phone or by e-mail about the breeds that are available for adoption.
Where can I go for low cost vaccinations? AC
Just stop by any of our Centers during normal business hours no appointment is needed.
For more information, see the Services and Fees section above.
I am not able to care for my pet anymore.
What can I do? AC
We have several programs that can help you to keep your pet: free pet food, help with behavior problems, and low or no cost spay/neuter surgery.
For full details, please see our Project Safety Net page.
If you have decided that you have no option but to give up your pet, you can relinquish your pet at our East Valley or West Valley Animal Care Center Tuesdays Fridays between 9:00 A.M. 6:00 P.M.
There is a $20 per pet surrender fee.
We cannot guarantee that we will be able to find a home for all surrendered pets.
I have wild cats in my neighborhood.
Is there anything that I can do? You may have a feral cat colony in your neighborhood.
A feral cat is a lot different than a stray cat.
A stray is an un-owned animal that is friendly and enjoys human contact.
A feral cat has had little or no human contact during its natural life.
You will see feral cats outdoors struggling to find food and using all their energy to stay safe.
Many people consider feral cats to be a nuisance because they exhibit annoying behaviors such as marking their territory, howling at night, fighting, and destroying personal property.
AC
For full details, please see our Feral Cats page.
What should I do if I see an animal that needs help? If you encounter a stray or injured animal, contact our Call Center at 602-506-PETS.
An Animal Control Officer will pick up the animal and bring him to our clinic.
Once a stray dog enters our Center, he/she is held for a minimum of 72 hours in the hope of finding the guardian.
If the animal is wearing identification, micro chipped, or tattooed, we will attempt to contact the guardian and hold the animal for up to six days.
Once the holding period is up, the animal's health and temperament is evaluated to determine eligibility for adoption.
Injured animals are given medical attention whenever possible and then placed in foster care for recovery.
Once the animal is well, she is placed up for adoption.
What should I do if I see a dead animal? Contact your local city government.
If you are in an unincorporated area of Maricopa County, call 602-506-PETS.
To report a dead dog or cat in the roadway, contact your local jurisdictions refuse removal service.
What should I do if I see a dog without a leash? All dogs in Maricopa County are required to have a current rabies vaccination and a dog license.
Dogs are also required to be on leash or confined on your property at all times.
Animal Control Officers enforce the animal control ordinances in the cities and towns we contract with (Phoenix, Scottsdale, Tempe, Paradise Valley, Chandler, Gilbert, Queen Creek, Cave Creek, Carefree, Guadalupe, Glendale, Tolleson, Goodyear, Gila Bend), as well as the unincorporated areas of Maricopa County.
We also contract with the Avondale and Peoria Police Departments for assistance when they contact us directly.
If you see a dog without a leash in one of the jurisdictions listed above, contact our Call Center at 602-506-PETS.
Is there anyone who offers low-cost spay/neuter surgeries? There sure is! AC
For full details please see, Spay/Neuter Programs.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Funding
AC
We are responsible for obtaining our own operating funds.
We raise the money we need to save the lives of thousands of animals in several ways.
· Donations - Generous donations allow AC
Donations have funded the construction of two spay/neuter clinics and an adoption center, a mobile adoption vehicle, and foster care program for injured and orphaned animals.
Whether it's one dollar, a bag of dog food, or major gift, donations go a long way towards the care of animals.
For more information, see How you Can Help.
· Dog Licenses - Dog licenses and vaccinations ensure the safety and welfare of pets.
License fees are used to help pay for the care of animals that come into our Centers.
For information on how to license a pet, see Dog Licenses.
· Service Contracts - AC
Revenue from these contracts fund the services provided to each city and town.
Extra services such as animal rescue and cruelty investigations are partially funded by donations.
For more information, see About our Field Services.
· Fees - AC
Kennel and adoption fees make up the majority of these revenues.
For more information, see Services and Fees.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Strategic Plan
AC
Throughout this process we adopted the County's "Managing for Results" approach to ensure that we implement measurable goals and remain accountable for achieving results.
The key strategic issues we will focus on over then next five years include:
· Pet population growth and the corresponding public demand for no-kill practices · The challenge of hiring and retaining qualified, committed staff · The community's increasing expectation for compassionate, efficient customer service · Alternative funding for innovative solutions · Expanding and improving the organization's infrastructure
For more information, check out our full Strategic Plan.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Statistics
The demand for animal care and control services in Maricopa County is rising.
This is because the County's pet population is directly related to the County's human population.
Over the next five years, the human population of Maricopa County is projected to increase 80,000 people each year.
The pet population is expected to follow a similar pattern, rising at a rate of 35,000 animals a year.
For detailed information about Maricopa's pet population, see Charts.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Position Statements
AC
These statements offer information and guidelines that we hope will be of value to the community.
Transporting Animals Every year animals die due to inappropriate air and car transportation practices.
AC
If it is necessary to do so, appropriate measures must be taken to ensure the health and well being of the animal.
For more information, see Transporting Animals.
When traveling by air, you should use only reputable airlines that have a written policy on animal transportation.
Transportation should be scheduled when ambient temperatures will be within animal health and safety margins.
When traveling by car, an animal should be confined within a crate or restrained with a seatbelt.
Animals should never be transported in the back of a pick up truck or allowed to hang out of a window without being secured.
AC
Wild and Exotic Animals as Pets AC
Most wild and exotic animals never fully adjust to captivity.
Therefore, AC
AC
The most common example of this practice is the sale of baby ducklings, chicks, and rabbits during the Easter season.
The majority of animals that are sold as novelties do not survive for any length of time.
Often, they die from starvation and neglect, or as a result of the stress and conditions they experience as part of the distribution process.
AC
Nothing in this statement is meant to criticize organizations that provide appropriate screening of an individual's ability to adequately care and provide for a specific animal.
Animals in Biomedical Research and Testing AC
AC
The following questions should always be asked when considering the use of animals in a laboratory.
· Can the proposed use of animals be replaced by non-animal methods that would yield comparable results? If not, can the proposed number of animals be reduced to a minimum without compromising the results? · Can the proposed procedure be refined so that any pain, suffering, or deprivation experienced by the animals is minimized without compromising the results? When employed, the principles of replacing, reducing, and refining animal use constitute a responsible approach to this issue.
AC
These include experiments that are unnecessary and/or duplicative, scientifically or medically trivial, extremely painful, or otherwise fail to balance scientific aims and the public's concerns for animals.
Study of Live Animals in Elementary and Secondary School Biology AC
If a class has a classroom pet, it should be housed, maintained, and cared for appropriately and incorporated into a regular educational routine.
AC
Experiments and activities using live animals should be limited to the observation of pets or normal living patterns of wildlife in the wild or an appropriate instructional setting.
AC
A group discussion on the humane ethical treatment of animals should be included in all lessons.
Animal Cruelty AC
AC
Cruelty and violence in all forms are unacceptable and integrally related, and coincidence and opportunity largely determine the species of the victims.
Therefore, prevention and intervention programs are fundamental to our mission.
· AC
· AC
AC
For more information see: The assessment of animal abuse potential Link between animal cruelty and family violence Signs of animal neglect, abuse, or cruelty
Responsible Pet Guardianship AC
Responsible pet guardianship begins with the initial decision to bring a pet into one's family.
An animal should be added to a home for the reason of companionship and not solely for utilitarian purposes (guard dog, pest control, hunting dog, etc.).
Advance research should be done to find an animal that matches the family's lifestyle.
The commitment to adopt an animal should not be taken lightly and should be a commitment for life.
AC
Therefore, all avenues should be explored (behavior programs, housing that allows pets, re-homing, etc.) prior to relinquishing an animal to a shelter.
AC
We are opposed to puppy mills and pet shops or breeders that produce and sell animals solely for a profit.
Someone who wants a specific breed that an animal shelter or rescue group cannot provide should obtain an animal from only a reputable breeder.
A reputable breeder breeds only to better the breed, ensures the integrity of the breed, offers health guarantees, screens their breeding stock for genetic health issues, is willing and able to take back any animal when an guardian can no longer keep him, requires spay/neuter of non-breeding animals, and helps to rescue the breed.
Responsible pet guardians ensure their pet is spayed or neutered, and provides appropriate food, water, veterinary care, training, exercise, socialization, identification, and love.
AC
A responsible pet guardian complies with all legal requirements of pet guardianship.
Animals should be licensed and always kept on a leash or contained when outside.
Dogs should be kept indoors unless supervised.
When left outside, dogs should have access to shade, food, and water.
In addition, dogs should not be left unattended for long periods of time because they are social animals and need to have regular contact with humans.
Cats should be kept indoors at all times to protect them from reproducing, injury, disease, getting lost, and causing a nuisance to the neighborhood.
Responsible pet guardianship follows through to the end of an animal's life.
If euthanasia is medically necessary, AC
AC
For more information, see Spay/Neuter Programs, Animal Licenses, Animal Care and Behavior.
Assistance Animals AC
These animals include guide dogs, hearing-assistance animals, resident pets of skilled nursing facilities, and animal-assisted therapy and activities.
AC
The training of such animals must be based upon positive reinforcement and not utilize coercive or abuse techniques (e.g. striking, food deprivation, choking, electric shock).
Only medically and behaviorally screened animals should be used in animal-assisted therapy or programs.
Zoos and Aquaria AC
AC
AC
Training and Behavioral Modification AC
Untrained animals are often subject to neglect and abandonment.
AC
All training methods should be non-invasive and free of physical abuse as well as adhere to positive reinforcement techniques based on the natural behaviors of the animal.
AC
For more information, see Dog Training or Animal Care and Behavior.
Cosmetic Surgery on Animals AC
This includes de-clawing cats, cropping ears, and docking tails.
If a veterinarian feels that any of the above should be performed for the safety or health of the animal, then the procedure must be performed in the most humane manner possible.
AC
Fur as Garments or Other Luxury Products, Trapping, and Hunting AC
Feral Cats and Colonies AC
TNR stabilizes feral cat populations, and with the support of sympathetic neighborhood volunteers, felines are able to live safely and peacefully within their territory.
In addition, typical feral problems such as yowling females and spraying toms are practically eliminated, and the incidence of disease and malnutrition are greatly reduced.
For more information, see Feral Cats.
[plain_34.gif] White Papers
AC
Check out the following papers for more information on who AC
A Century in Review Care or Control Cat Licensing
Return to top
[slice_introducing-our-pet-o.gif] [slice_pet-of-the-week-image.gif]
Site Map What's New
[footer_grad.gif]
Legal Information Privacy/Security Policy
© 2002 Maricopa County
