city logo city buttons Parks logo Parks logo background image background image animated picture background image picture of park picture of recreation picture of marina [mm1b_r03_c02.gif] [mm1b_r03_c05.gif]
Passionately rendered in the forms of many cultures, they stand as a witness to the lives of the people who populate the neighborhoods of Long Beach.
Each is a story, a voice raised and a visual tribute.
Each celebrates the roots of diverse cultures and traditions blended and shaped to create our contemporary communities.
In Long Beach, it is the city's Mural and Cultural Arts Program that has been the guiding hand in the creation of dozens of murals throughout the city.
On walls that were once empty or filled with graffiti, murals of astonishing power express stories from the surrounding neighborhoods.
These murals capture the richness of human lives and the city's historic role in commerce and industry.
The process of mural making builds understanding, and, through it, neighborhoods reclaim cultural roots.
In reflecting the citys diversity, these murals stand as a force for unity.
The showcase highlights eight of the many murals created in this project.
A Showcase of Neighborhood Murals * mural #1: "Learning" * mural #2: "Open Minds, Open Hearts: Building the Future" * mural #3: "Oil, Life, and Ecology" * mural #4: "Storytellers" * mural #5: "Community of Music" * mural #6: "Village Pride with Sights High" * mural #7: "Melody of Life" * mural #8: "Together We Dance"
Back to mural list
In a detail of the mural shown here, the artist has depicted a Mexican dancer in costume, poised in mid-step.
Beside her.
a grandmother teaches her granddaughter a traditional Cambodian dance.
The older couple kissing suggests that love flourishes at all ages, not simply in youth.
The hgures of wooden horses from carousels are reminiscent of the Pike Amusement Park.
A vibrant sunset illuminates well-known Long Beach landmarks, including the World Trade Center and the historic Villa Riviera, while reflecting the artist's boyhood memories of the skies above Long Beach.
"Open Minds, Open Hearts: Building the Future" Eva Cockcroft Star's Market 346 West Eighth St. Assistants-Vue Her, Raymond Diaz, neighborhood children picture of Open Minds... mural
Artist Eva Cockcroft discovered that problems with gangs were the most compelling concern of this neighborhood.
In this mural the rose emerges as a brilliant image, blending in symbolic form, death and resurrection The rose also speaks to a neighborhood story.
A young boy picks roses for his mother from the garden of an older woman (shown at far left).
The mother sends him back to make sure that he has not taken the flowers without permission.
The two couples symbolize love and reconciliation.
As a backdrop, the row of houses represents the neighborhood's broad cultural mix.
The neighborhood is in transition with some Victorian homes being restored in a gentrification process that brings new residents into the area beneath the center rose, the artist invites neighborhood children to draw objects they would like to see buried in their community.
Guns, needles and even a bomb can be found in the roots of the rose at the bottom of the mural.
Back to mural list
"Oil, Life and Ecology" Eva Cockcroft California National Guard Armory 854 East 7th St. Assistants- Raymond Jackson, Celia Ko, Kenneth Leach, Alessandra Moctezuma picture of Oil Life and Ecology mural
Displayed on a wall at the National Guard Armory in Long Beach, this mural--a portion of which is show --traces the story of humanitys use of petroleum, reflecting both positive and negative aspects of this history The National Guard Command in Long Beach and Sacramento--the "community" for this mural approved its design.
A harpooned whale, tied to a three-masted schooner, recalls the use of whale oil for energy prior to the petroleum age.
Other images signify the National Guards crucial role in clean-up efforts and the impact of spills on the environment.
Petroleum has been the source of life-giving products, including plastics used in medical treatments.
In the full mural, this is depicted in an image of open-heart surgery, as well as a woman runner who represents the restored health of the heart patient.
If human beings can travel into space, as the mural suggests, they also have the potential to develop the clean energies of the future.
Back to mural list
"Storytellers" Elizabeth Garrison NQ Market 14th St. at Peterson Ave. Assistants- Dareth Morm, Michelle Saucedo picture of Stoytellers mural
"Older Women are often afamilys storytellers", says artist Elizabeth Garrison.
"They are the ones who pass down a family's history to younger members " Created as a triptych, this mural pays tribute to the women elders of three cultures --African-American, Cambodian and Latino.
Shown here is one panel of the mural, located in the city's MacArthur Park neighborhood.
The son of this Cambodian woman had journeyed back to Cambodia during a time of political turmoil to find his mother who had been imprisoned in refugee camps.
Based on his photographs of her, she became the subject for the mural.
Traditional images of Cambodian culture are woven in the tapestry that forms a backdrop while flowers indigenous to this country grow along the border.
The American flag, which flies behind each of the women, becomes a unifying element for the three mural panels.
Storytellers suggests that the personal journeys and cultural legacies of people arriving on these shores have greatly deepened this country's heritage.
Back to mural list
"Community of Music" Ben Valenzuela George Washington Middle School picture of Community of Music mural 15th St. and Cedar Ave.
Assistants-Brittney Powers, Opie Ortiz, Glen Sabalza, Art Valenzuela
photo: Victoria Damrel This 101-foot wide mural |celebrates the universal language of music, reaching back to the tribal roots of all people as a message of unity.
Students and faculty at George Washington Middle School contributed to and approved the design by artist Ben Valenzuela.
The wall, once laden with graffiti and known as a gang wall, today fuses images of various musical traditions.
As shown in the detail, the mural links the long evolution from the handmade flutes that date back to pre-Columbian periods of Latin America to contemporary or Western jazz instruments.
At the center of the mural, a man blowing an Amazonian bark horn tied together by reeds is dressed in modern garb to illustrate transition
.
Artist Ben Valenzuela personalized the mural by portraying friends and celebrities, including Poncho Sanchez and his band members.
Back to mural list
"Villiage Pride with Sights High" Ricardo Mendoza picture of Village Pride... mural Drake Park Community Center 951 Maine Ave.
Assistants-Daniel Moreno, George Fiores, Jr., Juan Espinoza, Phillip Lopez Rigoberto Bernal, neiqhborhood youth
Hundreds of neighborhood volunteers armed with brushes along with the five youth chosen as part of the city's Mural Mentor Program--contributed to this mural under the guidance of artist Ricardo Mendoza.
Its dedication saluted the spirit of true equality for all.
In this detail of the mural, a Latino woman and African-American man stand with hands clasped, expressing a shared vision of vitality, hope and inspiration.
Intertwining cords connected to a series of globes signify unity.
Back to mural list
"Melody of Life" Trace Tres Fukuhara Long Beach Senior Center 1150 4th Street Assistants- Michelle Saucedo Andrew Gulmatico, Guillermo Avalos, Dareth Morm picture of Melody of Life mural
The themes and imagery for Melody of Life were developed with senior citizens at the Long Beach Senior Center, who agreed unanimously that the work should depict the many ethnic cultures of Long Beach.
"The melody of life is teaching, learning, loving, sharing, giving and caring," the artist says.
"The essence of these images is to teach and pass down history."
In a detail of the mural shown here, the artist has depicted a Mexican dancer in costume, poised in mid-step.
Beside her.
a grandmother teaches her granddaughter a traditional Cambodian dance.
The older couple kissing suggests that love flourishes at all ages, not simply in youth.
The hgures of wooden horses from carousels are reminiscent of the Pike Amusement Park.
A vibrant sunset illuminates well-known Long Beach landmarks, including the World Trade Center and the historic Villa Riviera, while reflecting the artist's boyhood memories of the skies above Long Beach.
Back to mural list
"Together We Dance" Elliott Pinkney CD Auto Repair 1328 Walnut St. Assistants- Idris Brown, Fermin "Pete" Santa Cruz picture of Together We Dance mural
Shown here is the panel depicting African dancers in authentic costumes, while at the far left the mural presents two African masks.
"Each group was very proud of the mural when we finished," the artist says.
Back to mural list
Working to Serve You
[filmreel.gif] Film Long Beach what's new image What's new? boatslip image Boat Slips telephone image
Reserve a Facility Forms to Reserve Fees for: Community Center Other Facilities telephone image
Moon Bounces
Picnic Vendors donation image
Donation Opportunities register image
Register for a Class [lbyouth.gif] Youth Service
