Home [rule.gif] Coral Reefs of the U.S. Virgin Islands
Most of the coral reefs around St. Thomas, St. John, and St. Croix are shallow fringing reefs that parallel the islands' coastlines.
Many of them are true coral reefs, established on a framework of coral skeletons deposited over thousands of years.
Elsewhere, coral reef organisms grow on submerged boulders and rock ridges near shore.
Submerged bank reefs are also found in deeper water, some with spur and groove formations.
Reef-building organisms grow on the walls of Salt River Canyon, a drowned river valley on the north shore of St. Croix.
Extensive barrier reefs with well-defined lagoons do not occur around St. John or St. Thomas, but such reefs are found around Buck Island Reef National Monument north of St. Croix and along the island's southeastern shore.
In some locations, fringing reefs extend out from rocky headlands at bay entrances, cutting off back-reef areas and eventually leading to the formation of salt ponds.
More than 40 species of scleractinian corals have been found on U.S. Virgin Islands reefs (Beets and Lewand 1986; C. Rogers, U.S. Geological Survey, Virgin Islands National Park, St. John, personal observation).
The total coverage of living coral on U.S. Virgin Islands reefs is typically less than 40%, although some reef zones have higher coverage (Beets et al. 1986).
Coral reefs in the U.S. Virgin Islands face the same pressures as reefs elsewhere in the Caribbean (Rogers 1985; Beets et al. 1986).
Hurricanes and other major storms, higher than normal water temperatures, and coral diseases, together with destruction caused by boat anchors and boat groundings, careless land use, dredging, pollution, and overfishing, cause reef deterioration.
Within the last 15 to 20 years, the amount of live coral cover has declined, while the abundance of algae has increased (Fig. 1).
The increase in algae probably reflects both the increase in substrate available after the death of coral and the inability of the herbivorous fish and sea urchins to keep the algal growth in check.
Long-term monitoring of reefs around St. John began in 1989 with the establishment of five permanent transects at depths of 12 to 14 meters in Lameshur Bay off the island's southern coast (Fig. 2).
Similar transects were established off Buck Island at the same time.
In 1991 other long-term sites were established around St. John in Newfound and Francis bays.
These sites have provided detailed information about the effects of storms and the recovery of reefs from storms and anchor damage (Rogers et al. 1991; Rogers 1992).
Maps of the major benthic habitats around St. John and early studies at Buck Island provide valuable baseline information about U.S. Virgin Islands reefs (Gladfelter et al. 1977, 1979; Beets et al. 1986).
[cr134f02.jpg] Fig. 2.
Coral reef in Lameshur Bay, U.S. Virgin Islands.
Courtesy Virgin Islands National Park
Perhaps the most conspicuous change on U.S. Virgin Islands coral reefs over the last few decades is the decline in elkhorn coral, one of the primary reef-building corals in the Caribbean (Fig. 3).
Elkhorn corals often form shallow crests near the water's surface, creating physical barriers to ocean waves, thereby reducing coastal erosion.
In the late 1970's, the elkhorn zone on the east end of Buck Island's barrier reef was described as perhaps the best in the Virgin Islands (Gladfelter et al. 1979).
Fifteen to twenty years ago it was possible to find entire stands and impressive, isolated colonies of this species around Buck Island and St. John, but few large, live colonies can be found now.
The primary culprit appears to have been white band disease, first observed in the U.S. Virgin Islands in the early 1970's (Robinson 1973; Gladfelter 1982).
This disease, which has yet to be correlated with pollution or any other human activity, generally kills the colonies it infects, although occasionally patches of live tissue survive.
[cr134f03.jpg] Fig. 3.
Elkhorn coral at Virgin Islands National Park.
Courtesy Virgin Islands National Park
At Buck Island, white band disease and physical destruction from Hurricane David and Tropical Storm Frederic (1979) reduced the live coverage of elkhorn coral from 85% to 5% (Rogers et al. 1982; Gladfelter 1991); in 1989 Hurricane Hugo led to even further declines (Gladfelter 1991).
Numerous new colonies of elkhorn coral, which had developed from sexually produced larvae and from branch fragments, were seen at Buck Island in the summer of 1995.
A few months later, Hurricanes Marilyn and Luis destroyed several of these (Z. Hillis-Starr, National Park Service, Buck Island Reef National Monument, Christiansted, U.S. Virgin Islands, personal observation).
In 1987 a study of 50 individual elkhorn coral colonies in Hawksnest Bay off the north shore of St. John indicated that only 10 remained undamaged 7 months after initial observation (Rogers et al. 1988).
Heavy ground seas and damage from snorkelers and boats were probably responsible for the observed decline.
The elkhorn coral pop-ulation in Hawksnest Bay appeared to be recovering when it suffered damage from Hurricanes Luis and Marilyn in September 1995.
Though little quantitative information exists, staghorn coral and finger coral also appear to have declined substantially around the U.S. Virgin Islands.
The U.S. Virgin Islands have been hit by 4 hurricanes and numerous tropical storms in the last 15 years.
Some of the most severe damage was associated with Hurricane Hugo in 1989 (Edmunds 1991a; Hubbard et al. 1991; Rogers et al. 1991; Bythell et al. 1992).
This category 4 storm flattened reefs off the south side of Buck Island, creating widespread areas of rubble.
Transport of rubble and coral resulted in movement of the southern reef crest 30 meters toward the island (Hubbard et al. 1991).
In contrast, little damage from Hurricane Hugo was noted off the north shore of the island.
At long-term monitoring sites around St. John and Buck Island, coral cover, initially less than 30%, dropped to 8%-18% following Hugo (Edmunds 1991a; Rogers et al. 1991; Bythell and Bythell 1992; Rogers 1992).
The dominant coral species, star coral, declined about 35% in Lameshur Bay.
Studies have shown that no substantial recovery in total coral cover has occurred, although coral recruitment is occurring.
Decreases in the amount of living star coral are of particular concern because it is one of the major reef-building species in the Caribbean.
During Hurricane Hugo, gorgonian corals and sponges were torn apart and ripped off their bases.
Many collected in sand channels and other depressions on the reefs, and piles of them washed up on the beaches.
Along long-term transects in Lameshur Bay, the number of species and the size of colonies of gorgonians and sponges increased between 1991 and 1992 (Gladfelter 1993).
Although there was a slight decrease in the number of sponge colonies during this time, the number of gorgonian colonies increased.
These results may indicate ongoing recovery of the sponge and gorgonian communities from Hurricane Hugo.
In September 1995 two hurricanes (Luis and Marilyn) hit the U.S. Virgin Islands within a 10-day period.
Reefs off the north side of Buck Island and the south side of St. John suffered severe damage.
Although damage was conspicuous at Lameshur Bay, the percentage of live coral cover along the permanent study transects did not decrease, perhaps because of the uneven nature of hurricane damage or because so little coral remained to be damaged (Rogers, unpublished data).
In some bays on the north shore of St. John, more physical destruction was caused by boats that had broken loose and dragged across coral colonies than by the storm itself.
Large coral colonies, some perhaps more than 100 years old, were split into pieces by boat keels.
At the long-term study site in Newfound Bay, little damage from Marilyn was observed; total live coral cover there has remained at about 23% for the last 6 years (Rogers, unpublished data).
Although the physical destruction from hurricanes and white band disease has produced the most drastic changes in U.S. Virgin Islands reefs, other stresses are also taking their toll.
Probably the greatest potential threat to the reefs around the U.S. Virgin Islands is sedimentation associated with runoff from coastal development sites.
The steepness of the islands exacerbates this problem.
A theoretical study of sediment runoff indicated that reef distribution around St. John is a function of watershed size, bay exposure and bathymetry, distance from sources of land-derived sediments, and storms (Hubbard 1987).
Cores taken from large coral colonies off St. John give some clues as to the sedimentation regime before, during, and after extensive clearing of vegetation for sugarcane plantations in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
Growth data from these cores suggest gradual declines over the last 200 years (Hubbard 1987).
Limited data from cores in Hawksnest Bay indicate that upland construction in the early 1980's led to significant decreases in annual growth rates (Hubbard et al. 1987), presumably a response to increased sedimentation.
Current developments of private land inside and adjacent to park boundaries, as well as construction of new roads, have increased the sediment flow into nearshore waters (Anderson 1994).
U.S. Geological Survey scientists are conducting research on this issue.
Black band disease has also been reported for several species of hard corals, including star corals and brain corals, around St. John (Edmunds 1991b) and at Buck Island Reef National Monument (Bythell et al. 1992).
This disease has not been conclusively linked to human activities.
Edmunds (1991b) found that less than 1% of the corals in Lameshur Bay were infected.
Even though the effects of black band disease are small compared with other stresses, the disease should not be ignored because it infects primary reef-building species.
Like coral bleaching, which was observed in the U.S. Virgin Islands in 1987 and 1990, this disease appears to be correlated with higher seawater temperatures.
If algae grow on the bare substrate that becomes available after the infected coral tissue dies, recolonization by hard corals and other reef organisms will be inhibited.
The abundance of algae on the long-term transects in Lameshur Bay has fluctuated between 2% and 32% cover, with the highest amounts occurring in the fall of each year (Rogers, unpublished data).
Increases in algal biomass result from nutrient input and reductions in herbivory, but no direct correlations have been documented.
In spite of some excellent early studies on herbivorous fishes in Lameshur Bay (Earle 1972), further research is needed to unravel the complex relationship among herbivorous fishes, invertebrates, and the species of algae (primarily Dictyota) that predominate on the reefs around St. John.
Some fishes and sea urchins graze on algae and open up new space on the reef for colonization by nonalgal reef organisms.
It is not clear how the decline in predatory fishes has affected these herbivores (see box on Reef Fishes).
With respect to natural resource protection, national parks are a mixed blessing.
Virgin Islands National Park attracts nearly one million visitors a year, most of them arriving on cruise ships or smaller boats.
A single anchor drop from a cruise ship in 1988 led to the destruction of almost 300 square meters of reef.
Monitoring at this site reveals no significant recovery of hard coral 8 years later
(Rogers 1993; Rogers, unpublished data).
A survey of 186 boats in 1987 revealed that 32% were anchored in seagrasses and 14% in coral communities.
About 40% of the anchors in coral and 58% in seagrass beds caused damage (Rogers et al. 1988).
Small boats continue to run aground on reefs within Buck Island Reef National Monument and Virgin Islands National Park.
The installation of mooring buoys and limits on the size of vessels allowed in park waters have resulted in less pressure on these reefs, but in some areas there is little coral left to protect.
Coral reefs are highly diverse and complex ecosystems.
We have only limited understanding of the ecological processes that occur within and among reefs and associated mangrove and seagrass bed systems.
Interactions among these systems include transfer of nutrients and the movements of organisms (primarily fishes).
Seagrass beds and prop roots of red mangroves provide critical feeding and nursery areas for reef fishes.
The degradation of reefs in the U.S. Virgin Islands is a result of a combination of stresses that sometimes act synergistically.
There is no doubt that the reefs have suffered serious declines from hurricanes and white band disease.
The hurricanes have scoured out large portions of the seagrass beds around St. John and, in combination with a severe drought in 1994-1995, have killed extensive mangrove areas.
The full effects of the changes that have occurred on the associated reefs are impossible to quantify.
Sedimentation, overfishing, and damage from boats continue to degrade U.S. Virgin Islands reefs (see box on Reef Fishes, this chapter).
On reefs off the north coast of Jamaica, similar stresses have resulted in a drastic, probably irreversible, decline in the amount of live coral cover to less than 5%, as well as increases in algal biomass of up to 90% (Hughes 1994).
Only time will determine if the amount of living coral on the reefs in the U.S. Virgin Islands will drop to these levels, leading to further increases in algae.
Future hurricanes, combined with human-related stresses, may tip the balance so that recovery becomes impossible.
Author
Caroline S. Rogers U.S. Geological Survey Biological Resources Division Virgin Islands National Park P.O. Box 710 St. John, U.S. Virgin Islands 00831 _________________________________________________________________
References
[rule.gif] Home
