Skip Navigation National Cancer Institute Progress Review Groups [USEMAP:prg_uninav.gif] Prostate Cancer Home Final Report PRG Charge Roster Research Portfolio Initiatives Member Info ____________________ Search Outcomes Research Current Status of the Field "Outcomes" include a spectrum of end points which, in the context of this chapter, describe the results (both patient-focused and disease-specific) of therapeutic interventions in the management of prostate cancer.
Disease-specific outcomes include such characteristics as disease-free survival and overall survival.
These are well-described endpoints of clinical cancer treatment and have been widely applied in clinical trials research.
In contrast, patient-focused outcomes have had less widespread inclusion in clinical trials despite their importance in prostate cancer treatment and research.
The patient-focused outcomes that were the subject of this review include quality of life, treatment-related morbidity, economic outcomes, and quality of and access to care.
Quantitative and comparative assessments of a variety of measures of immediate or long- term morbidity and of quality of life are currently integrated into almost all large-scale trials in prostate cancer.
There are, however, few projects that directly address morbidity, late complications, or supportive care.
In addition, disease-focused outcomes, such as disease-free survival and overall survival, are being studied to a limited degree through the clinical trials mechanism as well as through NCI's Surveillance, Epidemiology and End Results (SEER) program.
It is only within the last few years that the technology has become available to quantitatively evaluate these outcomes in a systematic way.
In the past, the technology of outcomes research has largely been separate from the traditional health care research mechanisms.
Reasons for this separation include the application of different scientific principles such as psychology, economics, and survey research, as well as the need for resources to collect this additional information.
There should be a coordinated development of a structure within NCI to advance this type of scientific inquiry and facilitate cooperation among researchers.
Vision
New approaches to early detection, as well as improvements in treatment, have resulted in a dramatic rise in the long-term survival rate of prostate cancer patients.
Most patients can now expect to live more than 10 years after their diagnosis.
However, the same treatments that have enabled long-term survival can also cause potentially disabling effects, ranging from minor alterations in day-to-day activities to major functional loss involving critical organs.
While the physical effects of cancer treatment have been documented, the impact of these sequelae on quality of life and economic consequence is less well understood.
There is considerable diversity in the methods being employed to measure outcomes, including both qualitative and quantitative studies.
Given the differences between study methodology, it is not surprising that reported quality of life varies.
This makes it difficult to draw firm conclusions about the magnitude and nature of the long-term consequences of prostate cancer for survivors.
Clearly, more data about all aspects of quality of life are needed to provide a more comprehensive and complete perspective on the needs of the long-term cancer survivor.
To accomplish this, the scientific community should address the methodological issues in long-term survivorship research.
In addition, we need to understand the long-term impact of different treatments on quality of life.
We also need to understand the impact of different treatments in more diverse populations.
We need to assess, from the patient's perspective, what they need and want.
Although curing prostate cancer is one criterion of successful cancer therapy, understanding the long-term impact on quality of life will ultimately determine the effectiveness of new and existing treatments.
Challenges and Opportunities
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among men in the United States.
Thus, it exerts an enormous financial impact, with an estimated $5 billion spent annually in direct medical care costs.
NCI research is focused on the long-term costs of cancer care in the Medicare population, according to clinical and sociodemographic characteristics.
However, the Medicare-based studies do not include patients under 65 years old.
In addition, these studies do not include the out-of-pocket burden faced by patients, including prescription drugs, lost earnings, or other family burdens.
Current efforts are focused on describing the cancer-attributed portion of Medicare payments for prostate and other cancer sites.
However, more studies are needed that directly address the issue of the cost of treatment and the cost/benefit ratio of treatment for prostate cancer.
There remain important opportunities to increase understanding of the costs of prostate cancer.
In addition, there has been limited research on how financial concerns affect treatment choice or the quality-of-life issues following treatment.
A recent area of investigation supported by NCI has focused on the patient costs of NCI-sponsored research trials.
Studies have been initiated to examine this question in support of the NCI's efforts to extend third-party payer coverage for routine care costs for patients involved in NCI-sponsored studies.
We have few data on the determinants of treatment choice.
Population-based studies have demonstrated that there are distinctly different patterns of prostate cancer care among African Americans and Caucasians and the reasons for this should be studied.
How patient decisions are made, including the role of insurance coverage, is unclear.
In summary, there is a need to develop and test the factors that determine treatment choice.
Hypothesis-driven research focused on differences among interventions provides an opportunity to develop new knowledge that may improve patient-focused outcomes after prostate cancer.
Among the many important questions to be answered is whether interventions aimed at enhancing quality of life may also affect survival, in addition to their likely impact on outcomes important to patients, such as alleviation of pain or retention of continence.
Although a small number of studies have evaluated quality-of-life issues in patients with metastatic disease, these efforts have been insufficient.
There is insufficient research in the development of new quality-of-life measurement instruments.
The main barrier may be a lack of resources within the clinical trials and cooperative groups to answer these questions.
The NCI portfolio, through the Community Clinical Oncology Program, focuses to a large extent on doctor/patient communication.
However, there is insufficient examination of how this communication affects treatment choice or outcome.
There is a need to develop ways to explain the prognostic variables in a simplified way in order to help providers develop methods to incorporate this into patient preferences and treatment decisions.
Furthermore, there are few tools available to explain the complex statistics and risk-to-benefit ratios necessary to make these decisions.
Finally, efforts must be made to educate the biomedical research community about outcomes research.
It is clear that consumers and purchasers of health care find these endpoints important.
Furthermore, communication to patients about the impact of treatment on patient-focused outcomes has been limited, and a broader discussion of these endpoints should enhance participation in outcomes research.
Another important obstacle to increasing the collection of quality-of-life data within the existing clinical trial mechanism is economic: there have been few additional resources available to add quality of life and outcomes research to this mechanism.
The resources required for this type of patient-focused research are greater than standard clinical trials because of the length of follow up necessary, as well as the fact that these are typically not endpoints collected as part of clinical care.
Research Priorities
During the initial Roundtable meeting for the outcomes group a number of questions were proposed for examining outcomes in prostate cancer during the next five years.
After reviewing the questions and comparing them to the current NCI portfolio, several general recommendations emerged, which are summarized below the Priority One research questions.
PRIORITY ONE
What is the impact of treatment on outcomes? How do the benefits differ in subsets of patients by age, morbidity, race, etc.? What are the outcomes in the community setting compared with those from clinical trials or centers of excellence? How do provider characteristics (e.g., volume, expertise) affect outcomes? How do patients value tradeoffs between length of survival and quality of life?
The NCI portfolio sponsors a number of research programs addressing the questions listed above.
However, specific age-related questions are an important aspect of completing these analyses.
Because prostate cancer is largely a disease of older men and will be increasingly so as the population ages, we need additional data on the efficacy of various treatments in older men.
Many older men have been excluded from clinical trials because of co-morbid conditions; they may not have been encouraged to participate in clinical trials, thereby impeding research that aims to determine which conditions are important when considering treatment and outcomes in this group of patients.
The NCI portfolio currently does not support the development of instruments to assess quality of life.
Nor does it support interventions to increase health-related quality of life for prostate cancer patients, such as pain management, and enhancing cancer control and screening in Hispanic and African American men.
In addition, there are gaps related to the impact of different approaches to prostate cancer screening and different options on quality of life and other manifestations of stress.
The question of how patients value tradeoffs between survival and quality of life has not been adequately addressed.
There have been relatively few studies evaluating differences in outcomes between the clinical trial mechanism, centers of excellence, and community centers, and there are few data on how provider characteristics affect outcome.
How are different types of outcomes defined? What are the standardized measures of outcomes, e.g., quality of life, morbidity, and patient satisfaction?
Both the prostate cancer outcome studies (PCOS) and the SEER program evaluate treatment practice patterns and the long-term prevalence of urinary, bowel, and sexual complications subsequent to initial treatment for prostate cancer.
These studies include thousands of men treated in a general community setting.
Results from these studies will complement ongoing randomized trials of treatment efficacy, providing prostate cancer patients and their physicians with information about likely outcomes of differing treatments.
Researchers should also strive to determine which co-morbid conditions are important when considering treatment and outcomes.
In the NCI portfolio there are many studies collecting data on morbidity and quality of life.
NCI has several existing research mechanisms that can facilitate these outcomes studies, including clinical trials groups and SEER.
The clinical trials groups can study patient-focused outcomes within the setting of randomized control trials.
In contrast, the SEER program tracks incidence of mortality rates for cancer in the U.S. population, thereby focusing primarily on disease-focused outcomes.
These two mechanisms are not necessarily linked.
What is the impact of early detection and screening on outcomes?
The NCI research portfolio is conducting ongoing research into early detection with the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer Screening Trial.
However, few of these studies will result in relevant information on how screening and early detection effect patient-focused, quality-of-life issues, or more specifically, cost.
In summary, there is a need to include aspects of patient-focused outcomes in clinical trials of early detection and screening.
Recommended Actions: * Use NCI clinical trials groups to foster outcomes research * Expand and support the scientific committees within clinical trials groups to focus on outcomes * Invest resources in the existing NCI clinical trials infrastructure and SEER mechanism so that the overall cost of outcomes research will be minimized * Convene a working group to identify the key patient-focused variables and make recommendations for how to include them in the clinical trials databases * Increase interactions among funders of health care to determine the optimum strategies for long-term management of prostate cancer patients * Train more researchers in outcomes research * Develop mechanisms to disseminate to patients outcomes information * Promote cooperation with health researchers and health economists through targeted workshops and conferences * Encourage the development of common mechanisms for reporting patient outcomes in prostate cancer studies
PRIORITY TWO * What are the determinants of treatment choice? * What are the important system/insurance/access factors? * What is the cost effectiveness of treatment? * What is the impact of treatment on quality of life relative to the benefit gained in life years? * What is the benefit or cost of treatment in dollars per life years saved? * What interventions can effectively enhance health related quality of life? * What types of new quality of life instruments can be developed and tested?
PRIORITY THREE * How does the source and type of patient information (e.g., patient-physician communication) affect treatment choice and outcomes? * How can quality of life information be collected in more clinical studies?
Table of Contents
Next Section
Previous Section
NCI Home Page
Comments
Top of Page
Other U.S. Government Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov
Last updated 11.25.01 (dlb)
