TITLE 15: GAMBLING AND LIQUOR CONTROL CHAPTER 2: HORSE RACING PART 3: FLAT RACING OFFICIALS 15.2.3.1 ISSUING AGENCY: New Mexico Racing Commission.
[15.2.3.1 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.1, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.2 SCOPE: All persons engaged in racing, or employed on a licensee's racetrack premises.
Additional regulations may be cross-referenced in 15.2.1 NMAC, 15.2.2 NMAC, 15.2.4 NMAC, 15.2.5 NMAC, 15.2.6 NMAC, 15.2.7 NMAC and 16.47.1 NMAC.
[15.2.3.2 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.2, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.3 STATUTORY AUTHORITY: Sections 60-1-1 thru 60-1-26 NMSA 1978 provide that the New Mexico Racing Commission has the authority to promulgate rules and regulations deemed necessary to enforce Chapter 60 NMSA 1978 pertaining to horse racing.
[15.2.3.3 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.3, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.4 DURATION: Permanent.
[15.2.3.4 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.4, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.5 EFFECTIVE DATE: April 13, 2001 unless a later date is cited at the end of a section.0
[15.2.3.5 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.5, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.6 OBJECTIVE: The objective of Part 3 of Chapter 2 is to establish the qualifications of persons to receive licenses for engaging in horse racing in New Mexico as deemed in the public interest.
[15.2.3.6 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.6, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.7 DEFINITIONS: Refer to 15.2.1.7 NMAC.
[15.2.3.7 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.7, 04/13/2001]
15.2.3.8 FLAT RACING OFFICIALS GENERAL PROVISIONS:
A. Racing Officials: Officials at a race meeting include the following: assistant racing secretary; chief of security; director of racing, or similar position; clerk of scales; clocker; general manager; handicapper; horse identifier; horsemen's bookkeeper; jockey room custodian; official veterinarian; paddock judge; pari mutuel manager; patrol judge, absent video replay equipment; placing judge, if duty not performed by stewards; racing secretary; racing veterinarian; stable superintendent; starter; stewards; timer; track superintendent; any other person designated by the Commission.
(1) Eligibility: To qualify as a racing official, the applicant shall: be of good character and reputation; demonstrate experience in flat racing; be familiar with the duties of the position and with the Commission's rules of flat racing and show an ability to fulfill the requirements of the position.
(2) Approval and Licensing: The Commission, in its sole discretion, may determine the eligibility of a racing official and, in its sole discretion, may approve or disapprove any such official for licensing.
An association shall submit to the Commission its request for approval of racing officials sixty (60) days prior to the first day of the race meet.
(3) Prohibited Practices: While serving in an official capacity, racing officials and their assistants shall not: participate in the sale or purchase, or ownership of any horse racing at the meeting; sell or solicit horse insurance on any horse racing at the meeting; be licensed in any other capacity without permission of the Commission, or in case of an emergency, the permission of the stewards; wager on the outcome of any race under the jurisdiction of the Commission; consume or be under the influence of alcohol or any prohibited substances while performing official duties.
(4) Report of Violations: Racing officials and their assistants shall report immediately to the stewards every observed violation of these rules and of the laws of this state governing racing.
(5) Complaints Against Officials: Complaints against any steward shall be made in writing to the Commission and signed by the complainant.
(a) Any complaint against a racing official other than a steward shall be made to the stewards in writing and signed by the complainant.
All such complaints shall be reported to the Commission by the stewards, together with a report of the action taken or the recommendation of the stewards.
(b) A racing official may be held responsible by the stewards or the Commission for their actions, and the actions of their assistants and/or employees.
(6) Appointment:
(a) A person shall not be appointed to more than one racing official position at a meeting unless specifically approved by the Commission.
(b) The Commission shall appoint or approve the stewards at each race meeting
(7) Appointment of Substitute Officials: Where an emergency vacancy exists among racing officials (except for stewards), the stewards or the association, with the stewards' approval, shall fill the vacancy immediately.
Such appointment shall be reported to the Commission and shall be effective until the vacancy is filled in accordance with these rules.
(8) Appointment of Substitute Steward: Should any steward be absent at race time, and no approved alternate steward be available, the remaining stewards shall appoint a substitute for the absent steward.
If a substitute steward is appointed, the Commission and the association shall be notified by the stewards.
The following are prohibited from serving as a substitute steward: director, deputy director, or racing Commissioner.
B. Stewards
(1) General Authority: The stewards for each meeting shall be responsible to the Commission for the conduct of the race meeting in accordance with the laws of this state and these rules.
(a) The stewards shall enforce these rules and the racing laws of this state.
(b) The stewards' authority includes supervision of all racing officials, track management, licensed personnel, other persons responsible for the conduct of racing, and patrons, as necessary to insure compliance with the Act and these rules.
(c) The stewards shall have authority to resolve conflicts or disputes related to racing and to discipline violators in accordance with the provisions of these rules.
(d) The stewards have the authority to interpret the rules and to decide all questions of racing not specifically covered by the rules.
Whenever the stewards find any person culpable for any act or omission in violation of these regulations or any violation of the Horse Racing Act, the person shall be subject to disciplinary action, which could include a fine, suspension, or revocation/denial of license or any combination of these penalties.
(2) Period of Authority: The stewards' period of authority shall commence up to ten days prior to the beginning of each meeting and shall terminate with the completion of their business pertaining to the meeting.
Following the completion of the stewards' business, the agency director shall carry out the duties of the stewards as described in this Chapter.
(3) Disciplinary Action: The stewards shall take notice of alleged misconduct or rule violations and initiate investigations into the matters.
(a) The stewards shall have authority to charge any licensee for a violation of these rules, to conduct hearings and to impose disciplinary action in accordance with these rules.
(b) The stewards may compel the attendance of witnesses and the submission of documents or potential evidence related to any investigation or hearing.
(c) The stewards may at any time inspect license documents, registration papers, and other documents related to racing.
(d) The stewards have the power to administer oaths and examine witnesses.
(e) The stewards shall consult with the official veterinarian to determine the nature and seriousness of a laboratory finding or an alleged medication violation.
(f) The stewards may impose any of the following penalties on a licensee for a violation of the Act or these rules: issue a reprimand; assess a fine; require forfeiture or redistribution of purse or award, when specified by applicable rules; place a licensee on probation; suspend a license or racing privileges; revoke a license; exclude from grounds under the jurisdiction of the Commission.
(g) The stewards may suspend a license for not more than the balance of the meet plus 45 days per violation; or they may impose a fine not to exceed $1,500 per violation; or they may suspend and fine; or they may order that a person be ineligible for licensing; or they may deny a license to an applicant on grounds set forth in the Act or these rules.
(h) The stewards shall submit a written report to the Commission of every inquiry and hearing.
(i) A stewards' ruling shall not prevent the Commission from imposing a more severe penalty.
(j) The stewards may refer any matter to the Commission and may include recommendations for disposition.
The absence of a steward's referral shall not preclude Commission action in any matter.
(k) Purses, prizes, awards, and trophies shall be redistributed if the stewards or Commission order a change in the official order of finish.
(l) All fines imposed by the stewards shall be paid to the Commission within 30 days after the ruling is issued, unless otherwise ordered.
(4) Protests, Objections, and Complaints: The stewards shall investigate promptly and render a decision in every protest, objection and complaint made to them.
They shall maintain a record of all protests, objections and complaints.
The stewards shall file daily with the Commission a copy of each protest, objection or complaint and any related ruling.
(5) Stewards' Presence: Three stewards shall be present in the stewards' stand during the running of each race.
(6) Order of Finish for Pari-Mutuel Wagering:
(a) The stewards shall determine the official order of finish for each race in accordance with 15.2.5 NMAC.
(b) The decision of the stewards as to the official order of finish, including the disqualification of a horse or horses as a result of any event occurring during the running of the race, shall be final for purposes of distribution of the pari-mutuel wagering pool.
(7) Cancel Wagering: The stewards have the authority to cancel wagering on an individual betting interest or on an entire race and also have the authority to cancel a pari-mutuel pool for a race or races, if such action is necessary to protect the integrity of pari-mutuel wagering.
(8) Records and Reports:
(a) The stewards shall prepare a daily report, on a form approved by the Commission, detailing their actions and observations made during each day's race program.
The report shall contain the name of the racetrack, the date, the weather and track conditions, claims, inquiries, and objections and any unusual circumstances or conditions.
The report shall be signed by each steward and be filed with the Commission not later than 24 hours after the end of each race day.
(b) The stewards shall maintain a detailed log of the stewards' official activities.
The log shall describe all questions, disputes, protests, complaints, or objections brought to the attention of the stewards and all interviews, investigations and rulings made by the stewards.
The log shall be available at all times for inspection by the Commission or its designee.
(c) Not later than seven days after the last day of a race meeting, the stewards shall submit to the Commission a written report regarding the race meeting.
The report shall contain: the stewards' observations and comments regarding the conduct of the race meeting and the overall conditions of the association grounds during the race meeting; any recommendations for improvement by the association or action by the Commission.
(9) Stewards' List:
(a) The stewards shall maintain a stewards' list of the horses which are ineligible to be entered in a race because of poor or inconsistent performance or behavior on the racetrack that endangers the health or safety of other participants in racing.
(b) The stewards may place a horse on the stewards' list when there exists a question as to the exact identification or ownership of said horse.
(c) A horse which has been placed on the stewards' list because of inconsistent performance or behavior, may be removed from the stewards' list when, in the opinion of the stewards, the horse can satisfactorily perform competitively in a race without endangering the health or safety of other participants in racing.
(d) A horse which has been placed on the stewards' list because of questions as to the exact identification or ownership of said horse, may be removed from the stewards' list when, in the opinion of the stewards, proof of exact identification and/or ownership has been established.
C. Racing Secretary:
(1) General Authority: The racing secretary shall be responsible for the programming of races during the race meeting, compiling and publishing condition books, assigning weights for handicap races, and shall receive all entries, subscriptions, declarations and scratches.
(2) Foal, Health and Other Eligibility Certificates: The racing secretary shall be responsible for receiving, inspecting and safeguarding the foal and health certificates and other documents of eligibility for all horses competing at the track or stabled on the grounds.
(3) Allocation of Stalls:
(a) The racing secretary shall assign stall applicants such stabling as is deemed proper and maintain a record of arrivals and departures of all horses stabled on association grounds.
(b) Stall approvals shall be determined by: each track's screening rule as approved by the New Mexico Racing Commission; consideration given to stables with a balanced application; and, New Mexico Breds on each application shall have preference over horses of comparable quality.
(4) Conditions:
(a) The racing secretary shall establish the conditions and eligibility for entering races and cause them to be published to owners, trainers and the Commission and be posted in the racing secretary's office.
(b) For the purpose of establishing conditions, winnings shall be considered to include all monies won up to the time of the start of a race.
(c) Winnings during the year shall be calculated by the racing secretary from the preceding January 1.
(d) A minimum of two (2) races, one for Quarter Horses and one for Thoroughbreds restricted to registered New Mexico bred horses, shall be offered daily in the condition book excluding trials.
(5) Listing of Horses: The racing secretary shall: examine all entry blanks and declarations to verify information as set forth therein; select the horses to start and the also eligible horses from the declarations in accordance with these rules.
(6) Posting of Entries: Upon completion of the draw each day, the racing secretary shall post a list of entries in a conspicuous location in his/her office and make the list available to the media.
If the racing secretary declares a race off, the names of entrants in that race shall be posted on the official bulletin board that day, identifying the race by number as it appears in the condition book.
(7) Daily Program: The racing secretary shall publish the official daily program, ensuring the accuracy therein of the following information: sequence of races to be run and post time for the first race; purse, conditions and distance for each race, and current track record for such distance; the name of licensed owners of each horse, indicated as leased, if applicable, and description of racing colors to be carried; the name of the trainer and the name of the jockey named for each horse together with the weight to be carried; the post position and saddle cloth number or designation for each horse if there is a variance with the saddle cloth designation; identification of each horse by name, color, sex, age, sire and dam; such other information as may be requested by the association or the Commission.
(8) Nominations and Declarations: The racing secretary shall examine nominations and declarations and early closing events, late closing events and stakes events to verify the eligibility of all declarations and nominations and compile lists thereof for publication.
(9) Stakes and Entrance Money Records: The racing secretary shall be caretaker of the permanent records of all stakes and shall verify that all entrance monies due are paid prior to entry for races conducted at the meeting.
D. Horsemen's Bookkeeper:
(1) General Authority: The horsemen's bookkeeper shall maintain the records and accounts and perform the duties described herein and maintain such other records and accounts and perform such other duties as the association and Commission may prescribe.
(2) Records:
(a) The records shall include the name, mailing address, social security number or federal tax identification number, and the state or country of residence of each horse owner, trainer or jockey participating at the race meeting who has funds due or on deposit in the horsemen's account.
(b) The records shall include a file of all required statements of partnerships, syndicates, corporations, assignments of interest, lease agreements and registrations of authorized agents.
(c) All records of the horsemen's bookkeeper shall be kept separate and apart from the records of the association.
(d) All records of the horsemen's bookkeeper including records of accounts and monies and funds kept on deposit are subject to inspection by the Commission at any time.
(e) The association licensee is subject to disciplinary action by the Commission for any violations of or non-compliance with the provisions of this rule.
(3) Monies and Funds on Account:
(a) All monies and funds on account with the horsemen's bookkeeper shall be maintained: separate and apart from monies and funds of the association; in a trust account designed as "Horsemen's Trust Account"; in an account insured by the Federal Deposit and Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
(b) The horsemen's bookkeeper shall be bonded in accordance with Commission stipulations.
(4) Payment of Purses:
(a) The horsemen's bookkeeper shall receive, maintain and disburse the purses of each race and all stakes, entrance money, jockey fees, purchase money in claiming races, along with all applicable taxes and other monies that properly come into his/her possession in accordance with the provision of Commission rules.
(b) The horsemen's bookkeeper may accept monies due belonging to other organizations or recognized meetings, provided prompt return is made to the organization to which the money is due.
(c) The horsemen's bookkeeper shall disburse the purse of each race and all stakes, entrance money, jockey fees and purchase money in claiming races, along with all applicable taxes, upon request, within 48 hours of the completion of the race with respect to all horses not tested and when no timely appeal has been filed, and where a horse been tested within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of notification that all tests with respect to such races have cleared the drug testing laboratory(ies) as reported by the stewards or the Commission, except that minimum jockey mount fees may be disbursed prior to notification that the tests have cleared the testing laboratory(ies).
(d) Absent a prior request, the horsemen's bookkeeper shall disburse monies to the persons entitled to receive same within fifteen (15) days after the last race day of the race meeting, including purses for official races, provided that all tests with respect to such races have cleared the drug testing laboratory(ies) as reported by the stewards, and provided further that no protest or appeal has been filed with the stewards or the Commission.
(e) In the event a protest or appeal has been filed with the stewards or the Commission, the horsemen's bookkeeper shall disburse the purse within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of dismissal or a final non-appealable order disposing of such protest or appeal.
E. Paddock Judge:
(1) General Authority: The paddock judge shall: supervise the assembly of horses in the paddock before the scheduled post time for each race; maintain a written record of all equipment, inspect all equipment of each saddled and report any change thereof to the stewards; prohibit any change of equipment without the approval of the stewards; ensure that the saddling of all horses is orderly, open to public view, free from public interference, and that horses are mounted at the same time, and leave the paddock for the post in proper sequence; supervise paddock schooling of all horses approved for such by the stewards; report to the stewards any observed cruelty to a horse; ensure that only properly authorized persons are permitted in the paddock; report to the stewards any unusual or illegal activities.
(2) Paddock Judge's List:
(a) The paddock judge shall maintain a list of horses which shall not be entered in a race because of poor or inconsistent behavior in the paddock that endangers the health or safety of other participants in racing.
(b) At the end of each race day, the paddock judge shall provide a copy of the list to the stewards.
(c) To be removed from the paddock judge's list, a horse must be schooled in the paddock and demonstrate to the satisfaction of the paddock judge and the stewards that the horse is capable of performing safely in the paddock.
F. Horse Identifier:
(1) General Authority: The horse identifier shall: when required, ensure the safekeeping of registration certificates and racing permits for horses stabled and/or racing on association grounds; inspect documents of ownership, eligibility, registration or breeding necessary to ensure the proper identification of each horse scheduled to compete at a race meeting; examine every starter in the paddock for sex, color, markings and lip tattoo or other approved method of positive identification, for comparison with its registration certificate to verify the horse's identity; supervise the tattooing, branding or other approved method of positive identification, for identification of any horse located on association grounds/
(2) Report Violations: The horse identifier shall report to the stewards any horse not properly identified or whose registration certificate is not in conformity with these rules.
G. Clerk of Scales: The clerk of scales shall: verify the presence of all jockeys in the jockeys' room at the appointed time; verify that all such jockeys have a current jockey's license issued by the Commission; verify the correct weight of each jockey at the time of weighing out and weighing in and report any discrepancies to the stewards immediately; oversee the security of the jockeys' room including the conduct of the jockeys and their attendants; promptly report to the stewards any infraction of the rules with respect to weight, weighing, riding equipment or conduct; record all required data on the scale sheet and submit that data to the horsemen's bookkeeper at the end of each race day; maintain the record of applicable winning races on all apprentice certificates at the meeting; release apprentice jockey certificates, upon the jockey's departure or upon the conclusion of the race meet; assume the duties of the jockey room custodian in the absence of such employee.
H. Jockey Room Custodian: The jockey room custodian shall: supervise the conduct of the jockeys and their attendants while they are in the jockey room; keep the jockey room clean and safe for all jockeys; ensure all jockeys are in the correct colors before leaving the jockey room to prepare for mounting their horses; keep a daily film list as displayed in plain view for all jockeys; keep a daily program displayed in plain view for the jockeys so they may have ready access to mounts that may become available; allow only authorized or licensed persons access to the jockey room; for the purposes of this subsection, authorized persons are jockeys, jockey attendants, jockey room employees, starting gate personnel, track physician, stewards, Commissioners and their duly authorized representatives, and such other persons who in the determination of the stewards have a legitimate purpose or need related to the conduct of racing that requires that they have access to the jockey room; report to the stewards any unusual occurrences in the jockey room; and, ensure all jockey's whips are in compliance with Paragraph (1) of Subsection A of 15.2.5.13 NMAC.
I. Starter:
(1) General Authority: The starter shall: have complete jurisdiction over the starting gate, the starting of horses and the authority to give orders not in conflict with the rules as may be required to ensure all participants an equal opportunity to a fair start; appoint and supervise assistant starters who have demonstrated they are adequately trained to safely handle horses in the starting gate; in emergency situations, the starter may appoint qualified individuals to act as substitute assistant starters; assign the starting gate stall positions to assistant starters by lot and notify the assistant starters prior to post time for the first race of their respective stall positions which will remain that assistant starter's position throughout the day; there shall be no changes except with permission of the stewards; assess the ability of each person applying for a jockey's license in breaking from the starting gate and working a horse in the company of other horses, and shall make said assessment known to the stewards; load horses into the gate in any order deemed necessary to ensure a safe and fair start.
(2) Assistant Starters: With respect to an official race, the assistant starters shall not: handle or take charge of any horse in the starting gate without the expressed permission of the starter; impede the start of a race; apply any device, without the approval of the stewards to assist in loading a horse into the starting gate; slap, boot or otherwise dispatch a horse from the starting gate; strike or use abusive language to a jockey; accept or solicit any gratuity or payment other than his/her regular salary, directly or indirectly, for services in starting a race.
(3) Starter's List: No horse shall be permitted to start in a race unless approval is given by the starter.
The starter shall maintain a starter's list of all horses which are ineligible to be entered in any race because of poor or inconsistent behavior or performance in the starting gate.
Such horse shall be refused entry until it has demonstrated to the starter that it has been satisfactorily schooled in the gate and can be removed from the starter's list.
Schooling shall be under the supervision of the starter.
(4) Report Violations: The starter and assistant starter shall report all unauthorized activities to the stewards.
J. Timer/Clocker:
(1) General Authority (Timer):
(a) The timer shall accurately record the time elapsed between the start and finish of each race.
(b) The time shall be recorded from the instant that the first horse leaves the point from which the distance is measured until the first horse reaches the finish line.
(c) At the end of a race, the timer shall post the official running time on the infield totalisator board on instruction by the stewards.
(d) At a racetrack equipped with an appropriate infield totalisator board, the timer shall post the quarter times (splits) for thoroughbred races in fractions as a race is being run.
For quarter horse races, the timer shall post the official times in hundredths of a second.
(e) For back-up purposes, the timer shall also use a stopwatch to time all races.
In time trials, the timer shall ensure that three stopwatches are used by the stewards or their designees.
(f) The timer shall maintain a written record of fractional and finish times of each race and have same available for inspection by the stewards or the Commission on request.
(2) General Authority (Clocker):
(a) The clocker shall be present during training hours at each track on association grounds, which is open for training, to identify each horse working out and to accurately record the distances and times of each horse's workout.
(b) Each day, the clocker shall prepare a list of workouts that describes the name of each horse which worked along with the distance and time of each horse's workout.
(c) At the conclusion of training hours, the clocker shall deliver a copy of the list of workouts to the stewards and the racing secretary.
K. Patrol Judge: The patrol judge, when utilized, is responsible for observing the race and reporting information concerning the race to the stewards.
If the track's video replay system is deemed adequate, use of patrol judges is optional.
L. Gate Judge: The Commission may require each track to employ a gate judge whose duties shall include being present at the starting gate just prior to the running of each race to observe and report any violations of the rules to the stewards, and to otherwise assist the stewards as they may so order.
M. Placing Judge:
(1) General Authority: The placing judges shall determine the order of finish in a race as the horses pass the finish line, and with the approval of the stewards, may display the results of the totalisator board.
(2) Photo Finish:
(a) In the event the placing judges or the stewards request a photo of the finish, the photo finish shall be posted on the totalisator board.
(b) Following their review of the photo finish film strip, the placing judges shall, with the approval of the stewards, determine the exact order of finish for all horses participating in the race, and shall immediately post the numbers of the first four finishers on the totalisator board.
(c) In the event a photo was requested, the placing judges shall cause a photographic print of said finish to be produced.
The finish photograph shall, when needed, be used by the placing judges as an aid in determining the correct order of finish.
(d) Upon determination of the correct order of finish of a race in which the placing judges have utilized a photographic print to determine the first four finishers, the stewards shall cause prints of said photograph to be displayed publicly in the grandstand and clubhouse areas of the racetrack.
(3) Dead Heats:
(a) In the event the placing judges determine that two or more horses finished the race simultaneously and cannot be separated as to their order of finish, a dead heat shall, with the approval of the stewards, be declared.
(b) In the event one or more of the first four finishers of a race are involved in a dead heat, the placing judges shall post the dead heat sign on the totalisator board and cause the numbers of the horse or horses involved to blink on the totalisator board.
N. Official Veterinarian: The official veterinarian shall:
(1) be employed by the Commission;
(2) be a graduate veterinarian and be licensed to practice in the state;
(3) recommend to the stewards any horse deemed unsafe to be raced, or a horse that it would be inhumane to allow to race;
(4) supervise the taking of all specimens for testing according to procedures approved by the Commission;
(5) provide proper safeguards in the handling of all laboratory specimens to prevent tampering, confusion or contamination;
(6) have the authority and jurisdiction to supervise the practicing licensed veterinarians within the enclosure;
(7) report to the Commission the names of all horses humanely destroyed or which otherwise expire at the meeting and the reasons therefore;
(8) refuse employment or payment, directly or indirectly, from any horse owner or trainer of a horse racing or intending to race in this jurisdicition while employed as the official veterinarian for the Commission;
(9) place horses on the Bleeder List and remove horses from the Bleeder List; and
(10) be authorized to humanely destroy any horse deemed to be so seriously injured that it is in the best interests of racing the horse to so act.
O. Racing Veterinarian:
(1) General Authority: At the discretion of the Commission, the racing veterinarian may be an employee of the Commission.
At the discretion of the Commission, the duties of the racing veterinarian may be assumed by the official veterinarian.
(2) The association may employ an additional racing veterinarian in order to further ensure the safety of racing.
(3) The racing veterinarian shall:
(a) be directly responsible to the official veterinarian;
(b) be a graduate veterinarian and be licensed to practice in the state;
(c) be available to the racing secretary and/or the stewards prior to scratch time each racing day, at a time designated by the stewards, to inspect any horses and report on their condition as may be requested by the stewards;
(d) be present in the paddock during saddling, on the racetrack during the post parade and at the starting gate until the horses are dispatched from the gate for the race;
(e) inspect any horse when there is a question as to the physical condition of such horse;
(f) recommend scratching a horse to the stewards if, in the opinion of the racing veterinarian, the horse is physically incapable of exerting its best effort to win;
(g) inspect any horse which appears in physical distress during the race or at the finish of the race; and shall report such horse together with his/her opinion as to the cause of the distress to the stewards and to the official veterinarian;
(h) refuse employment or payment, directly or indirectly, from any horse owner or trainer of a horse racing or intending to race in this jurisdiction while employed as the official veterinarian for the Commission;
(i) refrain from directly treating or prescribing for any horse scheduled to participate during his/her term of appointment at any recognized meeting except in cases of emergency, accident or injury;
(j) be authorized to humanely destroy any horse deemed to be so seriously injured that it is in the best interests of racing to so act;
(k) conduct soundness inspections on horses participating in races at the meeting; and
(l) with approval of the official veterinarian, place horses on the Bleeders List.
(4) The racing veterinarian shall place horses on the veterinarian's list, when necessary, and may remove from the list those horses which are, in the racing veterinarian's opinion, able to satisfactorily compete in a race.
(5) The racing veterinarian shall be present at the office of the racing secretary and/or stewards prior to scratch time each racing day at a time designated by the stewards, to inspect any horses and report on their condition as may be requested by the stewards.
(6) Veterinarian's List:
(a) The racing veterinarian shall maintain a list of all horses which are determined to be unfit to compete in a race due to physical distress, unsoundness, infirmity or medical condition.
(b) A horse may be removed from the veterinarian's list when, in the opinion of the racing veterinarian, the horse has satisfactorily recovered the capability of performing in a race.
P.
Any Other Person Designated by The Commission: The Commission may create additional racing official positions, as needed.
Persons selected for these positions shall be considered racing officials and shall be subject to the general eligibility requirements outlined in Subsection A of 15.2.3 NMAC.
[15.2.3.8 NMAC - Rp, 15 NMAC 2.3.8, 04/13/2001; A, 11/15/2001]
History of 15.2.3 NMAC:
Pre-NMAC History:
Material in this part was derived from that previously filed with the commission of public records - state records center and archives as:
NMSRC 67-1, Amendment No. 1., Rule Revisions Adopted by the New Mexico State Racing Commission April 21, 1967 Rules 352 
NMSRC 69-1, New Mexico Laws and Rules and Regulations Governing Horse Racing, filed 06-09-69;
NMSRC 81-1, Rules Governing Horse Racing in New Mexico, filed 12-04-81;
History of Repealed Material: 15 NMAC 2.3, Horse Racing - Flat Racing Officials, filed 09-29-95 repealed in its entirety; renumbered, reformatted and replaced by 15.2.3 NMAC, Horse Racing - Flat Racing Officials, to conform to the new NMAC requirements effective 04/13/2001.
Other History:
NMSRC 81-1, Rules Governing Horse Racing in new Mexico, filed 12-04-81 - that applicable portion renumbered, reformatted and amended to 15 NMAC 2.3, Horse Racing - Flat Racing Officials, filed 09-29-95.
