PRESS RELEASE From the Office of State Senator Jeff Wentworth For Immediate Release April 14, 2000 Contact: Margaret Rambie - (210) 826-7800 Reverse Mortgages Can Back Up Seniors' Retirement Income It took two constitutional amendments to make it happen, but reverse mortgage loans soon will be available to senior Texans who want to use their home equity to increase their retirement income.
Voters approved reverse mortgages in a 1997 constitutional amendment election, but some of the provisions were unclear.
In 1999 Texans approved a more specific reverse-mortgage amendment, yet loans still are not widely available.
Reverse mortgage lending for most senior Texans will begin as soon as the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development attorneys put the final touches on insurance guidelines that will protect lenders when the amount borrowed is more than a house's value.
Lenders will not offer Fannie Mae and Federal Housing Administration reverse mortgages without HUD insurance, which means that potential borrowers have to wait until attorneys finish dotting i's and crossing t's.
They should complete their work by the end of this month.
Jumbo reverse mortgage loans for houses valued at more than $250,000 currently are available.
These loans are insured by a private program.
Judging from calls to my Capitol and district offices, senior Texans are anxious to access this additional funding source that could make it possible for them to live out their retirement years in their own homes and, for example, finance in-home nursing care, if needed.
Like a traditional home equity loan, a reverse mortgage uses home equity as collateral, only with a reverse mortgage the borrower receives a lump sum or monthly payments.
Payment formulas are determined by a borrower's age, the house's value and interest rates.
No money is paid back to lenders until the homeowner dies or sells the house.
At that time, the loan and the interest must be repaid.
Any excess equity is returned to the owner or the owner's heirs.
Although borrowers may qualify for reverse mortgages at age 62, experts recommend waiting until age 67 or older.
Because lenders place a lien on a house but never take title, a borrower retains control of the property and may sell at any time.
Unless they fail to pay property taxes and insurance, borrowers can never be forced from their homes no matter how long they live.
There is no debt-to-income qualifying, but there is a check for tax liens.
Loan closing costs can be financed into the reverse mortgage or paid at closing.
Potential borrowers must attend a counseling class before receiving a reverse mortgage, so they and their families will be fully informed about the loan.
Reverse mortgage income is not taxable and does not affect Social Security or Medicare benefits, although Social Security Supplemental Income and Medicaid could be affected.
Information about reverse mortgages is available on the Internet at www.texasreversemortgage.com.
In spite of their advantages, reverse mortgages are not for everyone.
Reverse mortgages are more expensive than traditional home equity loans and work best for homes that are 90 percent to 100 percent paid off.
Texans who do not plan to live in their houses for the rest of their lives or who want their children to inherit their homes might want to consider other loans, but for other seniors a reverse mortgage might provide the financial freedom they need to make their golden years shine more brightly.
###
Top
