Mailing Date: Oct. 22, 1997
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE FOR PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE, BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT
: : :
Citation No. 96-2077
v.
: : :
Incident No. W4-143222
FORLIN INC T/A KEY WEST LOUNGE 729 EAST STREET PITTSBURGH PA 15212-4934 ALLEGHENY COUNTY LICENSE NO. R-AP-SS-2527
: : : : : : : :
LID - 33648
BEFORE : JUDGE FRISK
APPEARANCES:
For Bureau of Enforcement:
For Licensee:
Richard Parker, Esquire
Louis Caputo, Esquire
ADJUDICATION
BACKGROUND:
This proceeding arises out of a citation that was issued on October 11, 1996, by the Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement of the Pennsylvania State Police (hereinafter Bureau) against Forlin, Inc., License Number R-AP-SS-2527 (hereinafter Licensee).
The citation charges Licensee with violation of Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] and Section 5513 of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.
C.S. §5513], in that on April 16, 1996 and August 8, 1996, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries on its licensed premises.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
An administrative hearing was conducted on March 12, 1997, at Two Parkway Center, 875 Greentree Road, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The Bureau was represented by Richard Parker, Esquire.
Licensee was represented by Louis Caputo, Esquire.
The Bureau began its investigation of this matter on April 1, 1996, and completed its investigation on August 21, 1996.
Thereafter, Licensee was notified of the nature of the violations disclosed by the investigation by letter sent by certified mail on September 4, 1996.
Counsel for Licensee stipulates that the notice provisions of Section 471 of the Liquor Code have been satisfied.
After hearing the testimony presented, and upon review of the evidence submitted, the following Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are entered:
FINDINGS OF FACT :
APRIL 16, 1996
1.
On April 16, 1996 at 7:00 p.m., Liquor Control Enforcement Officer Joseph M. Cozzoli entered Licensee's premises in an undercover capacity and observed a bartender later identified as Paul A. Elsesser, Jr. rendering service to twelve patrons.
Officer Cozzoli noted that Licensee maintained three "Cherry Master" electronic video slot machines and a "Fruit Bonus" electronic video slot machine.
(N.T. 6)
2.
At approximately 7:05 p.m., a male patron who had been playing one of the "Cherry Master" video slot machines since the time of Officer Cozzoli's arrival had accrued 800 credits.
This patron sought the attention of Paul A. Elsesser, Jr., who approached the machine and caused the 800 credits to be cleared after touching something on the lower left front panel of this machine.
Mr. Elsesser proceeded behind the bar and produced a black vinyl bank bag from which he removed an undetermined amount of United States currency.
Mr. Elsesser then returned to the area where the machines were located and provided this United States currency to the patron who had accrued the 800 credits on the video slot machine.
(N.T. 7-8)
3.
At approximately 9:30 p.m., Officer Cozzoli observed two unidentified male patrons playing the "Fruit Bonus" video slot machine.
Officer Cozzoli then observed one of the male patrons place an undetermined amount of United States currency in this machine, at which time 100 credits appeared on this machine.
The two patrons proceeded to play this machine until approximately 7:39 p.m., when they had accrued 800 credits.
After these credits had been acknowledged by Mr. Elsesser, one of the patrons cleared the 800 credits from the screen of this machine by touching something located on the left side of the machine.
Mr. Elsesser remained behind the bar where he was observed counting out an undetermined amount of United States currency which he provided to one of the aforementioned patrons.
(N.T. 8-9)
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
MAY 5, 1996
4.
On May 5, 1996 at 7:20 p.m., Officer Cozzoli entered Licensee's premises in an undercover capacity and observed Paul A. Elsesser, Jr. tending bar and rendering service to eleven patrons.
Officer Cozzoli noted that Licensee continued to maintain a total of four video slot machines on the premises.
Officer Cozzoli further noted that one of the four video slot machines was inoperable.
(N.T. 9)
5.
During the course of his visit, Officer Cozzoli noted that the three video slot machines that were in operation were being played.
At one point, a male patron accrued an undetermined amount of credits on one of the machines, and requested a "payoff," at which time Mr. Elsesser refused, indicating that there was an unknown individual on the premises.
(N.T. 9-10)
AUGUST 8, 1996
6.
On August 8, 1996 , a detail of Liquor Control Enforcement officers including Officer Joseph M. Cozzoli and Santo P. Bonadio conducted an open inspection of Licensee's premises and seized four video gaming devices, including three "Cherry Master" video slot machines and a "Fruit Bonus" video slot machine in the presence of bartender Paul A. Elsesser, Sr. Prior to seizing these slot machines, Officer Bonadio played two of the three "Cherry Master" video slot machines and the "Fruit Bonus" video slot machine, and verified that each machine was operational and contained a method of clearing accrued credits.
The remaining "Cherry Master" video slot machine was in the process of being repaired, and was not able to be examined.
(N.T. 10, 14, 17-20)
AUGUST 21, 1996
7.
On August 21, 1996, Officer Cozzoli examined the internal components of three of the four video gaming devices seized from Licensee's premises on August 8, 1996, pursuant to a Search Warrant.
(N.T. 11, 17)
8.
As the result of this examination, Officer Cozzoli verified that two of the "Cherry Master" video slot machines and the "Fruit Bonus" video slot machine each contained internal metering components in addition to a method of clearing accrued credits.
The remaining "Cherry Master" video slot machine was inoperable and was unable to be properly examined.
During this examination, a total of $152.10 in cash was removed from these four video gaming devices.
(N.T. 11-16)
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
CONCLUSION OF LAW :
On April 16, 1996 and August 8, 1996, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling on its licensed premises, in violation of Section 5513 of the Crimes Code, which constitutes "sufficient cause," as that term is used in Section 471 of the Liquor Code, thereby subjecting Licensee to the penalties provided by that Section
DISCUSSION:
Licensee argues that the decision of the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County in Commonwealth v. Kratsas, et al.
(Criminal Division, February 27, 1997) is binding upon the Office of Administrative Law Judge.
Licensee further asserts that the Kratsas decision compels the Office of Administrative Law Judge to dismiss the civil/administrative matter brought by the Bureau against Licensee in the present case.
Counsel for the Bureau argues that in the Kratsas case where the Pennsylvania State Police filed criminal gambling charges, the defendants filed motions to dismiss those charges alleging that their due process rights were violated.
The Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County held evidentiary hearings.
At those hearings, the defendants presented evidence through the testimony of numerous witnesses including one of the defendants.
Based upon that evidence, the Court made numerous findings of fact which were set forth in its opinion.
The Court's factual determinations are summarized as follows: (1) that various municipalities in Allegheny County collected licensing fees for video poker and slot machines; (2) that the municipalities in which the defendants' machines were located charged higher licensing fees for video poker machines and slot machines as opposed to other vending machines, because the municipalities knew that the poker and slot machines generated higher revenues as they were used for gambling; (3) that various public officials within the municipalities in which the defendants placed their video gambling devices acknowledged that the use of gambling devices was open and notorious; (4) that within the municipalities in which the defendants placed gambling devices and paid licensing fees, the local police departments never instituted criminal complaints against the defendants for gambling; and (5) that public officials are aware of the use of gambling devices for gambling, but permit such conduct because people want them and municipalities derive substantial revenue from the licensing fees.
(See Kratsas Slip Opinion, pp. 2-13).
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
Additionally, the Court made a crucial finding of fact based upon the testimony of one of the defendants.
44.
Because of the licensing practice of the various municipalities identified above, the lack of enforcement of 18 Pa.
C.S.A. 5513 by local police departments and many conversations had with various public officials and/or representatives, Defendants believe that their conduct with regard to video poker/slot machine gambling devices was not illegal.
(Kratsas).
Com. v. Kratsas, et al ., Slip Opinion, p. 12.
(Emphasis added).
The Common Pleas Court in its opinion in the Kratsas case relied on three United States Supreme Court decisions which stand for the following proposition: When government officials affirmatively mislead a person into believing that a law does not apply to particular conduct of that person, due process bars prosecution for that conduct, even if the conduct was otherwise unlawful.
United States v. Pennsylvania Industrial Chemical Corporation, (PICCO) 411 U.S. 655 (1972); Cox v. State of Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559 (1965); Raley v. Ohio, 360 U.S. 423 (1959).
(See Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 14).
As the result of this rationale, the Kratsas Court then held that: "...the prosecution of the above defendants is barred as being violative of the due process clause of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 9, of the Pennsylvania Constitution, both of which guarantee fundamental fairness in the treatment of all citizens."
See Kratsas Slip Opinion, Order of Court.
(Emphasis added)
In the opinion of this court, the Common Pleas Court's decision in Kratsas simply held that due process prohibited the criminal prosecution of three specific defendants because government officials affirmatively misled those defendants into believing that their conduct would not result in criminal prosecutions.
Licensee, however, argues that the narrow holding in Kratsas should be expanded to encompass civil/administrative proceedings against all owners and possessors of video gambling devices in Allegheny County.
Neither the case law nor the Kratsas decision itself supports Licensee's argument.
Licensee argues that this court should follow the findings of fact of the Kratsas Court.
For the reasons set forth below, Licensee's argument is meritless.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
First, the Kratsas Court never made a finding of fact that Licensee was affirmatively led to believe that its conduct with regard to video poker machines was not illegal.
More significantly, the Court of Common Pleas never made a finding of fact that all owners and possessors of video gambling devices believed that their conduct was illegal.
Thus, there is no basis within the Kratsas decision itself for this court to adopt such a finding of fact.
Second, with regard to the Kratsas findings of fact relating to the licensing practices of various public officials, those factual findings are based upon evidence that was offered into the record in Kratsas.
The law is well settled that a court may not ordinarily take judicial notice in one case of the records of another case, whether in another court or its own, even though the contents of those records may be known to the Court.
Woolard v. Burton, 498 A.2d 445 (Pa.
Super.
1985).
"Thus, a court is admonished not to take judicial notice of the record of another case, if not pleaded."
Woolard, supra, 498 A.2d at 448.
Thus, there is no statutory or case law requirement compelling this court to adopt any findings of fact of the Kratsas Court.
To the contrary, pursuant to Woolard, supra, this court is precluded from adopting such findings.
Third, at the evidentiary hearing held on March 12, 1997, Licensee never introduced any evidence whatsoever regarding the licensing practices of any municipalities, the conduct of public officials which may give rise to an estoppel argument, or its belief regarding the ramifications of maintaining video gambling devices.
Since this court is prohibited from taking judicial notice of the record in Kratsas , and Licensee introduced no evidence at the hearing on May 6^th, there is no evidence supporting Licensee's due process argument for dismissal of this citation.
In the alternative, even if this court is bound to follow the holding of an Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas case, with regard to a liquor licensee located in Allegheny County, the Kratsas decision does not support Licensee's position: that the application of 18 Pa.
C.S. §5513 to video poker gambling is unconstitutional as violative of due process and equal protection guarantees.
The Kratsas Court never concluded that the due process rights of all owners and possessors of gambling devices in Allegheny County had been violated by the conduct of public officials.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
Rather, the Kratsas Court limited its holding and its conclusion of law to the three specific defendants.
The narrow reach of the Kratsas decision is supported by the common pleas court's language.
...the defendants in this case were affirmatively led to believe that they were acting within the prescriptions of the law in engaging in the conduct at issue in this case.
It is patently unreasonable to hold George Kratsas, John Kratsas and Amusement Supply criminally culpable for the conduct described in the information filed in this case...
(Government officials) allowed the defendants in this case to believe that they were engaging in conduct that would not result in criminal prosecution."
Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 28.
(Emphasis added)
This language clearly demonstrates that the Kratsas Court's determination of the due process violations was limited only to the three defendants charged in that case.
Therefore, there is no legal precedent that would justify the dismissal of the charges brought by the Bureau against Licensee in the present case, simply because the Kratsas Court found that the criminal prosecution of three specific defendants is barred on due process grounds.
In Kratsas , the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County primarily relied upon three United States Supreme Court cases in reaching this decision.
See Raley, supra; Cox, supra; and PICCO, supra.
Those cases involved the application of the due process clause to criminal prosecutions.
As noted by the Kratsas Court: "The clear, overriding evil sought to be remedied by the Raley, Cox and PICCO cases and their progeny is fundamental unfairness in the initiation of criminal prosecutions."
See Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 28.
(Emphasis added).
In contrast, the case before this court is a civil matter.
As such, the Raley , Cox, PICCO and Kratsas holdings are not binding upon this court because criminal law rules and concepts do not apply to civil proceedings unless there is authority to that effect.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
Although the exclusionary rule prohibits the introduction of illegally obtained evidence in a criminal case, such illegally obtained evidence may be introduced in an administrative proceeding.
See United States v. Janis , 428 U.S. 433 (1976); Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Lopez-Mendoza, 468 U.S. 1032 (1984); Sertik v. School District of Pittsburgh, 584 A.2d 390 (Pa.Cmwlth.
1990).
Likewise, the defense of entrapment as codified at 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§313 is only available in the context of a criminal prosecution.
In Smith v. Pennsylvania State Horse Racing Commission, 535 A.2d 596 (Pa. 1988), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held that the common law defense of entrapment, which differs from the codified defense, is available in administrative proceedings.
Thus, since criminal law principles and concepts do not automatically apply to civil proceedings, Licensee must present authority for its argument that the Raley ¸ Cox, and PICCO line of cases apply to administrative proceedings.
In light of the foregoing, this court believes that Licensee's argument is not supported by relevant case law.
In R. v. Commonwealth, Department of Public Welfare , 636 A.2d 142 (Pa. 1994), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court stated that the due process guarantees of Article I, Section 9 of the Pennsylvania Constitution only apply to criminal proceedings.
They do not apply to administrative matters.
In conclusion, this court is not bound by the holding in the Kratsas decision since the present case is a civil/administrative proceeding.
Licensee argues that the administrative gambling charges should be dismissed because Crimes Code gambling charges would have been dismissed against Licensee, if they had been filed, based upon Kratsas .
However, this argument is contrary to relevant and controlling case law.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court has specifically held that sanctions may be imposed under the Liquor Code against liquor licensees for gambling activity even though criminal charges based upon that same gambling activity have been dismissed.
V.J.R.
Bar Corp. v. Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board , 390 A.2d 163 (Pa. 1978).
Furthermore, the Commonwealth Court has held that an injunction against the criminal prosecution of the holder of a liquor license, for instances of maintaining and permitting gambling devices, as illegal discriminatory enforcement of gambling laws did not preclude the Liquor Control Board from imposing penalties upon that license holder for such gambling conduct.
Americus Hose Co., Inc.
Liquor License Case , 454 A.2d 1165 (Pa.Cmwlth.
1983).
The argument raised by the liquor licensee in the Americus Hose Co. case is similar to the argument raised by Licensee in this case.
In Americus Hose, the licensee contended that gambling charges brought under the Liquor Code should be dismissed because a common pleas court had enjoined the criminal prosecution of those gambling charges based upon a criminal law constitutional concept - selective and discriminatory enforcement.
The Commonwealth Court rejected that argument and stated that the licensee's contention was meritless.
The Court then reinstated penalties imposed by the Liquor Control Board.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
Pursuant to Americus Hose , Licensee's contention that the administrative gambling charges must be dismissed because of a court of common pleas decision enjoining the criminal prosecution of gambling charges is meritless.
Therefore, based on the testimony and evidence presented, this court is of the opinion that the testimony of Officer Cozzoli relating to gambling activities observed on Licensee's premises on April 16, 1996, the seizure of the video gaming devices on August 8, 1996, and the subsequent examination of the components of those devices, establishes the violation as charged by a clear preponderance of the evidence.
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board v. Leggens, 542 A.2d 653 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1988); Omicron Enterprises, 449 A.2d 857 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1982).
PENALTY :
Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] prescribes a penalty of license suspension or revocation or a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 or both for violations of the type found in this case.
In mitigation, the record discloses that this citation represents Licensee's first violation.
Therefore, Licensee shall be afforded some consideration as a first offender.
Nevertheless, this court is of the opinion that Licensee's possession and operation of electronic poker machines, slot machines, or similar devices used for gambling purposes on its licensed premises constitutes a relatively severe gambling offense warranting more than a minimal penalty.
For the foregoing reasons, a penalty shall be imposed in the amount of $600.00.
ORDER :
THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that Forlin, Inc., t/a Key West Lounge, License Number R-AP-SS-2527, pay a fine of $600.00 within 20 days of the mailing date of this Order.
In the event the aforementioned fine is not paid within 20 days from the mailing date of this Order, Licensee's license shall be suspended or revoked and the bond forfeited.
FORLIN, INC.
Citation Number 96-2077
The fine must be paid by Treasurer's Check, Cashier's Check, Certified Check or Money Order.
Personal checks, which include business-use personal checks, are not acceptable.
Please make your guaranteed check payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and mail to:
PLCB-Office of Administrative Law Judge Brandywine Plaza 2221 Paxton Church Road Harrisburg PA 17110-9661
Dated this __________ day of ____________________, 1997.
____________________ Roderick Frisk, J.
bas
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
