FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: October 16, 1996 Governor Pataki Submits Interm Welfare Plan to Feds [thinbar.gif] First Step in Renewed Effort to Continue Historic Decline in Welfare Rolls Governor George E. Pataki today submitted New York State's welfare plan to the federal government, the first step in the Governor's continuing efforts to build on the historic decline in the state's welfare rolls by moving more people to work.
"Our efforts to move people from welfare to work, combined with our tough efforts to improve child support enforcement and to weed out welfare cheats with finger imaging and front-end detection programs, has produced real results for taxpayers and welfare recipients alike," Governor Pataki said.
"In less than two years, we have cut the state's welfare rolls by more than 200,000 -- representing a 12 percent decline in the number of New Yorkers trapped by the failed welfare system," the Governor said.
"Despite the progress we have made, welfare remains a way of life for far too many New Yorkers."
"Federal welfare reform gives us the opportunity to build on our record here by providing hope, removing the lure of dependency, eliminating disincentives to work and restoring personal freedom to those trapped in the welfare system's vicious cycle," Governor Pataki said.
"Our reforms will increase child care support so that families can go to work and realize the independence that will allow them to share in New York's renewal," the Governor said.
By submitting the plan to the federal government, New York is eligible for a $2.36 billion in federal funding, the maximum amount the state could receive under federal welfare reform legislation.
The "Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act," signed into law on August 22, requires the state to file its plan no later than July 1, 1997.
Despite the fact that the Federal fiscal year began October 1, the state will not lose any federal aid by filing the plan today, and remains eligible for federal funding equal to the entire block grant amount under the federal welfare legislation.
-more- The plan's submission comes after the Governor's bipartisan Welfare Reform Task Force completed two months of review and analysis of the more than 400-page federal welfare legislation.
It is the next step toward reforming welfare in New York State.
As a result of submitting the plan, two major mandates of the federal welfare reform legislation automatically take effect in New York under the federal block grant: The federal five-year cumulative lifetime limit on welfare assistance to each family and the federal requirement that all recipients participate in a state defined work program after two years on public assistance.
"These federal mandates are consistent with my efforts to help people on welfare break free of the failed system that has discouraged them from working and providing for their families," Governor Pataki said.
While those mandates take effect immediately, the Governor said the state Legislature must make changes to state laws to comply with new federal laws and to assure the uninterrupted receipt of federal funds.
The Governor said he will submit legislation and plan amendments in the next several weeks that will incorporate comprehensive welfare reform, emphasizing the transition of welfare recipients into work and promoting independence.
"I look forward to working with the Legislature to reach bipartisan agreement on meaningful reforms to the welfare system," Governor Pataki said.
"We must act responsibly to ensure that New Yorkers get the full benefit of this historic opportunity."
Governor Pataki said the State will continue to use federal funding to provide Medicaid, temporary assistance and Title XX -- which provides funding for services to individuals and families so that they can remain independent and self-sufficient -- to qualified legal immigrants who arrived in the United States prior to August 22, 1996.
Federal welfare reform made this optional for the states.
Federal welfare reform transforms the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) into a new Temporary Assistance program, which provides states with substantial flexibility in designing a new welfare system.
The major changes included in the Temporary Assistance program are as follows: federal funding is in the form of a block grant instead of an open-ended match; the recipient entitlement to benefits is eliminated and benefits are time-limited; work requirements are strengthened; federal oversight and mandates are greatly diminished; and states have more flexibility in design of the programs.
The State will seek appropriate conforming changes to state law and will file an amended state plan if needed.
The statutory provisions must reflect a program that includes time limits on assistance, a requirement that all parents or caretakers engage in work, the denial of assistance to unwed parents under 18 years of age not participating in educational activities, the denial of assistance for fugitive felons and probation and parole violators and other conforming changes.
The Governor said the comprehensive state welfare reform legislation will reflect the bipartisan state Welfare Reform Task Force analysis of the federal legislation.
The task force, which has been meeting since August 13, includes bipartisan representation from the Governor's administration, Senate, Assembly, New York City and New York State Association of Counties.
The task force has analyzed the federal bill and discussed the array of options that the Governor and Legislature will have to address.
The task force report has identified many changes that must be made for the state to avoid fiscal penalties, including time limits, work requirements, child support enforcement measures, education requirements for teen parents, denial of assistance to fugitive felons and others.
The report also addresses opportunities for giving local governments better tools and greater flexibility in identifying the needs of and providing the necessary assistance to transition individuals into the workforce.
[thinbar.gif]
Return to the Press Releases Return to the Office of the Governor
