CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES IN SOUTH CAROLINA _________________________________________________________________ Deciding where to live in retirement is a major decision in anyone's life, but many people at or near their retirement years find that their once comfortable house no longer affords them the convenience and security they require.
They may have concerns about their future financial and personal security and their physical well-being.
In recent years, many people are finding continuing care retirement communities (CCRCs) an attractive option for retirement living.
Generally, CCRCs are communities which provide a continuum of care for elderly persons.
This continuum of care is sometimes referred to as the levels of care and may include the following:
Independent Living - Residents live independently in their daily activities in their independent living units.
Some services are generally provided to these residents such as housekeeping, meals and laundry service.
Assisted Living - Residents need some assistance with the activities of daily living such as bathing, dressing, eating or taking medications.
Skilled Nursing Care - Residents generally require round-the-clock nursing service in a nursing facility.
In general, this type of community is different from other housing and care options because it offers a long term contract, either express or implied, to provide housing, assistance with daily living and/or nursing care, usually at one location.
This means that the community continues to meet your needs in a relatively familiar setting as you age.
As a resident of a CCRC you can take advantage of a variety of activities and services conveniently located within your community.
The services and activities will vary with the individual CCRC.
CCRCs provide a place where a resident may continue to live in a community with which they are familiar when they need health related services.
These services could be provided at an assisted living or skilled nursing center, when they are available.
Independently living spouses may be able to live on the same campus or the same building, in most instances, and visit their spouses in assisted living or skilled nursing more frequently than if the spouse lived in a facility away from home.
These communities allow the elderly to progress through the later stages of life and health with the peace of mind that they may continue to live among friends and family.
CCRCs, sometimes referred to as life care communities, must be licensed in South Carolina under the South Carolina Continuing Care Retirement Community Act.
The licensing responsibilities lie with the South Carolina Department of Consumer Affairs.
The Act provides some safeguards and mandatory disclosures to all residents, current as well as prospective.
The safeguards include requirements for disclosures in the contracts used by CCRCs, a requirement that the CCRC have audited financial statements and the Department's review of those statements.
Additionally, each CCRC must have a disclosure statement that answers questions about the owners of the CCRC, the management and other information including a description of fees and services.
This disclosure statement must be provided to prospective residents either upon the signing of the contract or before, or upon the transfer of money or property to the CCRC by or on behalf of a prospective resident.
Characteristics in South Carolina
CCRCs in South Carolina are typical of those in other states.
Most CCRCs in South Carolina are owned and operated by nonprofit organizations that are sponsored by or affiliated with a religious organization.
Although they are affiliated with the religious organization, the religious organization does not accept financial or contractual responsibility for the CCRC.
The other CCRCs are either owned by large corporations or small family owned businesses and operate to make a profit.
The CCRCs in South Carolina are located all over the state, from the coast to the mountains in the upstate, in urban, suburban and rural communities.
They range in size from just a few residents to several hundred.
The services and amenities offered range from modest to luxurious.
In South Carolina, the Department of Consumer Affairs licenses the independent living part of these communities.
The Department of Health and Environmental Control licenses the assisted living and skilled nursing care units of the communities.
Agreements/Contracts
The agreements or contracts used by CCRCs differ between CCRCs, generally, based on the health care provided.
The three most common types of health care coverage in the CCRC agreement are listed below.
Extensive agreements include housing, residential services and amenities, and unlimited, specific health related services with little or no substantial increase in periodic (monthly) payments.
Modified agreements include housing, residential services and amenities, and a specific number of long term nursing care days with no substantial increase in periodic (monthly) payments.
After you have used your allocation of nursing care, you are then charged the daily rate for each additional day.
Fee-for-service agreements include housing, residential services and amenities for the fees stated in your agreement.
You also pay for any health related services as you use them, at the current rate, either daily or monthly.
Payment Plans/Fees
Another way continuing care agreements differ is how you pay for the care.
The three general types of payment or fee arrangements are: (1) entry fee and monthly fee, (2) monthly-fee-only or rental, and (3) ownership or equity (condominium, cooperative or membership).
Entry Fee and Monthly Fee.
The entry fee is a one-time, up-front fee that is combined with monthly fees to cover the living unit, services and care items covered in your resident agreement.
Most CCRCs in South Carolina charge an entrance fee.
The entrance fees charged can be minimal to several hundred thousand dollars.
This is the most common type of fee arrangement offered.
The entry fee may or may not be refundable or refundable under certain conditions described below and specified in the mandatory disclosure statement.
Additionally, in South Carolina you have an initial thirty days in which you can cancel the agreement and obtain a full refund less any cost the CCRC has associated with the cancellation.
Non-refundable entry fees become non-refundable to you or your estate after an initial adjustment period.
Refundable on a declining scale entry fees are refundable over a specified period during which the amount refunded is reduced.
The period and amount of the refund are generally specified in the agreement and disclosure statement.
Partially refundable fees are refunded as specified in the agreement and disclosure statement.
Fully refundable - the entire entry fee may be refunded less a fixed charge, as specified in the agreement and disclosure statement.
Monthly Fee Only or Rental.
There is no lump sum entry fee.
The cost of your living unit, services and care are covered in your monthly fee payment.
Sometimes, however, there is a small up-front fee or deposit charged.
Ownership or Equity (Condominium, Cooperative or Membership).
These types of CCRC agreements involve the actual purchase of real estate and/or membership.
The purchase of the real estate can be an expensive undertaking, especially if a large down payment is required.
Additionally, there can be a mortgage associated with the transaction.
The service and health care package is generally separate from the real estate transaction and is covered through monthly fees or assessments.
Questions to Consider
If you are thinking about a CCRC, the following are some questions you might want answered:
Who owns the CCRC? Are the owners financially stable? What are the CCRC's long term plans? Will the CCRC be around to deliver services as long as you need them?
Who manages the CCRC? How long have they been managing it? Are they likely to continue? What is the turnover rate among the staff with whom you will be interacting on a daily basis?
If the CCRC is a condominium, individual housing unit or a co-op, are there any restrictions on selling it?
Is there a waiting list? If so, how long do they estimate it will take for you to be admitted?
What services are you getting for your monthly fee? Are more services available if you need them? At what cost? Is transportation available? At what cost?
How often and for what reasons can the monthly rate increase? Is the increase predictable and is it tied to something like the consumer price index?
Is there a basic entry fee? How much is it and how long do you have to pay it? Is the entrance fee refundable and under what circumstances?
How much care will you get for your monthly fee? What care is available and who chooses the care provider, you or the CCRC? What care is available at additional cost? At what cost? Will it cost extra to use your own doctor?
What happens if you can no longer afford to stay in the CCRC? Are they certified for Medicare and Medicaid?
How are medical emergencies handled? Is a hospital close and what services does it offer?
Will your cost rise if you need assistance with daily living or you need to move to assisted living or skilled nursing care? What if you are a couple and only one of you moves?
What happens if you get Alzheimer's disease? Can the CCRC provide care for you on the premises? If not, where can you obtain the care? Who pays for all of this? If it's you, how much will it cost?
Is there anything that gives the CCRC the right to ask you to leave? If so, what is it, and what happens to the money you paid as an entry fee?
There are always rules for residents, can you live happily with them? Can the CCRC handle your dietary needs and your tastes in food?
Most of the above questions are required to be answered in the CCRC's disclosure statement, discussed above.
The disclosure statement must be furnished to each resident by law in South Carolina.
Things to Remember Before Selecting a CCRC
Do a thorough review of the services, operations and finances of the CCRC you are considering, including a review of their audited financial statements.
Consult an attorney and/or a financial advisor to determine if the CCRC contract is appropriate for your lifestyle and financial situation.
Spend at least one night at the CCRC and fully participate in its activities.
Like any major decision in life, plan ahead.
You should check out CCRCs very thoroughly and, if possible, compare several.
To ensure a place in the CCRC of your choice when you want it, do your research and apply early.
Make sure, however, that the CCRC you choose is right for you since it could cost you a lot if you decide to move.
While at the CCRC visit all the facilities, talk to residents and staff.
Objectively evaluate the services and amenities based on your lifestyle.
For example, if they have a golf course and you do not play golf, then the amenity may not be of value to you.
Share the details of the proposed CCRC contract with someone you know and trust.
They might be able to be more objective than you and assist you in your evaluation.
Back to SCDCA's Home Page
3600 Forest Drive POST OFFICE BOX 5757 COLUMBIA, SC 29250-5757 1-800-922-1594 (803) 734-4182
September 1998 (may be copied or reprinted without permission)
