Skip Office of Secretary Left Hand Navigation and jump to main content.
Click here to go to MyFlorida.com Department of Environmental Protection Banner DEP Logo
Programs
Home | Contact DEP | Search DEP | DEP Site Map Administrative Services Air Beaches Cabinet Affairs Clean Marina Program Coastal 
Quick Topics Agency Information Brownfields Redevelopment Coastal Management Program DEP e-Newsletters Education Emergency Response Employee Directory Environmental Problem Solving Environmental Regulation Commission Everglades Restoration Geographical Information Systems Job Opportunities News Official Notices Projects 
Copyright 
Last Updated: 10/28/03
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: September 26, 2003 CONTACT: Kathalyn Gaither, (850) 245-2112 or Wayne Stevens, (850) 245-2100
Olustee Battlefield State Park Receives Prestigious Award
-- Civil War battle reenactment recognized in national ceremony --
TALLAHASSEE -- The Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park received the prestigious Congressional Black Caucus Veterans Braintrust Award today in a Washington D.C. ceremony.
Park Manager Valinda Subic accepted the award on behalf of the park, its employees and the reenactment participants and spectators that pay tribute to the battle each year.
We are very proud of Valinda and her staff.
They do an exceptional job of managing several significant cultural and historic sites in Florida, said Mike Bullock, director for the Department of Environmental Protections Division of Recreation and Parks .
The Olustee reenactment is a momentous and fascinating heritage event for both Floridians and visitors to our state.
The Congressional Black Caucus Veterans Braintrust Award was established by General Colin Powell in 1990.
The award recognizes outstanding national commitments by African American veterans and promotes further interest in veterans activities.
The Battle of Olustee reenactment is held at the state park each February.
More than 2,300 Civil War reenactors participate in the annual event, many coming from out of state.
The reenactment is based on the furious five-hour battle that led to one of the highest rate of casualties suffered by the Northern troops in the Civil War and features full-scale artillery, military drills and living history demonstrations.
Floridas award winning state parks attract more than 18 million visitors annually.
For more information on the Olustee Battlefield Historic State Park or other state parks, visit www.floridastateparks.org.
- 30 -
