Mailing Date: June 14, 1999 COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE FOR THE PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE, BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT : : : Citation No. 98-1849
v.
: : :
Incident No. W10-183234 LID - 41913
18 
: : : : : : : :
BEFORE: JUDGE SHENKLE THIS ORDER WAS APPEALED TO THE BOARD.
APPEARANCES:
For Bureau of Enforcement: Edward B. McHugh, Esquire
For Licensee: Barry Goldstein, Esquire
ADJUDICATION
BACKGROUND:
On October 22, 1998, the Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement of the Pennsylvania State Police issued this citation to 18 
The citation alleges that Licensee violated §471 of the Liquor Code, 47 P.S. §4-471, and §5513 of the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.
C.S. §5513, on August 19, 1998, by possessing or operating gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitting gambling or lotteries, poolselling and/or bookmaking on the licensed premises.
An evidentiary hearing was held on Thursday, April 15, 1999, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
The parties stipulated to the timely service and receipt of the notice letter and the citation.
FINDINGS OF FACT : 1.
Liquor Enforcement Officer Robert Peterson entered the licensed premises at noon on Wednesday, August 19, 1998, and saw a bartender serving alcoholic beverages to four customers.
He identified himself to the bartender and asked to speak to the owner or manager.
The bartender directed the officer to John C. Brock, who advised the officer that he was the president of the corporation.
The officer then conducted a routine inspection (N.T. 3-5).
2.
The officer saw a video slot machine and a Dodge City brand draw poker machine on the premises.
He inserted a dollar bill in the bill acceptor of the video slot machine and received four credits.
He played one of the credits, but lost.
The officer then manipulated the buttons on the machine, and as a result the three credits remaining were erased immediately (N.T. 6-8).
3.
The officer informed Mr. Brock that he was seizing the machine and used the keys Mr. Brock gave him to open its bottom, in which he found only the one dollar bill he had deposited earlier.
The machine was transported to District Office #1, where it was secured in the receiving room (N.T. 8-9).
4.
There is a button on the inside of the machine which activates a video accounting feature, which displays the number of points in and out and the number of plays used during a certain time period (N.T. 19-20).
5.
Mr. Brock stated to the officer that he did not make payoffs on the machine, but that if a person accumulates enough points they would receive tickets, which could be redeemed for a watch on display at the back of the bar (N.T. 22).
6.
The video slot machine is equipped with a ticket dispenser and a supply of tickets.
The officer does not know how many tickets are needed to obtain a watch (N.T. 28-29).
7.
Once this machine has become operational by the deposit of money, pressing the "bet" button on the left front of the machine reduces the credits by one and highlights a line of the slot machine display on which the player is betting.
A player could choose to bet one, two, or three credits on each spin.
Once the player has determined that he does not want to bet any more credits, he hits the "start" button on the right front of the machine.
The display then begins to roll over in the same manner as a slot machine (N.T. 39-40).
8.
Officer Peterson has no knowledge concerning the number of credits necessary to accumulate in order to obtain any tickets, nor did he know the amount of money necessary to deposit in order to obtain any number of tickets (N.T. 43-44)
DISCUSSION:
Counsel for Licensee argued that the Commonwealth failed in its burden of proof because it did not show the element of a reward necessary to establish that the machine seized was a gambling device.
It is true that the only evidence the machine was actually used for gambling was the admission of Mr. Brock that a sufficient number of points would yield tickets, which could be redeemed for a watch, the value of which was not established.
This might be gambling, if the value of the prize exceeds the amount of money one has to deposit in order to win it; or, it might not be gambling, if the game was rigged in such a way that the customer always loses.
The latter factor was present in Commonwealth v. Irwin, 636 A.2d 1106 (Pa. 1993).
Counsel for the Bureau argued that Irwin was distinguishable because there was no "knock-off" device, and no accounting mechanism, in the machines seized in that case.
Mr. McHugh also argued that the presence of a "double up" feature in the game seized in this case distinguishes it from the devices in Irwin.
In Commonwealth of Pennsylvania v. Two Electronic Poker Game Machines and One Electronic Blackjack Game Machine, 502 Pa. 186; 465 A.2d 973 (1983), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court reviewed the history of cases in which actual gambling is not proven, but the devices in question are alleged to be gambling devices per se because of their characteristics at the time of seizure.
The historical standard held that a machine is a gambling device per se if it can be used for no purpose other than gambling.
The Supreme Court explained: This broad standard must be interpreted to provide a meaningful test for judging a given machine.
If it is to be useful, it cannot mean that the machine could not possibly be used for any activity other than gambling, because almost any machine, including the Electro-Sport, can be used for non-gambling (e.g., pure amusement) purposes.
Instead, the inquiry must be whether the machine is "so intrinsically connected with gambling" as to constitute a gambling device per se. -- 465 A.2d at 977
The Court in Two Electronic Poker Game Machines noted that the determination depends on the characteristics of the machine when read against the three elements necessary to gambling: consideration, a result determined by chance rather than skill, and a reward.
Consideration in the present case is not an issue: the seized machine works only if money is deposited into it.
A result determined by chance is also not an issue.
One could argue that the game of draw poker requires some skill, and it is undeniable that some people are better poker players than others.
The traditional slot machine, however, requires no skill whatsoever.
One can choose whether to bet one, two or three lines of the display, but the odds for each bet are the same; betting additional credits does not increase the odds on any given line.
Reward is the issue in this case, and it may be inferred circumstantially.
The last element -- reward -- is also present in the Electro-Sport machine, despite the fact that the game ostensibly gives only free games to the winner.
Although a free game in and of itself does not constitute a reward, In re Wigton, supra, the awarding of free games by a machine which possesses other characteristics can be taken to constitute a sufficient reward.
We agree with the analysis of Commonwealth Court in 9 Mills Machines, supra:
The ability to knock-off free games, the presence of meters to enable the owner to determine how many games were knocked-off, the ability of a player to hold a part of his previous play over to the next game in order to increase his or her chances of winning a higher pay-off on the next game, and the extremely short playing time involved compels the conclusion that the reward of a free game constitutes a thing of value.
62 Pa.
Commonwealth Ct. at 404, 437 A.2d at 71 (citations omitted).
All of these features are present on the Electro-Sport machine, as well as a "dip switch" which allows the owner to vary the number of game credits per coin.
None of these features is necessary to the functioning of the device as a legitimate profit-making amusement game.
Rather, they provide circumstantial evidence which we believe establishes by a preponderance of the evidence a sufficient reward to meet the third element of the test for a gambling device per se.
-- 465 A.2d at 978
I find that since the machine seized in this case was capable of "knocking off" free games, since the owner had the ability by use of the video accounting mode to determine how many games were knocked off, and since the playing time involved is extremely short, this machine is a gambling device per se.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW :
Licensee violated §471 of the Liquor Code, 47 P.S. §4-471, and §5513 of the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.
C.S. §5513, on August 19, 1998, by possessing a gambling device on the licensed premises.
PRIOR RECORD :
Licensee has been licensed since February 12, 1998, and has had no prior violations.
PENALTY :
Section 471 of the Liquor Code, 47 P.S. §4-471, prescribes a penalty of license suspension or revocation or a fine in the $50.00 to $1,000.00 range, or both, for violations of the type found in this case.
ORDER
THEREFORE, it is hereby ORDERED that Licensee, 18 
TR-2844, pay a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) within 20 days of the mailing date of this order.
In the event the fine is not paid within 20 days, Licensee's license will be suspended or revoked.
The fine must be paid by treasurer's check, cashier's check, certified check or money order.
Personal checks, which includes business-use personal checks, are not acceptable.
Please make your guaranteed check payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and mail to:
PLCB-Office of Administrative Law Judge Brandywine Plaza 2221 Paxton Church Road Harrisburg PA 17110-9661
Dated this 9th day of _ June___, 1999.
____________________ David L. Shenkle, J.
jb
Section 471 of the Liquor Code provides to a licensee who feels aggrieved by the adjudication of the administrative law judge, a right to appeal to the board.
The appeal shall be based on the record before the administrative law judge.
[Section 471 also provides for the board decisions to be appealed to Common Pleas courts.]
THIS ORDER WAS APPEALED TO THE BOARD.
CLICK HERE to view board's decision.
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
