News Release For Immediate Release Friday, April 20, 2001 STATE'S WELFARE FAMILIES SPEAK OUT IN NEW STATEWIDE STUDY (AUSTIN) Thousands of low-income and elderly Texans are voicing their views on the state's delivery of public assistance services in two new statewide studies.
One report was developed by the Survey Research Center at the University of North Texas and involved a confidential survey of more than 7,000 Texans using Food Stamps, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) financial assistance, and various services for residents who are elderly or disabled.
A second study was conducted by Business Resources, an Austin-based research firm, which conducts "mystery shopper" research on government agencies and private companies.
Together, the studies represent the most comprehensive review of customer service provided for two million Texans annually.
The University of North Texas study rated DHS in several areas including clarity of application forms and other written materials, office hours and locations, and staff treatment of applicants.
The Business Resources "mystery shopper" survey sent researchers posing as public assistance applicants to 100 local DHS offices and made phone inquiries to 200 different offices to study the professionalism of staff in responding to public requests for help.
"These studies are the most accurate picture yet of how we're treating poor, elderly, and disabled Texans, and the reports shed light on areas that need improvement.
I also think Texas is on the right track in our recent outreach efforts to needy families," said DHS Commissioner Eric M. Bost.
According to the University of North Texas study, DHS staff scored highest in the convenience of office hours, help in providing clear answers and easy-to-understand written materials, and treating clients with respect.
The survey also indicates the agency could make improvements in providing clients information about the complaint process and speeding up the amount of time taken to answer phone inquiries.
According to the Mystery Shopper survey, DHS scored higher ratings than other government agencies studied by Business Resources in the treatment of the public in a friendly and courteous manner and in providing clear instructions and explaining options for services.
Areas needing improvement include making changes in the automated phone systems used in some DHS field offices.
Survey results also indicate DHS scored similar ratings to banks and insurance companies in responding to the public.
UNIVERSITY OF NORTH TEXAS SURVEY RESULTS
95.5% are satisfied with office hours 92.7% area satisfied with office location 91.2%are treated with respect 89.3% say written materials easy to understand 87.6% say they receive clear answers to questions
MYSTERY SHOPPER SURVEY RATINGS
98.3% for friendliness (by telephone) 95.0% for providing clear instructions (by telephone) 96.8% for treating applicants with dignity and respect (in person) 95.1% for helping applicants in an efficient and orderly manner (in person)
In recent months, DHS has taken several steps to improve the application process.
The actions include: * Simpler Application Form - Based on feedback from clients and advocacy groups, DHS began using a redesigned application form for the Medicaid, Food Stamp and TANF programs in April 2001.
The new form is more readable and Texans just applying for Medicaid only need to complete a portion of the application.
* Cut Verification Requirements - In November 2000, DHS officials eliminated requirements that applicants provide proof of age, past employment and more than two months of recent income to qualify when applying for Medicaid, TANF, and Food Stamps.
Both studies were part of the DHS customer service improvement initiative.
The text of the University of North Texas study is available on the DHS web site at http://www.dhs.state.tx.us/publications/ClientSatisfactionSurvey.pdf.
The full text of the Mystery Shopper report can be found at http://www.dhs.state.tx.us/publications/MysteryShopper.pdf.
###
For more information contact: Michael A. Jones (512) 438-3045
DHS News Releases
