FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: November 13, 1996 Governor Pataki Replaces Welfare With "NY Works" [thinbar.gif] Governor George E. Pataki today released his "NY Works" plan to reform welfare and get participants back to work, transforming the State's failed welfare system into a work program that promotes personal responsibility, independence and ends the cycle of dependency.
"NY Works is an aggressive plan that will transform a system that has trapped far too many New Yorkers, giving them new hope and opportunity, restoring personal dignity and creating a brighter future for families by freeing them of the web of dependency," Governor Pataki said.
"We have already reduced the welfare rolls by nearly 220,000 -- more than any other state in the nation -- by moving more New Yorkers into work and weeding out the welfare cheats who have taken advantage of our compassion," the Governor said.
"These new reforms will build on our successes by putting in place stricter enforcement of child support, tougher anti-fraud measures and increased work programs for the able-bodied.
We will replace welfare with Workfare, Learnfare and Earnfare.
"NY Works provides incentives to seek and retain work, while providing families the help they need -- like more money for day care -- so they can pursue economic freedom," Governor Pataki said.
"We will allow welfare recipients to keep more of the money they earn as they move into the workforce; give them health insurance for one year through Medicaid after they move off welfare; provide counseling for women who have been victims of domestic abuse to break the cycle of violence; and give children a better future by insisting that their parents make sure they stay in school."
The Governor's plan will spend a total of $1.3 billion for child care and employment services.
The plan includes $630 million -- an increase of more than $130 million above last year -- for child care, employment and related support services targeted to welfare participants.
The child care and employment training will help participants transition off welfare and into work.
In addition, the $1.3 billion plan includes more than $700 million -- an increase of $70 million above last year -- for employment services that help keep New Yorkers off the welfare rolls.
This funding will help low-income New Yorkers remain in the workforce.
The plan also will help welfare recipients move into the work force by allowing them to keep more of what they earn.
Currently under the Earned Income Disregard for a family of three, welfare participants are able to keep $667 a month before becoming ineligible for assistance.
As a result of the Governor's plan, participants can earn up to $1,080 a month (the federal poverty level) before losing welfare benefits.
In addition, participants who leave the welfare rolls because of a job will be eligible to remain on Medicaid for up to one year to help with their transition into the workforce and self-sufficiency.
"My plan will replace welfare checks with pay checks," Governor Pataki said.
"New Yorkers have a long tradition of helping those in need.
We will continue that tradition by helping our neediest citizens help themselves by moving them into the work force."
The Governor's plan puts aside $150 million to help ensure that the State can meet future federal work requirements and comply with federal reporting and tracking requirements.
This money can only be used for welfare-related expenses and will be placed in a "NY Works" compliance fund.
The State anticipates receiving the entire federal block grant made available to New York under the federal legislation recently signed by President Clinton, totaling $2.36 billion.
The money comes as a flexible block grant that allows New York to design a program based on getting people back to work.
The block grant rewards the State with a $450 million "bonus" for recent successes in reducing our welfare caseload.
The State and local governments will share the additional funding to provide financial relief and increased levels of funding for support services needed to get participants into jobs, such as day care and job placement.
Governor Pataki's plan will provide New York's counties and New York City with the needed flexibility to develop programs in a way that best meets the needs of their regions.
"We have an historic opportunity to change the failed welfare system by helping NY Works participants find jobs and economic freedom," the Governor said.
"We must return welfare to its original intent: a temporary benefit to help those in need move back into the workforce."
Highlights of the Governor's historic welfare reform legislation follow:
WELFARE REPLACED BY WORKFARE:
Governor Pataki's plan will replace the old welfare system that has failed too many, and will include programs that emphasize work and economic freedom rather than welfare and dependency.
The plan will abolish the old welfare programs and establish work programs in their place.
"NY Works", funded by the federal block grant and State and local dollars, will replace Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC).
The State and locally funded Home Relief Program will be replaced by the Article XVII Safety Net program (Safety Net) and the Temporary Disability Assistance program (TDA).
"These work programs will put significant energies into getting welfare participants out of the cycle of dependency and into the environment of jobs and responsibility," the Governor said.
"Through work, we learn self-reliance, independence and freedom -- qualities we should encourage and foster in all New Yorkers."
The Temporary Disability Assistance program will provide transitional welfare benefits to individuals and families who are not able to work because of a temporary disability, because they are over 60 or because they are caring for a disabled child or adult.
Participants in NY Works, Safety Net and Temporary Disability Assistance will receive medical assistance (Medicaid) and Food Stamps.
NY Works
The changes made by federal welfare reform legislation to the family assistance program, now the NY Works program, are as follows: federal funding is in the form of a block grant instead of an open-ended match; the federal entitlement to benefits is eliminated and benefits are time-limited; work requirements are strengthened; federal oversight and mandates are greatly diminished; and within the framework of a number of statutory restrictions on the use of federal funds, the State role in determining program design is greatly enhanced.
To emphasize the transitional nature of the program, the Governor's plan includes the federal five-year time limit on benefits for the able-bodied.
It also requires able-bodied participants to work.
Incentives to work increase as participants move closer to the five-year limit.
Benefit levels will decline after a participant has received 18 months of benefits.
However, the plan offsets any benefit reductions by expanding the Earned Income Disregard (Earnfare), which rewards work and allows participants to keep more of what they earn.
The plan includes an exemption from the work requirements for the disabled, the elderly and for adults caring for someone with a disability.
These persons will be served under the Temporary Disability Assistance program.
NY Works Benefit Levels
The NY Works maximum benefit, for a family of three, will be retained at $577 per month for the first 18 months, the seventh highest in the nation.
The monthly welfare grant will be consolidated from a disparate set of allowances to a single flat grant similar to flat grants in most other states.
The flat grants will be paid in the form of a monthly pay check.
To emphasize the transitional nature of the NY Works program and its benefits, assistance levels will decline after a participant has been on welfare for more than 18 months, and will continue to decline annually over the final three years of the five-year eligibility period.
The benefits in the NY Works program will decline after the first 18-months by 10 percent.
Subsequently, after the 18-month reduction, benefits decline 5 percent in year two and step-down further by 15 percent annually beginning in year three.
As a result, current benefits in year five will be reduced by 45 percent.
This is designed to underscore that the benefits are transitional and to further show the need for longer term participants to seek and retain employment.
Earnfare
The Governor's plan increases economic work incentives for NY Works participants by expanding the Earned Income Disregard and allowing participants to keep more of what they earn and to collect welfare and Medicaid benefits longer as they transition to the workplace.
By expanding the Earned Income Disregard, the plan rewards work and progress toward self-sufficiency.
Under the current welfare system participants are allowed to earn up to $667 before becoming ineligible for public assistance.
Governor Pataki's plan will enable participants to earn up to $1080 (the federal poverty level) and also allows them to remain on Medicaid for one year after their earnings supply most of their income.
Participants will receive Medicaid benefits and necessary job-related services, such as child care, for a longer period of time, assuring that when they get off welfare they stay off.
Although the federal welfare reform legislation eliminates federal funding for the child support pass through and disregard, Governor Pataki's plan will continue State and local support for the progra.
Article XVII Safety Net Assistance program:
Home Relief, a State and locally-funded program, which provides benefits to mostly employable single adults and childless couples, as well as to persons with temporary disabilities that prevent work, will be replaced by the Article XVII Safety Net program (Safety Net) and the Temporary Disability Assistance Program.
"The Safety Net program will help meet the participants' individual needs rather than just handing someone money," the Governor said.
"Counties will have the flexibility to develop and implement plans that can best help their welfare participants transition off welfare and enter the workforce.
We are replacing the counterfeit compassion of the failed system with a real hand up."
The Article XVII Safety Net Program will not provide cash payments to participants.
The program provides in-kind or voucher assistance to destitute single adults, families that have exhausted their five-year limit on t he NY Works program, those who are affected by the family payment cap, and aliens who no longer are eligible for federal assistance.
Able-bodied single adults and childless couples, formerly on Home Relief, will no longer receive a cash benefit.
The cash benefits are replaced with vouchers, food, shelter, and medical assistance.
Safety Net services may include any of the following: in-kind assistance a nd referrals; direct vendor payments or vouchers; contracts with non-profit or for-profit agencies for specific services or overall program administration and use of existing county and State facilities.
Further, those Safety Net participants who are deemed employable will be required to immediately engage in workfare or other work activities.
In addition, the Article XVII Safety Net program, which will be funded at $1.2 billion, has no time limits on benefits and is designed to meet the State's constitutional obligation to provide for the needy and to cover emergencies of destitute persons.
Services available will be tightly defined.
Temporary Disability Assistance program (TDA):
The Temporary Disability Assistance (TDA) program retains benefits at current levels and will cover individuals and families with temporary disabilities, mental or physical, which prevent the recipient from working.
Unlike the NY Works and Safety Net programs, families or individuals in the TDA program will not be subject to benefit reductions and these participants will not be able to work because of their disability.
In addition, the program will cover adults age 60 through 64 (persons 65 and over are eligible for SSI), persons awaiting an eligibility determination for federal SSI benefits and caretakers of disabled dependents.
The Temporary Disability Assistance program will serve HIV infected persons if they are deemed unable to work because of their illness.
FUNDING FOR SUPPORT SERVICES ARE INCREASED:
Federal, State and local funding for child care and job training programs will total more than $1.3 billion, an increase of $180 million over last year's level.
This funding will allow the family head of household to work.
The funding will also help participants and low-income New Yorkers transition off and remain off welfare.
The Governor's plan will spend $630 million, an increase of almost $130 million above last year, for child care, job training and related support services.
The plan includes $383 million for child care slots needed to meet work participation requirements, and nearly $225 million in direct welfare employment related services.
This funding along with the $20 million transfer to the Title XX program will help welfare participants transition off the welfare rolls, become more independent and realize economic freedom.
The funding will go to counties to help counter reductions made in the Title XX program by the federal government.
This program provides support services such as child care for low-income New Yorkers, which helps keep them off the welfare rolls.
Further, the State will spend more than $700 million for the employment and training programs, including JTPA, directed to low-income New Yorkers.
This is an increase of about $70 million above last year's level and will provide for programs that help low-income New Yorkers remain in the workforce and off welfare.
PUTTING PEOPLE FIRST:
Consistent with Governor Pataki's recent welfare successes, which required participants to work, his plan includes the federal mandate that states meet certain work participation goals.
"Our aggressive approach to engage able-bodied participants in work has paid dividends," the Governor said.
"More than 50,000 participants are currently in work activities and thousands more are in work-related activities that can be modified, with minimal cost to the state, to meet federal requirements."
Consequently, the State estimates that only 17,000 additional participants need to be placed in order for the state to meet its first year work goals.
The State is already more than 70 percent of the way to reaching the first year federal participation requirement.
Work Requirements:
NY Works program
The Federal legislation requires states to engage 25 percent of their total caseload in work or work activities by September 30, 1997.
The State is already 70 percent of the way toward reaching that goal.
The Federal requirements increase incrementally to 50 percent in FFY 2002.
Those states that do not meet the federal laws could be sanctioned and penalized by losing hundreds of millions of dollars.
The Governor's plan, consistent with the federal welfare legislation, also requires welfare participants to work as soon as they are determined ready to do so but no later than two years after receiving benefits.
Participants must accept a job immediately if one is offered to them.
Participants will also be required to engage in community service activities in locally designed programs, after two months of receiving benefits.
Participation requirements are similar to those for NY Works.
Article XVII Safety Net program
Able-bodied participants will be required to work.
Availability of Jobs:
Over the past two years under Governor Pataki's leadership New York State has created more than 120,000 private sector jobs.
The Governor's successful policies of cutting taxes and controlling spending will continue to create private sector jobs in 1997.
This past summer New York State had 8 million jobs, the most since 1990.
Moreover, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that hundreds of thousands of job openings will be available in 1997 to be filled.
Many of these jobs are entry level positions and will provide earnings and the necessary work experience needed to rid participants of the crutch of the welfare system.
Accordingly, local districts will be working with the private sector in a combined effort to place welfare participants in jobs.
For example, counties can provide private businesses with grant diversions, which divert a portion of participants' grants then to supplant their salaries.
These provisions along with local workfare programs will make participants more attractive to the private sector and in turn participants will be afforded job training and job skills experience.
LOCAL FLEXIBILITY:
The current welfare system's one-size-fits-all approach has provided inadequate incentives and too few opportunities for welfare participants to transition from welfare to work.
The Governor's plan will allow individual districts to implement programs that provide those opportunities in the way that best benefits each community.
New York's counties and New York City will be given significant flexibility to run their programs, resulting in less red tape and a much more efficient and community needs-based system saving on costs and giving local districts additional resources that can be reinvested into support services.
The State and New York's counties will be advantaged by federal "bonus" money resulting from New York's recent success in reducing welfare caseloads.
Projected State savings for 1997-98 from the new reforms total $105 million, while local districts will save an equal amount.
These savings are in addition to increased district funding for support services such as child care and job training.
State and local governments working together will ensure that programs implemented at the local level meet all federally required family assistance performance standards, such as work participation and compliance with child support enforcement.
FRAUD PREVENTION:
The plan will enhance anti-fraud provisions already enacted by Governor Pataki last year and include additional initiatives that will build on those successful laws and help prevent welfare cheats from stealing taxpayer money.
The following is a list of common sense proposals:
Finger Imaging expanded: To help the State catch welfare cheats who are receiving benefits in other states, finger imaging will be expanded enabling the state to share data with other states.
Drug Testing: The legislation will require local districts to conduct drug tests on applicants for welfare and on participants when they are recertified.
Participants who test positive may lose their benefits.
Eliminate Benefits for Felons: Consistent with the Governor's philosophy that acts against society should be punished and not rewarded, the State plan will eliminate welfare benefits for any participant who is convicted of a felony (drug related or otherwise) and who fails to comply with probation or parole requirements.
Fugitive Felons: The plan will deny benefits to fugitive felons.
STRENGTHENING FAMILIES:
Welfare has had many ill-effects on society; many of society's problems can be traced back to the failed welfare system.
For example, out-of-wedlock births have escalated to over 100,000 annually in New York State with too many babies having babies.
"It is imperative that our young people are taught to be independent and productive citizens," the Governor said.
"That begins by introducing them to the environment of work and responsibility where they can learn about economic freedom and self-reliance."
Further, the problems of domestic violence and deadbeat parents also have caused more women with children to end up on welfare and have made it difficult for them to re-enter the workforce.
"We must address the problem of out-of-wedlock births by encouraging young people to become more responsible," the Governor said.
"Too many of our young people end up trapped in the welfare system, leading them to a life of dependency and lowered expectations."
Highlights of the Family strengthening policies are as follows:
Child Care: The Governor's plan will provide more than $383 million in child care funding, an increase of almost $55 million.
This funding will help place children in child care and allow the family head of household to seek and retain work.
Family Payment Cap: The Governor's welfare reform eliminates this provision and will no longer provide increased benefits for additional children.
Consistent with working families who would not receive a salary increase from their employer upon the birth of a child, the welfare system should reflect the same reality.
Child Support Enforcement:
To make sure that deadbeats pay their fair share the plan calls for stricter enforcement of child support.
New tools will be available to establish paternity for children born out-of-wedlock, establish support orders and aggressively enforce child support obligations.
11
The plan suspends drivers licenses, occupational, professional and recreational licenses for parents who do not show up for paternity and support order establishment proceedings.
This cooperation requirement is in addition to current law which already suspends driver's licenses, professional and occupational licenses to suspension for deadbeats who don't pay child support.
Local child support staff will have a more active role in soliciting child support information from participants and can reduce welfare benefits if a participant refuses to cooperate;
Local offices will order genetic testing, subpoena information and access relevant client information from other State, Federal and local agencies as necessary to make deadbeat parents pay their legal obligations.
Educational Requirement: The plan will require that teen parents work toward a high school diploma.
Living with a Responsible Parent: The plan requires that unmarried teen parents live with a responsible adult in order to receive assistance.
Learnfare: The State will expand the Learnfare program that requires children to stay in school in order to receive public assistance.
Domestic Violence: The Governor's plan will give social service districts the authority to screen participants to determine if there is a history of domestic violence, in order for the state to provide support services for the victims and potentially waive some program requirements.
Out-of-Wedlock-Births: The Governor is setting up a Task Force on out-of-wedlock pregnancies and poverty.
His Executive Order directs the new task force to address the more than 100,000 out-of-wedlock-birth s in New York State.
The Task Force will develop a statewide plan aimed at reducing the amount of out-of-wedlock births, putting the emphasis on abstinence, personal responsibility and the consequences that result from irresponsible behavior.
12 THE STATE WILL NO LONGER BE A WELFARE MAGNET:
New York State has the highest welfare benefits in the nation.
While other states are reforming their state welfare system in conformance with the federal legislation, implementing time limits and work requirements, it is imperative that New York address the same issues.
The longer New York continues under the old welfare system, and the longer New York maintains the seventh highest benefit levels in the nation, the state becomes a welfare magnet for recipients from other states who have refused to meet work requirements and are looking for a free ride on the taxpayers.
Participants from Other States: To ensure New York does not become a magnet for welfare participants from other states, the Governor's legislation will limit new State residents to the benefit level of their former state for 12 months.
FOOD STAMPS:
The Federal legislation on the federal Food Stamp program, requires participants to engage in work or work activities in more than 33 months out of 36 months.
The plan affects mostly single adults between the ages of 18 and 50.
Governor Pataki has directed State officials to apply for a federal Food Stamp Waiver, the waiver will exempt food stamp participants from the work requirements who live in an area that has at least 10 percent unemployment.
The waiver will allow participants when they live in these high unemployment areas to continue receiving benefits when they are not able to find work for longer than three months.
LEGAL NON-CITIZENS:
Governor Pataki has chosen to exercise his option under federal law to provide benefits to qualified legal aliens who arrived in the state prior to August 22, 1996.
They will continue to be eligible for Medicaid, Family Assistance from the NY-Works program and Title XX -- which provides funding for services to individuals and families so that they can remain independent and self-sufficient.
The federal welfare legislation made benefits to such non-citizens optional for states.
13 Recent federal legislation prohibits state s from providing federal assistance for legal aliens who come to the U.S. subsequent to the signing of the federal welfare legislation including family assistance, Medicaid, SSI and food stamp benefits.
Governor Pataki said that New York will actively lobby Washington to make sure the federal government which is entirely responsible for immigration policy and control, meets its responsibility for caring for all legal aliens.
The Governor will lobby Washington to:
Restore SSI and food stamps to lawfully present non-citizens, in particular to those resident prior to the federal legislation enactment date August 22, 1996.
Restore full Medicaid coverage at state option to all lawfully present non-citizens.
Allow TANF and Title XX coverage at state option for all lawfully present non-citizens.
Restore state and local discretion for provisions of non-federal services t o their residents, whether citizen of non-citizen.
In the meantime, the Governor's plan provides Safety Net services for all legal aliens in need.
LEGISLATIVE ACTION:
Governor Pataki asked that the State Legislature to act quickly to reform the welfare system.
"The time has come to put aside the rhetoric and take bold action to free our people from welfare's web of dependency," the Governor said.
"We must act promptly and responsibly so all New Yorkers can realize economic freedom.
"I urge the Legislature to act in a timely manner to pass this historic legislation," Governor Pataki said.
"We must act with a bi-partisan effort by following the example set in Washington, where President Clinton and the Republican Congress found common ground to end welfare as we know it.
We have an obligation to the taxpayers and the welfare recipients to act in the same responsible manner."
14 Governor Pataki said the legislature should act expeditiously because the sooner the system is reformed the sooner participants become self-sufficient and realize economic freedom.
The public is demanding that the failed welfare system be reformed into one that promotes work, responsibility and independence.
The Governor has already provided the Legislature extensive briefings and information, through the Welfare Reform Task Force, related to options in the federal welfare legislation.
Leaders of both houses, majority and minority, had representatives on the state's Welfare Reform Task Force.
"For two months, State and local officials reviewed and analyzed the federal welfare legislation.
This was done to ensure that the decisions we make today to reform welfare have been well-thought-out and informed," said the Governor.
"The time has come to act."
Federal block grant funding will be disbursed to New York State after the federal Department of Health and Human Services cites the State plan, which was submitted October 16, as complete.
A 45-day public comment period must elapse before the State's plan can be found complete.
[thinbar.gif]
Return to the Press Releases Return to the Office of the Governor
