[cap_winter.jpg] News Release State Senator Mee Moua District 67 235 State Capitol 75 Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Blvd.
St. Paul, MN 55155-1606 Telephone (651) 296-5285 sen.mee.moua@senate.mn Date: January 22, 2003
Sen. Moua Looks at Issues Facing Hmong
As the only Hmong senator in Minnesota, I am often looked to for guidance and leadership about issues relevant to the Asian community, especially Hmong people.
I am pleased to have been invited to write a monthly column for the Hmong Times, addressing issues of concern to the Hmong community.
As we begin the 2003 Legislative Session, one issue stands out in the minds of most legislators: The state budget deficit.
In short, the state doesnt have enough money--$356 million specifically--to serve the state through this June.
If no money can be found, most state services would stop functioning.
If no money can be found, Minnesota would be a very difficult place to live.
So, how will this affect the Hmong community?
Governor Tim Pawlenty, the Republican-controlled House of Representatives and the Democrat-controlled Senate all have similar answerscut some services and use extra money from other programsbut each offer different ways to do it.
For example, the Governor has found $468 million by cutting some services, such as grants for Women, Infants and Children Nutrition programs, and taking unspent money from other programs, such as early childhood education.
You will hear in the news that the Governor has found the $356 million and will put the remaining $112 million into a savings account for the state in case emergencies come up between now and June 30, 2003.
In the Senate, we understand that we also need to find $356 million for the budget.
Like the Governor, we found money by cutting some programs and taking unspent money from other programs.
But because we want to protect services like nutrition for women, infants and children, grants for first-time homeowners, and legal services for low-income people, we have decided to use $384 million for the deficit, and put only $24 million into savings.
You may also hear in the news that the Senate did not cut enough programs so the state can have a bigger short-term emergency savings account.
The Senate believes that we need to take a more cautionary approach, without making any long-term policy changes, at least for the time being.
The Republican-controlled House has not yet passed their proposal on how to deal with the short term deficit.
Starting in February, the legislature will have to start looking at how to cut or reduce state services and programs so the state can save $4.2 billion.
The main reason we need to cut costs is because the Governor and the House Republicans have decided that the state will not raise taxes.
Imagine losing your job and not being able to pay your expenses.
The state wont allow you to get a job either, and is actually telling you to just not buy food for your family.
Every citizen across the state will feel the pain, including several funding areas which are critical to the Hmong community.
For example:
Services for EnglishLanguage Learners.
The state is a primary provider of services for people for whom English is a second language.
For example, hunting and fishing informationfrom firearm safety to fishing regulationsare translated to Hmong.
Health insurance documents are translated to Hmong.
These will be easy targets for cuts by the House Republicans and the Governor.
Education.
While cuts that directly affect the classroom will be avoided at all costs, non-traditional education programs like adult basic education and community education classes will likely be cut.
Housing.
The state offers many programs for home owners, such as low-interest loans for purchase or repairs, and you should expect these to be cut or eliminated.
Additionally, if state funding to cities is cut, cities may have to raise your property taxes and charge you fees for such services as street cleaning and road repair.
Of course, these are just a few of the many areas I expect to see cut.
With that said, I will be monitoring the services and programs important to you, and will do my best to minimize the cuts.
As the legislative session progresses, your input is needed more than ever.
I would urge you to contact Governor Tim Pawlenty at 651-296-3391 and let him know what issues are important to you.
We are all going to have to share the challenge facing us, but that means Hmong people shouldnt feel the pain more than others.
