Alaska Division of Elections [rwbline.gif] New definition of "political party" generates innovative computer programming and identifies need for further statutory definition Excerpt from Volume 1, No. 3 - November, 1997 Election News Newsletter Virginia Breeze, Editor
[rwbline.gif]
In the good old days the Division of Elections kept track of voters political party affiliations by listing those groups that didnt qualify as recognized parties in a category called "other."
Thats where we placed "Mickey Mouse," for instance, whenever voters said Mickey was their party choice.
We can no longer do this.
An amendment to the law defining political parties, passed earlier this year by the state legislature, requires us to track voters who register under any "political" group.
If that group attracts a particular number of voters, it becomes an officially recognized political party.
The other "original" way (still part of the law) for a political group to become recognized as a party is to field a candidate for governor who receives three percent of the votes cast for candidates for that office.
The division is now tracking the following groups listed under party affiliation on voter registration forms, and more affiliations are arriving regularly: American, Communist, Moderate, Reform, Populist, Independent, White, Unitarian, Libertarian, Republican Moderate, Indigenous Peoples, Taxpayers, Natural Law, Anarchist, We The People, Alaska Native Liberation Front, Fence, No Road and Christian.
Since we track by alphabetical code, weve almost run out of letters.
When that happens well list the groups by double letters (e.g., AA, BB).
We need several letters for parties already recognized, e.g., A for Alaskan Independence Party and G for Green Party.
And we use N for Non-Partisan (not affiliated with any particular party) and U for Undeclared (may or may not be affiliated with a party or group).
The amendment to the law also generates a question, which is how to determine if voters offering such party affiliations as "Fence" truly represent an organized group.
The law doesnt help us in this regard because such "groups" are not required to file a letter of intent once they become organized for the purpose of being recognized as parties.
What would help is a simple amendment to the law stating just that.
We then wouldnt have to track non-serious entries, and once the magic number of 6,403 (i.e., three percent of those voting for governor in the last general election) is reached, the transition of newly-recognized parties to the fold would proceed smoothly.
Before last August, when the amendment to the law went into effect, voters who registered their party affiliation as something other than a recognized political party were, as we stated earlier, simply classified as "other" in voter registration computer files.
Recognized political parties currently include Alaskan Independence, Democratic, Green and Republican.
Voters who register as non-partisan or undeclared are classified in categories, not as members of a party.
But voters who signed up as belonging to "other" parties went into a single file.
Thus, people who said they were Libertarians, or belonged to the Taxpayers or Natural Law parties were all lumped together because none of these parties candidates had received three percent of the total votes cast for governor.
Last July there were approximately 5,000 "other party" registered voters in this file.
(Editors Note: The Libertarian and Reform Parties already have limited political party status in Alaska, meaning they currently exist only for the purpose of selecting candidates for electors for president and vice president of the United States.)
[rwbline.gif]
[back.gif] Election News Index [back.gif]
[rwbline.gif]
