State of New York Office of the State Comptroller Division of Management Audit and State Financial Services THE BROOKLYN PUBLIC LIBRARY DELIVERY OF SERVICES AND SELECTED FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REPORT 97-N-12 H. Carl McCall Comptroller
State of New York Office of the State Comptroller Division of Management Audit and State Financial Services Report 97-N-12 Ms. Marsha Steinhardt President Board of Trustees The Brooklyn Public Library Grand Army Plaza Brooklyn, New York 11238 Mr. Carl T. Hayden Chancellor The University of the State of New York State Education Department of New York Albany, New York 12234 Dear Ms. Steinhardt and Mr. Hayden: The following is our report addressing the delivery of services and selected management practices by the Brooklyn Public Library.
We did this audit according to the State Comptroller's authority as set forth in Article X, Section 5 of the State Constitution, and Article II, Section 8 of the State Finance Law.
We list major contributors to this report in Appendix A.
May 10, 1999
OSC Management Audit reports can be accessed via the OSC Web Page : http://www.osc.state.ny.us.
If you wish your name to be deleted from our mailing list or if your address has changed, contact the Management Audit Group at (518) 474-3271 or at the Office of the State Comptroller, Alfred E. Smith State Office Building, 13th Floor, Albany, NY 12236.
Executive Summary The Brooklyn Public Library Delivery of Services and Selected Financial Management Practices Scope of the Audit Founded in 1897, the Brooklyn Public Library (BPL or Library) system includes a Central Library, a Business Library, and 58 branch libraries.
The Library is a not-for-profit corporation that is supported by Federal, New York State (State) and New York City (City) appropriations, as well as funds from private sources.
The Library serves the 2.4 million residents of the Borough of Brooklyn.
Its mission is to ensure the "preservation and transmission of society's knowledge, history and culture, and to provide the people of Brooklyn with free and open access to information for education, reference, and recreation."
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 1997, BPL received about $60 million in funding from various sources, including nearly $7.1 million in State aid.
Our audit reviewed the Brooklyn Public Library's delivery of library services and selected financial practices from July 1, 1995 through February 28, 1998, and addressed the following questions: ! Is the Library delivering services to Brooklyn residents according to its mission, and according to guidelines established by the State Education Department (SED)? Has the Library established and implemented internal controls that provide adequate protection of its assets?
!
Audit Observations and Conclusions
To determine the minimum number of hours that libraries should be open, SED has standards based on the population of the geographic service area.
However, these standards apply to the Central library, not to the individual branches located throughout the Borough.
We believe that to enhance service delivery to the communities in which library branches are located, BPL management should consider, along with the population of the branch's geographic service area, the rate of usage by that population.
Also, BPL should use usage statistics to identify branch libraries that appear to be underutilized and consider ways to increase the usage of those branches by the communities they serve.
(See pp. 5-8) BPL follows the weeding policy of the American Library Association, which states that certain materials should be removed from the shelves once they reach a certain age.
We found that 22 percent of the books we selected judgmentally at BPL were outdated.
(See pp. 9-10)
The Connecting Libraries and School Project (CLASP) is designed to encourage children to read and to make the fullest possible use of their neighborhood libraries.
Although BPL had defined specific objectives of CLASP in terms of the number of students to be served, it did not meet them during the period reviewed in our audit.
For the future, BPL management should establish uniform procedures that will ensure the efficient and effective use of the funds it allocates to CLASP activities.
(See pp. 13-14) We visited several branches and the Central Library and found that BPL security systems were not effective in protecting the Library from the loss of its materials.
In addition, we found that staff do not routinely magnetically-sensitize popular materials, which are usually multi-media items such as videotapes and audiotapes.
At both the branches and the Central Library, we also noted that audio cassettes were left unprotected, making it possible for patrons to walk out with them undeterred.
(See pp. 15-17) We also determined that there was a high risk that the BPL was losing a significant portion of its loan and reference materials due, at least in part, to the control weaknesses we identified.
We judgmentally selected 151 books from 5 branches to determine if the books were on the shelves or could otherwise be accounted for.
Although library staff assisted us in our search for the books we selected, 54 (36 percent) of those books could not be accounted for.
(See pp. 16-17) The State Education Department (SED) is authorized to oversee the funds it provides to the Library and to ensure that they are used for their intended purposes.
However, SED has never reviewed BPL's actual expenditures of the funds provided.
(See pp. 19-22)
Comments of Brooklyn Public Library and State Education Department Officials
Brooklyn they have to them.
loaned to
Public Library officials responded to a draft of this report that taken actions pertaining to the recommendations we addressed These actions include improving controls over materials that are the public.
State Education Department officials advised us that they will take actions to improve monitoring of library operations by developing a reporting process to track the results of field visits to institutions under the Division of Library Development's scope of responsibility.
Contents Introduction Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology Internal Control and Compliance Summary Comments of Brooklyn Public Library and ... ... ...
SED .....
.....
.....
Officials ....
....
.... ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 1 3 3
Branch Library Hours Shelf Life of Library Collections New Technology Initiative Program Connecting Libraries and School Project Controls over Library Materials State Education Department Oversight Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C
Establishment of Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5 Evening Hours . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 ..........................................9 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13 Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
Library Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15 Books Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
Major Contributors to This Report Comments of Brooklyn Public Library Officials Comments of State Education Department Officials
Introduction Background Founded in 1897, the Brooklyn Public Library (BPL or Library) system includes a Central Library, a Business Library, a foundation, and 58 branch libraries.
The Library is a not-for-profit corporation that is supported by Federal, New York State (State) and New York City (City) appropriations.
Also, BPL uses its foundation to obtain funds from private sources.
The Library serves the 2.4 million residents of the Borough of Brooklyn.
Its mission is to ensure the "preservation and transmission of society's knowledge, history and culture, and to provide the people of Brooklyn with free and open access to information for education, reference, and recreation."
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 1997, it received nearly $48.7 million in funding from the City; about $7.1 million in State aid; slightly more than $3 million in other receipts, including interest, fines, and fees; and about $350,000 in Federal aid.
This audit was done concurrently with similar audits of the Queens Borough Public Library and the New York Public Library, which operate separately and independently from the Brooklyn Public Library.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
The audit scope included a review of the Brooklyn Public Library's delivery of library services and selected financial practices from July 1, 1995 through February 28, 1998.
The audit objectives were to determine whether the Library was delivering services to Brooklyn residents according to its mission statement, as well as guidelines established by the State Education Department (SED).
We also sought to determine whether the Library has implemented controls and procedures that will provide adequate protection of its assets and whether it has kept pace with today's ever-expanding technology.
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed appropriate Library staff; reviewed BPL's policies and procedures for the circulation of books and other library materials to determine whether those policies were in compliance with SED guidelines; and tested the Library's compliance with its own policies and procedures.
We also conducted tests to evaluate the adequacy of the Library's internal controls that are intended to safeguard its assets.
We reviewed the Library's educational and recreational programs to determine whether program goals were being met, and analyzed the service hours of the various branches to evaluate their compatibility with the needs of the populations they were intended to serve.
In addition, we tested the Library's compliance with State laws and regulations governing the use of State aid to library systems, and sought to determine whether the Library had established and implemented
certain financial management practices in areas such as contract awards and procurement activities.
We identified no reportable weaknesses in BPL's use of State aid or in BPL's contracting and procurement processes.
We requested SED's legal interpretation as to its oversight authority to audit BPL and BPL's foundation expenditures of funds from nongovernmental sources, such as fines and fees and donations from the public.
SED informed us that it has no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate BPL's foundation, but as of the date of this report, we have not received SED's legal interpretation as to whether its oversight authority allows it to audit BPL expenditures of funds received from nongovernmental sources, such as fees and donations from the public.
For the year ended June 30, 1997, BPL received over $5.7 million of such funds.
We did not review the BPL or the BPL's foundation's expenditures of these funds, and they are not subject to audit by other government agencies with oversight responsibilities such as the City Comptroller's Office or the State Attorney General's Office.
Moreover, these funds are not considered by the City when funding the BPL's operating budget.
Since a portion of the funds obtained by the Library had been spent, in effect, without restriction or oversight, we could come to no conclusions about whether that portion had been spent appropriately.
We did our audit according to generally accepted government auditing standards.
Such standards require that we plan and do our audit to adequately assess BPL operations included in our audit scope.
Further, these standards require that we understand BPL's internal control structure and its compliance with those laws, rules and regulations that govern the operations included in our audit scope.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting transactions recorded in the accounting and operating records and applying other auditing procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances.
An audit also includes assessing management's estimates, judgments, and decisions.
We believe, except for the expenditure of nongovernmental funds, our audit provides a reasonable basis for our findings, conclusions and recommendations.
We use a risk-based approach when selecting activities to audit.
This approach focuses our audit efforts on those operations identified through a preliminary survey as having the greatest chance for needing improvement.
So, by design, we use our finite audit resources to identify where and how to make improvements.
Thus, we devote little audit effort to reviewing operations that may be efficient or effective.
As a result, our audit reports are prepared on an "exception basis."
This report, therefore, highlights those areas needing improvement and does not address in detail those activities that may be functioning properly.
2
Internal Control and Compliance Summary
Our consideration of BPL's internal control structure identified significant weaknesses in procedures used to safeguard books and other libraryrelated materials.
These are discussed in the section of this report entitled "Controls Over Library Materials."
We also identified a need for stronger oversight of BPL's operations by the State Education Department.
This matter is discussed in the section of this report entitled "State Education Department Oversight."
We provided draft copies of this report to officials of the Brooklyn Public Library and the State Education Department for their review and formal comment.
We have considered their comments in preparing this report and have included them as Appendices B and C.
In their responses, both Brooklyn Public Library and State Education Department officials indicated they have already taken actions to implement most of our recommendations.
Within 90 days after final release of this report, we request that the President of the Board of Trustees of the Brooklyn Public Library and the New York State Commissioner of Education to report to the Governor, the State Comptroller, and leaders of the Legislature and fiscal committees of the State of New York, advising what steps were taken to implement the recommendations contained herein, and where recommendations were not implemented, the reasons therefor.
Comments of Library and SED Officials
3
4
Branch Library Hours To determine the minimum number of hours that libraries should be open, SED has standards based on the population of the geographic service area.
However, these standards apply to the Central library, not to the individual branches located throughout the Borough.
We believe that to enhance service delivery to the communities in which library branches are located, BPL management should consider, along with the population of the branch's geographic service area, the rate of usage by that population, as evidenced by the volume of book-lending traffic (the total number of books borrowed) or the number of people visiting the branch.
However, we found that management has not established or considered such factors in determining the number of hours its branch libraries should stay open.
Instead, w e found that the Library decided to have nearly all branches open for relatively the same number of hours.
In the face of budget constraints, this has meant that some low-usage branches have been allocated more hours - more than necessary based on their usage statistics --while hours at other more-heavily used branches have not been increased.
Establishment of Hours
BPL's Chief of Branch Administration told us that it tries to have all branches open for an equal number of hours so that all residents of Brooklyn will have equal access.
Accordingly, each branch is open until 8 p.m. at least one evening each week.
Officials advised that evening hours are staggered between branches near each other, so that if one branch is open late, for example, on Monday evening, another nearby branch will be open late on a different evening.
However, in setting the branch libraries' operating hours, we found that management has not considered statistics already available about usage indicators.
In addition, Library officials said they do not poll residents of their service areas to determine when and where their prospective patrons use library services now and how their behavior would change in the future if the facilities' policies regarding hours, etc., were different.
Our review of the hours of operation for the BPL's 58 branch libraries showed that all of the branches' current scheduled hours are basically meeting management's criteria.
They are open, on average, 39.6 hours per week, on schedules that range from 37 hours for 14 branches to 45 hours at one branch.
More than half of the branch libraries (30) are open 40 hours a week.
Library officials did not formally consider use indicators to help develop schedules at the branches.
For several branches, the schedules contravene
5
some of the usage indicators.
We considered two major usage categories when we analyzed the libraries' schedules: the number of books borrowed ("total circulation") and the amount of "in-Library use of materials."
We found that three branch libraries (Borough Park, Highlawn, and Ryder), each of which has a total circulation of more than 300,000, are open fewer than 40 hours per week; while 29 of the 30 branches that are open 40 hours a week have a total circulation of less than 300,000.
Fourteen of these 29 have a total circulation of less than 100,000; the circulation of one is as low as 27,800.
In the category "in-Library use of materials," just 2 of the 30 branches that are open 40 hours a week show a higher rate of usage than the 3 busiest libraries.
BPL officials told us that basing hours of operation solely on usage patterns would likely result in reductions of service in communities with lower than average rates of use.
Officials said these branches are, for the most part, in communities that historically receive fewer City services.
They emphasized their commitment to serve these communities adequately and that such commitment requires equal amounts of service.
The desire of BPL officials' to keep most branches open for 40 or more hours a week is commendable, and we do not suggest that management base hours of operation solely on use statistics.
A number of factors impact scheduling policy, and all branches need to be open for a certain minimum number of hours regardless of use volume.
Nonetheless, since the Library has limited resources to allocate among its branches, an hour that is allotted to a low volume branch is an hour that is taken away from a branch that could be used by more Brooklyn residents.
In addition, SED has established standards for the scheduled minimum number of hours libraries should be opened per week.
These standards are based on population and took effect January 1, 1999.
Consequently, we believe that BPL management should reconsider its policy for scheduling the hours that branch libraries are open, and should formally consider use indicators as well as the SED standards, when establishing the hours that the branches will be open.
Subsequent to our field work, BPL officials informed us that they had made several revisions to the schedules of several branches.
Specifically, Saturday services were established at the Borough Park branch, adding seven hours, and at the Ryder branch, adding three more hours.
Three hours of Saturday services were added at 10 other branch libraries as well.
Evening Hours
According to BPL officials, branches should be open during the evening to accommodate patrons who cannot take advantage of library services
6
during the day, and branches located near each other should be open late on different evenings.
Although Library personnel told us that two branches close to one another are open late on different week nights, we found this is not always the case.
Our review of the branches' evening hours indicated that, in at least three groupings of libraries in close proximity to one another, the branches are open until 8 p.m. on the same night.
For example: ! ! ! The Brownsville, Stone Avenue, and Saratoga branches are located near each other, and are all open late only on Tuesday evenings.
Carroll Gardens and its nearest neighboring branch, Red Hook, are both open late on Wednesday evenings.
Coney Island and Brighton Beach, the only two branches in the Brighton Beach area, located in the southernmost part of Brooklyn, are both open late only on Tuesday evenings.
Library officials claimed that, although the latter two groupings are near each other, they are not accessible to the same population because of physical barriers.
For example, they said the Red Hook and Carroll Gardens branches are separated by the Gowanus Expressway.
However, we found that at least two underpasses can be used to cross under the Expressway.
In addition, the Coney Island and Brighton Beach branches are easily accessible to the same population.
It is difficult for a working person to use the library in the evening if it is open late just once a week.
The situation is exacerbated when the closest alternative branch maintains the same evening schedule.
Recommendations 1.
Consider usage indicators when scheduling hours branch libraries will be open.
(Library officials responded that they recognize the need for more accessibility and have extended Saturday hours at branch libraries and established a goal to have all branch libraries open a full day on Saturday.
2.
Identify the branch libraries that are underutilized, and consider ways to increase their usage by the communities they serve.
(Library officials responded that they have received a grant to develop a model for improving services at three branches that were perceived to be underutilized.
Officials expect to apply the results of this project on a system-wide basis.)
7
Recommendations (Cont'd) 3.
Consider polling Brooklyn users about their library service preferences, and take the results of these polls into consideration when evaluating possible revisions in the hours branch libraries are open.
(Library officials responded that they have used focus groups to obtain feedback on a regular basis to assess user needs for new services and programs.
Officials added that they are seeking funds to conduct more formal polls and surveys to obtain information about library hours and a wide range of services.)
4.
Evaluate the benefits of having neighboring libraries open late on different evenings.
(Library officials agreed that alternating evening hours of branch libraries in neighboring communities can provide the accessibility that is desired.
Officials added that they will continue to assess this need and tie it to other service enhancements.)
8
Shelf Life of Library Collections According to the collection-weeding policy recommended by the American Library Association (ALA), each category of books has a certain shelf life.
Once a book has reached its shelf life, according to the policy, it should be discarded.
For instance, all textbooks in the pure sciences should be discarded after five years, while mathematics textbooks may be kept for ten years; but geography textbooks and travel guides should be discarded after just three years.
However, we found that 22 percent of the books we tested (based on a judgmental sample) at BPL were outdated in terms of these standards.
To determine whether the Central Library and the five branch libraries (that we had judgmentally selected) were adhering to the policy, we examined a judgmental sample of 3,856 books from several categories, such as encyclopedias; and books dealing with education and careers, computers, science, geography, and travel guides.
(Each volume of a set was counted as one book.)
We found that 867 of these books, or 22 percent, were outdated relative to the ALA's standards.
For example, at the Central Library, we found five mathematics textbooks that were published in the 1970s and a biology text dating back to 1942.
At the Kings Highway branch, we found two travel guides that were published in the 1930s.
Library officials agreed that some of the books on their shelves were outdated.
However, they pointed out that, in certain cases, the books on BPL shelves may still be the most current editions available, because some publishers do not publish updates regularly.
They also noted that branch managers may use their professional judgment in determining whether certain titles still provide useful information, even though they exceed the ages prescribed by the applicable ALA guidelines.
Officials told us that, even though some publications may be in technical violation of the Library's weeding policy, branch librarians allow them to remain on the shelf because the contents of the materials are still useful.
We acknowledge that BPL officials have justifications for keeping certain books, that are technically outdated, on the library shelves.
We also believe, however, that the value of a branch's collection, can be greatly diminished if an excessive proportion of available materials are outdated.
(In their response to our draft report, Library officials indicated that the number of materials weeded during the first six months of the 1999 fiscal year [subsequent to our audit fieldwork] was 61 percent greater than the number weeded during the same period of the previous year.)
9
Recommendations 5.
Amend the weeding policy to include specific guidelines that library branch managers should follow when deciding whether to keep outdated books on the shelves.
(Library officials responded that their existing weeding policy addresses all of the issues described in our recommendation.)
6.
Direct all branch libraries in the BPL system to comply with the weeding policy.
(Library officials responded that weeding guidelines and procedures are included in the training curriculum for all public service librarians.
Officials added that Collection Development staff w ill work with Library managers to provide additional training and support in this area.)
10
New Technology Initiative Program The Brooklyn Public Library started the New Technology Initiative Project (Technology Initiative) in 1997 to provide its patrons with computer-based services such as an On-line Public Access Catalogue, Internet access, searches, references, and educational programs for children.
The total cost of the project is $12.1 million, which is funded by the City and the Library as well as private sources, including the Microsoft Corporation, which contributed $2.2 million in computer software.
We found that planning for this project was inadequate, and consequently, implementation of the Technology Initiative was well behind schedule.
The new, faster services should be available to patrons at all of the Brooklyn branches by the end of 1998, about two years later than the New York Public Library and the Queens Borough Public Library systems.
Library officials told us that the previous management team had not perceived the project as a priority, and had not pursued it vigorously enough to effectively implement it.
The current management team obtained City approval in May of 1997 and have begun the implementation process.
To ensure that a project is completed on time, management should prepare a detailed plan that is based on the best-available information.
For example, before the branch libraries are supplied with computer-based services, they should have been surveyed to ensure that the infrastructure could support the installation of local area networks (LANs) and Internet service.
However, we found that Library staff who conducted surveys of the branches were not accompanied by representatives of the telephone services provider (provider) responsible for the installation.
The Library planners set completion dates for the installation based on their surveys; and learned later, after the provider had surveyed the locations, that the infrastructure would not allow them to install the necessary cables by the completion dates the Library had set.
Furthermore, Library officials claimed that, even after the provider furnished them with an alternate date, the provider's personnel were not able to complete the installation by that date and were not willing to guarantee specific installation dates in the future.
Because of the problems resulting from poor planning, the completion dates for the project had to be extended.
In the original Technology Initiative proposal, the Library had planned to have 15 branches on line by April 1997 and an additional 11 sites by July 1997.
In fact, just 11 branches were on line by the end of 1997; and 3 more had been installed by February 1998.
11
At a minimum, Library staff should have conducted the surveys in conjunction with the provider's personnel.
Problems that might be encountered could have been anticipated, and more-realistic dates might have been established.
In addition, as one of the biggest provider customers in Brooklyn, the Brooklyn Public Library system (with its 60 branches) should have been given priority in the installation of lines -- or at least a written explanation for the providers's inability to meet the installation schedule.
After our discussion with the telephone services provider and BPL management, we were informed by Library officials that the Technology Initiative would be completed before the revised target date of December 1998.
Recommendation 7.
Conduct an up-front survey of Library sites in conjunction with representatives of the service provider when further installations of computers and related equipment are planned.
(Library officials responded that delays in the implementation of the New Technology Initiative were related mainly to the provider's facilities.
Once issues with the provider's facilities were resolved, all Library branches were surveyed by both Library and provider staff to help expedite the installation of new equipment.)
12
Connecting Libraries and School Project In addition to the standard library loan and reference material services, BPL administers five other distinct programs.
The Connecting Libraries and School Project (CLASP) is the largest of the five programs.
CLASP is a New York Public Library program designed to encourage children to read and to make the fullest possible use of their neighborhood libraries.
Geared to elementary school students (kindergarten through 8th grade) in both public and private schools in New York City, CLASP's objective is to promote a direct relationship among schools, teachers, parents, and librarians.
CLASP includes library card registration for children and families; workshops for teachers, school librarians, and parents; guidelines for greater integration of literacy training and library resources into school and family activities; and weekend, after-school, and summer programs that promote reading and public library use.
The BPL began to use CLASP in 1995 to promote the use of its facilities.
For a program to be effective, reasonable goals must be established and attained.
Periodically, actual program results should be measured against the prescribed goals to determine if the goals have, in fact, been met.
If the goals have not or can not be met, corrective actions should be taken.
Since City funding for this program has increased significantly from $375,000 in fiscal year 1995 to $1.3 million in fiscal year 1998, we decided to review CLASP's program accomplishments.
We found that the Library has not yet been able to meet its program goals for CLASP.
To achieve its CLASP goals of encouraging Brooklyn children to read and make full use of their neighborhood libraries, the Library set specific objectives in terms of the number of students it expected the program to serve in a calendar year.
The number of students it expected to serve, and the number actually served, during 1995 through 1997 were published in the Mayor's Management Report as follows: Projected Number of Students 53,127* 42,000 42,000 Actual Number of Students Served 2,358 33,489 37,210
Year 1995 1996 1997
Difference 50,769 8,511 4,790
*Indicates BPL's goal when it initially received funds to implement this program.
13
BPL program officials told us that the goals were not met because they were too "ambitious" in the face of the large staff turnover the system had sustained during those years.
Officials also mentioned that the number of students reached by CLASP in FY 1998 was 59,637 - 98 percent of BPL's goal.
They claimed to have reached 169 schools, or 95 percent of their school goal.
We found that BPL management has not established uniform procedures for allocating the time of field librarians to CLASP activities.
They were unable to produce work schedules showing how and when field staff assigned to the program were to be deployed.
We concluded that BPL staff, whenever their own regular work load became minimal, would contact the schools and make arrangements to conduct workshops or make classroom visits.
Staff routinely did not schedule CLASP visits when workloads were normal.
We believe that the Library could improve its ability to attain its performance goals for CLASP by directing staff to work with the schools to schedule regular field visits and workshops by CLASP librarians.
Recommendation 8.
Develop a formal means of distributing, monitoring, and tracking the deployment of field staff assigned to perform CLASP-related duties.
(Library officials responded that, as of February 1, 1999, CLASP librarians document their visits by means of a Class Program Report [CPR].
CPR information is posted to a database monthly and sent to the CLASP Manager.
CPR information is then summarized quarterly for internal and external performance reporting.)
14
Controls Over Library Materials As a good business practice, management should establish internal controls to adequately safeguard the organization's assets from unauthorized use and possible loss.
Thus, it is important for the BPL to have a good internal control system governing the purchasing, recording, monitoring and safeguarding of its books and other library-related materials.
We concluded that BPL officials need to strengthen several procedures that are used to protect the Library's assets.
Library Security System
BPL's security system (system) is intended to deter patrons from leaving the library with materials they have not borrowed through the proper procedures.
The system, which is installed in all public exits at each site, detects materials that have been magnetically-sensitized (tattle-taped).
Library officials told us that a new system was installed in 39 of its 60 branches, including the Central Library, as of the beginning of 1998.
However, we identified some significant flaws in the system.
We visited 14 branches and the Central Library to determine whether the new and old systems both worked and whether the Library was safeguarding its materials from loss.
In five of the branches we tested, we found that the new system was not working.
In the other nine, we found one of three situations: The new system was too sensitive; it was taking too long to reset; or there was a "dead zone" where materials could be passed by it without detection.
In addition, at many of the branches, we found that staff did not routinely tattle-tape popular materials, which are usually multi-media items such as videotapes and audiotapes.
At both the branches and the Central Library, we also noted that audio cassettes are not kept in a secure place.
They are left unprotected, making it possible for patrons to walk out with them undeterred.
Based on our observations, we believe BPL officials have not assigned a high priority to safeguarding the Library's property.
Library officials told us that tattle-taping popular materials would be too time-consuming.
However, we observed that the procedure took just a few seconds for each item.
The purchase of these materials accounts for a large part of BPL's budget.
Consequently, Library officials' reluctance to utilize the best-available security measures to avoid theft may be placing a major portion of these expensive materials in jeopardy.
After our field work was completed, Library officials told us that all of the theft-detection installations had been completed.
In addition, they said they had received $200,000 in capital funds to buy new sensitizing
15
equipment.
They also assured us that all adult, young adult, and juvenile hard cover and trade paperback books now arrive at the Library with vendor-applied tattle tape and that 90 percent of the paperbacks they purchase also bear the tape.
Books Inventory
Central Library staff can use a single purchase order to buy a large amount of books and other materials for several of BPL's branch libraries.
The items can then be delivered to the Central Library or to the individual branches; they are not assigned to a specific location.
We selected a recent purchase order placed by the Central Library for 2,046 books with a list price of $30,597, which included books that were supposed to have been received at the central location then shipped to five different branch libraries.
We judgementally selected 151 of these books, visited each destination, and used each of the five branches' circulation systems to determine whether the books had been recorded by Central Library staff as received but not loaned to patrons.
We then went to the shelves, accompanied by a librarian working at that branch, to search for the books.
If the books were not on the shelves, we asked the librarian to search the book carts and bins containing books that had been returned recently.
We could not account for 54 books, after receiving help from the branch librarian.
The results of our test are summarized by the following table: Books Branch Arlington Brighton Beach Brower Park Kings Highway Red Hook Total Ordered 11 33 44 26 37 151 Not Found (NF) 8 22 3 10 11 54 NF List Price $158 355 43 108 126 $790
The 54 missing books had cost $790 and represented 36 percent of the 151 new books we attempted to locate.
After we advised BPL officials of our findings, they conducted a follow-up search to locate the books we could not account for.
Based on their follow-up search, officials advised that just 18 percent of the books were missing; and they cited several reasons for our inability to find them.
For example, they said, the books
16
could have been misfiled, or could have been in the process of being returned, but had not yet reappeared in the system.
Furthermore, BPL staff has not performed a periodic physical inventory of its holdings and has not established an acceptable loss percentage (as retail establishments and distributorships do).
Moreover, based on our discussions with branch managers, we concluded that there was a significant risk that considerable amounts of books could not be accounted for at branches we did not test, because the controls (and associated control weaknesses) that existed at the branches we tested were similar to the controls that existed systemwide.
BPL management advised us that a systemwide inventory project was underway.
Recommendations 9.
Direct all branches, including the Central Library, to begin tattletaping all new books and popular items as well as all existing hardbound books in their collections.
(Library officials responded that this recommendation has been implemented.
In addition to hardcover and trade paperback materials, tattle-taping is now used to protect mass-market paperbacks, gifts added to collections, foreign language materials, and videos.)
10.
Arrange for periodic testing and maintenance of the security systems at all branches.
(Library officials responded that, as of January 22, 1999, the new security system was installed in almost all the branches.
Now, security systems are inspected on each public service day and any malfunctions are repaired.)
11.
Increase staff awareness about the need to secure the Library's property.
(Library officials responded that they have undertaken additional measures to secure materials including: holding periodic theft prevention programs, and instructing staff about the need to be vigilant in safeguarding Library property.)
17
Recommendations (Cont'd) 11.
Take periodic inventories.
These might be done by category of materials, or in staggered periods of years.
(Library officials responded that a system-wide inventory project has begun, and estimate that inventories will be completed at the branch libraries in 2001 and at the Central Library in 2003.)
12.
Identify and investigate differences found between the perpetual inventory records and the physical counts.
(Library through holdings accuracy 13.
officials responded recent revisions to database that will of holdings records that this issue has been addressed procedures for maintaining the help ensure the consistency and and branch material counts.)
Establish an acceptable rate of loss over a specific period and, when this rate is exceeded, review controls to ascertain the cause of the losses.
(Library officials responded that there is no industry standard for acceptable loss rates.
Officials added, however, that following the completion of the inventory project, they will be able to more accurately calculate and monitor rate loss.)
18
State Education Department Oversight Article 5, Section 216, of the State Education Law (Law) authorizes the State Education Department (Department or SED) to incorporate (or grant a charter to) any library whose purposes are of educational or cultural value deemed worthy of recognition and encouragement by the Board of Regents.
Section 261 of the Law requires a public library's board of trustees to apply to the Board of Regents for a charter in accordance with the actions to establish such library.
Moreover, Section 215 of the Law authorizes representatives of the State Education Department to visit, examine or inspect any institution under the educational supervision of the State.
Thus, through a visit, examination or inspection, SED officials could determine if a public library's program activities were properly performed and its objectives met.
The Department's Division of Library Development (Division) is responsible for administering State programs for the public libraries in New York State.
The Division has a staff of 21 employees.
One of the 21 employees is responsible for monitoring the activities of the Brooklyn Public Library, Queens Borough Public Library, and New York Public Library in New York City, as well as public libraries in Westchester County and Long Island.
The BPL system is registered with the State Education Department as a not-for-profit organization and must abide by SED's rules, laws, regulations, and fiscal guidelines.
Because BPL is registered with SED, it is exempt from registering with and reporting annually to the Attorney General, the New York State monitor of not-for-profit entities.
In fiscal year 1997, the Brooklyn Public Library received approximately about $7.1 million from the State in various program aids.
For the same period, City funding to BPL was $48.7 million.
The BPL has 60 branches and served a population of more than two million people.
SED officials are responsible for ensuring that program funds given to the Library are used for their intended purposes.
However, we found that SED has never verified the actual expenditures of funds provided to BPL by auditing the documentation supporting them.
Although SED followed the procedures outlined in the New York State Education Law (Law), it relied on unverified information and documentation BPL had submitted to determine whether program objectives had been met; whether the activities had been carried out; and whether the funds provided had been used for their intended purposes.
Without any review of program-related documents, SED could not be assured that the funds were spent only for program purposes.
19
We also requested SED's legal interpretation as to its oversight authority to audit BPL expenditure of funds from nongovernmental sources, such as fines and fees; and BPL expenditure of funds received from its foundation.
SED informed us that it has no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate BPL foundation, but as of the date of this report, we have not received SED's legal interpretation as to whether its oversight authority allows it to audit BPL expenditures of funds received from nongovernmental sources.
A pamphlet entitled "Helpful Information for Meeting Minimum Public Library Standards," published in June 1996 by SED, indicates that libraries must have a written budget, both to ensure fiscal accountability and to obtain the funds that will enable them to address the needs of the community.
It points out that the budget presentation can also be useful for library advocacy and that such a presentation, if well-documented and well-prepared, can help show local funding authorities the importance of the library in the community.
According to the pamphlet, a library budget should: ! indicate the resources that will be needed to meet the library's goals and objectives within a certain period of time; base income and expenditure figures on past experience and anticipated change, taking into consideration the library's longrange plan for development.
(The budget should be realistic, something between a wish list and a recipe for survival); and present expenditure allocations to meet both the community's information and service needs and legal requirements, including SED's minimum standards for public libraries.
!
!
To ensure that the Library's money has been used as intended, we believe it would be prudent to verify that a sample of actual expenditures is reviewed against planned budgeted expenditures and tested to ensure the actual expenditures were made for legitimate library purposes.
We found that SED has not performed such reviews.
The Education Law prescribes the procedures to be followed by the recipients of State grants or aid.
In most instances, the grantee must submit an application detailing the objectives and activities of the program, including a proposed budget, and how the program will be evaluated both qualitatively and quantitatively.
The application is reviewed by a panel of professionals at the Division for content and completeness.
Once the application is approved, funds are released to the grantee.
At the
20
completion of the program, the grantee is required to submit to SED a report describing the results of the program.
We reviewed documentation available at SED to determine whether SED had provided effective oversight of the Library's expenditures for two State-funded programs (the Adult Literacy Program and the Coordinated Outreach Services Program directed to the aging).
We found that, even though BPL had submitted the required reports and SED had access to supporting documentation for the reports, SED officials had made no effort to verify either the information in the reports or the documentation.
In 1996, under provisions of the Adult Literacy Service Grant, BPL had submitted a request for $20,000 to cover some of the costs of administering five learning centers projected to serve more than 750 students.
The money was to be spent on books, part-time staffing, and a computer, as shown in the following table: Books for Deposit Collection Books for 5 Learning Centers (Divided equally to build each Center's public collections) Five part-time computer-literate staff to maintain deposit collection -- working 12 hours/week for 40 weeks at $10/hour, plus 7.65% FICA Computer to build a database of materials and keep track of deposit collection Total Budget $ 6,830 5,000 5,170
3,000 $20,000
The application was evaluated by a review panel, made up of professionals on the SED staff, that awards grants to applicants receiving the highest scores in the selection process.
The Library application received a high score and was approved by SED, with 90 percent of the money awarded upon approval by the SED Commissioner.
The remaining 10 percent was to be awarded upon receipt of a final project report.
All of the documents required for this grant were located in SED files.
For each of the three years from 1996 to 1998, SED awarded $316,430 to BPL for its Coordinated Outreach Services Program, which included services to the elderly.
Under this program, SED awards to each library system that qualifies a grant of $43,000 plus 13 cents for each participant.
The value of SED's $316,430 award implies that the program had more than 2.1 million participants [$43,000 + ($0.13 x 2,103,307)].
Since the entire population for the borough of Brooklyn was estimated to be slightly
21
more than 2.2 million as of July 1, 1997, we question whether SED has reviewed the veracity of this figure and the fact that it has remained stagnant for the past three years.
SED should have reviewed, on a sample basis, the supporting documents for actual expenditures made against budgeted figures for these two programs.
Also, the Division has not performed any formal assessments of the general operations of the BPL.
Our review of BPL disclosed some significant weaknesses in each library's operations.
Therefore, we believe that the Division should exercise its statutory authority to formally inspect the library programs periodically.
Such inspections could be used to help ensure that three library systems management are effectively addressing the matters we identified and any others, as identified by Division staff, which impact the Library's ability to maximize the services it provides to its patrons.
Recommendations (Cont'd) 15.
Develop a plan to verify key program accomplishments included on BPL's summary reports.
(Department officials agreed, in part, with this recommendation.
They indicated that the Library Board's review and authentication of program accomplishment reports was an acceptable validation of program accomplishments.
Officials added, however, that the Department may, on an exception basis, test the validity of reported program data should it find cause to do so.)
22
Recommendations 16.
Periodically do a risk assessment of significant operations of BPL to focus, from a risk perspective, on the verifications of the supporting documentation maintained by the libraries for their operations.
(Department officials responded that, as a result of our audit, the Division will strengthen its monitoring practices by developing a staff reporting process that tracks the results of staff visits to institutions that are under the Division's scope of responsibility.)
17.
Determine SED's legal authority to audit BPL expenditures of funds from nongovernmental sources.
If it is determined that they have such authority, they should develop a plan for reviewing such funds.
(SED did not respond to the specifics of this recommendation.
Instead, SED officials indicated that SED has "no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate foundation for the Brooklyn Public Library."
However, our recommendation concerns auditing expenditures of BPL's nongovernmental funds not its separate foundation.)
23
Major Contributors to This Report William Challice Carmen Maldonado Walter Mendelson Brian Mason Santo Rendon Tenneh Blamah Eli Yarmish Marc Geller Ronald Gerstein Alina Mattie Orin Ninvalle Alex Ruiz Sheila Williams Marticia Madory
Appendix A
Appendix B
B-2
B-3
B-4
B-5
B-6
B-7
B-8
Appendix C
C-2
