Before The State Of W isconsin DIVISION OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS Application of International Paper Company to Abandon the Ward Paper Company Dam, City and Town of Merrill, Lincoln County, Wisconsin Case No. 3-NO-98-1030
FINDINGS OF FACT, CONLUSIONS OF LAW AND PERMIT The Department of Natural Resources received an appltcation from the International Paper Company, Two Manhattanville Road, Purchase, New York, to abandon and remove its dam on the Prairie River in Merrill.
The dam is located partially m the City of Merrill and partially in the Town of Merrill at the site of the former Ward Paper Mill.
The mill was closed in November, 1994, and the hydroelectric generator associated with the dam is no longer operable.
International Paper has attempted to transfer ownership of the dam to a responsible party but has been unsuccessful.
Consequently, the company has proposed to the Department that it abandon and remove the dam.
The Department of Natural Resources prepared a detailed Environmental Assessment addressing the various natural resource and environmental aspects of this proposal.
Several objections were filed to the Department opposing the permit application.
Pursuant to due notice hearing was held on March 9, 1999 at Merrill, Wisconsm before Jeffrey D Boldt, administrative law judge (ALJ).
Pursuant to sec. 31.185, Stats., the Division waited more than 120 days (July 9, 1999) prior to issuing an Order in thts matter.
In accordance with sets.
227.47 and 22753(1)(c), Stats., the PARTIES to this proceeding are certified-as follows.
International Paper Company, by Attorney Jordan Hemaidan 1 South Pinckney Street, Suite 700 Madison, WI 53703 Steve Gmski, Senior Counsel Environmental, Health 
,
.
CaseNo 3-NO-9X-1030 Page2
Department of Natural Resources, by Attorney Michael Cain P. 0.
Box 7921 Madison.
WI 53707 City of Merrill, by Attorney Jim Godlewski 1004 E.
First Street Merrill, WI 54452 Michael J. Caylor, Mayor 1004 E.
First Street Merrill, WI 54952 Kurt Helmstadter, 3rd Dist. Alderman 110 E. 6 ' Street h Merrill, WI 54452 Merrill ' Prairie Lake Association, by s Patrick Taylor, President N2374 CTH K Merrill, WI 54452 Kevin Koss, Vice President N2 194 CTH K Merrill, WI 54452 Town of Merrill, by _ Dean Rem, Assessor W4185 Ackerman Road Merrill, WI 54452
Trout Unlimited, by Lloyd M. Andrews, Northeast Region Vice President-Counsel 8764 Brunswick Road Mmocqua, WI 54548 Jeff Moore 804 E. Riverside Avenue Merrill, WI 54452
Case No 3.NO-98.1030 Page 3
Jerry Kunkel W5109 Sunset Drive Merrill, W I 54548 Max Bachi W5 135 Sunset Drive Merrill, W I 54452 Louis S. Schroeder W5 167 Sunset Drive Merrill, W I 54452 Steven L. Peterson W US 94 Highway G Merrill, W I 54452 Dennis Schult N2109 Bus. 51 Merrill.
W I 54452 Becca Ma
W I 54452 Norm Heckendorf W5079 Sunset Drive Me
CaseNo 3.NO-98.1030 Page4 Mary Downing W5 117 Sunset Drive Merrill, WI 54452 Frank A. Iwen, Curator U.S. Zoological Museum 204 S. Allen Street Madison, WI 53705 Gordon King 108 E. Riverside Avenue Merrill, WI 54452-3346 Robert Sumnicht Lincoln Board Chairman 1310 E. 10th Street Merrill, WI 54452 Patrick W. Buckett 1302 N. Center Avenue Merrill, WI 54452-1252 FINDINGS OF FACT International Paper Company (IP), Two Manhattanville Road, Purchase, New 1.
York, completed filing an apphcation with the Department for a permit under sec. 3 1.185, Stats., to abandon and remove its dam on the Prairie River, located in the City and Town of Merrill, Lincoln County.
The Department and the applicant have fulfilled all procedural requirements of sets.
3 1.06 and 3 1 185.
Stats.
The applicant owns real property located in the SE L/4of the SW ` of Section 1, /4 2.
Township 3 1 North, Range 6 East, Lincoln County.
The above-described property abuts the Prairie River which is navigable in fact at the project site.
3.
The apphcant proposes to abandon and remove the Ward Paper Mill Dam on the Prairie River.
The dam was originally constructed in 1904 to serve logging operations and generate hydroelectric power.
In 1924, Grandfather Falls Company acquired ownership of the dam.
In 1948 the Ward Paper Company Division of Arvey Corporation obtamed ownership of the dam.
The applicant, IP, acqmred Arvey Corporation in December, 1987.
4.
The dam is constructed of an earthen embankment and gated spillway 7 1 feet wide.
There are five tainter gates, each 11 feet wide and nine feet high.
The dam is 18 feet high, with 13 feet between the headwater and tail water.
The main embankment is approximately 550 feet wide; a secondary embankment is 400 feet long.
The abutments and gate piers of the dam serve as bridge supports for an existing railroad spur serving the site.
The dam also includes a powerhouse contaming a 40-foot wide flume and intake pipe, located under the mill budding,
, CaseNo.
3.NO-98.1030 Page5
connecting to a 250 horsepower generator that was capable of producing approximately 186 kilowatts.
The generator is currently inoperable due to a worn bearing that has been removed and the couplmg between the generator and the turbine being disconnected.
The dam impounds a 118 acre flowage known variously as the Ward Mill Pond, 5.
or, more commonly as Prairie Lake.
The impoundment stores approximately 709 acre feet of storage that supports both a cold and warmwater fishery.
6.
A dam safety mspection on July 6, 1994, by the Department of Natural Resources determined the Ward Dam to be an unsafe, high hazard dam because of development downstream of the dam and due to a lack of spillway capacity needed to pass large flood flows.
In April of 1996 there was a flood which resulted in significant damage to neighboring properties.
It is likely that the potential floodplain area would be reduced as a result of dam removal.
(Ex. 4) 7.
On October 15, 1994, International Paper ceased operations at the Ward Paper Company Mill, and soon thereafter closed the mill.
Attempts by IP to transfer ownership of the mill buildings, landfill, dam and ratlroad spur line have been unsuccessful.
8.
A large group of local residents have opposed the abandonment of the Ward Paper Company Dam, indicating that its removal would have negative effects on aesthettcs, property values, flood control, health concerns, wildlife, wetlands, aquatic habitat, recreation and the community as a whole.
9.
There is no stgnificant contamination in sediment samples in the impoundment tested by the State Laboratory of Hygiene at the request of the DNR. (Ex. 48, Martini) The applicant has prepared a detailed erosion control plan that descrtbes the staged drawdown and removal of the dam.
(Ex. 11) All of the expert testimony at hearing indicated that the Mead and Hunt plan employs state-of-the-art erosion control measures which should mmimize sediment transport to the greatest extent practicable during drawdown and construction and removal activities.
Some short-term turbidity is to be expected, particularly during in-river construction and removal.
Further, there is no question that there will be some sediment transport associated with dam removal.
However, to reduce sediment transport, the drawdown of the flowage would be accomplished m two stages.
The first stage would be to lower the pond level to the elevation of the gate sjlls, about nme feet, by opening the gates on the existing dam.
The DNR recommended drawdown rate of water levels in the Mill Pond would be at a rate of about two feet per day over a four to five day period.
The first stage would expose more than 80% of the flowage bed and allow revegetation efforts to begin prior to removal of the dam.
The second stage would occur when the gate sills are lowered by five feet and the level on the remaining pond would be brought down to the stream bed elevation.
The flowage would be restored to Its original riverine character.
River flows would not be altered from extsting natural flows except that the existing south raceway below the powerhouse would be abandoned due to filling of the intake and flume.
(Ex. 4) The permtt as issued requires the permit-holder to stabilize and restore downstream areas impacted by significant sediment transport.
A preponderance of the credible evidence, includmg all expert testimony, indicates that the proposed dam removal will not adversely affect water quality nor will it increase water pollution in the Prairie Rover.
The dam
CaseNo 3-NO-98-1030 Page6 removal and abandonment will not cause environmental pollution as defined in sec. 299.01(4), Stats., if the removal is undertaken in accordance with this permit.
The Pratrie River is classified as a warm water sport and a Class I and II brook 10.
and brown trout fishery.
(Ex. 39) The fishery has "overlap " characteristics, meanmg tt consists of warm water, cool water and cold water fish spectes, many of which migrate to find suitable seasonal habitat.
(Ex. 44) DNR staff conducted an extensive review of fish passage issues in connection with consideratton of the abandonment permit application.
(Id.)
The Department concluded that with respect to maintaining and enhancmg the public interest m the high-quahty fishery in the prairie river system, "the preferred alternative IS dam removal.
" If there had been a solid commttment to reconstruct the dam, the DNR would have required constructton of fish passage devtces.
However, the report concluded, as follows: "No fish passage device will be as effecttve as dam removal in restoring the full hydrological, chemical, biological and navigation functions of the Prairie Rtver.
" (Id., p. 3) The proposed dam abandonment and removal will not have a detrimental Impact on maintaining the high quality fishery in the Prairie River.
There would be significant benefits to amphibians and reptiles from dam removal, 11.
as better habitat for these creatures would likely result from larger sections of undtsturbed vegetation of particular benefit to turtles and frogs.
(Ex. 52) There is no questton that other dam removal projects have resulted in a return to a more natural vegetation cover whtch is of benefit to various wtldhfe species.
(See: Exs. 61-62) The project will have no sigmficant detrimental impact on nesting bald eagles whtch currently make use of Ward Pond.
The river supports an excellent fishery which should allow the eagles to remain and continue to nest in this area of the Prairie River.
(Ex 5 1) Further, there are freshwater mussel species downstream of the dam.
None of the mussels identified m the area are endangered or threatened species.
While there are some concerns that individual mussels may pertsh during dam removal, no significant detrimental impacts on mussels are likely.
(Ex. 53) The apphcant has agreed to make every effort to recover and save individual fish and mussels that become stranded during dam removal.
Further, the permtt has a spectfic conditton reqmring all reasonable efforts to save stranded fish and mussels.
Taken as a whole, a preponderance of the credible evidence leads to a conclusion that there will be no detrimental impacts to wildlife habitat as a result of dam removal.
12.
Given the predominant flow of groundwater in the area, the drawdown would not be likely to de-water wells or wetlands in the area.
(Martini testimony) Further, based on the report, "Wellhead Protection Plan, Ctty of Merrill Lincoln County Wisconsin " published by the North Central Wisconsin Regional Planning Commission in July, 1996, there should be no Impact to the City of Merrill water supply wells, There ~111also not be any impacts to other water supplies not in the vicinity of the existing mill pond.
Previous experience with drawdowns s of the mill pond in the 1980 ' have Indicated the extent of the impact of the groundwater
.
CaseNo 3.NO-98.1030 Page7
drawdown on wafer supply wells.
Water wells not impacted by previous drawdowns should not be impacted by the permanent reduction in the level of the Prairie River.
(Ex. 50) Members of the public raised concerns about an increased risk of blastomycosis, a 13.
fungal Infection related to the presence of rotting tree stumps.
(Ex 56) However, a preponderance of the evidence was that there would likely be no increased risk of the infection as a result of dam removal.
Dr. Jeff Moore testified that he was familiar with the etiology and treatment of the illness and that in his professional judgment there was likely no greater risk of the illness associated with dam removal.
Further, the W isconsin Division of Health does not recommend avoidance of areas associated with the drawdown of impoundments.
(Exs. 4) A preponderance of the evidence, all of the expert testimony, indicates that there is already a risk of blastomycosis m the area, and that said risk will not increase as a result of dam removal.
14.
The proposed abandonment will not adversely affect pubhc rights in navigable waters and will not endanger life, health and property upon compliance with the conditions in the permit.
15.
The Department of Natural Resources had made an environmental assessmentof the proposed project and determined that the grant or denial of the permit requested does not constitute a major state actIon significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.
DISCUSSION There is no question that many area residents love Prairie Lake passionately and will be very sorry to see it gone.
The public input at this hearmg demonstrated the sincerity and depth of feeling with which this view is held.
However, as the ALJ and the DNR made clear at the hearing, the legal standard for dam abandonment focuses on public rights m navigable waters, and the protection of life, health and property.
The applicant has demonstrated that its plans will protect the pubhc ' interest in maintaining the high-quality fishery, and will be protective of s water quality by employment of erosion control practices.
Unhke the many people who urged Savmg Prairie Lake, the law does not state a preference for a river or an impoundment.
The DNR properly identified the dam as a hazard, given the cyrrent state of disrepair.
The 1996 flooding, demonstrates t
The applicant has the legal right to abandon the dam, instead of repairing it, if the abandonment protect pubhc rights and does not directly threaten public safety, and protects life, health and property.
Some area residents urged a reading of this statutory language to include the protection of property values, rather than direct harm to property from impacts of the navigable waters.
However, this reading would not be consistent with longstanding DNR and Division interpretation of sec. 30.185, Stats., hmiting property concerns to direct impacts such as floodmg damage.
Further, the W isconsm Supreme court has made It clear that the public interest in navigable waters focuses on impacts to and of the water itself rather than indirect, upland socioeconomic impacts.
W isconsm Environmental Decade v. DNR, 115 W is.
2d 381, 340
---
.
..
CaseNo 3.NO-98.1030
Page 8
N. W .2d 722 (1983).
In this regard, it should be noted that by lessening the risk of flood damage, dam abandonment is likely to result in less direct damage to property.
Wh ile the changes along this section of the Prairie River will be difficult for many to accept, the long-term interests of the river will be protected.
The record at the hearing established that the legal standards would be met, and the permit must be issued.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 1.
The Division of Hearings and Appeals has authority under sets.
31 185 and 227.43(l)(b), Stats., and in accordance with the foregoing Fmdings of Fact, to issue a permit for the abandonment and removal of said dam subject to the conditions specified.
2.
All conditions are necessaryto protect the public interest in the Prairie River, to promote safety, and to protect life, health and property within the meaning of sec. 30.185, Stats.
3.
Hearing in this matter was held on March 9, 1999, and the Division deferred issuing this Order until after July 9, 1999, to allow a period of 120 days for any municipahty or other person, or association an opportunity to acquire ownership of the dam pursuant to sec. 30.185(4), Stats.
No such municipality, persons or other organization have made themselves known to the Division.
4.
The project is a type III action under sec. NR 150.03(8)(f)4, W is Adm. Code.
Type III actions do not require the preparation of a forma1 environmental impact assessment.
PERMIT WHEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, that a permit be issued pursuant to sec. 30.185, Stats., subject to the following conditions: 1.
Acceptance of this permit and beginning the project means that the permit-holder has read, understand and agree to follow all conditions of this permit.
2.
- The drawdown, removal and restoration must be done in accordance with the plan submitted to and approved by the Department and the conditions of this permit.
3.
The permit-holder shall obtap any necessary authority needed under local zoning ordmances, from agencies of the State of W isconsin, including the Department of Natural Resources, and from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
4.
This permit expires three years from the date of its issuance if the project is not completed before then.
No work may begin or contmue after this date unless a new permit or permit extension 1sgranted in writing by the Department.
.,
.
~ Case No 3-NO-98-1030
Page9
The permit-holder must allow free and unlimited access to your project site at any 5.
. ti me to any Department employee who is investigating the project.
The Department may change the conditions of this permit if the project obstructs 6 navigation or becomes detrimental to the public interest or if such changes become necessary to protect the environment.
The permit-holder must provide a copy of this permit to your contractor and keep 7.
a copy at the project site at all ti mes until the project has been completed.
The permit-holder must notify Gary Bartz, Antigo Area Office, Box 3 10, Antigo, 8.
W I 54409 (7 15) 627-43 17, in wrmng at least five days before starting your project and again within five days after completmg the project.
The permit-holder must notify the owner of the dam (WI Public Service) 9.
immediately downstream from the Ward Paper Company Dam, in writing, at least five days before starting the project and again within five days after completmg it.
Drawdown of the flowage must occur at a rate of 1 inch per hour, unless 10.
otherwise approved by the Department.
11.
The permit-holder must remove the dam m a manner that ~111result m minimal, long-term sediment deposition downstream from the dam.
The permittee shall cease or modify drawdown at the request of the Department if the Department determines that detrtmental, longterm sediment deposition IS occurring.
The permit-holder shall make reasonable efforts acceptable to the DNR to stabilize and restore downstream areas impacted by significant sedtment deposition associated with dam removal.
12.
The abandonment and removal of the dam described herein should be accomplished in a manner, which will provide for the restoration of navigation.
The removal and abandonment should be made in such a way that flood flows are 13.
not materially obstructed and flood damage potential is reduced.
14.
The permit-holder must stabihze all exposed sediment outside of the river channel in a mannerspecified in the erosion control plan and approved by the Department.
The permtt-holder shall inspect the flowage during drawdown to determine if fish 15.
or aquatic life are stranded.
To the extent practical, in cooperation with Department staff, living fish and mussels shall be returned to the water as soon as practicable.
16.
The permit-holder must drawdown the flowage to the sill of the existing gates prior to September 1 after the first growing season after the permit issuance subject to review by the Department taking into consideration growing seasons, flow conditions, precipitation patterns, or other environmental factors relevant to protection of the pubhc interest.
The gate
.
.
`
CaseNo.
3.NO-98-1030 Page IO
structure must be maintained as a functioning water control structure until adequate vegetative stabilization ts accomphshed.
The Ctty and Town of Merrill shall be notified prior to commencement of any 17.
drawdown, removal and restoration activities undertaken by the permit-holder.
Dated at Madison, W isconsin on July 23, 1999.
STATE OF WISCONSIN DIVISION OF HEARINGS AND APPEALS 5005 University Avenue, Suite 201 Madison, W isconsm 53705 Telephone: (608) 266-7709 FAX: (608) 264-9885 By: B .
'
- JEFFREY D. BOLDT ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE F\DOCS\GENDECISIOMINTERPAPERJKF,DOC
NOTICE
Set out below IS a list of alternative methods available to persons who may desire to obtain review of the attached decision of the Admmtstrattve Law Judge.
This notice IS provided to insure comphance with sec. 227.48, Stats., and sets out the rights of any party to this proceeding to petition for rehearing and admimstrative or judictal review of an adverse decision.
Any party to this proceeding adversely affected by the decision attached hereto 1.
has the right within twenty (20) days after entry of the decision, to petition the secretary of the Department of Natural Resources for review of the decision as provided by Wisconsm Administrative Code NR 2.20.
A petition for review under this section IS not a prerequisite for judicial review under sets.
227.52 and 227.53, Stats.
Any person aggrieved by the attached order may within twenty (20) days after 2.
service of such order or decision file with the Department of Natural Resources a written petmon for rehearing pursuant to sec. 227.49, Stats.
Rehearing may only be granted for those reasons set out in sec. 227.49(3), Stats A petition under this section is not a prerequisite for judicial review under sets.
227.52 and 227.53, Stats.
Any person aggrieved by the attached decision which adversely affects the 3.
substantial interests of such person by action or inaction, affirmative or negative m form IS entitled to judicial review by tilmg a petition therefor in accordance with the provisions of sec. 227.52 and 227.53, Stats.
Satd petmon must be filed within thirty (30) days after service of the agency decision sought to be reviewed If a rehearing is requested as noted m paragraph (2) above, any party seeking judicial review shall serve and file a petition for review within thirty (30) days after service of the order disposing of the rehearing application or within thirty (30) days after final dtsposmon by operation of law.
Since the decision of the Admimstrative Law Judge in the attached order is by law a decision of the Department of Natural Resources, any petition for judicial review shall name the Department of Natural Resources as the respondent.
Persons desiring to file for judicial review are advised to closely examine all provisions of sets.
227.52 and 227.53, Stats., to insure strtct comphance with all its requtrements.
