Chapter V Suggested Por t and Waterway Improvements Survey Findings Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Operations surveys were mailed to over 390 likely Florida barge operators, handlers, bunkering and services providers both in and out-of-state.
The survey was designed to provide an operational overview of each operator while offering a forum to address specific deficiencies within the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System.
(Appendix B) lists all survey recipients and associated survey status (Completed, Not Returned or Undeliverable).
(Appendix C) contains an example of the survey.
An eight percent (8%) response rate was achieved (not inclusive of 30 surveys returned as undeliverable).
· · ·
Average Annual Bulk Tons: 1,100,000 Annual Container Tons: 40,000
(One container operator responded) Top Five Commodities Reported: 1.
Petroleum 2.
Chemicals 3.
Steel 4.
Coal 5.
Nonmetallic Minerals
From these surveys, valuable feedback was provided regarding specific Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System deficiencies and areas suggested for improvement.
The primary issues identified, in order of frequency, are the following:
· · ·
Dredging Width restrictions Congestion points
The level of detail to which survey respondents addressed specific issues varies, however in
Following is a list of the general characteristics of the operators responding to the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Study survey:
summary form, the feedback received provides a valuable overview of Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System improvement priorities.
· ·
Average Number of Employees: (Florida based Operations only) Average Fleet Size: (Inclusive of Tugs and Barges)
62
Dredging
22
Dredging is the most cited improvement suggestion for the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Warerway
5-1
System.
Responses vary from entire lengths of identified waterways to specific points and ports along these waterways.
Below is a summary (in order of survey cited frequency) of Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Study identified dredging requirements.
-
Port of Tampa Port Everglades Jacksonville
Width Restrictions
Width restrictions were also cited by a number of survey respondents.
Listed below is a summary of
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway (entire length cited as requiring dredging).
Specific problem points cited include:
Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System width restrictions cited as in need of improvement:
· ·
Baker Haulover Inlet - Biscayne Bay Points south of Miami to the Keys
·
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway specific points cited as in need of width restriction mitigation include:
The Florida Inland Navigation District reports that approximately $7,800,000.00 is needed annually to properly maintain the entire Florida Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway to its current federally authorized depth of 12 feet.
·
Baker Haulover Inlet at Biscayne Bay Bridge of Lions at St. Augustine
Cross-Florida Barge Canal and Okeechobee Waterway at various unspecified locations along entire length (St. Lucie Canal and
·
Cross-Florida Barge Canal and Okeechobee Waterway at various unspecified locations along entire length (St. Lucie Canal and Caloosahatchee River).
Caloosahatchee River).
·
Port of Tampa was cited by one operator for narrow channels.
· · · ·
Gulf Intracoastal Waterway at Pensacola Land Cut - Pensacola Bay.
Escambia River at the mouth of the river.
Apalachicola River at mile marker 39 through 46.
Port Specific dredging required at the following ports (unspecified location): Specific congestion points have also been identified by survey respondents.
The location and cause of the identified congestion points (if provided) are listed below.
Congestion Points
5-2
·
Cross Florida Barge Canal and Okeechobee Waterway due to narrow railroad bridges.
Identifiable Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System Areas for Improvement:
·
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway at St. Augustine due to the Bridge of Lions.
Dredging and width restriction mitigation have been identified as the primary drivers of future Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway system efficiency
·
Port of Tampa due to narrow channels coupled with one-way cruise ship channels.
and use.
Dredging in particular has been identified by the most survey respondents as a necessary improvement to meet this goal.
Beyond dredging, the width restriction mitigation issues cited in survey responses focus primarily on bridge related restrictions and associated congestion.
·
Other locations cited (with no specific cause of congestion given) include:
-
Matanza Inlet ­ Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Ponce Inlet to the south - Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Haulover Canal - Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Crossroads Shoal at St. Lucie Inlet Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway
The following two waterways were identified repeatedly, either in whole or specific locations on each, as in need of improvement:
· ·
Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Okeechobee Waterway
Some of the heaviest Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System freight flows, as identified in (Appendix A), occur on the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
These heavy freight flows, coupled with the high incidence of Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway issues cited in survey responses, suggests that this waterway might be a first priority for Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System
improvement efforts.
The Port of Tampa was the only port cited by multiple
5-3
survey respondents for needing improvement in several areas.
All key issues of dredging, width restriction mitigation, congestion, and even port infrastructure construction/renovation were cited as requirements for improving the efficiency and usability of the port.
accountability to ensure that public and private money is spent on sound job creating investments.
This approach is key to the success of the Florida Seaport Transportation and Economic Development Program under Chapter 311 and the $214,000,000.00 and $147,000,000.00 seaport bond programs enacted subsequently by Florida's Legislature under F.S.
Order of Magnitude Capital Needs
320.20 in 1996 and 1999.
These programs and funding sources have allowed Florida's deep water
Over the past thirteen (13) years, the State of Florida and the Florida Department of Transportation in particular, has recognized the importance of Florida's maritime industry as an economic engine, a political force, and a partner and stakeholder within the state's transportation network and intermodal system.
The State Legislature in 1990 through passage of the Omnibus Transportation Appropriations Bill, created the Florida Seaport Transportation and Economic Development Council and its complementary entitlement funding program of $8,000,000.00 per year, to provide for capital infrastructure needs of the state's fourteen (14) deep water ports.
Chapter 311, Florida Statutes creates a partnership between the State and its seaports.
It is driven by an approach to project development that reflects the special characteristics of the maritime industry; the seaports are public entities, but must function as businesses to fulfill their public charters.
Like any business, they must demonstrate a service orientation and prompt response to customer demand, provide flexibility to meet changing market trends, and maintain
ports to compete effectively with domestic and global rivals by accelerating the pace of construction for capital projects while at the same time, fostering a mechanism to eliminate internal competition for capital priorities of state wide significance.
The seaport funding programs require consistency with local comprehensive transportation
development plans and matching funds from each seaport; assuring that seaport investments are driven by local commitment to meet the local community's strategic objectives.
Responsibility for project
development through the State program is initiated at the local level based on an understanding of local demand and local financial commitment and capacity.
Section 311.07(3)(a), Florida Statutes requires that program funds be used to fund approved projects reviewed and concurred in by the State on a 50-50 matching basis with any deep water port that is governed by a public body.
An approved project is a project that has been approved by the statutory Council and only to specific types of port facility or
5-4
port transportation projects identified in statute.
identify and target key ports as hubs for accommodating future opportunities for coastwise
Florida's Legislature recognizes the role and importance water transportation plays in contributing to Florida's State Domestic Product through trade revenues and jobs created within port local jurisdictions.
container or bulk barge operations.
In fact, the existing seaport financing program was used to fund construction of the Roll-on/Roll-off facility completed in 1999 at Port Canaveral and a similar facility in Tampa in the mid 1990's (under the Federal Ferry Boat Discretionary Program).
State funds were also
The collective programs have proved to be extremely successful in accelerating construction of over $1,000,000,000.00 in cargo and cruise infrastructure over the past 13 years.
used for the refurbishment and rehabilitation of the West Dock at Port Panama City where barges presently call at that port.
As t he Louisiana State University (LSU) study Capital projects for capturing future coastwise barge and short-sea shipping opportunities are already completed in June 2000 indicates, the present system of deep-sea terminals most likely could not be utilized in their present configuration without
How does this discussion relate to How does this discussion relate to the Florida's Intracoastal and Inland the Florida's Intracoastal and Inland Waterway initiative? In one Waterway sentence; the mechanism for enhancing and developing Florida's coastwise and short-sea shipping system is already in place.
eligible project purposes under the State's existing Florida Seaport Transportation and Economic Development Program.
A strategic development
modification to support the coastal system, primarily because of the high cost and operational inflexibility of those existing facilities.
The high cost stems from the specialized facilities and handling equipment which are designed to handle much larger, deep-draft vessels.
The inflexibility stems from Custom's regulations and the resulting cumbersome processing at the terminal gate; not to mention the lack of 24/7 operations at many of the existing deep water port facilities.
Coastwise shipping terminals must be designed and constructed to handle the smaller, shallow draft coastal fleet and only include the most basic facilities and limited handling equipment.
Gate procedures (including security) should be minimized and both the gate and berthing
plan approved by the Florida Seaport Transportation and Economic Development Council including the three state agency members may be required to
5-5
infrastructure available for operations 24 hours a day at no additional charge.
For the coastal system to become competitive with trucks, it must be based on domestic terminals that function as an integral extension of the highway system.
Under these conditions, handling costs at such terminals are estimated at $40-$50 per box, which is similar to costs at truck terminals, but in most cases three to four times lower than charges at deep-sea terminals.
High frequency service is a must in order to be truck competitive (extension of the truck/intermodal operation).
coastwise container barge facilities.
Given these parameters and the potentials previously discussed in this report, a system wide investment in new coastwise barge related infrastructure for a future scheduled Florida barge service system might approach a needed one-time capital influx of approximately $30,000,000.00 (excluding Port Canaveral's facility, already constructed).
These capital need estimates are by no means all inclusive, but represent reasonable assumptions based on actual experience in the existing coastwise barge trade.
Order-of-magnitude terminal construction could be expected to cost in the range of $5,000,000.00 to $10,000,000.00 per terminal given the experience of Port Canaveral's barge RO/RO facility project.
Prior experience suggests that such facilities should have paved container storage areas of at least 70 acres, complete with utilities to accommodate reefer boxes and other refrigerated units.
They must be in close proximity to truck access and designed with proper features and turning radii for 70+ foot long and 14 foot wide minimum cargo envelopes.
On dock railroad access is a plus, but not an absolute necessity provided truck transfer infrastructure is unimpeded and has available to it 24/7 access.
Based on trucking and water rate structures currently in place in the Florida market, a minimum of 600 boxes per week or approximately 30,000 boxes per year would most likely be needed to justify terminal construction, operating cost and service functions for dedicated Documented from the previously mentioned LSU study, a survey of truck tonnage movements along the I-95 corridor was prepared from secondary sources in 1999 and suggested that most of the freight Should a policy decision be made to further investigate the potential for a regularly scheduled coastwise and short-sea shipping alternative within the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway and/or Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway, detailed market analysis, feasibility, and site specific engineering estimates would need to be conducted to determine the optimum location, size, and configuration of infrastructure to support such a services.
Operational Cost Considerations
5-6
truck traffic in that East Coast corridor is intra-regional (delivery/distribution) in nature, while the interregional traffic (bridge traffic), between distant origins and destinations for which coastal shipping may be attractive, maybe somewhat limited.
An example given was that while traffic within the New York region of the I-95 corridor amounted to 2,500 trucks/ day, the through freight traffic between New York and Miami was estimated at only 100 trucks/day in each direction.
and frequency can successfully make such a service a reality.
The main beneficiaries of such a service would be the truck lines by having an additional alternative to all truck or truck/intermodal (truck/ railroad) in delivering goods to market.
Barge
operations could handle long hauls of 300 miles or more with efficient transfers at either end built into the drayage and truck delivery function.
Coastal shipping would expand truck line intermodal options, especially in regions where rail services are unavailable or track capacity is short.
However, a survey of trucking rates in the corridor as of summer 1999 indicated that the rate per mile by freight truck was $1.30-$1.50 for long distance container moves and up to $3.20 per mile for short distances in congested areas such as the BaltimoreBoston corridor.
At that time, truck lines using railroad, mainly for long distance transport (beyond 300 miles) quoted an "intermodal rate" about $0.20 lower than an all truck rate ( a function of fuel cost and operational efficiencies associated with intermodal transport).
Total charge for the trip between New York and Miami was about $2,000.00 for all-truck and $1,700.00 for intermodal (truck/rail combination).
While coastal service must be based on daily or higher service frequency to be economic, projected near and mid-term land side congestion on Florida's road network, could make the service very attractive.
Higher frequencies further enhance a coastal system's competitiveness, and will also facilitate the development of more sophisticated service patterns; perhaps resulting in shorter transit times from point It is clear that the potential market for coastal container shipping is the inter-regional and domestic box traffic currently moving by truck.
Only a of origin to destination and return.
Current truck/intermodal services that utilize railroads are provided on a daily or more frequent service.
Thus, a major factor for the integration of coastwise barge operations with trucking service is also to have daily or higher frequency service.
coastwise scheduled service with truck like responsiveness and flexibility in terms of trip time
5-7
