1999 ACO #352 STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION BARBARA LAMORIA, PLAINTIFF, V HEALTH CARE AND RETIREMENT CORPORATION (SUN VALLEY MANOR, INCORPORATED) AND HARTFORD ACCIDENT 
APPEAL FROM MAGISTRATE LENGAUER.
MICHAEL J. BROWN FOR PLAINTIFF, MARK A. WARBER AND CHARLES F. GRZANKA FOR DEFENDANTS.
OPINION WITTE, COMMISSIONER Defendants appeal the decision of Magistrate Thomas Lengauer, mailed January 21, 1998, granting plaintiff an open award for a slip-and-fall injury to her left knee.
Defendants contest the choice to permit plaintiff to proceed with her case based on the issue of claim, and disagree with the magistrate's decision to award benefits despite his determination that there were many sedentary registered nursing activities plaintiff remained able to perform.
Further, defendants dispute the magistrate's reliance upon the disability opinion of plaintiff's surgeon, Dr. Distler, since, as the magistrate acknowledged, it was based on a considerably inaccurate description of how her injury occurred.
Finally, defendants disagree with the determination that the fall did other than temporarily cause soft-tissue symptoms, particularly in light of the magistrate's express finding that plaintiff's preexisting arthritic condition was not contributed to by the fall.
Plaintiff cross appeals the magistrate's finding that the cost of a total knee replacement would not be the employer's responsibility.
Plaintiff also contends that there is not competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record for the magistrate's conclusion that her "fall did not significantly contribute to or aggravate her degenerative arthritic condition and her current need for knee replacement surgery."
We reverse because the magistrate misinterpreted the medical evidence.
The evidence supports only a closed award.
DOCKET # 98-0060 Plaintiff fell on August 9, 1993 in defendant employer's dining room.
She missed three days of work and returned, working and receiving physical therapy until January 7, 1994.
On Monday, January 10, 1994, she received diagnostic arthroscopic surgery and never returned to work.
Considerable amounts of synovial thickening and some areas lacking any cartilage cushion were discovered.
Occasional "buckling" or a giving away of her knee was an instinctual pain response to bone-on-bone contact in the knee.
Her employment was terminated in July 1994.
Defendants voluntarily paid worker's compensation benefits until July 1, 1994, and terminated them based on their contention plaintiff had recovered from a soft-tissue injury.
Plaintiff never contacted defendants to question or contest the termination of these voluntarily-paid benefits.
Plaintiff did not file her application for worker's compensation benefits until August 2, 1996.
When, at trial, defendants contested the timeliness of plaintiff's claim, the magistrate stopped the proceeding and invited briefs.
The only testimony taken up to that point was plaintiff's acknowledgment that she did nothing from the time her benefits were terminated until filing her application for benefits.1 Plaintiff answered yes to these statements: "You were aware that your benefits had been terminated pursuant to the notice of dispute you received in July of 1994, is that correct? You stopped receiving worker's comp benefits then did you not? . . .
And until you filed the petition in July in August of 1996, you made no further claim, is that correct? . . .
[Y]ou made no other claim for worker's compensation other than this civil litigation you filed through Mr. Brown, is that correct?" (Plaintiff had filed a wrongful termination lawsuit.)
No relevant exhibits were admitted at this hearing, conducted October 16, 1997.
Both parties filed briefs, almost simultaneously.
Critically, in her "Memorandum of Law," plaintiff attached seven pages, each being a distinct "Employee Request for Leave of Absence."
On each is a representation that the injury is to plaintiff's "left knee," that it is "work-related," that the employee requests "medical leave" and that the medical leave is based on defendants' receipt of a "current disability statement."
All but one are signed as approved by the employer's administrator and/or the department head.
These documents cover the period of January through July 1994.
While we reject plaintiff's claim that she made oral claim for worker's compensation benefits the day she fell, since no such testimony appears anywhere in the record, and we reject plaintiff's belief that the accident report filled out the date of injury claimed benefits, since it does not, we do find that the requests for leave make repeated claim for benefits for a work-related injury.
Nowhere in defendants' filings or on-the-record arguments is there any contest or objection to the reliability, authenticity or even recognition of these documents' existence.
While we would have liked to have seen them admitted at hearing as exhibits, they were attached to plaintiff's memorandum of law and, adopting the informal approach to such proceedings, we have considered them.
Further, since they The magistrate found that plaintiff's benefits were paid voluntarily until August 11, 1994 and that plaintiff's application for benefits was received August 8, 1996.
By the magistrate's own factual findings, plaintiff filed her application less than two years after termination of her benefits, making her claim timely.
1 2 are defendants' records, signed by their management, we cannot imagine any objection to their authenticity.
Because we have accepted these documents, we need not reach defendants' understandable difference with the magistrate's interpretation of the statute as construed by Bieber v Keeler Brass Co, 209 Mich App 597 (1995).
The magistrate, without commenting on these documents' existence, believed that defendants' voluntary payment was enough to preserve plaintiff's claim without plaintiff having to timely ask for worker's compensation benefits.
He wrote, "The benefits in this case were apparently paid voluntarily, and it is unclear whether plaintiff specifically asked for these benefits.
I do not believe this is a relevant issue.
. . .
Why should plaintiff specifically have to state that she is making claim, when benefits are being paid?" That was not a correct interpretation of the law.2 However, the presence of these documents permits this case to fall directly under Bieber's holding that plaintiff's right to claim worker's compensation benefits was preserved without need to file a further claim once she timely claimed (and was voluntarily paid) worker's compensation benefits.
Thus, while reached by an erroneous path, the magistrate's conclusion that plaintiff timely made claim is affirmed.
In their second issue, the defendants state that plaintiff has not shown a compensable disability.
The magistrate found that there are many sedentary activities a registered nurse can perform but that plaintiff "has not made any effort to seek employment.
Nevertheless, given her physical condition, I find that there is a connection between Plaintiff's wage loss and her accident on August 9, 1993."
The parties do not dispute that plaintiff was disabled; she was awaiting total knee replacement surgery as of trial and represented she had been ambulating only on crutches for years, ever since the arthroscopic surgery.
She stated that was when her problem of her left knee buckling began.
The magistrate concluded that plaintiff, who had missed little work before her date of injury, was disabled due to her fall.
Since she had never regained full use of her left knee following the work-related injury, and because she suffered wage loss as a result, he found that she satisfied the Haske v Transport Leasing Inc, Indiana, 455 Mich 628 (1997), test for a compensable disability.
In Haske, supra, at 658, it is said, "Unemployment or reduced wages must be causally linked to work-related injury, and a plaintiff may not reject actual wages reasonably offered or avoid or refuse actual wages."
(Emphasis ours.)
Here, defendants demonstrated that many aspects of plaintiff's work were sedentary and other women in plaintiff's position had performed only the lighter aspects of the job and delegated the rest, but defendants did not show that plaintiff was offered work by defendant employer or by any other It was also an incorrect interpretation of the facts since plaintiff's claim was required, at the latest, at any point during the two years following the termination of her employment, a time period during which she was not being paid any benefits.
2 3 entity.
Therefore, while we, like the magistrate, were disturbed by plaintiff's lack of any attempt to return to work, pursuant to Haske, plaintiff is not ineligible for benefits as a result.
Third, defendants argue that the magistrate should not have relied on Dr. Distler's testimony since it was based on an inaccurate hypothetical.
Plaintiff was given emergency care the day she fell.
Ten weeks of physical therapy was unsuccessful.
The arthroscopic surgery was purely diagnostic, noting no torn meniscus or ligament injury, but further surgery was indicated at some unknown future time to replace the knee joint.
Plaintiff's family doctor, James K. Brasseur, D.O., began treating plaintiff while he was defendant employer's medical director, until 1991, and treated her privately thereafter.
He testified that, before the August 1993 fall, he had already been administering cortisone shots into plaintiff's painful left knee and that he had seen her use a crutch.
He found plaintiff to have "generalized osteoarthritis" not just an arthritic knee.
The doctor agreed that "certainly activity is beneficial for patients with arthritis in terms of making sure there is an adequate blood supply into the area in terms of keeping up muscle tone . . . [and a]s a way of even retarding the progression of the disease process."
Brasseur agreed he would defer to the findings and recommendations of any treating orthopedic surgeon.
The magistrate found Dr. Brasseur's testimony describing plaintiff's pre-existing condition as "somewhat vague."
Plaintiff's treater referred her to Dr. Distler who performed the arthroscopic surgery.
He testified that at surgery he found pre-existing arthritis and stated that plaintiff's years of working on her feet were to blame for accelerating the arthritis.
The magistrate recognized that Dr. Distler was given an inaccurate hypothetical.
The facts found at trial were that plaintiff fell onto her right side but hyperextended her left knee and felt symptoms only on the left.
Dr. Distler instead understood that plaintiff fell directly onto her left knee and he concluded that someone of plaintiff's weight would "certainly" affect the knee by falling on it.
But he could not begin to estimate the extent of the effect.
Plaintiff weighed more than 300 pounds for most of her adult life, as well as at the time of injury.
The doctor's testimony includes these statements (emphasis ours): The trauma such as a fall on a hard floor, a hard surface, with someone who weighs that much would certainly have a negative or bad impact on a knee, especially a knee that already has some degenerative changes in it.
Exactly how much of an impact I have a very, very difficult time telling.
It certainly didn't help the knee and I could say that it most probably exacerbated the problem but to what degree I find it very difficult to pin down.
Again, 4 The question, as I understand it, a fall as you described, someone who weighs over 300 pounds landing on the knee, probably right on the medial femoral condyle, what's the likelihood of that not having a negative effect on the knee or a detrimental effect? I think it's very unlikely that a fall like that would have no impact on the knee.
It's very speculative, especially when it's three or four months between the fall and the time that I look at the knee.
I cannot foresee someone weighing that much falling on the knee not causing some damage to that knee.
When asked the pre-injury effect on her knee of 18 years on her feet as a registered nurse, the doctor said, [B]asically most of her activities over the 18 year period contributed to the arthritis that we saw.
She spent most of her waking hours working there and walking on those hard floors with probably 1500 pounds going through the knee joint with every step.
That would cause the knee to wear.
If you include everything that you did, I would say that's very easy to see that her activities over that 18 year period were probably the major factor in causing the wear in her knee.
When asked to assume the fall had a significant impact on a knee in this condition, the doctor was very reluctant to attribute any significance to the fall: [I]t's very, very difficult to look at this one case when there's so many parameters to look at and say what impact did this fall have.
That is extremely, extremely difficult, and it could have had a major impact in her knee condition.
Did it? I really I don't think I can.
. . .
You know, I don't know.
I honestly don't know.
The doctor later stated that if he could consider the knee without its history he could be more direct: Whether you fall at work and do it or slip on the ice at home . . . you will hasten the wear, and if you look at this and say, What was the impact of this fall, if we take it out of the context of everything you said, it certainly didn't help it and it probably sped the wear.
His closing comment on this issue was given during cross examination: Q.
And, Doctor, so the record is clear, when we're talking about the effect that this August 1993 incident may have had on the left knee, . . . you cannot say here today, within a reasonable degree of medical certainty, as to the extent of pathological damage which may have been caused to that knee as a result of that incident? A. That's true.
5 Finally, the doctor was informed of the differing history of hyperextending the knee given at trial.
In response he said, "[S]he told me her right knee gave out on her.
As far as the right knee striking the floor, I really can't comment on that.
I wasn't told that that was what happened."
In summary, the doctor could not say what degree of damage was done by a direct fall on the knee, he was sure plaintiff's years of walking had damaged the knee, explaining the complete loss of certain areas of cartilage discovered during surgery, and he could not comment on a fall such as she described at trial as opposed to a direct fall on the left knee.
From this, we do not see support for the magistrate's sharply-contrasting conclusions, which he claimed were based on Distler's testimony, that the fall damaged plaintiff's left knee on a continuous basis through trial, that plaintiff's work otherwise was not to blame for the condition of her knee and that although it was based on an inaccurate hypothetical, the doctor's testimony aided the magistrate's determination as to the nexus between the fall and plaintiff's disability.
Defendants' final issue is related: "There is not competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record for the magistrate's finding that plaintiff's fall aggravated her underlying condition."
The magistrate determined that while the plaintiff's degenerative arthritic condition was not "caused or contributed to by her employment," was "not employment-related," and that the needed total knee replacement would not be defendant employer's responsibility, nonetheless, her disability was compensable.
Impliedly, he found her knee condition aggravated or accelerated by the injury.
We have already given, in great detail, the specifics of Dr. Distler's testimony, that it was the years of walking on the job (and elsewhere) that caused plaintiff's disability and that the fall could not be quantified in its effect.
We have already noted Dr. Brausser's testimony that plaintiff had generalized osteoarthritis and that his pre-injury treatment was specifically to the left knee.
Defendants had plaintiff examined by Dr. Michael R. Krieg on November 19, 1996.
He testified that the bilateral x-rays he took of plaintiff's knees were identical, thus objectively revealing no traumatic worsening of plaintiff's left knee due to her fall.
Both knees revealed "minimal degenerative arthritis" which the doctor attributed to her "weight, age and parentage."
He also concluded that plaintiff was using her crutches "improperly" since he found no atrophy despite her 35 months of using crutches.
He said that plaintiff's twisting injury occurring in her fall would only temporarily affect the soft-tissue structures and would have absolutely no effect on the bony structures involved with her degenerative arthritis.
He testified: I have no question in my mind that this lady had this injury and the symptoms that are related to that, but I don't think that she changed or aggravated or added to any of the underlying degenerative changes in her knee.
I think that this strain and hyperextension got better as there was no evidence of any ligamentous loss that I could discern that would be related to hyperextension or strain.
6 On the day he examined her, he wrote: It is interesting to note, at least clinically today, that she has minimal changes of arthritis in both knees comparatively and is not a candidate for total knee replacement at the present time.
In fact, she does not need the crutches that she is walking with and, in my opinion, could go back to work without any restrictions whatsoever doing the same job she did before.
She does not need further medical care to her left knee but does have degenerative changes in both knees.
At his deposition, he gave this prognosis: She does have arthritis of significance in both knees, that will need to be treated as time goes along periodically for symptomatic changes, for progress of the normal disease of degenerative arthritis.
At some point in the future she will need treatments, medications, braces, treatments [sic], surgery possibly but not on the day I saw her.
And I also didn't find any evidence of any injury that could change those degenerative changes in the knee or knees that would have been related to the work place in any way.
In summary, which doctor supports the magistrate's conclusion that plaintiff's fall aggravated her knee arthritis through the time of trial? Dr. Brasseur diagnosed generalized pre-existing arthritis and was even treating the left knee.
He did not comment on the effects of the fall.
Dr. Distler said years of walking on the knee wore it down and he could not estimate the effect of the fall.
Dr. Krieg said when he was permitted to examine plaintiff in November 1996, there was no lingering evidence of a soft tissue injury.
Thus, on this record, there is support for the magistrate's credibility finding, supported by both the lay and the expert testimony, that plaintiff experienced increased symptoms immediately following the fall.
However, differentiating between symptoms due to the fall and those which were merely ongoing symptoms due to the pre-existing arthritis requires expert testimony.
No doctor testified to ongoing symptoms due to the fall.
Dr. Krieg most specifically said that the soft tissue symptoms, which certainly had been present, had abated.
Therefore, we terminate benefits as of his examination.
As for plaintiff's cross appeal that she is entitled to a total knee replacement at the employer's expense, we decline her argument.
There is support for the magistrate's conclusion that plaintiff's work is not responsible for her need for surgery.
The magistrate accepted Dr. Krieg's opinion that plaintiff's worn-out knee is not work related but due to her "weight, age and parentage."
Even Dr. Distler said that every time the 57-year-old plaintiff takes a step, 1500 pounds of pressure is exerted upon each knee.
That is true regardless whether plaintiff is at work.
Plaintiff further argues that the x-rays of March 1993, demonstrating mild degenerative arthritis, and those following the injury in August 1993, showing significant degenerative arthritis, 7 show the fall was legally significant.
However, plaintiff failed to elicit expert testimony that it was the fall and not the natural progression of plaintiff's disease which was culpable for the increased arthritis.
We also note that Dr. Krieg described the latter x-ray findings as "mild."
Plaintiff finally argues that since she was able to work until the fall, but due to pain and buckling in her knee, she has not been able to work since January 1996, the employer should pay for surgery to rebuild the knee.
Plaintiff told Dr. Krieg that she has occasional give-away sensation but has not fallen.
The explanation given by her surgeon gave for this sensation is that there are areas of bone-on-bone contact due, not to her fall, but to the progression of the degenerative arthritis.
Once the cartilage is worn away, the contact can be painful and buckling is the body's pain response.
The link to the fall is not shown.
Therefore, we reject all arguments except defendants' argument that there is not competent, material and substantial evidence on the whole record for a finding of work-related disability beyond Dr. Krieg's examination occurring November 19, 1996.
Commissioners Kent and Wyszynski concur.
Joy L. Witte James J. Kent James Edward Wyszynski, Jr.
Commissioners 8 STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION BARBARA LAMORIA, PLAINTIFF, V HEALTH CARE AND RETIREMENT CORPORATION (SUN VALLEY MANOR, INCORPORATED) AND HARTFORD ACCIDENT 
This cause came before the Appellate Commission on defendants' appeal and plaintiff's cross appeal from Magistrate Thomas Lengauer's decision, mailed January 21, 1998, granting plaintiff an open award of benefits.
The Commission believes that the magistrate's award should be affirmed with modification.
Therefore, IT IS ORDERED that the magistrate's decision is affirmed with the modification that plaintiff's benefits shall terminate as of Dr. Krieg's examination on November 19, 1996.
Joy L. Witte James J. Kent James Edward Wyszynski, Jr.
Commissioners DOCKET # 98-0060
