Who regulates Assisted Living Facilities? The Division of Licensing Services, Office of Assisted Living Licensing regulates and monitors Assisted Living Facilities statewide.
Most facilities are inspected once a year, and as needed to ensure compliance and investigate complaints.
If a facility receives a deficiency-free relicensing survey, it may receive a two-year license.
With the exception of initial licensing visits, all visits are unannounced.
What is an Assisted Living Facility? An assisted living facility is a residential care institution that provides or contracts to provide supervisory care, personal care, or directed care on a continuing basis.
Types of assisted living facilities include: adult foster care homes, where care is provided for up to four people in the home in which the caregiver lives, assisted living homes, which provide care for up to ten people, and assisted living centers, which provide care for eleven or more people.
The Office of Assisted Living Licensing also regulates Adult Day Health Care Centers statewide.
How can I find information about a particular Assisted Living Facility? The Department maintains a public file for all licensed health and child care institutions, including assisted living facilities.
The files contain records of inspections, complaints, and licensing history.
The files are available for public viewing from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Copies of statutes and regulations governing the operation of assisted living facilities are available upon request.
What if I have a complaint about an Assisted Living Facility? Complaints regarding licensed and unlicensed health care institutions may be placed by phone, fax, letter, or e-mail.
The office is open from 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday.
Complaints are prioritized according to the severity and risk to the resident, and investigated in a timely manner.
The Office of Assisted Living Licensing works in conjunction with other state, local, and county agencies to ensure the health and safety of residents in assisted living facilities.
Choosing an Assisted Living Facility Different facilities provide different types of care in a variety of settings; some have only five or six residents in a single family home, others are apartment settings with hundreds of residents.
Regardless of size and setting, all assisted living facilities must provide certain basic services.
The key is to match the setting to the resident's needs and preferences.
Choosing the right home or center will require you to use critical judgement, and to rely on the intuitive "gut feeling" of the prospective resident or his/her representative.
A free list of licensed assisted living facilities is available through the office.
Prior to selecting a facility, make more than one visit to the home or center.
Include the prospective resident in as many visits as possible.
Make unannounced visits at different times of the day.
Be observant.
Ask questions of residents and staff.
Review the public file.
Carefully review any admission agreement before signing it.
The admission agreement is a legally binding contract.
Be sure that it is complete and correct, with no blank spaces.
Questions to Ask Is there a posted current license, with the facility's correct address, from ADHS? What are the admission requirements? What are resident to staff ratios? Is there a certified manager on duty? Are caregivers available 24 hours a day? Can residents continue to see their own doctor? Are the grounds and the building(s) neat and clean? Is the menu balanced and appealing? How much time do residents have to eat their meals? Do they have substitutes if a resident does not like the meal? Do staff know residents by name? What activities are available? Are residents clean and comfortable? Are residents wearing appropriate seasonal clothing? What is facility policy on holding a bed if a resident leaves the home for hospitalization or vacation? How close is the location of the home to family and friends? Ask for a "typical profile" of a resident in their facility.
Are residents alert or confused? Match the facility to the resident.
Are residents permitted to have visitors at any time? Are resident permitted to access to the outdoors, get beverages, use the telephone, rest, etc. on their own? Can residents go to bed at night and get up in the morning when they choose? Who arranges doctor appointments and manages resident medication? What are the added expenses? (service plan, transportation, personal items, beautician) Are resident rooms decorated with personal belongings? Are relationships between staff and residents warm and friendly? Are there communication barriers between staff and residents? Do they allow pets? Licensing specialists are available to answer your questions Monday through Friday at (602) 674-9775.
If you need this publication in alternate format please contact us with your needs at 1-800-842-4681 (State Voice Relay) or 1-800-367-8939 (State TDD/TTY Relay).
For more information, please visit our website at www.hs.state.az.us/als.
