TABLE OF CONTENTS PAGE Letter to the Task Force Members from the Attorney General ......................................................
1 Task Force on Identity Theft ­ Full Membership .............................................................................
2 Charge of the Attorney General to the Identity Theft Task Force .................................................
3 The State of Identity Theft Today........................................................................................................
4 History of the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force .......................................................
10 Task Force Work Group Assignments .............................................................................................
13 Synopsis of the Task Force Meetings.................................................................................................
16 Findings of the Law Enforcement Work Group .............................................................................
21 Findings of the Business Work Group ..............................................................................................
28 Findings of the Prevention Work Group ..........................................................................................
36 Findings of the Consumer Work Group ...........................................................................................
39 Recommendations of the Identity Theft Task Force.......................................................................
43 Conclusion .............................................................................................................................................
50
i
TASK FORCE ON IDENTITY THEFT - FULL MEMBERSHIP Margaret Ballard, Director of Government Affairs, Retail Alliance of Tidewater Liz Bernhard, Director of Chesterfield County Victim Witness Program Paul Blachowicz, Senior Analyst; Pittston Company Richard F. Bowman, Executive Vice President, First Virginia Bank The Honorable Mike Brown, Sheriff of Bedford County Brad Bryant, Special Agent, FBI The Honorable Kathy J. Byron, Member, House of Delegates, Lynchburg Robert Chapman, victim, Chester Rob Childress, Resident Agent in Charge, Social Security Administration Joanna Crane, Program Manager, Federal Trade Commission Beth DeHaven, Government Account Executive, Microsoft Corporation Virginia Dudley, Member, Franklin County Chamber of Commerce Dr. Jeff Eisenach, President, Progress and Freedom Foundation Eric Ellman, Director of State Government Relations, Consumer Data Industry Association Tom Falat, Assistant Commissioner for Government Relations, Department of Motor Vehicles Tom Gallagher, CEO, Better Business Bureau Mitchell Goldstein, Director, Joint Commission on Technology and Science Mark Grady, Dean of George Mason University School of Law Vance Gudmundsen, Assistant Corporate Counsel, Capital One Max Hamel, Associate, The Dutko Group Dick Johnston, Director, National White Collar Crime Center Bill Kallio, State Director, AARP Virginia Sue Keith, Branch Sales Manager of the Mid-Atlantic Region, Oracle Corporation Hugh Keogh, President, Virginia Chamber of Commerce Bobbie Kilberg, President, Northern Virginia Technology Council Irene Leech, President, Virginia Citizen's Consumer Council Cynthia Mann, victim, Spotsylvania Colonel Gerald Massengill, Superintendent of the Virginia State Police Paul J. McNulty, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia The Honorable William C. Mims, Member, Senate of Virginia, Leesburg Ray La Mura, Director of Government Relations, Virginia Association of Bankers Anne Nemitz, Assistant Vice President and Investigator, Bank of America The Honorable George Newstrom, Secretary of Technology Laurie Peterson, President, Virginia Retail Merchants Association Rick Pillow, President, Virginia Credit Union League Paul Russinoff, Director of State Public Policy, America Online/Time-Warner Patricia G. Satterfield, Executive Director, Virginia Association of Community Banks The Honorable Randy Smith, Chesapeake Commonwealth's Attorney Charles H. Staples; Legal Services of Eastern Virginia The Honorable Robert J. Stolle, Executive Director, Greater Richmond Technology Council Jane Watkins, President, Virginia Credit Union
2
Charge of the Attorney General to the Identity Theft Task Force Portions of the following charge are excerpted from Attorney General Kilgore's address to the Identity Theft Task Force on June 26, 2002 at George Mason University:
As you focus on Identity Theft issues, your charge is to recommend practical and effective solutions to combat Identity Theft.
Find ways to strengthen our Identity Theft Statute.
We need to amend the statute so that it is not only illegal to obtain, record or access "personal identifying information" with fraudulent purposes, but also to use or possess that information with fraud in mind.
We need to increase the penalties for those who market in stolen identities.
Just as we treat those who possess drugs with the intent to distribute them more severely than mere possessors or users, so we need to increase the penalties for those who would possess stolen identities with the intent to sell them to someone else.
We need to send a message to these criminals who would steal someone else's identity: You are taking a huge risk ­ and we will catch you.
We need to stiffen the penalties and fines for all perpetrators of Identity Theft.
To that end, recommend ways law enforcement can report and acquire information in Identity Theft cases with more standardized and cooperative procedures.
This will mean that statewide, and in cooperation with other law enforcement agencies around the country, we can apprehend and punish these thieves, because we have a standard way of reporting this all too common offense.
Recommend ways to protect the use of Social Security numbers as a primary identifier.
Just as you may elect to have an alternate "T" number on your Virginia Driver's License, as opposed to your Social Security number, I want you to recommend additional ways individuals can protect personal identifying information.
Finally, consider the merit of an "Identity Theft Certification" or "Identity Theft Passport."
This "Identity Theft Passport" would verify that an individual is a victim of Identity Theft and could help in "proving their innocence."
We have our work cut out for us! In our constitutional republic, we value the individual and nothing is closer or more intimate to an individual citizen than his identity.
As Attorney General, I view fighting this consumer fraud as one of my most important duties.
Once again, I want to thank each of you for helping protect Virginia from the scourge of Identity Theft.
3
THE STATE OF IDENTITY THEFT TODAY Identity theft occurs when an imposter misuses personal identifying information to assume another's identity or obtain goods, services, or benefits in his name.
The fruits of identity theft are mostly pecuniary, but identity theft also involves fraudulently obtained documents, such as passports, Social Security cards, and drivers' licenses which, enable a thief to defraud a victim in a variety of ways.
Identity thieves have misused personal information to open fraudulent credit card accounts, secure deposits on cars and housing, obtain employment opportunities, create insurance benefits, and rob retirement earnings.
This form of financial sabotage can devastate a victim's credit.
Approximately 20% of all victims and 23% of victims in Virginia experienced more than one type of identity theft.
The following chart contains the percentage of victims experiencing each theft type:
How Victims' Information Is Used January 1 - December 31, 2001 60 50 Percent of Victims
40
Virginia 30 20 10 0 Credit Card Fraud Phone or Utilities Fraud
All Locations
Bank Fraud
Employment -Related Fraud
Loan Fraud
Government Documents/ Benefits Fraud
Other Identity Theft Fraud
Attempted Identity Theft Fraud
The graphs used in this section of the Report are used with the permission of the Federal Trade Commission.
4
The number of identity theft victims increases every day.
Indeed, "identity theft is the fastest-growing crime in America."1 Over 700,000 people were victims of identity theft in 2001.2 Last year the Federal Trade Commission received 1,935 reports of identity theft from Virginians.3 The Commonwealth of Virginia ranks fifteenth of all the United States for the number of identity theft victims.4
Top 10 Cities In Virginia (number of identity theft victims)
City Alexandria Richmond Arlington Virginia Beach Fairfax Norfolk Falls Church Newport News Chesapeake
No. 173 114 110 110 66 64 60 48 46
According to the Identity Theft Resource Center ("ITRC"), "on average, a victim of identity theft spends 175 hours restoring his or her good name by notifying credit bureaus, canceling credit cards and negotiating with creditors."5
Christine B. Whelan, How to Strike Back at Identity Theft, Wall St. J., August 21, 2002, at D1.
Christine B. Whelan, How to Strike Back at Identity Theft, Wall St. J., August 21, 2002, at D1.
3 Federal Trade Commission, Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse Report from January 1-December 31, 2002 (April 25, 2002), at http://www.ftc.gov.
4 Id. 5 Identity Theft Resource Center, Facts and Statistics ­ Find Out More About the Nation's Fastest Growing Crime, (July 2, 2002), at http://www.idtheftcenter.com/html/fact_and_statistics.htm.
2
1
5
The following chart is based on reports from victims who contacted the FTC directly (70, 540 victims) because external data providers generally do not compile this information.
Eighty-eight percent (61, 956) of all victims reporting directly to the FTC provided their age.
Victim Age Distribution January 1 - December 31, 2001 30 Percent of Victims Providing Age
20
10
0
Under 18
18-29
30-39
40-49
50-59
60 and Over
6
The following chart is based on complaints from victims who contacted the FTC directly (70, 540 victims).
Of those victims, 44% (31,012) provided the dates on which the identity theft first occurred and they first discovered it.
Because some victims experienced multiple instances where their information had been misused, these figures do not track the amount of time it took a victim to discover a particular instance of identity theft, but, rather, the amount of time between the initial misuse of the victim's information and when the victim first discovered that their information had been misused.
There was an average of 12.3 months between the initial misuse of the victim's information and when the victim first discovered that their information had been misued.
Number of Months Between Date Identity Theft First Discovered and Date First Discovered by Victim 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0
January 1 - December 31, 2001
Percent of Victims Reporting
Less Than 1 Month
1 to 6 Months
7 to 12 Months
13 to 24 Months
25 to 48 Months
49 to 60 Months
Over 60 Months
The ITRC estimates that identity theft victims, on average, spend "$1,000 in out of pocket expenses to clear their names."6 According to the ITRC, "the Secret Service estimates that in 1997 consumers lost more than $745 million due to identity theft."7 The financial cost of identity theft is also borne by the government and businesses.
A General Accounting Office (GAO) study on identity theft has discussed the significant costs to federal agencies of identity theft investigations.
The executive office for the United States Attorney estimated the cost of prosecuting the average white-collar crime is $11,443.
The Secret Service estimates the cost per financial crime investigation is $15,000.
The Federal Bureau of
6 7
Id. Id.
7
Investigation estimates the average cost per financial crime investigation is $20,000.8 The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse estimates that identity theft costs "financial institutions, utilities and merchants more than five billion dollars annually."9 Even more foreboding is the increasing availability of information in cyberspace and criminals' advancing capabilities to commit computer crimes.
"[A] computer simply may make it more efficient to organize a criminal enterprise and to carry its goals into fruition . . . .
Although the objectives of criminal conduct remain constant, computers have changed the crime equation."10 The Identity Theft Resource Center recently reported that online identity theft led to losses of $12 billion in 2001.11 Computers and Internet access can cause cyberspace to become a dark, wide frontier for high-tech identity thieves.
What was formerly being achieved by "dumpster diving" and theft of a wallet or purse, can now take place with a click of a computer key.
For instance, recent reports recount the exploits of a new breed of cyber pirate: the Wi-Fi hacker armed with a lap-top and wireless modem, who roams the streets searching for access to unprotected wireless networks and uses such networks to obtain free access to the Internet.
In this fashion, however, a Wi-Fi hacker also roots around the network's databases, window-shopping for useful information.
The Wi-Fi hacker then shares his findings with other hackers ­ posting or even selling information on how to access the unprotected network with other thieves.
These kinds of secondary identity thieves must also be brought within the ambit of the law.
Identity theft is a crime under federal and Virginia law.
In 1998, the United States Congress passed the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act12.
Violations of the Act are investigated by federal agencies such as the United States Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigations, and the United States Postal Inspection Service, and are prosecuted through the Department of Justice.
Penalties include fines and potential terms of up to twenty years in prison.
If the offense is committed to facilitate an act of international terrorism, the identity thief can receive a twenty-year prison term.
In 2000, the Virginia the state statute are generally victim is greater than $200.
apply if identity fraud causes General Assembly passed an Identity Fraud Law13.
Violations of punishable as Class 1 misdemeanors unless the financial loss to the Subsequent offenses are a Class 6 felony.
Greater penalties also a victim to be falsely arrested.
Based on FY2001 Local Inmate Data System (LIDS) data, 397 offenders were held preor post-trial in jail for an offense committed during FY2001 under Virginia's Identity Fraud 8
Identity Theft: Prevalence and Cost Appear to be Growing, United States General Accounting Office, Report No.
GAO-02-363 (March 2002) 9 Yochi J. Dreazen, U.S.
Is Cracking Down on Thefts of Identity, Arresting about 130, Wall St. J., May 3, 2002.
10 Michael Edmund O'Neill, Old Crimes in New Bottles: Sanctioning Cybercrime, 9 George Mason Law Review 237, 257 (Winter 2000).
11 Ben Elgin, Peter Elstrom, Pallavi Gogoi, Faith Keenan, 
Wk., September 2, 2002, at 72.
12 13
18 U.S.C. § 1028 et. seq Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3
8
Law.
Of these, 73 resulted in a reported conviction under the same statute by September 2001.
Nearly all of the persons held or convicted under this statute were for the misdemeanor crime.
The Virginia Criminal Sentencing Commission has compiled all available data on this new crime in Virginia, as the following chart demonstrates: Background Information for Offenders Confined in Jail Between 7/1/2000 and 6/30/2001
Crime Under § 18.2-186.3 (Identity Fraud) Violations of this section shall be punishable as a Class 1 misdemeanor.
Any violation resulting in financial loss of greater than $200 shall be punishable as a Class 6 felony.
Any second of subsequent conviction shall be punishable as a Class 6 felony.
Any violation resulting in the arrest and detention of the person whose identification documents or identifying information were used to avoid summons, arrest, prosecution, or to impede a criminal investigation shall be punishable as a Class 6 felony.
Number Confined in FY01 314 40 10
Number Convicted through 8/30/2001 66 4 2
33
1
(Note: Includes only convictions of those held in the local jail pretrial or sentenced to server time posttrial.
14 Data Source: FY2001 Local Inmate Data System (LIDS) database).
The Virginia Code also prohibits the improper use of a credit card, debit card, and other payment device numbers and the improper use of driver's licenses.15 It is Attorney General Kilgore's goal to strengthen Virginia's Identity Fraud Law to further protect consumers and punish identity thieves.
14
1.
2.
Data Limitations: Data obtained from LIDS have severe limitations with respect to convictions.
Information regarding convicted offenders is limited to those who were either held pretrial up to the point of sentencing, were held after sentencing to complete a term of incarceration (either prison or jail), or both.
If the offender was never booked into jail, and was sentenced to no term of incarceration, there would be no information in the LIDS database.
Similarly, if the offender served several weeks pretrial before making bond, and at sentencing the judge decided that the pretrial time constituted sufficient punishment, LIDS would not be amended to include the conviction and sentencing information because the offender had already been released from jail and was not returning to serve an additional sentence in either jail or prison.
Section 18.2-186.3 was enacted on July 1,2000.
The Commission has found that due primarily to case processing time it takes approximately two years for the full impact of a new crime to been seen in the PSI database.
FY200 1 represents the first full year of implementation.
Although the time lag issues are less well known with the LIDS data, FY200 1 should still be less than complete with respect to the conviction information.
15
Va.
Code Ann.
§§ 11-33.2 and 46.2-342.
9
History of the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force Attorney General Jerry Kilgore launched the Identity Theft Task Force on May 10, 2002, composed of technology and business leaders, law enforcement officers, legislators, identity theft victims and consumer advocates.
The Attorney General directed the Task Force to convene town hall style meetings in communities across the Commonwealth to hear from victims and interested parties about identity theft.
The Task Force was charged with developing practical and effective ways to prevent identity theft and to help victims.
The Task Force was subdivided into four Work Groups to address law enforcement, business, prevention and consumer concerns about identity theft.
The Task Force convened every month from June through October 2002 in various locations in Northern Virginia, Southside Virginia, Hampton Roads, Roanoke, and Southwest Virginia, as well as in Richmond.
Meetings generally included an address by an expert on a particular subject related to identity theft, after which the Task Force divided into the four Work Groups to make recommendations and answer questions posed by the Attorney General, the public, and members of the Identity Theft Task Force.
These Work Groups focused on law Enforcement, business, prevention and consumer issues.
Following Work Group sessions, at every meeting, there was an opportunity for the public to provide comments to the Task Force.
In 2002, Virginia's General Assembly passed an open government measure sponsored by Attorney General Kilgore.
This legislation requires Executive Branch agencies, boards and commissions to post minutes on the Internet.
Although not required, in keeping with the spirit of this legislation and the Attorney General's support for open government, all Task Force meeting minutes were posted on the Attorney General's Office website and the Commonwealth Calendar.
The Attorney General's Task Force addressed four major areas with respect to identity theft: law enforcement, prevention, consumer concerns, and business 
Law Enforcement Law enforcement's response to identity theft and prevention of identity theft are subjects that were frequently addressed by victims and members of the public who testified at the Identity Theft Task Force meetings.
The crime of identity theft has no respect for traditional jurisdictional boundaries.
Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code states that the crime of identity theft shall be considered to have been committed in any locality where the person whose identifying information was appropriated resides, or in which any part of the offense took place, regardless of whether the defendant was ever actually in such locality.
Accordingly, victims of identity theft should be able to contact the law enforcement agency in which they live to make a report and expect that the investigation of the incident will be commenced by that agency.
Unfortunately, in many instances this has not been the case.
Victim after victim testified to the lack of response received from their local law enforcement agencies, with many agencies going so far as refusing to take police reports because the offense "occurred in another jurisdiction."
A
10
clear need exists for consistent report-taking practices among law enforcement agencies across the Commonwealth.
There also appears to be a need for the crime to be taken more seriously since it is currently only a misdemeanor, unless the amount in question exceeds $200, many identity theft cases are not attended to by law enforcement, or even seen by Commonwealth Attorneys who often only try felony cases.
Moreover, the chart on page 9 of this report demonstrates the inadequate level of punishment available under current Virginia law.
The filing of a police report is only the first step in the investigation and prosecution of an identity theft crime.
Victims need to follow through on their filing of reports of identity theft by appearing in court to assist in the prosecution of their cases.
Additionally, businesses need to cooperate and participate in the prosecution of identity theft cases in which their employees may be called as witnesses.
The marketers of stolen identities, just as drug dealers must be prosecuted and punished.
Furthermore, the penalties for identity theft must be considered and, where appropriate, increased.
Prevention The prevention of identity theft, and means to minimize its effects, were also matters of great concern to Task Force members.
Testimony and information revealing the ease with which thieves can obtain the personal identifying information of another showed that efforts to give citizens more control over their identifying information and to prevent the unknowing or unnecessary dissemination of that information are needed.
At the same time, the Task Force remained mindful that the protection of personal identifying information should not unreasonably restrict free commerce.
The public needs a centralized and accessible source of information about the ways to prevent identity theft and to report theft effectively when it occurs.
By the same token, victims need a means to prove their identities to law enforcement and creditors, if subjected to this growing crime.
Consumer Concerns Consumers are concerned with their ability to control their own personal information, as well as their ability to rectify or rebuild their identity after it has been violated by identity theft.
Victim after victim testified to the Attorney General and the Task Force that he or she had found themselves helpless to prove who they really were to commercial institutions, as well as to law enforcement.
A veritable outcry was heard from individuals who repeatedly endured a lengthy process of demonstrating and establishing their true identity, as opposed to that which had been stolen from them or violated and compromised as a result of identity theft.
Consumers also voiced their concern with the requirement to pay for their credit report when fraud has occurred or identity theft is suspected.
Consumer victims spoke of the enormous amount of time they spent trying to obtain police reports and to clear their credit reports.
The Task Force also heard from victims who had
11
arrest warrants issued in their names for crimes that were committed by others using their name.
The Consumer and the Business Work Groups conceived a system to help consumers.
The system encourages Virginia police to take police reports from victims of identity theft.
The victim would then submit their police report to the credit reporting agencies, which would then be required to block the trade lines16 on the report that resulted from the identity theft.
The system also enables consumers to obtain a circuit court finding that they were a victim of identity theft.
Victims could then obtain an "Identity Theft Passport," helping them to prove their identity and avoid being mistaken for the thief.
An Identity Theft Passport could be used to help the victim demonstrate that they have had their identity stolen.
The Task Force envisions that an Identity Theft Passport would assist victims avoid being arrested for crimes committed in their name.
Although an Identity Theft Passport would help victims prove their identity to creditors, the Task Force does not intend that the Identity Theft Passport would require that credit be issued to victims simply because they have or produce an Identity Theft Passport.
The Consumer Work Group also believes that the Commonwealth needs to ensure that only necessary parties gain access to vital records.
The group also discussed that they are aware that the General Assembly is studying what court records should go online.
The group understands that some records necessarily contain personal identifying information and thus, must be better protected.
In other cases, personal identifying information is unnecessary to a record and should be removed or omitted before it is recorded by a court clerk.
Business and Credit Organization Concerns Businesses, financial institutions, technology representatives and credit organizations participated in the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force.
Representatives verified the cost that businesses must bear because of the increasing incidents of identity theft.
Financial institutions and credit organizations also expressed their interest in helping train citizens and provide prevention materials to citizens about identity theft such as the Attorney General's Identity Theft Handbook.
The Business group found further ways to protect the display of Social Security numbers on numerous documents, and recommended ways to limit their display on state and some private documents.
16
Trade lines denote a specific purchase or credit item on a credit report.
12
TASK FORCE WORK GROUP ASSIGNMENTS The Identity Theft Task Force consists of forty-one diverse individuals.
Their experience with identity theft represents the entire continuum of the crime ­ from a consumer victim to prosecutor.
The membership also consisted of members of the business community.
Each Task Force member served on one of the following four Work Groups: Law Enforcement; Business; Prevention; and Consumer.
Law Enforcement Work Group The Law Enforcement Work Group focused on strengthening Virginia law to increase penalties for identity theft and to help victims.
Many of the members of this Work Group have experience in investigating crimes, prosecuting criminals, and providing security to corporations.
The members of the Law Enforcement Work Group include: Paul J. McNulty, U.S. Attorney, Eastern District of Virginia The Honorable William C. Mims, Member, Senate of Virginia, Leesburg The Honorable Randy Smith, Chesapeake Commonwealth's Attorney The Honorable Mike Brown, Sheriff of Bedford County Brad Bryant, Special Agent, FBI Dick Johnston, Director, National White Collar Crime Center Bobbie Kilberg, President, Northern Virginia Technology Council Rick Pillow, President, Virginia Credit Union League Charles H. Staples, Legal Services of Eastern Virginia Paul Blachowicz, Senior Analyst, Pittston Company
13
Business Work Group The Business Work Group's experience ranges from credit reporting to credit issuance and from government service to technology expertise.
The Business Work Group worked on ways to limit the use of Social Security numbers on state identification and mailings, and business documents.
This group also focused on victims.
The members of the Business group include: The Honorable George Newstrom, Secretary of Technology The Honorable Kathy J. Byron, Member, House of Delegates, Lynchburg Paul Russinoff, Director of State Public Policy, America Online/Time-Warner Beth DeHaven, Government Account Executive, Microsoft Corporation Vance Gudmundsen, Assistant Corporate Counsel, Capital One The Honorable Robert J. Stolle, Executive Director, Greater Richmond Technology Council Hugh Keogh, President, Virginia Chamber of Commerce Patricia G. Satterfield, Executive Director, Virginia Association of Community Banks Virginia Dudley, Rocky Mount Eric Ellman, Director of State Government Relations; Consumer Data Industry Association Prevention Work Group The Prevention Work Group focused on victim assistance and how to prevent identity theft.
The membership had experience in law enforcement, education, banking, retail and technology.
An identity theft victim was also a member.
The members of the Prevention Work Group include: Colonel Gerald Massengill, Superintendent of the Virginia State Police Mark Grady, Dean of George Mason University School of Law Margaret Ballard, Director of Government Affairs, Retail Alliance of Tidewater Richard F. Bowman, Executive Vice President, First Virginia Bank Mitchell Goldstein, Director, Joint Commission of Technology 
14
Bill Kallio, State Director, AARP Virginia Cynthia Mann, victim, Spotsylvania Max Hamel, Associate, The Dutko Group
Consumer Work Group The Consumer Work Group focused their work on creating a means to assist victims of identity theft.
The members have business, government and victim assistance experience.
This group also included a victim of identity theft.
The members of the Consumer Group include: Rob Childress, Resident Agent in Charge, Social Security Administration Sue Keith, Branch Sales Manager of the Mid-Atlantic Region, Oracle Corp.
Dr. Jeff Eisenach, President, Progress and Freedom Foundation Laurie Peterson, President, Virginia Retail Merchants Association Tom Gallagher, CEO, Better Business Bureau Jane Watkins, President, Virginia Credit Union Liz Bernhard, Director of Chesterfield County Victim Witness Program Irene Leech, President, Virginia Citizen's Consumer Council Robert Chapman, victim, Chester Tom Falat, Assistant Commissioner for Government Relations, DMV Joanna Crane, Program Manager, Federal Trade Commission
15
SYNOPSIS OF THE TASK FORCE MEETINGS June 2002, Arlington, Virginia The first official meeting of the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force took place on June 27, 2002 at the George Mason University School of Law, home to the National Center for Technology and Law in Arlington, Virginia.
Dean Mark Grady opened the meeting.
The group was also welcomed by Senator Leslie L. Byrne and Delegate James F. Almand.
Attorney General Kilgore followed with a charge to the Task Force and brief remarks about identity theft's importance in Virginia.
General Kilgore cited statistics that demonstrate identity theft is one of the fastest growing crimes, by which approximately one out of every five Americans has been victimized.
He also pointed to the fact that incidents of Identity Theft cost businesses an estimated five billion dollars, devastate the financial well being of our citizens, and wreak havoc on our financial institutions.
Attorney General Kilgore charged the Task Force with exploring practical and effective ways to prevent identity theft and to help those citizens who have been victimized.
He asked the Task Force to consider specific avenues for consideration.
The members of the Task Force introduced themselves to the audience.
In accordance with the Attorney General's support for open government, he announced that the minutes of all full task force meetings will be posted on the Office of the Attorney General's website and Commonwealth Calendar.
Richard Campbell, Deputy Attorney General for Technology and Transportation and Lisa HicksThomas, Assistant Attorney General and Director of the Computer Crime Unit conducted a Power Point presentation on the problem of Identity Theft that included a summary of the statistics of Identity Theft nationwide and in Virginia and a discussion about laws that are in place (both federal and state) that address identity theft.
After the presentation, Campbell and Hicks-Thomas answered questions from members of the Task Force.
The final portion of the meeting was dedicated to public comment.
Members of the audience were encouraged to tell the members of task force about their experiences in regards to identity theft.
July 2002, Danville, Virginia The second meeting of the Attorney General's Task Force on Identity Theft convened on Friday, July 26, 2002 at the Danville Community College.
Attorney General Kilgore introduced Delegate Danny Marshall, III representing the City of Danville.
Delegate Charles W. Carrico, Sr. was also present and was introduced to the Task Force and the audience.
Attorney General Kilgore reiterated the fact that identity theft looms as one of the most dangerous threats to our citizens and our economy today as evidenced in the daily news stories that are reported on identity theft.
16
After the Task Force members introduced themselves, Bret Brumbaugh, Postal Inspector with the United States Postal Inspection Service, made a presentation.
Inspector Brumbaugh is based in Roanoke and covers a vast territory ranging from Tennessee to the North Carolina border.
Inspector Brumbaugh began his presentation with the point that law enforcement alone cannot successfully tackle the problem of identity theft.
The assistance of credit card companies, bankers, the victim and others is needed to solve this problem.
Inspector Brumbaugh warned that perpetrators often steal pre-approved credit applications from victims' mailboxes and mail them (changing the address where the card is to be sent).
He discussed the difficulty that online credit applications create for investigation since many of the credit card companies do not have tracing technology.
Inspector Brumbaugh also spoke about how pointed to the need for cooperation among Although federal agencies have the luxury agencies must be willing to work with other law enforcement investigates identity theft cases.
He law enforcement officials of different jurisdictions.
of "nationwide" jurisdiction, local law enforcement jurisdictions to investigate these cases.
Finally, Inspector Brumbaugh addressed what citizens can do to protect themselves from becoming victims of identity theft.
The next speaker was a Charlottesville resident and teacher with the Charlottesville Public School System who had fallen victim to identity theft.
She discovered that she had been victimized in August of 1999 when she went to her local credit union to apply for a car loan and was denied credit.
After examining her credit report, she discovered several credit accounts that had been opened in her name.
There were also delinquent hospital bills and a judgement for a townhouse on her report.
All of these accounts were maxed out ­ in excess of $30,000 total.
She immediately began contacting the different companies and was told that these accounts led to a Fredericksburg address and that her current employer was listed as GEICO Insurance Company.
She have never lived in Fredericksburg nor worked for GEICO.
Unfortunately, the victim encountered further problems when she tried to get assistance.
She contacted all of the credit bureaus to put fraud alerts on her accounts, to no avail.
The local police department did not seem to take her claim seriously.
Many companies tried to garnish her wages.
She had to hire an attorney to stop several garnishments and had to send her utility bills to various companies to prove that she lived in Charlottesville not Fredericksburg.
The investigation finally uncovered the fact that the perpetrator was an employee of the victim's insurance company who had access to her personal information.
In September 2001, the police in Mississippi apprehended the criminal.
She was extradited to Virginia, but after being released on bond, is currently being sought by the police as a fugitive.
The victim told the Task Force about the devastating effect this incident has had on her credit and how she is still unable to even write checks in certain stores.
After hearing from this victim, the Task Force divided into its various Work Groups and, after those sessions, the meeting was adjourned.
17
August 2002, Norfolk, Virginia The third meeting of the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force convened on August 21, 2002, at the Roper Performing Arts Center at the Tidewater Community College in Norfolk, Virginia.
After a brief welcome and introduction to the college by Dr. Di Croce, Attorney General Kilgore spoke about the fact that most identity theft crimes are often carried out by a person whom the victim knows.
Out of the 70,000 identity theft crimes complaints filed in 2001, 3,900 involved family members.
The members of the Task Force introduced themselves to the audience.
The first presentation was made by Eric Ellman, Director of State Government Relations of the Consumer Data Industry Association.
The Consumer Data Industry Association is a trade association representing credit reporting agencies, check verification servicing companies, employment screening and reporting companies, and residential screening companies.
Ellman addressed identity theft from the point of view of the credit card companies and credit reporting agencies.
The second presenter, Victor Branch, Bank of America's Government Relations Manager for Virginia, discussed their program for customers who are victims of identity theft.
The bank provides customers with a single point of contact and enhanced assistance in resolving their identity fraud cases.
A fraud investigator is assigned to work with the customer on the incident and any future incidents of fraud that are discovered.
The meeting was opened for public comment.
Several members of the public commented on their experiences of being victims of identity theft.
Notably, one victim relayed being arrested by federal agents for drug trafficking when in fact the real perpetrator had stolen his identity.
Another victim described her experience as being more like "identity rape" than identity theft.
Following these presentations, the Task Force divided into its four Work Groups.
The Work Groups worked on the recommendations each were considering for proposal to the Attorney General in the Fall.
September 2002, Roanoke, Virginia On September 24, 2002, the Attorney General's Identity Theft Task Force meeting was held in Roanoke, Virginia at the Roanoke Higher Education Center.
Roanoke City Mayor, Ralph K. Smith, welcomed the group to Roanoke and gave a brief example of his personal experience with identity theft.
Delegate Kathy Byron also made special remarks.
After a welcome from Attorney General Kilgore, the Task Force members divided into their respective Work Groups: Law Enforcement, Prevention, Consumer and Business, to finalize the proposals that they had been working on during the preceding months.
After the small groups met, the full Task Force reconvened to hear the reports from each Work Group.
Representatives from each Work Group read the suggestions and explained the reasoning behind each suggestion.
Comments were sought and received from the entire Task Force.
18
The Law Enforcement Work Group focused on three primary areas: strengthening the current identity fraud criminal statute, aiding law enforcement in the investigation of identity theft by expanding the statute that currently provides for obtaining email records and cell phone records, and setting up or partnering with central places like those created by the National White Collar Crime Center and the Federal Trade Commission's Identity Theft Clearinghouse for victims to report identity theft and for information to be shared in Virginia.
The Business Work Group presented recommendations, which dealt with providing further protection of the use of Social Security numbers.
The group's other recommendations included studying the way state agencies are currently handling the destruction of records containing personal identifying information, encouraging businesses to participate in the National Fraud Database,17 encouraging businesses to comply with Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 prior to the deadlines of July, 2003, and July 1, 2007,18 and allowing victims of identity theft to have the record of police reports and judgements placed on their credit reports.
The Prevention Work Group recommended the creation of a Virginia state identity theft web site, possibly maintained by the Attorney General's Office, that would serve as a repository for victims' complaints and would link to the other pertinent databases.
Another recommendation was to encourage statewide participation in the FTC's Identity Theft Clearinghouse.
The group recommended amending the Virginia Code to make it a violation of the statute to obtain, record, or provide to another, without permission and with criminal intent, the means to access identifying information.
This recommendation was made in light of the recent trend of Wi-Fi hacking.
The final recommendation was to prohibit obtaining identifying information through fraudulent investigation of identity theft claims.
This recommendation arose out of a scam in which thieves have posed as employees of the Attorney General's Office.
The Consumer Work Group recommended studying the current law governing the ability to obtain vital records in Virginia to determine whether additional restrictions are necessary.
The Work Group also recommended continued monitoring of proposed federal and state legislation dealing with court records retention and the posting of court documents on the Internet.
The Consumer Work Group's final recommendations focused on ways to enable consumers who have become victims of identity theft to protect themselves and their credit from further damage.
Specifically, recommendations were made for consumers to have "one call" ability to communicate with the credit bureaus.
That is, a consumer should be able to call one number and effect change on their credit report with all three credit bureaus.
Secondly, the possibility of identity theft "password" was discussed.
A password would enable a victim to control her credit report by freezing their credit file and only having it opened when she directed, with a password.
Consumers could pay for such a service and it might begin as only being available to The NFD's the first and only national repository of verified fraudulent credit application activity; members submit their information.
18 § 11-33.2 deals with the recordation of a consumer's entire credit card number on the receipt given by the merchant.
17
19
substantiated victims of identity theft.
Lastly, the Consumer Work Group proposed an Identity Theft Passport.
An Identity Theft Passport would operate as a legally trustworthy shield against false arrests and perhaps adverse credit decisions.
A victim would obtain an Identity Theft Passport by appearing before a Circuit Court, much like those seeking restoration of civil rights.
After a court is satisfied that someone has substantiated that he or she is a victim of identity theft, he or she would receive an Identity Theft Passport and be eligible to be placed on a statewide registry.
Following the reports from the Work Groups, several members of the audience shared with the Task Force their experiences as victims of identity theft.
The Attorney General thanked the public for their attendance and thanked the Task Force for their continued hard work.
October 2002, Abingdon, Virginia The Identity Theft Task Force met on October 7, 2002 at the Southwest Virginia Higher Education Center, in Abingdon, Virginia.
Attorney General Kilgore and Delegate Terry G. Kilgore welcomed the Task Force and the members of the audience to Abingdon.
After brief introductions from the Task Force members, a representative from each Work Group reported the group's recommendations along with any updates and additions, since the Roanoke meeting.
Following the recommendations from the Work Groups, Randy Marchany, from Virginia Tech's Computer Incident Response Team, gave a presentation on the various ways criminals obtain access to consumers' personal identifying information on the Internet, and the ease of Identity Theft in the electronic arena.
Following this presentation, several victims of identity theft spoke to the Task Force, one of whom had been falsely arrested and paraded through the Charlotte Airport in handcuffs as a result of mistaken identity.
October 2002, Richmond, Virginia On October 29, 2002, Attorney General Kilgore and the Identity Theft Task Force released the Task Force's report at the State Capitol.
20
FINDINGS OF THE LAW ENFORCEMENT WORK GROUP The Law Enforcement Work Group focused on strengthening Virginia law to increase penalties for identity theft and to help victims.
Many of the members of this Work Group have experience in investigating crimes, prosecuting criminals, and providing security to corporations.
Make Identity Theft a Felony The Law Enforcement Work Group reviewed the current Virginia Code section dealing with Identity Theft.
Based on testimony from numerous victims, and the apparent widespread problem of ensuring that a report is actually taken, the Work Group recommends that Identity Theft be made a felony akin to Grand Larceny.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to increase the penalty for Identity Theft to an Unclassified Felony, so that it tracks the language of the Grand Larceny statute (which covers larceny from the person of $5 or more).
Thus, instead of Identity Theft being a Class 1 Misdemeanor, except in cases involving loss of $200 or more (or second offenses), Identity Theft would be: "punishable by imprisonment in a state correctional facility for not less than one nor more than twenty years or, in the discretion of the jury or the court trying the case without a jury, confinement in jail for a period not exceeding twelve months or a fine or not more than $2,500, either or both."
Pursuant to amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include Identity Theft.
21
Amend the Current Statute to Include the Theft of a Deceased Person's Identity Identity theft increasing reports of deceased demonstrate bereaved spouses and has become the 21st Century's most rapidly rising fraud type.
The identity fraud involving identities stolen from the dead and recently that identity thieves will stop at nothing, whatever the distress causes to relatives.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§18.2-186.3 to prohibit the theft of the personal identifying information of any person, living or deceased.
22
Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include Marketing or "Dealing" in Identifying Information The Law Enforcement Work Group determined the Virginia Code should be revised to address "dealers" in false ID's and those who seek to profit from an illegal operation to manufacture and distribute personally identifying information in a fraudulent manner.
Just as current law makes it a crime to possess illegal drugs, and a separate offense to do so with intent to distribute, the Virginia statute could be amended to provide enhanced penalties for persons obtaining, recording or accessing identifying information with the intent to unlawfully distribute it - in this fashion addressing not only identity thieves but those who unlawfully trade in the means for such thieves to commit their crimes.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation possession of "identifying information" with the intent to market.
(This would cover just a single instance of possession with the intent to distribute unlawfully).
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant unlawfully possessed "identifying information" with the intent to market.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation possession of more than one person's "identifying information."
(This would cover possession of multiple pieces of "identifying information" with intent to distribute unlawfully).
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant unlawfully possessed more than one person's "identifying information".
23
Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include "Identity Embezzlers" At the Identity Theft Task Force meeting in Danville on July 27, 2002, a victim of identity theft spoke about her harrowing experiences.
She described her struggle to reclaim her credit and reputation.
She also described how her personal information was stolen and used by someone who worked at her insurance company and, therefore, had access to personal information by virtue of her employment.
The Law Enforcement Work Group reviewed the Virginia Code and determined that provision should be made for such "skimmers" or "Identity Embezzlers".
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation the fraudulent use of a person's identifying information that is obtained by legal means, such as by virtue of an employment relationship.
This amendment would address "Identity Embezzlers" who gain access to the identifying information in a legal manner (such as the Geico employee who victimized the teacher who spoke to the Task Force on July 26, 2002) but then willfully and criminally use the information in an unauthorized way.
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant fraudulently used identifying information obtained by legal means such as by virtue of an employment relationship.
24
Amend the Code of Virginia to Add a Provision Relating to Obtaining Records of Financial Transactions and Services The biggest obstacle that law identity theft cases is the problem business all over the United States, By adding financial information to and cell phone records, the ability greatly enhanced.
enforcement currently faces with respect to investigating of limited jurisdiction.
Although most companies now do state subpoena power stops at the Commonwealth's borders.
the statute that now enables law enforcement to obtain email to investigate and prosecute cases of identity theft will be
Recommendation: Amend the Code of Virginia by adding a section relating to obtaining records of financial transactions and services by warrant and otherwise.
This recommendation will provide law enforcement with better access to financial information in investigations and prosecutions.
(Several Commonwealth Attorneys support this proposal.)
25
Standardize the Reporting of Identity Theft in Virginia Victim after victim testified at the Task Force meetings about the difficulty in making a report of identity theft.
Even members of the Law Enforcement community who spoke referred to the fact that there does not exist a standard report for this offense.
Law enforcement members of the Task Force reaffirmed this fact.
The Law Enforcement Work Group determined that this calls for a statewide effort to simplify the reporting process for victims and for law enforcement.
Virginia law enforcement should participate in helping standardize and simplify the reporting process that is being developed by the National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C) and the Federal Trade Commission.
Recommendation: Establish a standardized reporting mechanism (form) to be used by all state law enforcement agencies when taking a report from an identity theft victim.
Recommendation: Establish a partnership with the NW3C Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC) to build a web page on the Attorney General's site where victims of Identity Theft can complete a standard online report.
This online report could also be utilized by law enforcement agencies when taking reports of identity theft.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should also urge Virginia Commonwealth Attorneys and Police Chiefs to partner with the FTC's Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse sponsored by Consumer Sentinel.
The Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse is the federal government's database for tracking identity theft complaints.
Complaints made to participating entities are entered into the Data Clearinghouse.
The Data Clearinghouse information is shared electronically with other law enforcement agencies nationwide via Consumer Sentinel.
The Clearinghouse information provides law enforcement agencies with a broad range of complaints, allowing them to spot patterns of illegal activity.
(So far only 10 Virginia Agencies participate: OAG, Alexandria PD; Arlington County PD; Fairfax City Dep't of Telecom and Consumer Services; Fredericksburg PD; Lynchburg PD; Virginia State Police; Virginia Beach Commonwealth Attorney; Virginia Beach PD, and W
26
Conduct Statewide Law Enforcement Training: "The Identity Theft Institute" The Law Enforcement Work Group recognized the centralized location and authority that the Office of the Attorney General holds with respect to Consumer Protection and Public Safety Issues.
It serves as an excellent training body for law enforcement on the law of Identity Theft.
Recommendation: The Attorney General's Office should hold an Identity Theft Institute for law enforcement officers and prosecutors across the Commonwealth to instruct them and help them in investigating and prosecuting identity theft cases.
27
FINDINGS OF THE BUSINESS WORK GROUP The Business Work Group's experience ranges from credit reporting to credit issuance to government service to technology expertise.
The Business group worked on ways to limit the use of Social Security numbers on State identification and mailings, and business documents.
This group also focussed on victims.
Eliminate the Display of Social Security Numbers on Virginia Employee and College and University Student Identification Cards The Business Work Group considered the statements from a Virginia college student and a professor who reported their Social Security numbers were on their identification cards, which concerned them because of identity theft.
The Business Work Group also learned that some state agencies display Social Security numbers on employee identification cards.
The Business group determined that eliminating Social Security numbers from State employment and student identification cards would help protect personal information, which will reduce identity theft.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§2.2-3800(8) to prohibit the display of Social Security numbers on identification cards.
[a]ny agency holding personal information shall assure its reliability and take precautions to prevent its misuse.
After July 1, 2004, no agency shall display a data subject's entire Social Security number on student or employee identification cards.
28
Eliminate Outwardly Visible Social Security Numbers on State Agency Mailings Some members of the Business Work Group received mailings from Virginia's tax department that contained their Social Security number on the return mailing labels.
The Business group strongly recommends that the Attorney General propose legislation that prohibits or limits the outwardly visible display of Social Security numbers on all state agency mailings.
This recommendation, however, does not prohibit the state tax department from utilizing its own system, such as the Department of Motor Vehicle "T-Number" system, on the tax form's return mailing label.
Recommendation: Add a new code section, Va.
Code Ann.
§ 2.2-3800(11), to prohibit the outwardly visible display of Social Security numbers on all state agency mailings.
After July 1, 2004, a state agency, as defined by Va.
Code Ann.
§ 42.177, shall not deliver or cause to be delivered an envelope or package on the outside of which a Social Security number is placed or on the inside of which a Social Security number is visible from the outside of the envelope or package.
29
Propose Legislation Regarding the Destruction of Public Records Containing Social Security Numbers, after Such Destruction is Determined to be Lawful Under the Virginia Public Records Act, Va.
Code Ann.
§§ 42.1-76 through 42.1-91 The Business Work Group discussed the importance of the proper disposal of public records that contain Social Security numbers so that the unnecessary disclosure of Social Security numbers does not take place.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 42.1-82(1), of the Virginia Public Records Act, to ensure that public records containing personal identifying information are destroyed when they are no longer needed.
Issue regulations to facilitate the creation, preservation, storage, filing, reformatting, management, and destruction of public records by all agencies.
Such regulations shall establish procedures for records management containing recommendations for the retention, disposal or other disposition of public records; procedures for the physical destruction or other disposition of public records proposed for disposal; and standards for the reproduction of records by photocopy or microphotography processes with the view to the disposal of the original records.
The procedures for the disposal, physical destruction or other disposition of public records containing Social Security numbers shall take all reasonable steps to destroy such documents by (1) shredding (2) erasing, or (3) otherwise modifying the Social Security numbers in those records to make it unreadable or undecipherable through any means.
Such standards shall relate to the quality of film used, preparation of the records for filming, proper identification of the records so that any individual document or series of documents can be located on the film with reasonable facility, and that the copies contain all significant record detail, to the end that the photographic or microphotographic copies shall be of archival quality.
30
Accelerate Efforts Already Underway to Further Protect Voters' Social Security Numbers Displayed on Voter Registration Cards The listing of Social Security numbers on Virginia voter registration cards was brought to the attention of the Task Force at the Abingdon, Virginia Task Force meeting.
The Business Group concluded that identity theft could be reduced by the elimination of Social Security numbers from voter registration cards.
Voters will still be required to provide the State Board of Elections with their Social Security number to vote in the Commonwealth, but their Social Security number will not be displayed on the card.
This could be accomplished by using a bar code or by not displaying the entire Social Security number on the voter registration cards.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should encourage the State Board of Elections to accelerate the efforts already underway to further protect voters' Social Security numbers that appear on voter registration cards.
31
Encourage Businesses to Comply with Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 Prior to the Statutory Deadlines This law makes it unlawful to print more than the last five digits of a credit number, debit card number, or other payment device number or the expiration date on an electronic receipt.
The elimination of this information from electronic receipts will reduce identity theft.
The law takes effect on July 1, 2003 with respect to new registers or receipt printing machines placed in service on or after that date.
Regarding older devices not in service, the law does not apply until July 1, 2007.
The Business group recommends that businesses voluntarily comply with Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 prior to the July 1, 2003 and July 1, 2007 deadlines.
Recommendation: The Business Work Group proposes that businesses be encouraged to comply with Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 prior to the existing deadlines.19
19
Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 provides that "[n]o accepts credit cards, debit cards or other payment than the last five digits of the credit card number, the expiration date on any receipt provided to the
person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation that devices for the transaction of business shall print (i) more debit card number or other payment device number or (ii) cardholder or holder of the other payment device."
32
Encourage Police to Take Police Reports of Identity Theft Victims The Business Work Group discussed that the majority of the identity theft victims that spoke to the Task Force had problems getting their local police to take reports.
The Business Group members unanimously agreed that proper police reporting helps consumers maintain the accuracy of their credit reports.
Recommendation: The Business Work Group requests that the Attorney General work with the Virginia police departments to encourage them to take police reports from victims of identity theft.
The Business Work Group encourages the development of a uniform reporting form.
33
Establish Statutory Guidelines for the Use of Police Reports Submitted to Credit Reporting Agencies The Business Work Group, generally supported a recommendation to establish statutory guidelines for the use of police reports by credit reporting agencies.
The Consumer Data Industry Association expressed concern that false police reports might be manufactured, and questioned the need for legislation maintaining that the credit reporting agencies arguably have a voluntary police reporting initiative in place.
This idea was well received by victims and consumer advocates.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to establish guidelines for the use of police reports submitted to credit reporting agencies.
Identity fraud; penalty; victim assistance; police reports submitted to credit reporting agencies § 18.2-186.3(G)(1) If a consumer, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., submits to a consumer reporting agency, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., a copy of a valid police report, the consumer reporting agency shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of such report, block the reporting of any information that the consumer alleges appears on his or her credit report, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., as a result of a violation of Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code.
The consumer reporting agency shall promptly notify the furnisher of the information that a police report has been filed, that a block has been requested, and the effective date of the block.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(2) Consumer reporting agencies may decline to block or may rescind any block of consumer information if, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, the consumer reporting agency believes that: (1) the information was blocked due to a misrepresentation of a material fact by the consumer; (2) the information was blocked due to fraud in which the consumer participated or of which the consumer had knowledge; for the purposes of this subdivision, fraud may be demonstrated by circumstantial evidence; (3) the consumer agrees that the blocked information, or portions of the blocked information, were blocked in error; (4) the consumer knowingly obtained possession of goods, services, or moneys as a result of the blocked transaction or transactions or the consumer should have known that he or she obtained possession of goods, services, or moneys as a result of the blocked transaction or transactions; or (5) the consumer reporting agency, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, has substantial reason based on specific, verifiable facts to doubt the
34
authenticity of the consumer's report of a violation of Section 18.2186.3 of the Virginia Code.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(3) If blocked information is unblocked pursuant to this subdivision, the consumer shall be notified in the same manner as consumers are notified of the reinsertion of information pursuant to 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1681i, as amended.
The prior presence of the blocked information in the consumer reporting agency's file on the consumer is not evidence of whether the consumer knew or should have known that he or she obtained possession of any goods, services, or moneys.
§18.2-186.3(G)(4) A consumer reporting agency shall accept the consumer's version of the disputed information and correct or delete the disputed item when the consumer submits to the consumer credit reporting agency documentation obtained from the source of the item in dispute or from public records confirming that the report was inaccurate or incomplete, unless the consumer credit reporting agency, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, has substantial reason based on specific, verifiable facts to doubt the authenticity of the documentation submitted and notifies the consumer in writing of that decision, explaining its reasons for unblocking the information and setting forth the specific, verifiable facts on which the decision was based.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(5) A consumer reporting agency shall delete from a consumer credit report inquiries for credit reports based upon credit requests that the consumer credit reporting agency verifies were initiated as the result of a violation of Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code.
§ 18.2-186.3(H) The provisions in this subdivision do not apply to (1) a consumer reporting agency that acts as a reseller of credit information by assembling and merging information contained in the database of another consumer reporting agency or multiple consumer reporting agencies, and does not maintain a permanent database of credit information from which new consumer credit reports are produced; (2) a check services or fraud prevention services company, which issues reports on incidents of fraud or authorizations for the purpose of approving or processing negotiable instruments, electronic funds transfers, or similar methods of payments; or (3) a demand deposit account information service company, which issues reports regarding account closures due to fraud, substantial overdrafts, ATM abuse, or similar negative information regarding a consumer, to inquiring banks or other financial institutions for use only in reviewing a consumer request for a demand deposit account at the inquiring bank or financial institution.
35
FINDINGS OF THE PREVENTION WORK GROUP The Prevention Work Group focused on victim assistance and how to prevent identity theft.
The membership has experience in law enforcement, education, banking, retail and technology.
An identity theft victim was also a member.
Identity Theft Website Over the course of its several meetings, the Task Force heard repeated testimony from victims and pleas from members of the community for a "one-stop" resource that would enable citizens to report instances of identity theft and to find materials about how to safeguard personal identifying information from potential thieves.
Proponents believe such a resource should share data with appropriate state and federal law enforcement agencies to prevent needless redundancy in the reporting process.
They believe, too, that it should direct victims not only to law enforcement but also to consumer or credit assistance resources.
Ease of access by individuals and agency officials was emphasized.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should consider developing a Statesponsored web-site, providing news and information to help visitors to the site prevent identity theft as well as links to Internet resources providing assistance in reporting identity theft claims and minimizing damage.
The Site would offer links to Internet resources providing assistance in reporting identity theft claims and minimizing damage.
It would also serve as a repository for victim complaints and share data with the Federal Trade Commission via its website: http://www.consumer.gov/idtheft/ enabling Virginia to coordinate prosecution and investigation of identity theft claims with federal authorities.
36
Amplify Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to make it a violation of the Statute to Obtain, Record or Provide to Another -- Without Permission and With Criminal Intent -- the Means to Access Identifying Information The Task Force also learned about one of the newest types of computer trespass: "Wi-Fi hacking."
"Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) hackers" use wireless modems and laptops to surf, scour for and hack into unprotected, wireless local area networks (LANS).
Wi-Fi hackers drive around an area, find unprotected business or home wireless LANs and hack into the network, usually to gain unauthorized, free Internet access through the network.
However, a Wi-Fi hacker can also gain access to the LAN's databases and even plant viruses.
Wi-Fi thieves may then post or distribute the network's location and other stolen access information in order to aid other hackers.
In this fashion, Wi-Fi hackers traffic in the means for unlawful access to personal identifying information.
Under the current Virginia statute, a person can be convicted for unlawfully obtaining, recording or accessing a person's identifying information, but not for unlawfully obtaining, recording or accessing the means by which to do so.
Recommendation: Amplify Va Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to cover this type of secondary identity theft which deals with the criminal possession, recording, or distribution of the means by which thieves may unlawfully access personal identifying information.
Obtaining Identifying Information in Fraudulent Investigation of Identity Theft Claims Recent news reports have revealed that there is an emerging scam whereby thieves obtain identifying information by posing as members of state attorney general offices.
In this fashion, some identity thieves are victimizing trusting citizens by posing as the very officials charged with protect them and obtaining information under the guise of investigating identity theft.
Recommendation: In order to prevent this particularly offensive kind of fraud, and to preserve public confidence in law enforcement, the Task Force recommends that the Attorney General consider amending Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation by the commission of an identity theft offense by posing as a law enforcement or state officials.
37
Change Procedures for Issuance/Activation of "Secondary" Credit Cards One victim who testified at the Task Force's June 27 meeting told of how her former fiancé applied for credit cards in her name and then requested and received "secondary" cards issued on those accounts with him as authorized user.
Those secondary cards did not list the victim as primary cardholder and did not arouse her suspicion even when used in her presence.
Recommendation: Recognizing the potential for fraud and identity theft in this area, the Attorney General should consider urging businesses to take measures to require that secondary or "authorized user" cards list the primary cardholder, or that the primary cardholder (not the authorized user) activate secondary cards.
38
FINDINGS OF THE CONSUMER WORK GROUP The Consumer Work Group focused their work on creating a means to assist victims of identity theft.
The members have business, government and victim assistance experience.
This group also included a victim of identity theft.
Identity Theft Passport and Registry In meetings throughout the Commonwealth, the Task Force heard troubling testimony that victims of identity theft can, and indeed have been, doubly victimized.
Not only do identity thieves rob victims of their name, and credit, sometimes they also impose upon the victim the thief's identity and the consequences of the thief's criminal history.
The Task Force heard testimony from some victims who not only found their credit damaged and finances depleted by an identity thief, but were also investigated, even arrested by police, as a result of a thief using the victim's identity when charged with a crime.
Recommendation: In order to avoid placing identity theft victims in this kind of "double-jeopardy," the Attorney General should consider implementation of an Identity Theft Passport.
Just as citizens can seek a court judgment to expunge an inaccurate criminal record or restore civil rights, the victim of identity theft should be able to obtain a judgment or certification from a circuit court, by a preponderance of evidence, that a transaction or account is the result of identity theft.
Such a judgment would enable the Court to issue the petitioner an Identity Theft Passport a document identifying them as a probable victim of identity theft and enabling them to advise officers of inaccuracies in police records in case of a mistaken arrest.
Coupled with a State-Wide Identity Theft Registry, an Identity Theft Passport could also be a vital tool for preventing thieves from not only taking a victim's credit but, by virtue of the crime, preventing the victim himself from properly obtaining credit in the future.
The Task Force heard testimony that some victims not only became responsible for accounts, loans, transactions they did not authorize but also could not then obtain credit themselves once branded as an identity theft victim and, thus, possible risk.
A State-wide electronic registry could list all recipients of Identity Theft Passports and, in this fashion, could notify creditors that credit can (and should only) be safely given a registrant who can produce an Identity Theft Passport.
The registry would also enable police to verify the authenticity of an Identity Theft Passport produced by an alleged victim.
39
The Attorney General Should Participate in Rulemaking Concerning Distribution of Vital Records and Should Consider Broadening Laws Regarding Use of Birth Certificates to Include Vital Records Work Group discussion frequently returned to the fact that a great deal of identifying information appears on publicly available documents.
The Consumer Group discussed that vital records contain a substantial amount of personal identifying information that could be used to commit identity theft.
In Virginia, vital records are defined as "certificates of reports of births, deaths, fetal deaths, adoptions, marriages, divorces or annulments and amendment data related thereto."
Va.
Code Ann.
§ 32.1-249(12).
The consumer group learned that some time in the next year the Virginia Office of Vital Records is planning to study their rules regarding who can obtain vital records in Virginia.
The Task Force also heard testimony from victims and reports from law enforcement officers that vital records often are released by record-keepers with little or no verification of the requestor's identity or authorization to obtain them.
This loosely regulated area appears to be a fertile field in which identity thieves can too easily find the tools with which to commit their crimes.
Recommendation: The Attorney General, or his designee, should participate in the rulemaking process at the Office of Vital Records regarding access to vital records.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-204.1, which prohibits the unlawful acquisition, possession, sale or distribution of another's birth certificate, to include the unlawful acquisition, possession, sale or distribution of such vital records.
40
The Attorney General Should Study the Issue of Online Court Records to Ensure That Only Necessary Identifying Information is Available on the Internet In some of the later Task Force meetings, Attorney General Kilgore and the Task Force addressed the timely issue of court records containing personal identifying information being published online.
The state needs to make sure that what is required in public records is absolutely necessary information.
If the personal identifying information is necessary on a document, the document should be secured and protected separately.
The access to those documents is not the problem.
Rather, unnecessary personal information should not become part of the public record in the first place.
The Consumer Group discussed that some Virginia Circuit Courts are posting deeds, land records and court records online.
In some parts of the Commonwealth, marriage licenses, deed records and other documents are freely available via the Internet and these records contain information that could be used by identity thieves to commit their crimes.
Recommendation: The Consumer Group recommends that the Attorney General, or his designee, study the issue of online court records to ensure that only necessary identifying information is available online.
Personal Identifying Information that is not necessary to a court record should not be recorded or placed online, because of the easy access it provides to identity thieves.
Recommendation: Consider supporting the amendment of Va.
Code Ann. § 55106.6.to codify when clerks may refuse documents to be recorded; § 55-106.6 "A clerk may refuse any document for recording in which any person's social security number appears, unless such number is required by law"
41
Encourage the Credit Reporting Agencies to Continue Working with the Federal Trade Commission on a "One-Call" Destination for Reporting Identity Theft.
Numerous consumers testified at the Task Force meetings that it was very difficult, and time consuming to call three credit reporting agencies, as their contact numbers often change.
The Consumer Group wants to assist consumers by encouraging the credit reporting agencies to continue working with the Federal Trade Commission to establish a "one-call" destination for reporting identity theft to all three of the credit reporting agencies.
Recommendation: Encourage the credit reporting agencies to continue working with the Federal Trade Commission to establish a "one-call" destination for reporting identity theft to the three credit reporting agencies.
42
RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE IDENTITY THEFT TASK FORCE Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to increase the penalty for Identity Theft to an Unclassified Felony, so that it tracks the language of the Grand Larceny statute (which also covers larceny from the person of $5 or more).
Thus, instead of Identity Theft being a Class 1 Misdemeanor, except in cases involving loss of $200 or more (or second offenses), the penalty would be: "punishable by imprisonment in a state correctional facility for not less than one nor more than twenty years or, in the discretion of the jury or the court trying the case without a jury, be confined in jail for a period not exceeding twelve months or fined not more than $2,500, either or both."
Pursuant to amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include Identity Theft.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§18.2-186.3 to prohibit the theft of the personal identifying information of any person, living or deceased.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation possession of "identifying information" with the intent to market.
(This would cover just a single instance of possessing with the intent to distribute).
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant unlawfully possessed "identifying information" with the intent to market.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation possession of more than one person's "identifying information."
(This would cover possession of multiple pieces of "identifying information" with intent to distribute unlawfully).
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant unlawfully possessed more than one person's "identifying information".
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation the fraudulent use of a person's identifying information that is obtained by legal means such as by virtue of an employment relationship.
This amendment would address "Identity Embezzlers" who gain access to the identifying information in a legal manner (such as the Geico employee who victimized the teacher who spoke to the Task Force on July 26, 2002) but then willfully and criminally use the information in an unauthorized way.
43
In accordance with this amendment, the Attorney General should recommend that the Virginia Sentencing Commission consider amending the Virginia Sentencing Guidelines to include as a sentencing factor whether the defendant fraudulently used identifying information obtained by legal means such as by virtue of an employment relationship.
Recommendation: Amend the Code of Virginia by adding a section relating to obtaining records of financial transactions and services by warrant and otherwise.
This recommendation will provide law enforcement with better access to financial information in investigations and prosecutions.
(Several Commonwealth Attorneys support this proposal.)
Recommendation: Establish a standardized reporting mechanism (form) to be used by all state law enforcement agencies when taking a report from an identity theft victim.
Recommendation: Establish a partnership with the NW3C Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC) to build a web page on the Attorney General's site where victims of Identity Theft can complete a standard online report.
This online report could also be utilized by law enforcement agencies when taking reports of identity theft.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should also urge Virginia Commonwealth Attorneys and Police Chiefs to partner with the FTC's Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse sponsored by Consumer Sentinel.
The Identity Theft Data Clearinghouse is the federal government's database for tracking identity theft complaints.
Complaints made to participating entities are entered into the Data Clearinghouse.
The Data Clearinghouse information is shared electronically with other law enforcement agencies nationwide via Consumer Sentinel.
The Clearinghouse information provides law enforcement agencies with a broad range of complaints, allowing them to spot patterns of illegal activity.
(So far only 10 Virginia Agencies participate: OAG, Alexandria PD; Arlington County PD; Fairfax City Dep't of Telecom and Consumer Services; Fredericksburg PD; Lynchburg PD; Virginia State Police; Virginia Beach Commonwealth Attorney; Virginia Beach PD, and W
Recommendation: The Attorney General's Office should hold an Identity Theft Institute for law enforcement officers and prosecutors across the Commonwealth to instruct them and help them in investigating and prosecuting identity theft cases.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§2.2-3800(8) to prohibit the display of Social Security numbers on identification cards.
[a]ny agency holding personal information shall assure its reliability and take precautions to prevent its misuse.
After July 1, 2004, no agency
44
shall display a data subject's entire Social Security number on student or employee identification cards.
Recommendation: Add a new code section, Va.
Code Ann.
§ 2.2-3800(11), to prohibit the outwardly visible display of Social Security numbers on all state agency mailings.
After July 1, 2004, a state agency, as defined by Va.
Code Ann.
§ 42.177, shall not deliver or cause to be delivered an envelope or package on the outside of which a Social Security number is placed or on the inside of which a Social Security number is visible from the outside of the envelope or package.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 42.1-82(1), of the Virginia Public Records Act, to ensure that public records containing personal identifying information are destroyed when they are no longer needed.
Issue regulations to facilitate the creation, preservation, storage, filing, reformatting, management, and destruction of public records by all agencies.
Such regulations shall establish procedures for records management containing recommendations for the retention, disposal or other disposition of public records; procedures for the physical destruction or other disposition of public records proposed for disposal; and standards for the reproduction of records by photocopy or microphotography processes with the view to the disposal of the original records.
The procedures for the disposal, physical destruction or other disposition of public records containing Social Security numbers shall take all reasonable steps to destroy such documents by (1) shredding, (2) erasing, or (3) otherwise modifying the Social Security numbers in those records to make it unreadable or undecipherable through any means.
Such standards shall relate to the quality of film used, preparation of the records for filming, proper identification of the records so that any individual document or series of documents can be located on the film with reasonable facility, and that the copies contain all significant record detail, to the end that the photographic or microphotographic copies shall be of archival quality.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should encourage the State Board of Elections to accelerate the efforts already underway to further protect voters' Social Security numbers that appear on voter registration cards.
Recommendation: The Business Work Group proposes that businesses be encouraged to comply with Va.
Code Ann.
§ 11-33.2 prior to the existing deadlines.
45
Recommendation: The Business Work Group requests that the Attorney General work with the Virginia police departments to encourage them to take police reports from victims of identity theft.
The Business Work Group encourages the development of a uniform reporting form.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to establish guidelines for the use of police reports submitted to credit reporting agencies.
Identity fraud; penalty; victim assistance; police reports submitted to credit reporting agencies § 18.2-186.3(G)(1) If a consumer, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., submits to a consumer reporting agency, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., a copy of a valid police report, the consumer reporting agency shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of such report, block the reporting of any information that the consumer alleges appears on his or her credit report, as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1681 et seq., as a result of a violation of Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code.
The consumer reporting agency shall promptly notify the furnisher of the information that a police report has been filed, that a block has been requested, and the effective date of the block.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(2) Consumer reporting agencies may decline to block or may rescind any block of consumer information if, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, the consumer reporting agency believes that: (1) the information was blocked due to a misrepresentation of a material fact by the consumer; (2) the information was blocked due to fraud in which the consumer participated or of which the consumer had knowledge; for the purposes of this subdivision, fraud may be demonstrated by circumstantial evidence; (3) the consumer agrees that the blocked information, or portions of the blocked information, were blocked in error; (4) the consumer knowingly obtained possession of goods, services, or moneys as a result of the blocked transaction or transactions or the consumer should have known that he or she obtained possession of goods, services, or moneys as a result of the blocked transaction or transactions; or (5) the consumer reporting agency, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, has substantial reason based on specific, verifiable facts to doubt the authenticity of the consumer's report of a violation of Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(3) If blocked information is unblocked pursuant to this subdivision, the consumer shall be notified in the same manner as consumers are notified of the reinsertion of information pursuant to 15 U.S.C. Sec. 1681i, as amended.
The prior presence of the blocked information in the consumer reporting agency's file on the consumer is not evidence of whether the consumer knew or should have known that he or she obtained possession of any goods, services, or moneys.
46
§18.2-186.3(G)(4) A consumer reporting agency shall accept the consumer's version of the disputed information and correct or delete the disputed item when the consumer submits to the consumer credit reporting agency documentation obtained from the source of the item in dispute or from public records confirming that the report was inaccurate or incomplete, unless the consumer credit reporting agency, in the exercise of good faith and reasonable judgment, has substantial reason based on specific, verifiable facts to doubt the authenticity of the documentation submitted and notifies the consumer in writing of that decision, explaining its reasons for unblocking the information and setting forth the specific, verifiable facts on which the decision was based.
§ 18.2-186.3(G)(5) A consumer reporting agency shall delete from a consumer credit report inquiries for credit reports based upon credit requests that the consumer credit reporting agency verifies were initiated as the result of a violation of Section 18.2-186.3 of the Virginia Code.
§ 18.2-186.3(H) The provisions in this subdivision do not apply to (1) a consumer reporting agency that acts as a reseller of credit information by assembling and merging information contained in the database of another consumer reporting agency or multiple consumer reporting agencies, and does not maintain a permanent database of credit information from which new consumer credit reports are produced; (2) a check services or fraud prevention services company, which issues reports on incidents of fraud or authorizations for the purpose of approving or processing negotiable instruments, electronic funds transfers, or similar methods of payments; or (3) a demand deposit account information service company, which issues reports regarding account closures due to fraud, substantial overdrafts, ATM abuse, or similar negative information regarding a consumer, to inquiring banks or other financial institutions for use only in reviewing a consumer request for a demand deposit account at the inquiring bank or financial institution.
Recommendation: The Attorney General should consider developing a Statesponsored web-site, providing news and information to help visitors to the site prevent identity theft as well as links to Internet resources providing assistance in reporting identity theft claims and minimizing damage.
The Site would offer links to Internet resources providing assistance in reporting identity theft claims and minimizing damage.
It would also serve as a repository for victim complaints and share data with the Federal Trade Commission via its website: http://www.consumer.gov/idtheft/ enabling Virginia to coordinate prosecution and investigation of identity theft claims with federal authorities.
Recommendation: Amplify Va Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to cover secondary identity theft which deals with the criminal possession, recording, or distribution of the means by which thieves may unlawfully access personal identifying information.
Recommendation: In order to prevent this particularly offensive kind of fraud, and to preserve public confidence in law enforcement, the Task Force recommends
47
that the Attorney General consider amending Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-186.3 to include as a violation the commission of an identity theft offense by posing as a law enforcement or state official.
Recommendation: Recognizing the potential for fraud and identity theft in this area, the Attorney General should consider urging businesses to take measures to require that secondary or "authorized user" cards list the primary cardholder, or that the primary cardholder (not the authorized user) activate secondary cards.
Recommendation: In order to avoid placing identity theft victims in this kind of "double-jeopardy," the Attorney General should consider implementation of an Identity Theft Passport.
Just as citizens can seek a court judgment to expunge an inaccurate criminal record or restore civil rights, the victim of identity theft should be able to obtain a judgment or certification from a circuit court, by a preponderance of evidence, that a transaction or account is the result of identity theft.
Such a judgment would enable the Court to issue the petitioner an Identity Theft Passport a document identifying the petitioner as a probable victim of identity theft and enabling the petitioner to advise officers of inaccuracies in police records in case of a mistaken arrest.
Coupled with a State-Wide Identity Theft Registry, an Identity Theft Passport could also be a vital tool for preventing thieves from not only taking a victim's credit but, by virtue of the crime, preventing the victim himself from properly obtaining credit in the future.
The Task Force heard testimony that some victims not only became responsible for accounts, loans, transactions they did not authorize but also could not then obtain credit themselves once branded as an identity theft victim and, thus, possible risk.
A State-wide electronic registry could list all recipients of Identity Theft Passports and, in this fashion, could notify creditors that credit can (and should only) be safely given a registrant who can produce an Identity Theft Passport.
The registry would also enable police to verify the authenticity of an Identity Theft Passport produced by an alleged victim.
Recommendation: The Attorney General, or his designee, should participate in the rulemaking process at the Office of Vital Records regarding access to vital records.
Recommendation: Amend Va.
Code Ann.
§ 18.2-204.1, which prohibits the unlawful acquisition, possession, sale or distribution of another's birth certificate, to include the unlawful acquisition, possession, sale or distribution of such vital records.
Recommendation: The Consumer Group recommends that the Attorney General, or his designee, study the issue of online court records to ensure that only necessary identifying information is available online.
Personal Identifying Information that is not necessary to a court record should not be recorded or placed online, because of the easy access it provides to identity thieves.
48
Recommendation: Consider supporting the amendment of Va.
Code Ann.
§ 55-106.6.to codify when clerks may refuse documents to be recorded; § 55-106.6 "A clerk may refuse any document for recording in which any person's social security number appears, unless such number is required by law" Recommendation: Encourage the credit reporting agencies to continue working with the Federal Trade Commission to establish a "one-call" destination for reporting identity theft to the three credit reporting agencies.
49
CONCLUSION As the Identity Theft Task Force has learned, identity theft impacts Virginians across the Commonwealth, with alarming frequency and devastating results.
Identity theft is one of the most burgeoning areas of criminal activity and one of the law enforcement community's biggest challenges.
The ideas contained in this Report, culled from a broad spectrum of representatives of our communities, constitute a first step toward addressing this new and alarming problem.
Even as this Report is written, however, new ideas and new tools for preventing identity theft and minimizing its impact are emerging.
"Smart" driver's licenses, containing microchips verifying their authenticity, though costly, may one day be a practical and safe form of identification.
Use of fingerprints or other biometric data, also is increasingly being examined as a way of foiling the would-be identity thief.
The Task Force has also considered the possibility -- in conjunction with recommendations concerning the Identity Theft Passport and Identity Theft Registry -- of employing a "password" that would enable the registrant to stop future victimization or preserve his own access to credit by restricting access to his credit history.
These ideas and many others merit further thought.
As we move forward in this area, Attorney General Kilgore remains committed to making practical and effective efforts to combat identity theft and thanks the Identity Theft Task Force for its timely and invaluable assistance.
50
