Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners Newsletter January 2001 Happy New Year! The members and staff of the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners wish you a Happy New Year.
We hope 2001 will be a rewarding year for all Iowa pharmacists, pharmacy students/interns, and pharmacy technicians.
Board Meeting Dates for 2001 January 30-31* March 6 April 17-18 June 12-13 July 10-11 September 11-12 October 9-10 November 6-7
*To be held on the Iowa Communications Network (ICN); all other meetings will be held at the Board office in Des Moines.
Nineteen Disciplinary Actions Taken by the Board Aldershof, John D., Cedar Rapids, Iowa, pharmacist license # 12633.
On September 16, 1998, Mr. Aldershof's license was placed on probation with the Board until July 1, 2002.
On October 10, 2000, he appeared before the Board to request early termination of his probation.
The Board approved his request and returned his license to good standing effective October 10, 2000.
Helling, Steven A., Fort Madison, Iowa, pharmacist license # 15501.
In previous disciplinary actions, the Board issued an Emergency Adjudicative Order and a Statement of Charges to Mr. Helling.
The Board later modified the Emergency Adjudicative Order and allowed Mr. Helling to return to the practice of pharmacy on a limited basis, with conditions, pending resolution of the charges.
Subsequently, the Board further modified the Emergency Adjudicative Order by making additional changes and allowing him to continue to practice pharmacy on a limited basis until July 2000.
On July 10, 2000, the Board issued a Third Modified Emergency Adjudicative Order which contains revised terms and restrictions that allow
Mr. Helling to continue to practice pharmacy on a limited basis pending the resolution of his case.
Keleher, Thomas L., Omaha, Nebraska, pharmacist license # 13241.
In previous disciplinary action, Mr. Keleher's license was placed on probation with the Board on July 10, 1998, for five years.
On July 11, 2000, he appeared before the Board to request early termination of his probation.
The Board approved his request and returned his license to good standing effective July 11, 2000.
Nikseresht, Masoode S., Glenwood, Iowa, pharmacist license # 16878.
In previous disciplinary action, Mr. Nikseresht's license was placed on probation with the Board on November 16, 1999, for two years.
On November 14, 2000, he appeared before the Board to request early termination of his probation.
The Board approved his request and returned his license to good standing effective November 16, 2000.
Pexton Drug, Harlan, Iowa, pharmacy license # 474.
On July 7, 2000, Pexton Drug was charged with (1) unlawful possession of prescription drugs by the pharmacy's owner and delivering prescription drugs to an unauthorized person and (2) failing to provide and maintain effective security, controls, and procedures to guard against the theft and diversion of prescription drugs and controlled substances.
During a routine inspection of the pharmacy, the Board's chief investigator discovered substantial shortages of Adderall 10mg, Methylphenidate 10mg, and other controlled substances.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated September 12, 2000, Pexton Drug's pharmacy license was placed on probation with conditions for three years.
The pharmacy agreed to adopt and implement appropriate policies and procedures for controlled substances.
It also agreed to maintain perpetual inventories of all controlled substances and to reconcile receipts and disbursements on a monthly basis.
Schlueter, David J., Dubuque, Iowa, pharmacist license # 16411.
On September 12, 2000, Mr. Schlueter was charged with violating Board rules relating to the creation of patient medication records and the use of those records.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated November 14, 2000, Mr. Schlueter's license was suspended for 30 days.
The suspension was stayed, however, and he was placed on probation with conditions for two years.
Mr. Schlueter agreed to author a paper on the importance of ethics in the practice of pharmacy and to submit it to the Board for its
approval.
He also agreed to adhere to the concepts set forth in the paper, as approved by the Board, whenever engaging in the practice of pharmacy.
In addition, Mr. Schlueter agreed to complete not less than ten additional hours of continuing pharmacy education in pharmacy ethics and pharmacy law.
Sinnott, Dalene S., Cedar Rapids, Iowa, pharmacist license # 13809.
On April 10, 2000, Dalene Sinnott was charged with being convicted of an offense or subjected to a penalty or fine for violation of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
The Board's charge resulted from Ms. Sinnott's guilty plea in federal court to two counts of misbranding drugs.
The U.S. District Court, Northern District of Iowa, sentenced Ms. Sinnott to one year probation for each of the two counts, to run concurrently.
She was also fined $4,000.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated September 12, 2000, the Board placed Ms. Sinnott's pharmacist license on probation with conditions for six months.
She agreed to pay a civil penalty of $500 and to submit policies and procedures for the dispensing and labeling of prescription drugs to the Board for its approval.
She also agreed to complete not less than six additional hours of continuing pharmacy education in pharmacy management.
Topf, Michael C., Sioux City, Iowa, pharmacist license # 12164.
On February 2, 2000, Mr. Topf was charged with (1) inadequate record keeping for controlled substances and (2) failing to provide accountability for certain controlled substances.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated October 10, 2000, Mr. Topf's license was suspended until July 9, 2001.
On February 1, 2001, the suspension will be stayed and his license will be placed on indefinite probation with conditions.
Mr. Topf agreed to implement appropriate policies and procedures for the handling of controlled substances and also agreed to complete not less than six additional hours of continuing pharmacy education in controlled substances record keeping and maintaining accountability for controlled substances.
Weirick and Patterson Pharmacy, Colfax, Iowa, pharmacy license # 289.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated September 12, 2000, Weirick and Patterson Pharmacy agreed to have its pharmacy license placed on probation with conditions for two years.
The pharmacy also agreed to develop and follow policies and procedures for the following: (1) ensuring adequate record keeping for drugs; (2) maintaining accountability and control of drugs; and (3) documenting, resolving, and preventing medication dispensing errors in the practice of pharmacy.
Weirick and Patterson
Pharmacy was charged with violating Board rules relating to the maintenance of pharmacy records including controlled substance records and drug product selection records.
Weirick, Brenda W., Colfax, Iowa, pharmacist license # 16267.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated September 12, 2000, Ms. Weirick agreed to have her pharmacist license placed on probation with conditions for two years.
She also agreed to develop and follow policies and procedures for the following: (1) ensuring adequate record keeping for drugs; (2) maintaining accountability and control of drugs; and (3) documenting, resolving, and preventing medication dispensing errors in the practice of pharmacy.
In addition, Ms. Weirick agreed to complete not less than six additional hours of continuing pharmacy education in controlled substances record keeping and maintaining accountability for controlled substances.
Ms. Weirick was charged with violating Board rules relating to the maintenance of pharmacy records including controlled substance records and drug product selection records.
Zortman, John L., pharmacist license # 14848.
On November 16, 1999, Mr. Zortman was charged with (1) failure to comply with the terms of probation ordered by the Board pursuant to a Stipulation and Informal Settlement and (2) engaging in the practice of pharmacy in Iowa without an active and current Iowa pharmacist license.
A hearing on the charges was held before the Board on July 11, 2000.
In a Decision and Order issued on September 12, 2000, the Board placed Mr. Zortman's license on a new, one year probation with conditions.
The Order requires him to complete 8.5 hours of additional continuing pharmacy education.
Impaired Licensee Cases Between June 1, 2000, and November 30, 2000, the Board finalized the following eight (8) disciplinary actions involving impaired licensees: Case #1.
In previous disciplinary action, the pharmacist's license was placed on probation with the Board from April 21, 1998, to January 5, 2004.
On April 18, 2000, the pharmacist admitted that she had relapsed and had violated her probation by abusing a controlled substance.
As a result, the pharmacist voluntarily surrendered her license.
The Board accepted the surrender of the license on July 11, 2000.
The surrender is considered a revocation of license with respect to any future request for reinstatement.
Case #2.
On July 11, 2000, the pharmacist was charged with (1) unlawful possession of prescription drugs and (2) inability to practice pharmacy with reasonable skill and safety by reason of chemical abuse.
During a routine inspection of the pharmacist's pharmacy, the Board's chief investigator discovered substantial shortages of Adderall 10mg, Methylphenidate 10mg, and other controlled substances.
The pharmacist eventually admitted that he had diverted the controlled substances to his own use without prescriber authorization.
He voluntarily entered a substance abuse treatment program.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order dated September 12, 2000, the pharmacist agreed to have his license suspended for six months, followed by probation with conditions for five years.
The pharmacist also agreed to participate in the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN) program under the direct support of a pharmacist advocate.
Case #3.
In previous disciplinary actions, the pharmacist's license was twice disciplined for drug addiction and dispensing controlled substances without prescriber authorization.
In addition, she was criminally convicted of writing fraudulent prescriptions and was placed on criminal probation for three years.
On May 1, 1997, the Board suspended her license for a minimum of three years, due to her long history of alcohol and drug abuse.
On July 12, 2000, a formal reinstatement hearing was held before the Board.
On September 12, 2000, the Board issued a Decision and Order that allowed the pharmacist to begin the reinstatement process by completing a minimum of 500 hours of pharmacy internship.
Following successful completion of the internship, her license shall be reinstated and placed on probation with conditions for five years.
In addition, she is required to comply with all of the terms of her Client Recovery Contract with the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN).
Case #4.
In a Statement of Charges issued on September 12, 2000, the Board charged the pharmacist with (1) having had his Minnesota pharmacist license disciplined by the Minnesota Board of Pharmacy on September 15, 1999, and (2) failing to report the Minnesota disciplinary action to the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners.
The Minnesota disciplinary action followed allegations that the pharmacist had diverted controlled substances for his own personal use without prescriber authorization and that he was impaired due to chemical dependency.
The Minnesota Board of Pharmacy suspended the pharmacist's license indefinitely, but stayed the suspension and placed him on probation with conditions until at least January 1, 2002.
In a Stipulation and Consent Order approved by the Iowa Board of Pharmacy Examiners on November 14, 2000, the pharmacist's Iowa license was similarly suspended indefinitely.
The suspension was stayed, however, and
the pharmacist's license was placed on probation indefinitely with conditions.
In addition, for as long as the pharmacist resides in Minnesota, he is required to comply with the terms of his agreement with the Minnesota Health Professionals Services Program (HPSP).
In the event that the pharmacist moves to Iowa, he is required to participate in the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN) program under the direct support of a pharmacist advocate.
Case #5.
In previous disciplinary action taken on September 10, 1997, the pharmacist's license was suspended as a result of unlawful possession of prescription drugs, inability to practice pharmacy with reasonable skill and safety by reason of chemical abuse, and making medication dispensing errors.
The reinstatement process began on September 15, 1999, following an informal conference with the Board.
On September 21, 2000, the Board issued an Order that allows the pharmacist to return to the practice of pharmacy and places his license on probation with conditions for five years.
He is also required to participate in the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN) program under the direct support of a pharmacist advocate.
Case #6.
In a Combined Statement of Charges and Informal Settlement issued on September 15, 2000, the pharmacist was charged with (1) unlawful possession of prescription drugs; (2) inability to practice pharmacy with reasonable skill and safety by reason of chemical abuse; (3) failure to ensure that the pharmacy where he served as pharmacist in charge employed a sufficient number of personnel, including licensed pharmacists, as required to operate a pharmacy competently, safely, legally, and adequately to meet the needs of the patients of the pharmacy; and (4) failure to ensure that pharmacists working under his supervision provided adequate patient counseling.
The Board's investigation began when the pharmacist was arrested for operating his motor vehicle while impaired.
The pharmacist admitted to taking controlled substances from the pharmacy where he worked and further admitted to using those controlled substances while practicing pharmacy.
In addition, the pharmacist admitted that multiple dispensing errors had occurred in his pharmacy.
The pharmacist agreed to an indefinite suspension of this pharmacist license.
He also agreed to submit to comprehensive physical and psychiatric inpatient treatment, including treatment for substance abuse.
Following completion of the treatment program, the pharmacist was allowed to return to the practice of pharmacy and his license was placed on probation with conditions for five years, beginning November 27, 2000.
The pharmacist also agreed to participate in the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN) program under the direct support of a pharmacist advocate.
Case #7.
In previous disciplinary action, the pharmacist's license was placed on probation with the Board on July 15, 1997, for five years.
On September 12, 2000, he appeared before the Board to request early termination of his probation.
The Board approved his request and returned his license to good standing effective September 12, 2000.
Case #8.
In previous disciplinary action, the pharmacist's license was placed on probation with the Board on October 21, 1998, for five years.
On November 14, 2000, he appeared before the Board to request early termination of his probation.
The Board approved his request and returned his license to good standing effective November 14, 2000.
IPRN The Board again wishes to remind readers of this Newsletter that the Iowa Pharmacy Recovery Network (IPRN) is available to assist impaired pharmacists, technicians, and pharmacy students.
Its toll-free telephone number is 1-877/890-IPRN.
Confidential e-mail may be sent to IPRN at the following address: iprn@iarx.org.
IPRN is a monitoring and advocacy peerreview program created for the purpose of helping impaired individuals.
If you or someone you know needs help, please contact IPRN.
Identification of Prescriber on Rx Labels The Board recommends that if the prescribing practitioner's profession (M.D., D.O., D.P.M., D.D.S., D.V.M., O.D., P.A., A.R.N.P.) is included on the label of a patient's prescription container, it should be the appropriate identifier for that prescriber.
Concern has been expressed to the Board that some Iowa pharmacies are identifying mid-level practitioners (P.A.s and A.R.N.P.s) as "Dr." on the label that is affixed to the patient's prescription container.
Care should be taken to avoid this misidentification of the prescribing practitioner on the Rx label.
