New Mexico Register / Volume XII Issue Number 24 / December 28, 2001 This is an amendment to 19.30.2 NMAC, Sections 7 
19.30.2.7 DEFINITIONS: A. Game Animals: This regulation shall apply to only those wildlife species defined as protected under 17-2-3, 17-5-2, 17-2-13, 17-2-14 NMSA 1978 and any other wildlife species managed or regulated by the New Mexico State Game Commission and New Mexico Department of Game and Fish.
B. "Depredation" is hereby defined as property damage caused by game animals on privately owned or leasehold interest land.
C. "Threat to human life" shall mean that death or great bodily harm is likely to occur to a person due to the closeness, aggression or attack of a game animal or quadruped.
D. "Immediate threat to human life" shall mean that an attack is so imminent that nothing, short of destruction, can be done to avert the aggression.
E. "Immediate threat of damage to property or crops" shall mean that game animals exist in such numbers that there is no time for intervention by the Department to avert substantial damage before the damage exceeds the value of the animal, as listed in 17-2-26, or when intervention has failed.
F. "Crops" shall mean any cultivated field or forage, whether sown or natural, which is used chiefly for livestock in that the landowner harvests the product to feed livestock or commercially sell it; or any other feed or commercially sold product that may be stored on properties for future shipping and/or marketing or any other crop grown to provide human subsistence.
G. "Attractive nuisance" shall mean any crop or other material placed on a landowner's property to intentionally draw in protected wildlife.
H. "Landowner" is any person who personally owns private property legally recognized by the State of New Mexico.
I. "Lessee" is any person who leases private property from another in order to grow crops or produce livestock.
J. "Employee" is any person who is paid by a landowner or lessee for providing services to the landowner or lessee and that the service is related to the depredation.
K. "Take" shall mean to trap, ensnare, or intentionally prevent the natural movement of a game animal or quadruped.
L. "Leasehold interest" shall mean any person who leases or rents private agricultural property, whether or not that person is responsible for the crop or livestock.
M. "Quadruped" shall mean any furbearing animal, as defined in 17-5-2 NMSA 1978, for which the Department has jurisdiction (muskrat, mink, nutria, otter, weasel, beaver, masked or black-footed ferret, ringtail cat, raccoon, pine marten, coatimundi, badger, bobcat, and all foxes).
N. "Good cause," as described herein shall mean that the landowner can show that the method of intervention offered would cause damage to persons or property or that the intervention method will not work.
The cause must be substantial, legally sufficient ground or reason that is not arbitrary.
O. "Big game depredation damage stamp" shall mean a stamp, check off or other official [document purchased each license year by a big game hunter prior to hunting] mark purchased with each big game hunting license as required by 17-3-13.3 and 17-3-13.4 NMSA 1978.
[9-1-89, 9-15-97; 19.30.2.7 NMAC - Rn 
Stamp fees shall be in accordance with 19.30.1.9.
[All hunters with a big game license purchased after July 1, 2001, must have a valid big game depredation damage stamp in their possession prior to hunting.
B. Validation: The purchaser of each big game depredation damage stamp must affix the stamp to a valid big game license and sign his or her name in ink across the face of the actual stamp.
Stamps not so validated shall not be valid for big game hunting within New Mexico.
C. Big game depredation damage stamps are not transferable to any other person.
D.
No one may use a big game depredation damage stamp validated by another person.]
19.30.2 NMAC
Page 1
New Mexico Register / Volume XII Issue Number 24 / December 28, 2001 [E.]B. Availability: [and expiration]
The big game depredation damage stamp fee shall be included with every big game license type purchased.
[F.]C. Expiration: Each big game hunter shall [only]
[year and] Each stamp will expire [on the following March 31 after the date of issuance]
[19.30.2.12 NMAC - N, 7-16-01; A, 12-28-01] [This amendment is for any application or license purchased for the 2002 hunting license season and beyond]
19.30.2 NMAC
Page 2
