Chapter VI Necessar y Changes to Enhance Barge Transpor t Beyond the suggested port and waterway improvements detailed in the previous chapter, increasing the use of barge transport (both volume and frequency) entails positioning the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System and its operators as an economical and efficient alternative to competing modes of transport for an expanded range of commodity types.
Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System freight carriers will need to extend service beyond bulk-freight operations and capture freight that traditionally moves via truck (i.e., containerized freight).
10 corridor (interstate Gulf Coast points to Tampa and Florida Gulf Coast).
The use of container barges, capable of carrying large numbers of containers able to be quickly loaded and unloaded at port, has the potential to change the dynamics of barge transport along these routes.
Containerization of barge traffic, or a Container-onBarge (COB) network, allows for the transport of higher value commodities typical of long-haul truck traffic.
Domestic ocean-going and intracoastal barge freight is no longer limited to traditional bulk commodities such as coal and scrap iron.
Container barges, coupled with efficient intermodal port facilities, enable the effective transfer of freight from road to water and back.
While current container traffic concentrates on feeding large ocean-going ships with international cargo, future container-on-barge traffic may include interstate and intrastate origin and destination points in addition to ship-to-ship international traffic.
Two factors can serve to increase the use of barge Port Canaveral, FL. Container Cargo by Barge
transport for Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway traffic: long distances between city pairs and increased congestion in over-the-road freight corridors (i.e., I-95 and U.S. 1).
Longer distances between origin and destination points such as Jacksonville-Key West, Tampa to interstate points on the Gulf Coast, or the longer Canada-Florida routes, make barge traffic more efficient in terms of both cost
Transporting containerized freight via barge along the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway, particularly along the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway, to deepwater and inland ports, may be a viable and attractive alternative to truck movements along the I-95 and U.S. 1 corridor (Jacksonville to Key West) and the I-
6-1
and time.
Shorter runs proportionally require more staging, load and unload time in relation to actual transit time.
If the time a barge spends in port relative to the time it is in transit can be reduced, the barge operation becomes more efficient in terms of distance covered in a given time period.
This efficiency will also translate into cost savings.
Since port operations are a fixed cost, a longer run between ports allows the cost to be distributed over a greater distance, creating a lower cost per mile.
Reduced Truck Traffic The sheer size and capacity of both ocean-going and intracoastal barges is the primary advantage of this mode.
Exhibit 6-1 illustrates the capacity of a single barge versus rail road and truck equivalents.
Note that a single barge (depending on size and weight of cargo) can move up to 300 containers per barge and several barges can move in a single tow.
Efficiency and Cost In terms of fuel usage per ton-mile, barge transport is the most efficient and cost effective means of moving container traffic.
Exhibit 6-2 illustrates the number of miles a ton of freight can be transported per gallon of fuel by truck, rail road and barge.
Note the vast superiority in fuel economy demonstrated
Shifting some truck traffic to barge transport and COB networks offer several benefits over an all-truck transportation approach.
The increased use of the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System to transport containerized freight will result in the following: · · · · · Reduction in truck traffic along the U.S.
I-95/I-75 corridor Reduction in truck traffic along the Gulf Coast segment U.S.
I-10 corridor Efficiency gains (fuel and manpower) Environmental benefits Improved safety of barge transport versus truck or rail
by barge transport.
An additional factor affecting the efficiency of barge transport is the reduced labor requirement of a barge operation.
Exhibit 6-1 Cargo Capacity Comparison
Source: Iowa Department of Transportation, The Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway Development Authority
6-2
Exhibit 6-2 Efficiency Comparison Number of Ton Miles per Gallon of Fuel
Exhibit 6-3 Cost Trends Revenue per Ton-Mile - All Modes
Source: U.S. DOT Maritime Administration, The Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway Development Authority Source: U.S. Dept. of Transportation
A single 300 container barge tow from Jacksonville to Key West effectively eliminates the cost of 300 over the road/long-haul truckers.
Additional labor costs, however, will be incurred at intermodal port facilities and from short-haul truckers required to dray freight to and from inland shippers.
Table 6-1 U.S. Inter-City Freight Revenues per Ton-Mile Year 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 Barge 0.35 0.30 0.52 0.77 0.80 0.76 0.78 0.76 0.76 0.74 0.73 0.73 0.73 0.74 Pipeline 0.28 0.27 0.37 1.33 1.57 1.44 1.40 1.49 1.42 1.40 1.51 1.37 1.37 1.40 Rail 1.27 1.43 2.04 2.87 3.04 2.66 2.59 2.58 2.52 2.49 2.40 2.35 2.40 2.34 Truck 6.46 8.50 11.60 18.00 22.90 24.38 24.82 23.08 24.95 25.01 25.08 26.00 26.12 26.19 Air 20.46 21.91 28.22 46.31 48.77 64.64 64.82 64.10 71.38 72.23 76.50 81.50 79.70 84.10
It costs approximately 35 times as much to send freight by truck than by barge.
Table 6-1 and Exhibit 6-3 detail the historic freight revenues per tonmile of all transport modes, illustrating the cost benefits and relatively flat to declining cost of barge transport versus other modes.
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996
Environment
1997 1998
Source: U.S. Dept. of Transportation
6-3
environmentally friendly alternative to truck and rail transport.
Safety Safety remains an important factor when considering the benefits of Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway barge transport.
Again comparing barge transport to truck and rail, Exhibit 6-5 details the number of deaths and injuries per billion ton-miles As illustrated in Exhibit 6-4, on a per ton-mile basis, barge transport produces the least amount of emissions when compared to rail or truck transport.
In an era of acute sensitivity to environmental pollutants, barge transport, when practical, offers an by mode.
Note that deaths and injuries resulting from barge transport are significantly lower than other modes of transport.
Exhibit 6-4 Emissions Comparison Pounds of Emissions per Ton-Mile
Source: C. Jake Haulk Ph.D. - Inland Waterways as Vital National Infrastructure: Refuting "Corporate Welfare" Attacks, The Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway Development Authority
Exhibit 6-5 Safety Comparison Deaths and Injuries per Billion Ton-Miles
Source: C. Jake Haulk Ph.D. - Inland Waterways as Vital National Infrastructure: Refuting "Corporate Welfare" Attacks, The Tennessee Tombigbee Waterway Development Authority
6-4
Overall Project Feasibility Currently, there are several Container-on-Barge (COB) networks or specific routes operating with success.
Several inland waterways in Europe successfully facilitate containerized barge transport, complete with supporting intermodal facilities.
However, European COB networks may not be a valid comparison to a similar Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway network due to the differences in population density and geographic dispersion of industrial centers.
Concentrations of population and industry along primary inland waterways are more pronounced in Europe than in Florida (and in the rest of the U.S.).
There is currently, an unsubsidized, operator specializing in the transport of container traffic along the Texas-Louisiana Gulf Coast.
Osprey Lines, based in Houston, Texas, utilizes ocean-going barges along the Gulf Coast and traditional barge runs along connected intracoastal waterways.
Primary Gulf Coast service is provided between the Ports of Houston and New Orleans.
Houston-New Orleans service moves containerized freight that feeds large container ships bound for international destinations.
This Houston-New Orleans-Houston round-trip route runs approximately once per week depending upon the volume and ship schedules that drive the traffic.
For the year ending December 31, 2002, it is estimated that 50,000 containers have been transported between Houston and New Orleans via barge.
Additional service from Lake Charles to Houston is also offered.
This route operates primarily to
transport U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) foreign aid goods to international destinations.
As is the case with the Houston-New Orleans-Houston route, the Lake Charles-Houston run connects USDA freight to larger internationally bound ocean-going freighters.
For the year ending December 31, 2002, it is estimated that 12,500 containers (or container equivalents) have been transported from Lake Charles to Houston via barge.
Though this service can be considered merely a niche market, it proves the commercial viability of the concept.
Expansion of both routes and schedule are planned, eventually developing into a Gulf of Mexico COB network running from Brownsville, Texas to Mobile, Alabama and points between.
For Container-on-Barge operations on the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway to become a truly viable alternative to truck traffic and move beyond niche market status, Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway barge operations must overcome several service deficiencies, including the following:
· · · · ·
Transit time Limited schedule and frequency of service Port/intermodal facility constraints Equipment/infrastructure costs Breakeven container volumes
These challenges can be addressed through several
6-5
avenues of network, infrastructure and operational development.
transit times into a supply chain.
In order to do this, barge operators must offer scheduled services.
Transit Time and Scheduled Service Shippers are increasingly selecting transportation services based on time-definite service and reliability, rather than mode or route.
This new emphasis focuses on the characteristics of goods movement, which most affect the end users, rather than on the mechanics of how the movement is accomplished.
Such focus is primarily driven by just-in-time (JIT) and lean inventory strategies adopted by industry over the past decade.
Time-definite service allows shippers and logistics personnel to plan for extended supply chains and adequate inventory levels without a specific need for speed in transit times.
By
Network Development To maximize the amount of traffic moved via barge and expand beyond niche market status, Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway barge operators must expand beyond single city-pair service.
Multiple destinations must be served from each origin port, thus offering shippers expanded options to meet shipping needs.
The development of a COB barge network, with "hubbing" and barge-to-barge container transfer capabilities, would essentially put most Florida deep-water ports within 3-4 day service of each other.
Multiple-stop barge routes (e.g., Jacksonville-Canaveral-Key West) can be
providing shippers (particularly business-to-business shippers feeding production or distribution facilities) with time-definite service and guaranteed delivery time and dates, slower modes (e.g., barge) can compete with faster modes (e.g., truck).
In order for consistent time-definite service to become a reality for Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway barge operations, scheduled (and frequent) service must be instituted.
Scheduled service is a must if logistics managers are to view barge transport as a viable alternative to longhaul trucks.
Again, the speed of barge versus truck will not be an insurmountable obstacle to barge usage if the logistics manager can reliably factor increased
supplemented with direct routing between larger citypairs such as Miami-Jacksonville.
Such direct routes would utilize larger, faster ocean-going barges/ container ships while providing improved transittime.
Port Infrastructure In order to handle increased barge container traffic, many traditional barge ports/docks along the Gulf Coast may need infrastructure improvements, expansion, or both.
Traditional barge facilities are designed to primarily handle bulk commodities (i.e., coal, petroleum, scrap iron).
To accommodate
6-6
container traffic and associated barge-to-truck and bargeto-barge transfer, the following improvements and additions must be considered:
network materialize to a scope beyond niche status.
Funding Strategies · · · · · On and off-load equipment (cranes, lifts, Ro-Ro capability) Container storage and staging areas (land requirements) Improved truck access roads (increased truck traffic) Truck queue/waiting areas (land requirements) Dredging of key intracoastal water way segments Many of these issues, such as dredging and land issues, are currently addressed in the course of facilitating current Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System freight traffic.
Still, a variety of lift and storage equipment will need to be made available at port and terminal facilities that are accessible by both barge and truck for efficient operation of a Container-on-Barge network.
Flexibility to change equipment modes is recommended.
Either stationary dockside cranes or mobile cranes can be used to unload containers from barges.
Alternatively, the RO/RO system (Roll-On, Roll-Off) uses trailers, or containers on chassis.
The choice of equipment and its location depends on a full understanding of local conditions, economics and operation/freight type, yet will most certainly represent a capital investment for operators and port authorities.
The FSTED Program offers a source of in-state funding for port improvements.
Funding from this program is provided under the mandate to "finance port transportation and port facilities More than likely several ports along the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway will need to address the listed infrastructure and capacity issues should a COB projects that will improve the movement and intermodal transportation of cargo or passengers in commerce and trade and that will support the There are two potential sources of direct port and waterway funding beyond private development dollars.
They are the Florida Seaport The cost of developing and implementing a Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Container-on-Barge network is twofold; port and waterway infrastructure and operator equipment.
As discussed in the previous section, as volumes increase, port facilities will need to expand and improve.
The question of which entities will undertake this expense and to what extent, will need to be addressed.
Transportation and Economic Development (FSTED) Program funded by the State of Florida and the Federal Inland Waterways Trust Fund funded by a fuel tax on users of select U.S. inland waterways (of which, the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway is one).
6-7
interests, purposes and requirements of ports located in this State."
While this is a broad mandate that can encompass multiple projects of interest to Florida ports and maritime commerce, it may be possible to allocate funds from this source to initiate preliminary planning and development of a Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway COB network.
Such initial funding will most certainly not address all costs and infrastructure requirements, but may provide sufficient data and planning to seek future Federal funds to implement the required infrastructure, waterway and port improvements.
and Inland Waterway System operators also present an obstacle to the rapid development of a Containeron-Barge network.
The cost of adding new vessels, particularly ocean-going barges necessary for long distance routes is artificially high due to current U.S. regulation (in part due to the Jones Act).
Current Gulf Coast ocean-going barge operators report that the required U.S. built vessels needed to operate the long distance routes cost up to 400 percent more than comparable internationally built vessels.
This barrier to expanding ocean-going barge fleets has the potential to hinder the development of a viable containerized Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway network.
Federal funds from the Federal Inland Waterways Trust Fund are also available for port and waterway improvement projects.
The Inland Waterways Trust Fund is directed by the Inland Waterways Users Board which represent various regions of the country.
It is this Board of industry representatives that makes primary decisions on the funding of waterway projects.
The Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System (as is all of Florida) is located in Region 5, is represented by Parker Towing Company, Inc. of Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
Competition for Inland Waterways Trust Fund dollars is competitive; any request for funding needs to be directed to and supported by Inland Waterways Users Board members.
Not all of these challenges need to be met immediately or simultaneously for a Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway barge network to develop successfully.
These are issues that need to be addressed in some form, now or in the future, so as to assist in the efficiency, growth and long-term viability of a well-developed and well-used network.
Ultimately, it will be up to the barge operators, their customers and market forces to determine how to successfully grow a Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway COB network, and which challenges need to be addressed first.
Recommended Implementation Schedule
In addition to port and waterway improvement costs, equipment costs for the Florida Intracoastal
6-8
