COLONIAL SETTLEMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROBLEMS Performance Standards (16EUS/16EW/17D).I Create a chart and a written response showing the cause-effect relationship of the colonial settlement of the United States and the development of environmental problems/issues over time accordingly: · Knowledge: identify human activities and environmental problems in the colonial north and south; · Reasoning: compare the connections between the human activities and future environmental problems in each region; and · Communication: produce a chart and a written response that is well-organized, well-focused and well-detailed; express all ideas in a way that provides evidence of knowledge and reasoning processes.
Procedures 1.
In order to understand Illinois, United States and world environmental history (16E), and understand the historical significance of geography (17D), students should experience sufficient learning opportunities to develop the following: · Identify the origins of significant environmental issues confronting the United States and North America, · Describe how the rise in colonial powers affected the environment in colonial empires, and · Compare past and present types of settlements in the United States and other countries to determine similarities and differences (e.g., the colonial South of the United States vs. the colonial North, settlement of Australia).
Have students review and discuss the assessment task and how the rubric will be used to evaluate their work.
Students should possess a basic understanding of European colonial settlement and the physical geography/climate of North America.
In small groups have students compile a list of factors that prompted European settlement of North America.
Have students group and label the factors: economic, political, and social.
Each student generates a chart during the group discussion showing two headings: colonial north and colonial south.
The students should list human activities occurring in each of these regions and indicate similarities and differences of the human activities between each of the regions.
Have students individually explain on their chart how the human activity contributed to environmental problems in each region.
Students develop an individual response to the following question: · How has colonial settlement and human activities contributed to a future environmental problem in both the northern and southern Atlantic U.S. coastal regions? Evaluate each student's work using the Social Science Rubric as follows and add the scores to determine the performance level: · Knowledge: the identification of human activities (e.g., cotton and tobacco production in the south, industrialization in the north) and environmental problems in each region is accurate and complete.
· Reasoning: the analysis in the response provides at least two valid, logical connections between northern and southern Atlantic coastal region settlement and future environmental problems and is logical and wellreasoned.
· Communication: the chart and written response is well-organized, well-focused and well-detailed; the knowledge and reasoning were completely and effectively communicated.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Examples of Student Work follow
Resources · Paper and pen · Social Science Rubric
Time Requirement · One-two class periods
ASSESSMENT (16EUS/16EW/17C).I
"Meets" (page 1)
"Meets" (page 2)
"Meets" (page 3)
