Professional-Technical Education # 360 Technical Committee Report and Curriculum Guide for Apparel Design and Merchandising This report was prepared by the Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Family and Consumer Sciences Education Boise, Idaho August, 1999 INTRODUCTION The curriculum development process undertaken by the Idaho Division ofProfessional-Technical Education involves active participation of family and consumer sciences educators at the secondary and postsecondary levels.
For development of the Apparel Desing and Merchandising curriculum the majority of committee members were educators who have taught Apparel Design and Merchandising and were recommended by their colleagues.
Industry personnel were consulted where their expertise and opinions were required.
The new Apparel Design and Merchandising curriculum framework was developed by state staff and university personnel using the National Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences Education and resources fron other state guides.
The curriculum team wrote, reviewed and revised the curriculum framework.
This report was prepared upon completion of the committees assignment.
The list of key competencies and performance indicators prepared by committee members reflects the knowledge and skill currently recommended for students in the Apparel Design and Merchandising course.
Students who complete this course will be better prepared to meet the challenges of living and working in today's society in the areas related to apparel design and merchandising occupational areas.
The result of the work of the curriculum committee members is this statewide curriculum guide.
These individuals have written overall outcomes, key competencies, and performance indicators.
The committee prepared materials in a competency-based format to have an effective and efficient methodology for determining student progress.
The statewide guides are dwsigned as the primary determiner of the program content.
It is not the intent of the State Division of Professional Technical Education that all programs are designed exactly the same, but assurance os needed that the program meets the minimum standards for operation.
Schools offering Family and Consumer Sciences Education should use program advisory committees to reflect local and community needs.
The Curriculum Guide is also used as the primary list for generating student profiles.
The profile is used as a cumulative record of each student's progress and serves as a proof of instruction for articulation purposes.
They have performance scales for each indicator so that student competence can be recorded.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The curriculum committee process involved personnel from Idaho High Schools, business and industry, the University of Idaho, and the Idaho Division of Vocational Education.
These people serve with the approval of their employers.
The Division of Vocational Education provides reimbursement for travel and meal expenses.
The Idaho Division of Vocational Education is deeply appreciative of the opportunity to meet with these committee members and to their employers for permitting them to do so.
The following people gave their time, energy and expertise in the development of this course of study: Project Director Nancy Walker, Program Manager Family and Consumer Sciences Idaho Division of Vocational Education Project Manager Yvonne S. Gentzler, Ph.D.
University of Idaho Project Coordinator Miskee Gendall University of Idaho
Writing Team Members: Marcia Farrar, Educator Family and Consumer Sciences Horseshoe Bend High School Horseshoe Bend, Idaho Carolyn Lage, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Timberline School Weippe, Idaho Norma Peterson, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Meridian High School Meridian, Idaho Jana Watson Family and Consumer Sciences Rexburg, Idaho Daylene Peterson, Instructor Family and Consumer Sciences Notus High School Notus, Idaho
APPAREL DESIGN AND MERCHANDISING COURSE DESCRIPTION: Apparel Design and Merchandising is designed to expose students to career opportunities and skills within the apparel design/merchandising industry.
Emphasis is on skill development in design, merchandising, production, and acquisition and care of textiles and apparel products and services.
Instruction includes art and design principles, construction techniques, entrepreneurship, merchandising opportunities and preparation for possible occupational coursework.
Semester one and semester two along with a one to two semester work experience, constitutes an occupational sequence.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION Delivery of the Apparel Design and Merchandising Curriculum It is recommended that this course emphasize full-class participation, teamwork, and individual projects and/or study.
The teachers is the facilitator and the manager of the classroom environment the focus is on problem-based instruction that is designed to enable others in the home, workplace, community and world.
Students also practice action through participation in FCCLA, Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America, a co-curricular student organization.
Teacher Qualifications The teacher of this course must be vocationally certified in Family and Consumer Sciences Education.
It is highly recommended that teachers have industry experience or a recent internship experience to gain knowledge about career opportunities in the apparel design and merchandising occupational areas.
Length and Level of this Course Apparel Design and Merchandising is a one or two semester/trimester experience preferably at the 11 or 12 th grade level.
The recommended program sequence included Career and Personal Development as a prerequisite to Apparel Design and Merchandising.
Students will also need to complete a work experience in the areas of apparel design and merchandising.
Recommended Resources Apparel Design and Merchandising Activity/Resource Guide, 1999 Material from the current curriculum material list for Family and Consumer Sciences.
th
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK
PROGRAM AREA: Family and Consumer Sciences EFFECTIVE DATE: June 1999
IDAHO DIVISION OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION PROGRAM TITLE: Apparel Design and Merchandising IDAHO CODE NUMBER:
CIP#:
I.
MAJOR CONCEPTS/CONTENT: Throughout history, clothing has had great meaning.
It reflects skills, artistic imagination, and cultural rituals.
Clothing also has and continues to be an indicator of advances in technology.
Fashion is both an art and a science, involving both creative thinking and the use of technology.
Additionally, fashion reflects the economic conditions, current events, political issues, and popular entertainment of a society at a given time.
Fashion related employment offers vast options and opportunities.
COURSE DESCRIPTION: Apparel Design and Merchandising is a one or two semester/trimester introductory course designed to expose students to career opportunities and skills within the apparel design/merchandising industry.
Emphasis is on skill development in design, merchandising, production, and acquisition and care of textiles and apparel products and services.
Instruction includes art and design principles, construction techniques, entrepreneurship, merchandising opportunities and preparation for possible occupational course work.
Semester one and semester two along with a one or two semester work experience, constitutes an occupational sequence.
INTENDED OUTCOMES: After successfully completing this program, the student will be able to: 01.
02.
03.
04.
05.
06.
07.
Analyze Apparel and Fashion Analyze the Textile and Apparel Industries Examine Fiber and Textile Product Materials Illustrate Apparel Design Skills Demonstrate Techniques to Produce, Alter and Repair Textile Products Analyze Personal and Industry Apparel Consumer Strategies Analyze Career Options within the Textile and Apparel Industries
II.
III.
Apparel and Housing Scope and Sequence ( %) 01.
ANALYZE APPAREL AND FASHION -analyze the meaning of apparel and fashion -examine the impact of fashion trends and forecasting on clothing -describe garment styles and features ANALYZE THE TEXTILES AND APPAREL INDUSTRIES -examine the development of the fashion industry -explore the textile industry -examine the apparel production, promotion, and retailing industries EXAMINE FIBER AND TEXTILE PRODUCT M ATERIALS -describe the physical and chemical properties of fibers -examine fabric construction techniques -examine fabric finishes and dyes -practice textile design skills ILLUSTRATE APPAREL DESIGN SKILLS -explore the effect of color as an element -examine the effects of elements and principles of design -demonstrate use of art principles and elements of design -assemble a visual presentation using representational form DEMONSTRATE TECHNIQUES TO PRODUCE, ALTER AND REPAIR TEXTILE PRODUCTS -develop skills in the use of construction equipment and tools -construct a project using a pattern -develop apparel repair, alteration, or recycling techniques
( %) 02.
( %) 03.
( %) 04.
( %) 05.
( %) 06.
ANALYZE PERSONAL AND INDUSTRY APPAREL CONSUMER STRATEGIES -explore methods for enhancing personal and professional appearance -develop skills of wardrobe planning -evaluate quality features of apparel and textile products -examine strategies for becoming a well-informed consumer -examine apparel for infants and children -examine apparel for individuals with special needs -demonstrate proper clothing care techniques ANALYZE CAREER OPTIONS WITHIN THE TEXTILE AND APPAREL INDUSTRIES -explore occupations in the textiles and apparel industries -explore skills and training for occupations in the textiles and apparel industries -examine entrepreneurship opportunities
( %) 07.
Apparel Design and Merchandising High School Family and Consumer Sciences Education Curriculum Framework 01.
ANALYZE APPAREL AND FASHION 01.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Analyze the meaning of apparel and fashion.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Analyze how clothing satisfies physical, psychological, and social needs 2.
Examine how values, attitudes, and personality affect clothing selection Explore factors that affect apparel and fashion decisions 3.
01.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the impact of fashion trends and forecasting on clothing .
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain fashion terminology 2.
Describe current and past fashion cycles and trends 4.
Analyze the influence of social, economic, and political factors on fashion cycles, fads, and trends 5.
Describe the fashion forecasting process Describe the impact of computer-aided design (CAD) on apparel design and 6.
production 7.
Describe the impact of computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) on apparel design and production Explain electronic merchandising 8.
9.
Describe the growth of home shopping network, catalog, and Internet sales 01.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Describe garment styles and features.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the relationship between the cut of a garment and the style 2.
Identify various dress designs and styles 3.
Identify neckline and collar 4.
Describe sleeve, skirt, pants, coat, and jacket styles 5.
Illustrate how garment features can be combined in different ways to achieve new and different fashions
02.
Describe how garment styles are modified for individuals with special and unique needs ANALYZE THE TEXTILE AND APPAREL INDUSTRIES 02.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the development of the fashion industry.
PERFORMANCE INDICATOR: 1.
Explain the worldwide importance of the apparel industries 2.
Describe the development of "Haute Couture" 3.
Explore 20th century designers 4.
Explain the importance of the ready-to-wear industry 5.
Describe how new color and fashion trends begin and are marketed 6.
Describe the influence of brand and name on the fashion industry 02.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore the textile industry.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the workings of textile businesses 2.
Describe textile technology 3.
Explore the worldwide textile industry of today and the future 4.
Explore color, fabric, and fashion trends in textile products 02.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine the apparel production, promotion, and retailing industries.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explore the business aspects of apparel production 2.
Explain the production processes of ready-to-wear clothing 3.
Describe selling methods of apparel manufacturers 4.
Identify issues related to global manufacturing 5.
Explore possible directions of apparel production Examine fashion promotion including advertising, publicity, visual 6.
merchandising, and video merchandising 7.
Explain retail terms 8.
Describe different types of apparel stores Explore the future in retail sales 9.
6.
03.
EXAMINE FIBER AND TEXTILE PRODUCT MATERIALS 03.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Describe the physical and chemical properties of fibers.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the characteristics of natural fibers 2.
Describe the characteristics of manufactured fibers 3.
Describe the characteristics of blends 4.
Explore laws governing textiles 5.
Explain the influence of technology on textile fibers 03.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine fabric construction techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe how fabrics are made from fibers and yarns 2.
Examine methods of fabric construction -woven, knitted, non woven, bonded Examine fabric characteristics that result from different construction techniques 3.
4.
Practice textile design skills 03.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine fabric finishes and dyes.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain how color and surface designs are applied to fabrics 2.
Explain dyeing and color processes 3.
Describe fabric finishes, and their effects
04.
ILLUSTRATE APPAREL DESIGN SKILLS 04.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore the effect of color as an element.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify color as a design element 2.
Distinguish among primary, secondary, and tertiary hues 3.
Examine the psychology, symbolism and terms related to color 4.
Practice using color schemes and illusions effectively in apparel 5.
Choose colors that enhance hair, eyes, and skin tone 04.02 KEY COMPETENCY:
Examine the effects of elements and principles of design.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Identify elements and principles of design 1.
2.
Examine the illusions created by each principle and element Explain how principles and elements are used in fashion design, construction, 3.
and alteration Explain how to use principles and elements to enhance the appearance of body 4.
shapes 5.
Describe silhouette and its effect on appearance 04.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Demonstrate use of art principles and elements of design.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Identify basic design details used in fashion design 1.
2.
Describe a proportioned croque or fashion figure 3.
Describe fashion figure variations Explain techniques used to enhance a fashion sketch 4.
5.
Examine the influence of technology on design 6.
Practice design techniques Create a design and/or fashion sketch 7.
04.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Assemble a visual presentation using representational form.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe different types of visual presentations 2.
Describe the benefits of visual presentations 3.
Describe the use of computer technology in visual presentations 4.
Identify props and equipment used in visual presentations 5.
Describe features to look for in visual presentations 6.
Select a theme and prepare a sketch for a visual presentation 7.
Create and evaluate a visual presentation
05.
DEMONSTRATE TECHNIQUES TO ALTER, PRODUCE OR REPAIR TEXTILE PRODUCTS AND APPAREL 05.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Develop skills in the use of construction equipment and tools.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Practice using cutting tools and equipment used in construction 2.
Practice using measuring tools and equipment 3.
Practice using sewing tools and equipment 4.
Practice using pressing tools and equipment 5.
Practice using miscellaneous small tools and equipment used in construction 6.
Practice safety procedures 7.
Practice pressing techniques 05.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Construct a project using a pattern.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Match measurements to pattern size 1.
Adjust a pattern for size 2.
3.
Explain information found on a pattern envelope and guidesheets Identify pattern symbols 4.
Select appropriate fabric and sewing notions 5.
6.
Practice pattern design and cutting and construction techniques 05.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Develop apparel repair, alteration, or recycling techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Practice techniques used to repair garments 1.
2.
Practice techniques used to alter garments 3.
Practice techniques used to recycle garments
06.
EXAMINE APPAREL SELECTION, CARE AND CONSUMER STRATEGIES 06.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore methods for enhancing personal and professional appearance.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explore how images and statements are projected 2.
Examine the importance of dressing for lifestyle, climate, and community standards Examine the importance of appearance for employment 3.
4.
Explain the impact of grooming on personal image, self-esteem, and selfconcept 06.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Develop skills of wardrobe planning.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Describe the benefits of a well-planned wardrobe 1.
Prepare a current wardrobe inventory 2.
3.
Identify clothing wants and needs for personal wardrobe 4.
Analyze current wardrobe needs for personal lifestyle 5.
Practice wardrobe-planning skills 6.
Examine the selection and use of accessories 06.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Evaluate quality features of apparel and textile products.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Analyze the quality of workmanship, fabric, and design 1.
2.
Recognize the importance of proper fit for maximum wardrobe value 3.
Examine apparel performance Develop skills for apparel care and maintenance 4.
06.04 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine strategies for becoming a well-informed consumer.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Examine apparel stores and resources 2. Decide when and where to shop 3.
Evaluate the information on hangtags, labels, and packaging 4.
Examine laws relating to apparel and textiles 5.
Examine the rights and responsibilities of the consumer
06.05 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine apparel for infants and children.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Evaluate apparel needs for infants and children 2.
Assess clothing sizes for infants and children 3.
Examine features of clothing for infants and children 4.
Examine fibers, fabrics and finishes used in clothing for infants and children 06.06 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine apparel for individuals with special needs.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe wardrobe selection guidelines for the elderly 2.
Describe the special apparel needs of people with disabilities Examine apparel for individuals with unique needs and sizes 3.
06.07 KEY COMPETENCY: Demonstrate proper clothing care techniques.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Examine basic laundering products and procedures 2.
Identify ways of saving energy during the laundry process Evaluate and apply techniques to treat and remove a variety of stains 3.
4.
Practice pressing techniques 5.
Examine the necessity and benefits of dry cleaning Explore clothing storage methods 6.
07.
ANALYZE CAREER OPTIONS WITHIN THE TEXTILES AND APPAREL INDUSTRY 07.01 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore occupations in the textiles and apparel industries.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explore occupations in the textiles industry 2.
Explore occupations in apparel design 3.
Explore occupations in apparel and textile merchandising 4.
Explore occupations in fashion promotion 5.
Explore other apparel-related occupations 07.02 KEY COMPETENCY: Explore skills and training for occupations in the textiles and apparel industries.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: Describe skills and knowledge needed by workers 1.
2.
Describe merchandising techniques and practices Demonstrate textile and apparel merchandising skills 3.
Evaluate components of customer service 4.
5.
Describe the education and training requirements Develop an educational/training plan for a career in the textiles or apparel 6.
industry 07.03 KEY COMPETENCY: Examine entrepreneurship opportunities.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the nature of small business in textiles and apparel 2.
Explore opportunities in home-based industry 3.
Describe the risks and rewards of business ownership 4.
Identify characteristics of entrepreneurs 5.
Explore the potential market for products or services Develop a business plan for a small business or home-based industry 6.
Student's Name
School ____________________________ Grade ______________
APPAREL DESIGN AND MERCHANDISING
OF 0550
Directions:
Evaluate the trainee using the rating scale below and check the appropriate number to indicate the degree of competency achieved.
The numerical ratings of 3, 2, 1, and 0 are not intended to represent the traditional school grading system of A, B, C, D, and F.
The descriptions associated with each of the numbers focus on level of student performance for each of the tasks listed below.
0 -No Exposure - no information nor practice provided during training program, complete training required.
Exposure Only - general information provided with no
1.
Number of Competencies Evaluated 2.
Number of Competencies Rated 2 or 3 3.
Percent of Competencies Attained (2/1)
Letter Grade Rating Scale: 1Instructor Signature Date
01.0 0123
Analyze Apparel and Fashion The student will be able to: 01.01 01.02 01.03 Analyze the meaning of apparel and fashion Examine the impact of fashion trends and forecasting on clothing Describe garment styles and features
05.0 0123
Demonstrate Techniques to Alter, Produce or Repair Textile Products and Apparel The student will be able to: 05.01 05.02 05.03 Develop skills in the use of construction equipment and tools Construct a project using a pattern Develop apparel repair, alteration, or recycling techniques
02.0 0123
Analyze the Textile and Apparel Industries The student will be able to: 02.01 02.02 02.03 Examine the development of the fashion industry Explore the textile industry Examine the apparel production, promotion, and retailing industries
06.0 0123
Examine Apparel Selection, Care and Consumer Strategies The student will be able to: 06.01 06.02 06.03 06.04 06.05 06.06 06.07 Explore methods for enhancing personal and professional appearance Develop skills of wardrobe planning Evaluate quality features of apparel and textile products Examine strategies for becoming a well-informed consumer Examine apparel for infants and children Examine apparel for individuals with special needs Demonstrate proper clothing care techniques.
03.0 0123
Examine Fiber and Textile Products Material The student will be able to: 03.01 03.02 03.03 Describe the physical and chemical properties of fibers Examine fabric construction techniques Examine fabric construction techniques
07.0 0123
Analyze Career Options Within the Textiles and Apparel Industry The student will be able to: 07.01 07.02 07.03 Explore occupations in the textiles and apparel industries Explore skills and training for occupations in the textiles and apparel industries Examine entrepreneurship opportunities
04.0 0123
Illustrate Apparel Design Skills The student will be able to: 04.01 04.02 04.03 04.04 Explore the effect of color as an element Examine the effects of elements and principles of design Demonstrate use of art principles and elements of design Assemble a visual presentation using representational form
