An Interdisciplinar y Unit On ENDANGERED ANIMALS Ariane Allen Shuffleton, M. Ed. ©2002
TABLE
OF CONTENTS 4 5 19 19 20 20 21 25 26
Introduction and Background Information Unit Goals and Lesson Plans Spelling Words and Dictation Sentences Writing Topics Graphs Helpful Organizations Literature List List of Endangered and Threatened Species in N.H.
Lesson Credits
This booklet is printed through funds made available from the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program
Copies are available from: New Hampshire Fish and Game Department Wildlife Education Unit 2 Hazen Drive Concord, NH 03301
INTRODUCTION
AND BACKGROUND INFORMATION
A
mericans list the environment as one of our prime concerns.
The problems our generation faces are becoming more alarming every day.
Although "endangered animals" is only one topic related to the environment, wildlife is considered by some an "environmental barometer".
("Wildlife, The Environmental Barometer" ­ brochure, Wildlife Management Institute, Washington, D.C.)
Wildlife exists where nature is balanced.
Some scientists estimate the current extinction rate is more than 1,000 times the natural rate of extinction.
("Windows on the Wild" ­ World Wildlife Fund 1999) Although extinction itself is a natural phenomenon, it is today's accelerated rate which is not natural.
Humans are altering the environment to such a degree that many animals cannot adapt ­ therefore they die.
Other species are being illegally hunted or trapped at a rate that is also causing extinction.
Oil spills, pesticides, acid rain, and solid wastes are f inding their way into animals' digestive tracts and skin, which is still another reason animals are disappearing from our earth.
If, in fact, wildlife is an "environmental barometer", the human species is also in trouble.
When a species is extinct, that means it no longer exists anywhere on the ear th; it is gone forever.
Endangered animals are in danger of becoming extinct.
Threatened animals are animals that will probably become endangered unless something is done to help them.
The federal government passed the Endangered Species Act in 1973.
This law protects listed endangered and threatened species from being hunted, collected, sold, or used in any way without a permit.
States set land aside solely for wildlife.
Zoos study endangered animals and attempt to breed them in captivity.
"Foster parenting" is another method used with some species to increase their numbers (for example, the whooping crane).
You don't have to be a scientist or a governor to help in the f ight against extinction.
You can help to enforce wildlife laws.
You can avoid buying products that are made from endangered animals (it's illegal in this country).
You can write letters to your congressmen.
You can support wildlife organizations.
Most of all, you can learn about endangered animals and teach others.
Educators can adapt the lessons and ideas to meet their own class needs, as I did for our second grade.
Enjoy!
Ariane Allen Shuffleton
4
UNIT GOALS The goals of this unit are as follows: 1.
Students will develop empathy, concern, and awareness of and about endangered animals.
2.
Students will understand the major factors that cause animals to become rare, threatened, endangered, and extinct (habitat destruction, over specialization, pollution, and poaching).
3.
Students will gain an understanding of what is presently being done to save endangered animals.
4.
Students will explore their own ideas of what needs to be done, as well as what individuals and groups can do, to help save endangered animals.
5.
In pairs, students will research an animal in order to gain an in-depth understanding of the problems and possible solutions for a particular endangered animal.
5
UNIT OUTLINE Lesson 1 Lesson 2 Lesson 3 Lesson 4 Lesson 5 Lesson 6 Lesson 7 Lesson 8 Lesson 9 Lesson 10 Lesson 11 Lesson 12 Lesson 13 Lesson 14 Lesson 15 Brainstorming Prior Knowledge Apple Demonstration Animal Interviews Habitat and Its Components From the Wild to Captivity Human Alterations in the Environment Acid Rain: An Experiment Car rying Capacity and Crowding Plastic Food Chopping Down the Forest Oil Pollution: An Experiment More Than One Reason Susceptibility to Extinction Bumper Stickers and Pins: Make a Statement Harmful Activities and Alternatives
6
Lesson 1 ­ Brainstorming Prior Knowledge Objective: Find out what students know about endangered animals.
Method: Brainstorm prior knowledge Material: Chalkboard or large piece of paper to record what students say.
Procedure: Write "Endangered Animals" on the top of the paper or on the chalkboard.
Ask students what they know about endangered animals.
Record all responses, correct and incor rect.
Note: Save this for the end of the unit; cross out incor rect responses at this time, and add other facts that were learned during the unit.
Lesson 2 ­ Apple Demonstration Objective: At the end of this lesson, students will have a better understanding of how small an area of the earth humans and all other land dwelling animals live.
Method: Demonstration Materials: A whole apple, a knife, and a cutting board, globe for comparison Procedure: Have the atmosphere.
Tell them the apple is similar to they think people and students sit so they can see the demonstration.
Create a "serious" that we are going to pretend that this apple is the earth.
Discuss how the earth.
Ask the students to guess how much of the earth (apple) animals that live on the land occupy.
· 70-75% of earth is covered with oceans; cut the apple in fourths and push 3 quarters to the side.
· 30% of what remains is too dry for life to exist; cut 1/3 away and push to the side.
· 30% of what remains is too mountainous for life to exist; cut another 1/3 away and push to the side.
· Of the remaining portion, only the surface (skin) is used for living space; trim off the skin.
· Ask the students "How long until we use it up?" Don't wait for a response; eat skin.
Have students write for f ive minutes to express their feelings, thoughts, and ideas to "save the earth".
Students who wish can then share their responses.
7
Lesson 3 ­ Animal Interviews Objective: Students will become aware of reasons why some animals are endangered.
Each student will examine an endangered animal by researching, writing, and verbally describing the problems of a particular animal.
Students will design their own costumes and props for interviews.
Method: Research, write reports, interviews with classmates Materials: Resource folders containing information about an animal, its habitat, its status (endangered, threatened, rare), its problems/reasons for being endangered, etc. (one folder per two children).
Teacher makes these in advance.
Materials for props and costumes.
Procedure: Teacher models an interview (s/he dresses up or makes a puppet); introduce yourself and ask students to write down a question to ask this animal.
Tell the students some facts about yourself (the animal): where you live, what you eat, your life cycle, etc. then allow the students to inter view you.
Students research animals in pairs; when a pair is ready, let their classmates interview them.
A "data sheet" listing the type of information they are expected to know might be helpful.
Note: Model an interview at the beginning of the unit.
Allow the students ample time to research their animal, and then make the interviews the culminating project for the unit.
In the following lessons, when I refer to "an animal", students can work with their partners, and use "their animals" as the focus of the lessons.
Lesson 4 ­ Habitat and Its Components Objective: Students will be able to def ine "habitat" and identify its components.
Students will brainstorm, then organize and synthesize the information.
Method: Brainstorm.
Draw and label parts of own habitat, then of an animal's habitat Materials: Chalkboard, drawing paper, crayons.
Procedure: On the board make two columns with headings "people" and "wildlife".
Ask the students what people need in order to survive; write down all responses.
Do the same for wildlife heading.
Go back over the lists to tr y to nar row each one of them down to water, food, shelter, space, ar rangement, sunlight, air, and soil.
· Define habitat: home for animals, what they need in order to survive.
· Add "pets" and "plants".
Do these have the same components? · Have students draw pictures of their own habitats (homes) and label water, food, shelter, space, and arrangement.
Share the pictures, then have students draw pictures of an animal's habitat and label the par ts.
Note: If students have a hard time with ar rangement, ask them how convenient it would be if their bathroom were two miles from their house!
8
Lesson 5 ­ From the Wild to Captivity Objective: Students will be able to identify and analyze problems that occur when animals are moved from the wild to captivity.
Students design zoo environments for endangered animals that satisfy all the needs for that particular animal.
Method: Discussion, drawings Materials: Drawing paper, crayons Procedure: Review the def inition of "habitat".
List components on board (water, food, space, protection, ar rangement).
· Discuss different types of habitat in relation to different animals.
· Choose one type of animal, and list habitat requirements for that animal.
· Draw a picture of that animal in a zoo with all its needs satisf ied.
Label the needs of the animal.
Is it possible? Discuss pictures.
Discuss the problems scientists and zookeepers have when they want to keep a wild animal in an enclosed area.
Read: Close to the Wild by Thomas Cajacob and Theresa Burton (See "Children's Literature" list for details)
Lesson 6 ­ Human Alterations in the Environment Objective: Students will be able to describe some ways that humans are altering habitats, which causes some animals to become endangered.
Method: Worksheet; discussion Materials: Worksheet (NatureScope "Endangered Species: Wild 
· Show pictures of endangered animals.
· Explain that the main reason species are disappearing is because humans are changing their habitats.
Ask the students why people would want to change habitats.
· Do worksheet together with discussion.
The large pictures in the middle represent the way people are changing habitats.
The smaller pictures on the top and bottom show why people change habitats.
· Draw lines from the big pictures to the small pictures to show the reasons why people are changing habitats.
· Discuss other ways that people are changing habitats, and why.
Discuss the consequences this might have for wildlife.
· Let students color the page.
9
10
Lesson 7 ­ Acid Rain: An Experiment Objective: Students will formulate hypotheses, perform an experiment, and evaluate the results.
Students will be able to draw conclusions about the way acid rain affects plant and animal life.
Method: Experiment with plants and vinegar Materials: Four bean plants (plant two ahead of time), two peperomia plants, two jade plants, vinegar, water, plastic bag, paper towels, two spray bottles, r uler.
Procedure: While students are out of the room, wet 4 or 5 paper towels with vinegar and place them around the room.
When students enter the room and notice the smell, discuss how people get rid of smells (place smelly paper towels in a plastic bag and throw away).
Animals don't have the ability to get away from some types of pollution.
· Does anyone know what acid rain is? Discuss.
· Draw a simple picture of smokestacks, pollution f illed clouds moving away, and then falling as rain in a pond with f ish, f ish die or are eaten by a bird, etc.
· Bring out plants and spray bottles.
Explain to the students that acid rain sometimes is as acidic as vinegar.
Label one bottle "acid rain" (vinegar) and the other water.
Have one student spray half the plants with water, and another student spray the other plants with acid rain.
Label the plants.
Determine how much liquid should be sprayed on the plants (for example, ten pumps).
For mulate a hypotheses about acid rain and how it might affect the plants.
Fill out charts.
Charts should include a date, color, height, width, and comments for each plant.
Optional: Start two other plants as seedlings.
What effect does acid rain have on these plants? Continue this for several days (two weeks is a good length of time).
Discuss how acid rain could affect animals by getting in the food chain.
For backg round, read: "Acid rain: Effects on f ish and wildlife", US depar tment of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife service, Leaflet 1, Washington, D.C., 1985; "The Acid Rain Story", Friends of the Earth / EPI / OS, Washington, D.C., 1985.
11
Lesson 8 ­ Carrying Capacity and Crowding Objective: Students will be able to def ine "car rying capacity".
Students will become more sympathetic toward animals whose habitat is being destroyed.
Method: Students experience crowding; discussion Procedure: Ask for a student volunteer.
· Approach the student, asking when the closeness feels uncomfortable.
· Discuss types of physical and emotional reactions.
Does one feel the same with family or close friends? Animals also feel uncomfor table when approached; discuss reasons why (fear of predation, protect young).
· Discuss why are some animals more comfortable around humans than others (fly, quick, swim, size, alone or in group).
· Now have students all sit very close together; how do they feel? What would happen if animals were crowded? Would they survive? What do they need to survive? What might an animal do if it were crowded? (Leave, attack, disease, die, not enough food) What kinds of human intervention could occur which would help wildlife? (Reintroduce predators, winter-feeding, plant additional vegetation, relocate animals, hunting) · Def ine "carrying capacity" ­ The number of plants and animals that an environment can support.
Why is this important? What is the car rying capacity for the classroom?
Lesson 9 ­ Plastic Food Objective: Students will be able to describe the potential harmful effects of plastic and garbage on wildlife.
Students will formulate and identify possible solutions to the problems that exist with waste.
Method: Student examines waste and learns about its effects on wildlife Procedure: Teacher collects garbage for a couple of days (the students could collect it).
Examine each article.
Discuss how it could be perceived as food.
Try to identify some animals that might perceive it as food.
How might these materials affect animals if ingested or otherwise be harmful? Show pictures of garbage and animal interactions.
What are some possible solutions to these problems? Homework: Tell students to list 30 plastic items found in their home.
The next day, share lists.
Make a classroom list.
For Background, read: "Oceans at Risk", Animals, Jan/Feb 1989, p. 7-23.
12
Lesson 10 ­ Chopping Down the Forest Objective: Students will be able to describe some ways that wildlife is affected by deforestation.
Method: Brainstorming; students create a "human forest"; discussion Materials: Fan; chalkboard or large piece of paper Procedure: Draw a picture of a forest on the board.
· Tell the students that a road is going to be put through the middle of this forest.
Erase a strip through the forest.
Ask the students how this might affect the wildlife.
Discuss and list all responses.
· Have the students stand very close together in a big group with their arms up (human forest).
Ask the child in the center to describe what he or she sees when "looking through the trees".
(How much light is on the floor? See me? See the rest of the room?) · Turn on a fan at the edge of the human forest.
Can the center student feel the breeze? Hear the fan? · Begin to "chop down" the forest by removing the kids near the edge.
Have the center child report any changes.
Continue to chop down the forest until the center child is at the edge of the forest (you might f ind your "forest" moves!).
Ask students what happened to the area that used to be the center of the forest (now it's the edge).
How might this affect wildlife that used to live in the center? · Discuss and add to list.
Read: Read Roadside by David Bellamy.
(See "Children's Literature" list for details.)
13
Lesson 11 ­ Oil Pollution: An Experiment Objective: Students will formulate hypotheses, perform an experiment, and evaluate the results.
Students will also be able to draw conclusions about the way an oil spill can cause species to become endangered.
Method: Experiment with oil and eggs Materials: Oil, water, 4 hard-boiled eggs, blue food coloring, eye dropper, 2 cup bowl, measuring cup Procedure: Ask the students if they heard about the Exxon Oil spill in Prince William sound, Alaska.
Discuss it and its effects on wildlife and people.
Note how far away we are from Alaska.
We can have our own spill in the classroom! · Peel, and then pass between the students, a regular hard-boiled egg (control egg) .
· Mix ½ cup oil, 10 drops of blue food coloring, and ½ cup water in bowl.
Place remaining 3 eggs in the bowl.
While waiting, formulate hypotheses about what affects the oil will have on the eggs.
· Remove the f irst egg after 5 minutes, the second egg after 15 minutes, and the third egg after 30 minutes.
Try to dry off the egg before peeling it.
· Observe, record and discuss the results.
· Discuss other effects oil spills have, such as: Harms unhatched eggs.
Gets into pores of skin then into the blood stream, gets into the food chain and is digested.
Gets into fur and feathers therefore they lose their ability to keep the animal warm, etc.
Note: Students do this experiment in four g roups of f ive.
Each student does an observation sheet (next pages).
Read: Ranger Rick, "The Big Oil Spill", Januar y 1990, p.32-34.
The Comeback Trail, "The Deadly Effects of Crude Oil", spring, 1989, p.1, 4 (Newsletter put out by DEFENDERS OF WILDLIFE ­ see bibliography).
14
OIL EXPERIMENT OBSERVATION SHEET Name: Before Experiment 1.
What do you think is going to happen to the egg that is in the mixture for a. 5 minutes b. 15 minutes c. 30 minutes During Experiment 2.
What does the egg look and feel like after being in the mixture for d. 5 minutes e. 15 minutes f. 30 minutes After Experiment 3.
What do you think would happen if we left an egg in the mixture for 24 hours (a whole day)? How do you think the results would change if we changed the amount of oil in the mixture? More oil Less oil 5.
Put a little bit of the mixture on your f inger tips.
Now rinse them with water.
Does the mixture come off? Do your f ingers still feel greasy? 6.
What effects do you think oil spills have on animals? 7.
8.
What can people do to stop oil spills? What can you do?
4.
15
Lesson 12 ­ More Than One Reason Objective: Students will understand that many reasons, not just one, cause animals to become extinct.
Method: Students will make paper plate wheels which show the various reasons why an animal is endangered Materials: Paper plates, paper fasteners, scissors, crayons or markers.
Procedure: Pass out two paper plates to each student.
· Discuss reasons why animals are endangered (pollution, habitat loss, illegal hunting or trapping, nets, etc.).
· Depending on the animal and its problems, divide one plate with a ruler, drawing lines (for example, turtles have at least four problems ­ pollution, caught in nets, illegally killed for products and habitat destruction ­ so divide the plate into fourths).
· Label and draw the problems in each section.
· Cut a triangle out of the other plate, the size of one of the sections DO NOT cut it all the way to the center.
· Fasten the plate with the cut triangle on top of the plate with the sections.
· Draw a picture of the endangered animal on the top plate; title your wheel.
· Share wheels.
Lesson 13 ­ Susceptibility to Extinction Objective: Students will be able to recognize the traits that make an animal susceptible to extinction.
Method: Students evaluate traits of imaginary animals, then design their own animals Materials: Teacher-made up imaginar y animals (2-4) with various traits (or see Nature Scope, Endangered species: Wild 
Procedure: Discuss imaginary animals that you have made up.
Decide which out of these is most likely to go extinct f irst and why.
Students now make up their own imaginary animals and list their traits.
Animals should either be "endangered" or never go extinct.
Share pictures and discuss traits.
Note: Traits of imaginary animals should be things like: eats food that only grows on one tropical island, lays one egg every four years, is very slow, not afraid of anything, have ver y valuable feathers, etc.
16
17
Lesson 14 ­ Bumper Stickers and Buttons: Make a Statement Objective: Students will identify button and bumper stickers designed to make a statement about some issues.
Method: Students make bumper stickers and/or buttons Materials: Bumper stickers ­ white contact paper or oak tag, which can be laminated when completed, tape for the backs, markers.
Buttons ­ button machine or 3" circles on white oak tag, markers, safety pins.
Bumper stickers and buttons for demonstration of examples.
Procedure: Show examples to kids.
Discuss various slogans and their pur pose.
· Brainstorm issues to use to make slogans.
· Help kids design their own sticker or button.
· Laminate or tape.
· Use safety pins to attach buttons.
· Share slogans and designs.
Lesson 15 ­ Harmful Activities and Alternatives Objective: Students will evaluate a number of activities that are harmful to wildlife, and recommend alternatives.
Method: Brainstor ming and drawings used for discussion Materials: Cards which show humans in various activities, some that harm wildlife and others that help it.
Chalkboard or pieces of paper, drawing paper, and crayons.
Procedure: Brainstorm a list of activities they have seen or heard that are harmful.
Divide the class into groups of 4 or 5.
Start by demonstrating what to do with the cards with the whole class.
Hold up a card, discuss what it shows and decide why it is har mful or why it is not harmful and if it is, what can be done to make the activity benef icial to wildlife.
Give each group some cards which they must separate into two groups: harmful and not harmful.
Students should then discuss alternative activities for the harmful pile.
Bring the class back together.
Have a spokesperson from each group share their results with the rest of the class.
Pass out drawing paper, and have students make their own cards.
On the back have them write the helpful alternative activity.
18
SPELLING WORDS
AND DICTATION SENTENCES
Extinct Threatened Endangered Some extinct animals were once endangered or threatened.
Habitat Pollution Illegal Many animals are endangered because of habitat loss, pollution, and illegal hunting.
Poachers Rare The name of animal he/she is studying The ______________ is rare because of poachers.
Animal Food chain Interview Critical habitat
WRITING TOPICS 1.
Response to Apple demonstration (Lesson #2) 2 .
How would I save the... students write their own ideas of how they would save the endangered animal they are studying, or wildlife as a whole.
3.
Letters to the Senator...
Students write letters to U.S. Senators and offer suggestions on what could be done to help protect endangered animals.
4 .
Report on Endangered A n i mal...
In pairs, students research and report on one endangered animal.
Reports include information such as name, habitat, range, special features, why it is endangered, and what people are doing to help it.
5.
All I know about endangered animals...
This assesses their knowledge about endangered animals.
6.
Possible Rewrites Shady Glade or Free Bird would be excellent books to rewrite.
7 .
Illustrate poem by Beverly Armstrong "where the wild things shouldn't be" Each student illustrates a page of the poem and then makes a class book.
19
GRAPHS 1.
Why is the animal you are studying endangered? (Habitat destruction, pollution, hunting, other) 2.
Is the animal you are studying extinct, endangered, threatened, or rare? 3.
Does the endangered animal you are studying live on land, water, or air? 4.
What kind of habitat does the endangered animal you are studying live in? (deser t, mountains, jungle, salt water, fresh water, other) 5 .
What continent does your animal live on? (Africa, South America, Nor th America, Asia, Antarctica, Australia, Europe) 6.
Does the animal you are studying live above, below, or near the equator? 7 .
Which endangered animal book did you like the best (list the books) 8 .
What have you liked best about studying endangered animals? (list activities) 9.
What did you like best about the animal repor ts? (covers, maps, reports, viewing f inal products, other)
HELPFUL ORGANIZATIONS Audubon Society of NH Wildlife Section 3 Silk Farm Rd. Concord, NH 03301 www.nhaudubon.org National Wildlife Federation 1400 Sixteenth St., NW Washington, DC 20036 www.nwf.org New Hampshire Fish and Game Department Nongame and Endangered Wildlife Program 2 Hazen Drive Concord, NH 03301 www.wildlife.state.nh.us Sierra Club Information Services 730 Polk Street San Francisco, CA 94109 US Department of Interior ­ Fish and Wildlife Services 18th and C Streets, NW Washington, DC 20240 www.fws.gov Wildlife Education, Ltd. 930 W. Washington Street San Diego, CA 92103 www.natureserve .org www.enature .com
20
LITERATURE LIST Books for Children: Althea.
Leopards, Gorillas, Whales, and Par rot, Longman Group USA Inc., United States, 1988.
Non-f iction; informative books about each animal listed in the titles; do deal directly with endangered species, although there is a note at the end of each book which describes their problems with humans; grades 1, 2.
Arnold, Caroline.
Saving the Pereg rine Falcon, Carolrhoda Books, Inc., Minneapolis, Minn., 1985.
Non-f iction; discusses habitat, enemies, scientif ic research, problems, and solutions; grades 2 and up.
Bonners, Susan.
Panda, Delacote Press, New York, NY, 1978.
Non-f iction; discusses the life cycle of the panda; does not discuss the fact that pandas are endangered; grades 1, 2.
Cajacob, Thomas and Burton, Teresa.
Close to the Wild, Carolrhoda Books, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, 1986.
Non-f iction; Up to page 14, discusses Siberian tigers, their characteristics, endangered, and the role zoos play in helping them; page 14 and beyond, discusses mating somewhat in detail; grades 2, 3 up to page 14, read aloud.
McClung, Robert M. Thor Last of the Sperm Whales, William Morrow 
Fiction based on fact; begins with a legend about a sperm whale; follows the life cycle of a sperm whale; briefly discusses reasons why whales are endangered; grades 3, 4 or read aloud for younger children.
Mor ris, Dean.
Endangered Animals, Raintree Childrens Books, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, 1977.
Non-f iction; overview of endangered species; discusses human impact (hunting, pollution, and habitat destruction), scientif ic studies, and the role zoos play in helping endangered species; g rades 2, 3.
National Geographic Society.
Animals in Danger, National Geographic Society, Washington, DC, 1978.
Non-f iction; discusses specif ic animals, their characteristics, and why they are endangered; grades 2, 3.
Peet, Bill.
Farewell to Shady Glade, Houghton Miff in Co., Boston, MA, 1966.
Fiction; group of animals are forced from their home due to habitat destruction, and on their way to f ind a new home they experience city pollution; grades 1, 2.
Roever, J.M.
The Black-Footed Fer ret, Steck-Vaughn Co., Austin, TX, 1972.
Nonf iction; discusses many aspects of the black-footed fer ret ­ habitat, diet, enemies, problems, and what people can do to protect wildlife; grades 2 and up, or read aloud.
Ranger Rick.
Endangered Animals, National Wildlife Federation, Washington, DC, 1989.
Non-f iction; discusses the problems endangered animals have through examples of specif ic species (Giant Panda, Whooping Crane, Humpback Whale, Blackfooted Fer ret, Komodo dragon, Tiger, Small Cats, Crocodiles, Gorilla, Peregrine Falcon, Numbat, Wombat, Wallaby, Nene Goose, Lemurs, Black Rhino, Muriqui, and Green Sea Turtle); grades 3 and up or read aloud.
21
Rice, Paul and Mayle, Peter.
As Dead As A Dodo, David R. Godine, Publisher, Inc., Boston, MA, 1981.
Non-f iction; one-page descriptions of animals that are extinct, and why; all ages, read aloud.
Stone, A. Har ris.
The Last Free Bird, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood, NJ, 1967.
Fiction; story about bird witnessing habitat destruction; simple, yet good for all ages.
Stone, Lynn M. Endangered Animals, Children's Press, Chicago, IL, 1984.
Nonf iction; def ines "endangered" and "extinct"; discusses reasons why animals are endangered (hunting, pollution, introduced species, bought as pets, lack of space); discusses specif ic species; discusses how people are helping, including what young people can do; grades 2, 3.
Weaver, John L. Grizzly Bears, Dodd, Mead, 
Nonf iction; discusses the life cycle, habit, and habitat of the grizzly; grades 2 and up.
World Wildlife Fund.
Our World in Danger, Ladybird Books, Inc., Loughborough, Leicestershire, England, 1989.
Non-f iction; discusses habitat destruction, pesticide use, overgrazing, pollution, and hunting, and the effect these have on wildlife; discusses what people can and are doing; grades 2-4.
Articles from Ranger Rick Magazine: "Adventures of Ranger Rick", August 1988, p. 34-38, (mountain gorillas) June 1988, p. 20-23 (loggerhead turtles) Februar y 1987, p. 27-30 (habitat destruction, critical habitat) June 1985, p. 15-17 (poaching) Februar y 1985.
p. 28-31 (introduced species) September 1984, p. 16-19 (woodland caribou, habitat destruction, hunting) November 1983, p. 21-24 (rainforest deforestation) September 1983, p. 16-19 (leatherback turtles, garbage) "The Big Oil Spill", January 1990, p. 32-34 (Alaska's Prince William Sound spill) "China's Precious Pandas", July 1989, p. 22-30 (Giant pandas) "Danger: Don't Pick a Wild Pet", July 1980, p. 36-37 (wild animals as pets) "Eco Cops", January 1989, p.26-28 (environmental conservation off icers) "Elephant Trivia", April 1989, p. 38-47 (elephants and their problems with humans) "Happy Bee", June 1988, p. 12-13 (peregrine falcon, turtle eggs, ospreys) June 1982, p. 44-47 (gray whales) Februar y 1981 p. 9-11 (sea otter, insecticides and birds, wolves, whooping cranes) "Take an Inside Look", November 1989, p. 18-24 (lemurs) "Wild Wings Over the West", January 1990, p.20-27 (birds of prey, including the endangered peregrine falcon)
22
Books for Adults: Beatley, Timothy.
Habitat Conservation, Planning, Endangered Species and Growth.
1994.
Brooks, F. Protecting Endangered Species, (Green Guide Series).
1991.
Burgess, Bonnie.
Fate of the Wild: The Endangered Species Act and the Future of Biodiversity.
2001 Cadieux, Charles.
These Are the Endangered, The Stone Wall Press, Inc., Washington, DC, 1981.
Discusses many endangered species (approximately 30), discusses national and inter national laws, describes the roles of zoos, refuges, and parks, and lists endangered species organizations.
Charman, Andy.
I Wonder Why the Dodo is Dead and Other Questions About Extinct and Endangered Animals.
1996 Cutter, Susan L., Renwick, Hilary Lambert, and Renwick, William H. Exploitation, Conservation, Preservation, Rowan 
Text book; gives an overview of natural resources.
Czech, Brian, and Paul R. Krausman.
The Endangered Species Act: History Conser vation, Biology, and Public Policy, 2001.
Facklam, Marger y.
And Then There Was None: The Mysteries of Extinction.
1993 Fichter, George S. Endangered Animals (A Golden Guide Series).
2001 Hutton, John (ed).
Endangered Species, Threatened Convention: The Past, Present and Future of Cities, The Convention on Inter national Trade in Endangered Species.
Middleton, Susan and David Littschwager.
Witness: Endangered Species of North America.
Chronicle Books 1994 Leen, Nina.
And Then There Were None, Holt, Rinehar t and Wiston, New York, NY, 1973.
Discusses different types of destruction, and how this affected specif ic endangered animals (for example, under "Threatened Wetlands", crocodiles, whooping cranes, elk, etc., are discussed), discusses the peregrine falcon's success with captive breeding, and lists environmental organizations.
National Wildlife Federation.
NatureScope, Endangered Species: Wild 
One book in a series; contains background information and lesson plans.
Nilsson, Greta, The Endangered Species Handbook, Animal Welf are Institute, Washington, DC, 1986.
Discusses causes and consequences, legislation and citizen action, resources, appendices, index, and illustrations.
Nilsson, Greta, Rare, Endangered and Threatened Species of Mammals, Birds, Reptiles and Amphibians, Animal Welfare Institute, Washington, DC, 1986.
List of animals that are rare, endangered or threatened, and in which states.
23
Wester n Regional Environmental Education Council.
Aquatic Project WILD, project WILD, Boulder, CO, 1987.
Environmental and conser vation education guide, with a focus on aquatic environments and species; lesson plans.
Wester n Regional Environmental Education Council.
Project WILD, project WILD, Boulder, CO, 1986.
Environmental and conser vation education guide; lesson plans.
Wilcove, David S. and Wilson, E.O.
The Condor's Shadow: The Loss and Recover y of Wildlife in America.
2000 Wilson, E.O.
The Future of Life.
2002 Wood, Frances.
Animals in Danger, Dodd, Mead, 
Discusses many endangered animals, why they are in danger, and what is being done to help them.
World Wildlife Fund.
Going, Going Gone, Animals in Danger Education Kit Resources: Computers, On-line and Video Biodiversity: The Variety 10-12.
The Last Show on 27-minute par t covers a endangered cultures and 1-800-543-3764 of Life is Earth is different regaring a 42-minute video with study guide for a four part video series for grades 9-12.
aspect: endangered species, endangered balance.
Both available from Bullfrog F grades Each habitat, ilms
Discovering Endangered Wildlife is a Windows CD-ROM containing games, puzzles, photos, video clips, sounds, narration and printable fact sheets focusing on 50 species.
For g rades 5-9 from CLEARVUE/eav, 6465 N. Avondale Ave., Chicago, IL 06031-1996 Encyclopedia of U.S. Endangered Species is a CD-ROM with detailed infor mation about 700 protected plants and animals, including multimedia presentations, photos, sounds, and interactive quizzes.
Available from Zane Publishing, 1950 Stemmons, Ste. 4044, Dallas, TX 75207-3109 Endangered! Is a web site developed in tandem with the exhibit of the same name at the American Museum of Natural History.
Features information on 34 endangered species with extensive information about each.
www.amnh.org/Exhibition/Expedition/Endangered Endangered Species Infor mation Central is part of the US Fish and Wildlife Ser vice web site featuring hundred of threatened and endangered species, each with its own mini home page, including biology, g raphics and links.
endangered.fws.gov/wildlife.html Journey North is an internet-based learning adventure that engages students in global study of wildlife migrations, including several endangered species.
Students get progress reports from scientists and help collect data that those studying the species use in their work.
To learn how to subscribe to this free program, visit www.learner.org/jnorth The National Wildlife Federation web site offers information on endangered species.
www.nwf.org The New Hampshire Fish and Game web site offers infor mation on nongame and endangered wildlife.
www.wildlife.state.nh.us
24
ENDANGERED MAMMALS:
AND THREATENED SPECIES IN NEW HAMPSHIRE Endangered Canada lynx, Lynx canadensis eastern small-footed bat, Myotis leibii Threatened marten, Martes americana Endangered pied-billed grebe, Podilymbus podiceps bald eagle, Haliaeetus leucocephalus norther n har rier, Circus cyaneus golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus piping plover, Charadrius melodus upland sandpiper, Bartramia longicauda roseate tern, Sterna dougallii common tern, Sterna hirundo least tern, Sterna antillarum pur ple mar tin, Progne subis sedge wren, Cistothorus platensis Threatened common loon, Gavia immer osprey, Pandion haliaetus Cooper's hawk, Accipiter cooperii arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea common nighthawk, Chordeiles minor three-toed woodpecker, Picoides tridactylus grasshopper spar row, Ammodramus savannarum Endangered Sunapee trout, Salvelinus alipnus shortnose sturgeon, Acipenser brevirostrum Threatened (none cur rently listed) Endangered timber rattlesnake, Crotalus horridus Threatened eastern hognose snake, Heterodon platirhinos Endangered marbled salamander, Ambystoma opacum Threatened (none cur rently listed) Endangered dwarf wedgemussel, Alasmidonta heterodon brook floater, Alasmidonta varicosa frosted elf in butterfly, Incisalia irus Karner blue butterfly, Lycaeides melissa samuelis Persius dusky wing skipper, Erynnis persius persius ringed boghaunter dragonfly, Williamsonia lintneri Threatened pine pinion moth, Lithophane lepida lepida pine bar rens Zanclognatha moth, Zanclognatha martha cobblestone tiger beetle, Cicindela marginipennis Federally threatened or endangered.
BIRDS:
FISH:
REPTILES:
AMPHIBIANS:
INVERTEBRATES:
25
LESSON CREDITS Lesson 2 - Taken from "Thinking Wild, Vermont Project Wild Newsletter", Summer/Fall 1989 (Project Wild, Vermont Fish and Wildlife Department, 103 South Main Street, Waterbury, VT 05676, p. 5).
Lesson 3 - Adapted from "Meet a Panda" out of NatureScope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 4 - Adapted from "The Beautiful Basics", "Everybody Needs a Home", and "What's That Habitat?" out of Project WILD (by Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Project WILD (by Western Boulder, CO 1986, p.29, 31-32, and 39-40).
Lesson 5 - Adapted from "Polar Bears in Phoenix?" out of Project WILD (Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Project WILD, Boulder CO, 1986, P. 103-104).
Lesson 6 - Adapted from "Habitat Is Home" out of NatureScope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 7 - Adapted from "Deadly Skies" out of Aquatic Project WILD (by Western Regional Environmental Education Council, project WILD, Boulder, CO, 1987, P. 133-136).
Lesson 8 - Adapted from " Classroom Carrying Capacity" and "Too Close for Comfort" out of Project WILD (by Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Project WILD, Boulder, CO 1986, p. 109-110, 185-186).
Lesson 9 - Adapted from " Plastic Jellyfish" out of Aquatic Project WILD (Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Project WILD, Boulder, CO, p. 159-160).
Lesson 10 - Adapted from "Sizing Up Reserves" out of NatureScope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 11 - Adapted from "No Water Off A Duck's Back" out of Project WILD (Western Regional Environmental Education Council, Project WILD, Boulder, CO, 1986, p. 151-152).
Lesson 12 - Adapted from "Wheel of Trouble" out of NatureScope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 13 - Adapted from "The Rare Scare" out of Naturescope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 14 - Adapted from : "All around the World" out of Naturescope, Endangered Species: Wild 
Lesson 15 - Adapted from: "Ethi-Thinking" out of Project WILD (by Western Regional Environmental Education Council, project WILD, Boulder, CO, 1986, p.209-210).
26
New Hampshire Fish and Game Department 2 Hazen Drive Concord, NH 03301 (603) 271-3211 www.wildlife.state.nh.us
