Figure 1.
Connecting Physical and Living Systems with Human Activities through Food, Fiber, Environment and Natural Resources Systems.
Vernon B. Cardwell Professor of Agronomy University of Minnesota
Examples of food, fiber, environment and natural resources con to provide context for basic educational concepts.
Code A B C D E F G H I J K L M O Human Activities History and culture Social/Economic/Political Trade/Markets Ecology/Agri-Ecology Carrying Capacity/Interdependence Land/Landscape Rights/Consequences/Utility/Benefits Aesthetics/Recreation Science/Technology Husbandry/Culture/Cultivation Pests/Pest Management Harvest/Storage Processing/Preservation Risk/Uncertainty
Code a b c d e
Living Systems Soils Micro-Flora 
Code 1 2 3 4 5
Physical Systems Mathematics Chemistry Physics Earth and Space Environment
Examples of food, fiber, environment and natural resources content to provide context for basic educational concepts.
A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A a a a a a b b b b b b c c c c c d d d d d e e e e e 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 Soil quality has impacted human migrations.
The rise and fall of empires is related to the fertility of the soil.
Tillage, cultivation and erosion of soil are a part of the history of westward migration in the U.S.
The type of agriculture, i.e. crop or livestock and the kind of crops in a given area is a function of geography and soil.
The soils of a given area are formed by the interactions of the original parent material (kinds of rock), the climate, vegetation.
Fermented foods and beverages - history, culture, and business Food spoilage - pH changes Food canning - temperature/pressure Myctotoxin and famine - ergot Mushrooms and other edible fungi - climate - geography Weather contributes to periodic pest epidemics of plants contributing to crop failure and localized famine.
Rice - corn - millet, etc.
Gods Bread baking/Breads of the world History of machines - labor and plants Centers of plant species origin, domestication Plants as idols, gods and religious symbols Animals as idols, draft animals and beasts of burden Ruminant and non-ruminant animals Horse power - how calculated, converting animal power to useful energy, i.e. tread mills, water wheels, threshing Origin of species and domestication Animals as idols, gods and religious symbols Birth of agriculture, development of applied fields of mathematics - economics, statistics Early applications of chemistry - fertilizer - Justin von Liebig Early tools and machines related to food and agriculture Early settlement patterns Growth of world population - Impact of climate and weather, on settlement, culture, traditions, foods
B a 1 The value of soil for production has been the basis of human conflict.
B a 2 Soils differ in their natural fertility (mineral composition) pH and buffering capacity thus requiring fertilizer and lime.
B a 3 Drainage of land has become a political issue because of the benefits of wetland to the ecosystem and the limitations to modern agriculture.
B a 3 Soil slope limits land use due to erosion.
B a 4 Parent material (geology) determines soil type.
B a 5 Weathering - the action of wind, water freezing and thawing, temperature, determine the chemical and physical properties of soil.
B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B b b b b b b b b c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 Microbes - economic Yeasts, Rhizobium + N Fixation Diseases/insects - quarantines R+D330egulatory - FDA Altering plant and animal materials with microbes - fermented foods Quarantine, isolation and sanitation are the common techniques used to avoid the spread of pests.
Mountains and oceans are the natural barriers to spread of micro flora and fauna.
Weather patterns affect distribution (wind) and infection (humidity) by microbes Plant introductions; Board of Trade Staple foods Trade barriers/agreements Marketing/Export/Imports/Federal Grain Inspection Federal/Crop Insurance Pesticide use regulation/labeling Food labeling Water quality acts Pollution and bio remediation OSHA Weights and measures Standard units - acre, bushel Ecological impact of bioengineered plants U.S. weather bureau - forecasts U.S. Geological Survey U.S. Soil Conservation Service Landscape Zoning Forest Service
B c 5 EPA-Pesticide application and use B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B d d d d d d d d d d d d d d e e e e e e e e e 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 4 5 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 4 5 Feedlot regulation Stockyard and Packers act Animal welfare Feedlot regulation Stockyard and Packers Acts Drug use/regulations/residues Feed regulations Public utilities - transportation Livestock handling equipment Public grazing lands Multiple use of public lands Bureau of reclamation Bureau of land management EPA-Animal waste management and comprehensive nutrient management plans for water quality Animal rights Federal land grant acts Federal land survey - section, township, range Share of after tax income expended on food FIFRA AND Delaney Acts regulating pesticide uses English units of measure Zoning and land use regulation Soil Conservation Service GMO's, EPA and Green Peace
B c 1 Cultivation/transformation of landscape B c 1 Hatch Act - USDA - EPA Soil productivity impact determines its value as a commodity.
Soil amendments (fertilizer, lime, gypsum) improve soil deficiencies.
Drainage - natural and artificial affect soil value.
Irrigation adds value to sandy soils.
Physical properties of soils differs, limiting their suitability for various uses, i.e. roads, buildings, crops, wildlife, etc. thus affecting market value of the land.
C a 4 Geographic location, topography soil type affect value for agricultural use.
C a 5 Environmental stability affect agricultural suitability for soil use.
C b 1 Global cheese and fermented food industry C b 1 Pest quarantine laws C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C C c c c c c c c c c c c c c c d d d d d d d d d d 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 5 5 5 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 4 5 5 Federal Grain Inspection Service Grain Exchanges - Chicago, Kansas City, Minneapolis Trade Agreements - NAFTA, GATT Economic advantage - production/consumption Competitive advantage Non food/fiber uses of plants Gasohol Bio-fuel Pharmaceuticals - drug producing plants - new products New plants for paper - New markets - transportation - forms + cost Diversity of geographic regions create economic advantage resulting in a global market for products from the land and the oceans.
New crops - corn belt, cotton belt, wheat belt Climate and weather effects on markets - Great Plains, New England, Garden State, Banana belt Competitive advantage Trade agreements Packers and stockyards Cholesterol and animal growth promoters/human health Pharmaceuticals - drugs from animals Transportation forms and cost Grass vs. grain fed Prairies, grasslands, grazing Dairybelt Livestock production dominate arid and semiarid landscapes Animal rights C C C C C a a a a a 1 2 3 3 3
C C C C C C C C C C C C D D D D D D D D D D D D D D
e e e e e e e e e e e e a a a a a a a b b b b b b b
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 4 4 5 1 2 2 3 3 4 5 1 1 2 3 4 4 5
Organic vs. traditional Rural vs. urban Vertical integration Horizontal integration Cooperatives Self-sufficient vs. Commercial Hobby Farm Standards of quality Standards of quality Centers of trade Centers of population Commodity markets respond to weather and production reports The best cropland soils are usually the most biologically dynamic soils.
Soils with the highest organic fraction have the highest nutrient availability and nutrient cycling.
Biological diversity of the landscape is related to the soils and available nutrients.
Soil inhabiting organisms modify the physical characteristics of the soil.
Depth of the rooting is a function of the soil physical and chemical properties.
Geography (latitude, longitude, elevation, slope alter the soil and the species adapted to an area.
Environment interacts with both soils and plants to determine species and biomass (productivity) in an area.
Value system place greater value on known benefits of organism Food and fiber uses of landscape alter micro- and macro organism on the landscape Micro-organism as major component of nutrient cycling Micro-organisms have dramatic effect on physical environment, especially weathering of soils and soil structure Most microbes are in the upper layer of earth's crust in area known as "soil" Microbes are major soil forming factors Micro flora and fauna populations are very sensitive to the environment
D c 1 Agri-ecosystems are those ecosystems modified for economic and social reasons to benefit humans.
D c 1 Agricultural plants or domesticated plants have some greater utility value than wild species D c 2 Natural chemical compound in plants have evolved with some ecological benefits for the organism.
Agriculture has selected plants or developed plants for their utility for humans.
D c 2 Photosynthesis, carbon capture, energy storage is the primary determinant of all ecosystems with high levels of commercially desired compounds, i.e. rubber, sugar, alkaloids, rotenone D c 3 Plants sequester carbon D c 3 Wood has been a traditional source of energy D c 3 Bio-energy - new sources, i.e. biomass, ethanol, soy-deisel D c 3 Plants and plant communities impact on soil erosion D c 4 Plant distribution and productivity determined by geography, soil and climate D c 4 Geography (latitude, longitude, elevation, and slope) alter the adaptation of crops, i.e. day length, precipitation, temperature extremes.
D c 5 Plants have critical stages in the life cycle where environmental stress affect productivity and survival D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D D d d d d d d d d d d e e e e e e 1 1 2 2 3 4 4 4 4 5 1 2 3 4 4 4 Ease of husbandry has determined which animal species have become domesticated Domestic animals compete for resources including space with native wildlife Animals have been selected for products other than meat, i.e. milk, egg, wool New biotechnology allow animals to produce complex drugs that cannot be synthesized in laboratories - Pharmaceuticals Earthworms and burrowing animals influence soil porosity Animal production less constrained by geography than are plants Carrying capacity is primary function of rainfall, length of growing season and total biomass production Weather affects efficiency of production Water quality influence kind and productivity of fish Warm blooded animals adapt similar to humans to environmental stress
Human survival depends upon extraction from nature, I.e.-hunting or livestock rearing; -gathering or plant harvest Humans have altered the physical environment by pollution of water and air and destruction of natural habitat Humans have altered the Chemical environment by pollution of water and air and destruction natural habitat Humans occupy and use land Land ownership and land use are are frequently in conflict with nature services Increase in human numbers places increased pressure on land and water resources which are in conflict with maintaining a balance in natural ecosystems D e 4 The majority of wildlife is on private lands D e 5 Global warming - shifting agriculture regions E a 1 Soil properties are major factors in determining the carrying capacity (biomass productivity) of a given site.
E a 2 Soil fertility and fertility balance is a chemical property affecting carrying capacity.
E a 2 Cation exchange capacity (CEC) of the soil affects the soil fertility and productivity.
E a 3 Soil classification based primarily on physical properties provides an estimate of productivity.
E a 4 Soils of different origins and in different geographic areas have differing carrying capacity.
E a 5 Environmental factors, especially water and available sunlight determine carrying capacity of a soil.
E E E E E E E E E E E b b b b b b c c c c c 1 2 2 3 4 5 1 2 2 2 3 Population growth and decline of microorganisms are predictable Population dynamics and diversity of microorganisms is a function of food supply.
Calculations of carrying capacity is a function of chemical composition of the food supply.
The elements of pressure and temperature are major factors affecting all organisms, their activity and abundance.
Carrying capacity is a function of the interaction of earth space and environment, i.e. climate, weather, geography, soil, water.
Environment determines primary production of plants which sets the table for the micro flora and fauna.
Plants are the primary energy capture and storage of carbon and determine the number of animals and humans per unit area.
Carbon capture via photosynthesis determines the amount of energy stored and ultimate carrying capacity.
Form of carbon stored determines utility and number of humans and animals per unit area.
Plant biomass and products produced is under genetic control.
The quantity of sunlight per day and duration of the growing season (temperature) available CO2 (wind) and water determine quantity of carbon capture - thus carrying capacity.
E c 3 Precision planting has increased light capture in agricultural crops.
E c 4 Geography - soil, water, growing season, temperature (latitude and slope) determine carrying capacity of adapted species.
E c 5 Environment mediate the normal natural endowments of an area and determines local production through climatic variables e.g. seasonal temperature, precipitation and growing season duration.
E d 1 Animal populations per unit area are determined by the food (forage) or feed supply.
E d 1 The use of grazing animals is the only means of extracting commercially useable commodities (milk, wool, meat, hides, etc) in drier regions, i.e. arid and semi-arid.
E d 2 Carrying capacity of animals is increased by increasing plant productivity.
E d 2 Animals are high in protein and provide essential amino acids in human diets.
E d 2 Mixed species of animals increase carrying capacity per unit area due to niche or species specific requirements.
E d 3 Humans and animals compete for space, nutrients, water E d 3 Intensive management of animals for increased carrying capacity requires sophisticated engineering and information systems.
E d 4 Animal carrying capacity in natural systems or grazing systems is determined by earth's physical system (soil, water, air, geography) which determines the amount of plant matter produced per unit area.
E d 5 Seasonal variation in productivity related to localized temperature, precipitation, etc.
E e 1 Carrying capacity is a calculation of the number of persons per unit area that can be sustained without diminishing the resources that sustain humankind.
E e 2 Carrying capacity can be increased by removing limiting factors, i.e. fertilizer, water or increasing bio-efficiency.
E e 3 Fossil fuel has been and often is expended to expand carrying capacity - this is not sustainable.
E e 3 Processing which reduces waste may increase human carrying capacity.
E e 4 The human carrying capacity of the earth has limits determined by the earth's physical and biological resources.
E e 4 The human carrying capacity of the earth has limits determined by the earth's physical and biological resources.
E e 5 Human attitudes and values affect rate of population growth and demands on earth resources.
F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F F a a a a a a a a a a a b b b b b b 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 4 4 5 1 2 2 3 4 5 Land utility for humans determines its economic value.
Soil is an under-valued component of the landscape.
Biodiversity of the landscape is strongly influenced by the soil.
Water quality is related to the soil of the watershed or landscape from which the water is derived.
Influenced by: Saline and alkaline soils alter the vegetation and landscape Solubility of elements such as phosphorus and aluminum is altered by soil pH which alters the plant growth which alters water quality Soil Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC) affects nutrient availability and biomass and biodiversity of the landscape Topography and hydrology of soils affect suitability for land uses, I.e. wetlands, drainage, irrigation Geology (parent material) determines soil properties and landscape.
Slope determines which soils can be row cropped.
Climate and soil without irrigation determines what crops can be grown.
Pollinator insects are Micro-flora and fauna Micro flora and fauna Micro flora and fauna Micro flora and fauna Micro flora and fauna of significant biological and economic importance shape the land and the landscape via soil forming and soil binding and channeling properties.
have dominant roles in nutrient cycling contribute to soil structure.
are among the oldest organism and apart of fossil records populations are very sensitive to the environment and these population influence the land and the landscape
F c 1 North American native plants created the biomes eg. Eastern hardwoods and Southern conifers forests, the tall grass prairies and the short grass prairies which created the diverse landscapes.
F c 1 The harvest of the forests for their lumber and forest produces where of great economic value F c 1 The harvest of the grasses lands by grazing livestock where of great economic value.
F c 1 Agricultural landscapes are dominated by large fields of single species.
F c 2 Native plants in the landscape are a source of herbals.
F F F F
c c c c
3 3 4 5
Plant roots bind the soil giving resilience to the land Organic matter derived primarily from plants shapes the fertility of the land Geographic location determines the plant communities in local ecosystems Climate and weather determine the annual biomass in a given locale
F d 1 Landscapes create the habitat for animals.
Wild animals for food and fur were a part of the Westward migration and settlement of the USA F d 2 The hunting of the American buffalo for hides also created bone collectors for their calcium and phosphate F d 3 The prairie pothole region of the upper Midwest is very important to wildlife and to the hydrology of the region F d 4 Pastoral landscapes F d 4 Topography and shallow soils limit tillage but not use as grazing land F d 5 The kind and availability of forages determines the kind and number of animals in a local.
The forage quantity and quality is a function of the climate and weather.
F F F F F F e e e e e e 1 1 2 3 4 5 Human settlement patterns shaped by the landscape Housing styles are shaped by the landscape Smog and pollution are altering the landscape Urban sprawl alters the landscape Human populations are concentrated on coastal areas Environment eg. Sunbelt, determines recreation and population movement
F b 1 Micro -flora and fauna dominate the biodiversity of the landscape G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G G a a a a a a a a a b b b b b b b 1 2 3 3 4 4 5 5 5 1 1 1 2 3 4 5 Utility of land is primarily a soil property and human use/function.
Cation Exchange Capacity (CEC) is a soil property of economic, biological and chemical importance.
Soil texture, i.e. sand, silt, and clay influence utility of soil, i.e. roads, building site, building materials.
Soil structure - soil particle arrangement, influence agricultural use and plant growth.
Geology affects the movement of water through the soil and into groundwater.
Geology affects availability of groundwater for domestic and agricultural use.
Cropping hazards increase as top soil's become thinner.
Cropping hazards increase as rainfall decreases.
Soil texture interacts with precipitation, amount, intensity, and seasonal distribution to determine crops and cropping risk.
Utility = usefulness as in products, good for serving a purpose or function, promote well-being, satisfaction micro organisms in denitrification, mineralization, nutrient cycling, N-fixation Fermentation food products: yogurt, sausage, sauerkraut, soy sauce, cheese, beverages, pickling Bio-remediation of chemical spills Enhance soil structure Majority of antibiotics derived from soil microorganism Biodiversity in macro and micro environments not well explored
G c 1 Domesticated plants are grown for their utility G c 1 Cultivated plants are selected for their high harvest indices of economically important traits G c 2 Chemical composition allows plants to be processed for extraction of useful compounds: sugar, extracts (mints, vanilla), oils, starch, proteins G c 2 Chemicals add to/enhance crop utility/value: fertilizers affect yield, growth regulators affect shelf life G c 3 Handling properties of plants and plant products enhance their utility, i.e. ease of storage, transport, transformation.
Transforming products: size, form, color, taste, shape, texture, smell G c 4 Useful plants differ by geographic regions, their adaptation to climate and weather extremes and limits of soil and topography G c 5 Sustainability in environmentally sensitive areas requires better use of native species.
G G G G G d d d d d 1 1 2 2 2 In many cultures animals are the walking bank account Animals are grown for: meat, wool, hides, milk, eggs, manure (fertilizer and fuel), draft, companion Animal manure is a major source of fertilizer Animal manures are a major water pollution concern, e.g. nitrates and E. coli in water, eutrophication due to phosphate Animal parts after slaughter, treated chemically, changed chemically become raw material for other chemical reactions: feedtankage, rendered-used for soap, horns + hoof-glue, hides-leathers Animal product processing involves adding value by changing, i.e. freezing, drying, reconstituting Grazing animals for food and fiber are concentrated in the arid and semi-arid regions of the world.
Utilizing land areas to dry for stable and sustainable crop product.
Animals provide a means of utilizing plant and animal products not acceptable for human consumption.
Companion animals represent a large population of animals whose utility is that of pleasure and aesthetics Native animals often have greater utility in environmentally limiting areas, eg. Reindeer in the tundra region Globally 50% of the world's population is rural.
The food and fiber system is the world's largest employer.
In the U.S. approximately 16% of all jobs are food and fiber system related.
In Minnesota approximately 23% of all jobs are food and fiber systems related.
Gd3 Gd4 Gd4 Gd4 Gd5 G G G G e e e e 1 1 1 1
G G G G G G H H H H H H H H H H H
e e e e e e a a a a a b b b b b b
2 2 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 4 5
The food and fiber chemistry industries are major areas of employment and business activity.
Careers applying chemistry to enhance our food and fiber system Careers and industries utilizing food, fiber and other renewable natural resources as feed stocks for manufacturing Careers in engineering to alter food and fiber products for the benefit of humans.
Careers in information services for producers, processors and consumers of food and fiber products, i.e. soil, water, climate.
Humans activity impacts on sustainable in a given environment.
Soil types affect suitability of sites for recreational uses and habitat for flora and fauna.
Chemistry of soils create unique vegetation and habitat.
Drainage and soil texture impact on recreational uses.
Topography makes some soils and land areas more suitable for recreational and aesthetic uses.
Location, location, location - factors affect human activity.
Edible fungi collection such as Morels is a favored past time Pests - ie. insects and their control.
Pasteurization, radiation, dehydration, physically alter foods/feeds for longer storage against damage from micro-organization.
Micro-organism in the landscape present aesthetic and recreational opportunities primarily in non-cultivated land areas Species are site and season specific Environment favorable to mosquito's gnats, ticks, deer fly and tsetse fly limit human activities
H c 1 Modern human activity systems are dependent upon the ease and quantity of plant/animal products that are harvested, stored, processed.
H c 1 The fastest growing ag-related industry in the U.S. is turf and landscaping H c 1 Land owners own the land but not the view of the land and the landscape H c 1 Plants in urban settings provide: shade affecting temperature and humidity, air quality filters, visual screens, altered micro-climate e.g.,, wind speed, reduced runoff, better water quality, and noise barrier.
H c 1 Some plants - out of place, diminish the aesthetic value.
Weeds such as stinging nettles, cockleburs, sandburs, ragweed, poison ivy, European milfoil.
H c 1 Diversity of plants in the landscape is pleasing H c 1 Total plant biomass is usually enhanced by diversity H c 1 Harvest of desired product's) is usually greater in monoculture or very simple polycultures H c 1 Overgrazing reduces diversity, quality and yield of animals and animal products H c 1 Additives may be added to improve flavor or nutritive value.
H c 1 Plants create the habitat for the animals that attract hunting and fishing activities H c 2 Plants are processed for their chemical constituents, i.e. sugar, oil, protein, vanilla.
H c 3 Riparian areas provide food and shelter for wildlife while preventing erosion and water contamination H c 3 Landscaping - includes physical form H c 3 Aesthetically pleasing are forms or evidence of conservation, contour tillage, pastoral scenes, terraces, windbreaks H c 3 High moisture plant parts normally consumed fresh require freezing, canning or drying for satisfactory storage.
H c 3 Fabricated foods involve extraction, processing to simulate traditional foods, and are important for some infant, special dietary needs.
H c 4 Diversity in the landscape is desirable including flora, fauna, topography, native vegetation and appearance of naturalness is preferred to cultivated .
H c 5 Vegetation creates favorable environment around homes and places of work.
Creates shade, removes pollutants, visional screens, etc.
H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 4 4 4 5 Wildlife management is a major role of personnel in Departments of Natural Resources Most of the wildlife is on private lands used for other purposes.
Hunting club leases provide some revenue to landowners for hunting privileges.
Wildlife may cause economy loss to crops and young trees through grazing, nesting, bedding, etc.
Hunting and gathering may be aesthetic and recreational or a way of life wild game is nutritional and low in fats for human nutrition Wild animals compete with domestic animals for forage and browse Carrying capacity of a given area must reflect the animal species present, domestic and wild, and their competitive or complimentary interactions Animals slaughtered for meat can be preserved by smoking, salting, fermenting, drying, pickling.
Animal proteins provide a balance of amino acids for human diets.
Animals convert non-usable carbohydrates for humans into useful protein and carbohydrates.
Radiation increasingly used to increase shelf life and reduce spoilage.
Erosion increases with increasing animal pressure, wild or domestic Burrowing rodents are a crop or land management pest due to direct crop losses and indirect loss due to machinery operation and erosion problems Climate impacts on the habitat and diversity of wildlife potentially present Climate determines the survival and productivity Water influence species, density and dispersion patterns Domesticated pleasure animals generally have less tolerance to environmental stress than do wild animals.
H e 1 There are multiple uses and benefits derived from both public and private lands H e 1 Government programs such as "Conservation Reserve" has positive impacts on wildlife populations
H e 1 Changes in lifestyle have altered the level of food and fiber processing, e.g. increased ready to use, synthetic or fabricated materials, increaased number of industrial uses of plant and animal origins, increasing demand for "natural" products.
H e 2 Additives in foodstuffs have increased to meet dietary needs (fortification), shelf life and safety.
H e 4 Stewardship of nature's resources is an expectation of the majority of citizens H e 4 Conversion of land from wild or agricultural land to other human activity uses has major consequences for wildlife, native vegetative, water and soil quality.
H e 5 Green lawns, snow for skiing, water for boating all are dependent on weather.
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I a a a a a a a a 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 5 Soil amendments - fertilizer, lime, gypsum - are major economic inputs into modern crop production Efficient and effective irrigation systems are required for arid and semi-arid croplands and sandy textured soils.
Efficient and environmentally friendly forms of soil amendments are needed, i.e. slow release fertilizers The soil is the most important site of nutrient recycling.
Soil bulk density - impacts on root growth, water infiltration, soil aeration.
Tillage equipment design alters the draft and surface soil characteristics.
Each soil has some unique properties based on its mineralogy and environment.
Stabilizing soil losses and enhancing soil formation is key to stable food and fiber systems.
b 1 Micro-organisms have become model systems in life science exploration b 1 Micro-organisms provide major economic impact on food and fiber: New foods, e.g. ferment product; more efficient organisms, e.g. Rhizobium and alcohol producers; new products, e.g. industrial uses; mechanisms for genetic transformations, e.g. GMO's b 2 Microorganisms are the mechanism for new industrial chemistry for the present and future.
b 3 Microorganisms have been identified that can perform unique transformations at high temperatures and pressure.
b 4 Microorganisms are ubiquitous and diverse over the entire earth's geography.
Source of much undiscovered potential.
b 5 Microorganisms have environmental tolerances much greater than humans c 1 Science has increased the productivity and efficiency of plant production for human use.
c 1 Productivity is due to genetic gain, identification and reduction of limiting resources, e.g. fertilizer, water and pests, altering harvest indices or yield components c 1 Science and technology has allowed U.S. crop producers to be low cost producers and contribute significantly to the very low food costs in the U.S. c 2 Yield increases have been approximately 40% since 1950 due to added fertilizer especially N, P, K c 2 Synthetic growth regulators alter plant growth for the economic components c 2 Chemicals have reduced crop losses due to insects, diseases and weeds.
c 2 Genetics alter the chemistry of plant and the potential uses.
c 3 Mechanization of plant agriculture has reduced labor requirement per acre and per unit of product harvested.
c 3 Mechanization has permitted precision farming, more uniform plant spacing.
c 3 Satellite imaging and information technology permit precise applications of fertilizer, water, pesticides.
c 3 Irrigation increases the stability of crop yields.
c 4 Applications of science and technology for plants are not uniform over geographic and climate regions.
c 4 Intensive agriculture typically has high levels of technology.
c 4 Extensive agriculture typically has low to moderate levels of technology.
c 4 Water and water management technology is the most limiting production factor on a global basis.
c 5 Selecting plants and developing production practices that permit crop production in marginal environments is a challenge to scientists and farmers.
d 1 Animal production is a value-added enterprise - extracting more value (sales) from the land or converting cheap feeds into high valued products.
d 1 Animal efficiencies have been improved via breeding, nutrition and health care.
d 1 Reproductive capacity has been increased through breeding and selection, i.e. liter size, eggs/hen, weaning weights.
d 1 New products and uses of animals to produce drugs have occurred through transgenic research.
d 1 Science and technology applied to plants and animals utilized by humans has permitted more and high quality products to be produced at lower prices for expanding human numbers.
d 1 1930's technology would require 3-5 times the land area to meet present day population needs.
d 1 Food and fiber production, processing and distribution technologies are major economic forces in all of the global economies.
d 1 Public research funds for food and fiber have declined over the last 50 years.
d 2 Improved nutrition is the key to higher productivity.
d 2 Animals have the capacity to synthesis complex organic molecules, i.e. pharmaceuticals that can not be produced in laboratories.
d 2 Animal products generally improve the quality of human diets.
d 2 Animal fats are less desirable than plant fats (oils) in human diets.
d 2 Growth hormones have increased animal production.
d 3 Electronic monitor of animals permits efficiency in feeding and performance.
d 3 Mechanization has reduced labor and increased size of animal operations.
d 3 Information systems are key components of orderly processing and distribution of animal products.
d 4 Animal technologies can be applied across wide geographic and climate regions.
d 4 Production of beef and sheep tend to be technology extensive operations.
d 4 Production of swine, poultry, and fish tend to be technology intensive operations.
d 5 Confined animal production systems increase efficiency but create environment stresses which must be managed.
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I J J J J J
e 1 Science and technology applied to plants and animals utilized by humans has permitted more and high quality products to be produced at lower prices for expanding human numbers.
e 1 1930's technology would require 3-5 times the land area to meet present day population needs.
e 1 Food and fiber production, processing and distribution technologies are major economic forces in all of the global economies.
e 1 Public research funds for food and fiber have declined over the last 50 years.
e 2 The food and fiber system have significant environmental interactions.
e 2 Modern technology has endangered air, water, and soil quality through point and non-point source pollution-industry primarily point source and agriculture primarily non-point source e 2 The high tech modern food system provides the safest and most diverse foods the world has ever known.
e 3 New and efficient methods of processing and storage, i.e. freeze-drying, radiation, increase the quality and quantity of food.
e 3 New technologies in the fiber industry allow production of high strength structural building materials from smaller trees and waste products.
e 4 Degradation of the environment is a consequence of human activities and inappropriate technology application.
e 4 Sustainable systems require the use of appropriate technologies.
e 4 Human activities, natural resource demands and environmental degradation require public investment in science and technology.
e 4 Understanding the interactions of humans, food and fiber systems and natural systems requires research and education.
e 5 Humans alter their environment and surrounding environment.
e 5 Ecosystems sustainability requires minimizing human impact on the environment a a a a a 1 2 3 4 5 Soil management for crops/livestock involves tillage, seeding, cultivation, fertilizing.
Altering soil chemistry, i.e. nutrients and pH to improve plant growth is a common management practice.
Altering soil structure and improving drainage are practices to improve aeration, mineralization and plant growth.
Managing sol water available to the plants is a major production function.
Soil erosion, either water or wind, produces serious injury or damage to plants.
J b 1 Production of microbes for benefit of humans is an economic enterprise of which the pharmaceutical industry is the largest producer of antibiotics and drugs to counter pathogen organisms.
J b 1 Beneficial organisms include nitrogen fixing - Rhizobium and azotobacter; Phosphorus uptake aiding-mycorrhiza and fermentation J b 1 Microbes for human use are produced in controlled environments.
J b 2 Microbes are produced commercially for their unique chemical transformation, e.g. breakdown of complex organic molecules such as petroleum spills.
J b 3 Microbes in the soil aid in building soil structure.
J b 4 Soil as the upper layer of earth's surface is defined as the "living part" because of the profusion of microorganisms present.
J b 4 Microorganisms are the principle biologic organism in the weathering of the earth's surface to form soils and release mineral nutrients.
J b 4 Plant species and crop rotations alter the soil flora and fauna and microbes.
J b 5 Micro-environments are critical to micro flora and fauna J J J c 1 Modern crop production is a high input business, i.e. purchase of seed, fertilizer, pesticides, equipment, tractors, etc. c 1 Costs of production have risen while value of agriculture products have actually declined on a constant dollar basis.
c 2 In the U.S. most crops receive applied chemicals: 1) fertilizers-N,P,K and some micro-elements; 2) pesticides-herbicides on most acres, insecticides and fungicides on selected crops; 3) plant growth regulators on a few crops e.g. apples, cotton, pineapples, banana; 4) organic acids for preservation and storage.
c 2 Organic crop production implies production without synthetic fertilizers and pesticides, natural compounds such as manure and plant derived natural pesticides such as pyrethrum are used.
c 3 Machinery permits or limits the row spacing, plant density, soil preparation, tillage and harvest of crops.
In most cases machinery is a substitute for labor.
c 3 Mechanization permits more timely operation, permitting greater yields or minimizing losses especially at harvest.
c 4 Crop production potential is primarily determined by: 1) solar radiation-intensity and duration, 2) length of the growing season, 3) water availability and 4) management practices that modify these environmental factors c 5 Localized weather is the single most uncontrollable factor in crop production c 5 Drought accounts for 50% of all crop insurance claims
J J J J J J
J d 1 Commercial animal production represents about 50% of farm gate receipts.
J d 1 Major economic aspects of animal husbandry is the inputs of feeds, feed additives and health care.
J d 1 Producers seek to maximize profits, usually achieved by maximizing production or achieving higher levels of efficiency in animal performance per unit of input, i.e. lbs feed/lb of gain; days to market, eggs/layer, lbs milk per cow, pegs/litter, wool/sheep J d 2 Balancing animal diets (rations) is matching nutritional needs with the available feed stuff.
J d 2 Animal diets do require supplementation with inorganic minerals - salts, i.e. NaCl, Ca, P, I. J d 2 Animal health care involves use of drugs not unlike those used in human medication.
J d 2 Growth regulators are used to promote growth of meat animals and lactation of milk animals.
J d 3 Mechanical devises are used to de-horn; castrate, de-tail (dock), milk, shear and handle animals.
J d 3 Computers are used to automatically record or limit feed intake, measure pounds of milk produced, monitor air temperature and humidity, control air quality.
J d 4 Grazing is the largest land use in the world (dominant agriculture enterprise in arid and semi-arid regions of the world) J d 4 With the advent of confinement feeding air pollution, water pollution and in some areas soil contamination with heavy metals have become major environmental issues.
J d 5 Mild climates are favorable to intensive livestock production
J e 1 Food and fiber production is the world's largest enterprise J e 1 The food and fiber system employees more people globally than all other activities combined J e 1 Commercial food, fiber and natural resource managers manage 75% of the U.S. land area and the majority of the world's arable land J J J J J J e e e e e e 2 3 4 4 4 5 All humans are dependent upon food and fiber managers for the raw materials in all food and much of our clothing and housing Modern transportation and engineering systems have made products of the land and the sea globally available All human activities compete for and with the biological and physical resources of planet earth.
Human choices on kinds, forms and amounts of food and fiber impact on the earth's systems.
Food and fiber production impact on wildlife, water use and quality, land use and land quality, air and air quality.
Specialized agriculture develops around population centers i.e..
Truck crops, turf, landscaping
K a 1 Several soil inhabiting pests can cause economic damage to crops: cutworms, wireworm, grub, seed maggot, nematode, phytophthora root rot, Rhizoctonia K a 2 Mineral deficiencies or toxicities cause economic losses.
K a 3 Some soil pest problems are increased by poor soil structure and high soil bulk density (compaction).
K a 4 Poorly drained soils increase pest problems K a 5 Pests are more prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions where soils seldom freeze.
K b 1 Pests are plants, animals or micro-organisms detrimental or annoying to humans or to organisms valued by humans (natural, undisturbed by human ecosystems do not have pests) K b 1 Economic injury thresholds for treatment of pests occurs when projected production loss equals cost of treatment to control the pest K b 1 Pests may alter yield, quality or both K b 1 Some pest damages are cosmetic but affect market acceptance by the consumer and thus are of economic importance.
K b 2 Plants and animals have natural genetic immunity or tolerances to pests but this is a dynamic relationship with new biotypes continually emerging to attach formerly resistant organisms.
K b 2 Breeding and genetic manipulation is the most acceptable method of managing pest problems.
K b 2 The use of chemicals to control pests is a common practice, e.g. drugs for treating animal diseases, fungicides for fungi on plants, insecticides for insects on plants and herbicides for for invasive species and other undesired plants K b 2 Chemicals are selected to interrupt key biological processes.
K b 3 Mechanical methods of pest control include cultivation, tillage and flaming or burning for weeds K b 3 Temperature and pressure is widely used for destruction of undesirable microbes in canning and food preservation K b 3 Sunlight is both a desiccant and UV-light will destroy many microbes on the surface of food products.
K b 4 Water is the media in which most microbes flourish and the source of much contamination of foodstuffs.
K c 4 Pest problems occur when a causal organism is in favorable environment (temperature, moisture, light, nutrition) and a susceptible host or competitor.
K c 4 Management strategies can control some biological and physical factors but weather can not.
Weather dictates the spread and infection of many pests, e.g. wind-migration of insects aphids, distribution of spores such as rust, and dispersal of weed seeds such as dandelion; humidity influences the infection of mildew and scab: temperature-determines growth rate and duration of life cycles and water carries weed seeds and parasitic organisms.
K c 4 Pest problems occur when a causal organism is in favorable environment (temperature, moisture, light, nutrition) and a susceptible host or competitor.
K c 5 Noxious (harmful of difficult to control) weeds are typically introduced species, invasive, i.e..
Species without natural competitors K c 5 Weeds occur in disturbed environments.
K c 5 Monocropping favors the establishment of selected adapted weed species.
K d 1 Animals experience health problems similar to humans caused by microorganisms (virus, fungi, bacteria, nematodes) insects aid allergy and toxin reactions to plants.
K d 1 Intensification for maximizing production and/or profit increases animal stress and potential for health problems K d 1 Animal health associated with insects and diseases is a major part of profitability K d 2 Animal drugs are essentially the same as human drugs K d 2 Animals suffer a similar set of biochemical imbalances induced by disease organisms.
K d 2 Zoonotic diseased animals must be removed from the human food chain K d 3 Animals become model systems for researching new human health innovations K d 4 Endemic pests of local geographic regions limit areas of animal production, i.e. tsetse fly and trypanosomiosis in Africa.
K e 1 Pest management is a major career effort for: 1)entomology-insects and human disease vectors, household nuisance pests, pest injuries to crops and animals, plant disease transmission; 2)Plant pathology-study of fungi, bacteria, viruses, and nematode, 3) Animal pathology, 4) Weed management K e 1 Plant, animal and food and fiber losses due to pest approach 25% of total production, in spite of current control and management efforts.
K e 2 Pest management must utilize biological, cultural, and chemical strategies to minimize the losses due to pests.
K e 2 Many pests produce toxins injurious to other plants, animals or humans K e 2 Legal designation of weeds: noxious-injurious to humans and animals and very difficult to control, common K e 2 Weeds may produce toxins injurious, e.g. alkaloids, nitrates, poison ivy, poison oak, to animals or humans K e 3 Weeds may produce structures (thorns, burs, nettles) which are injurious to humans and animals K e 4 The more disturbed the ecosystem, the greater the opportunity for pests.
L L L L L
a a a a a
1 2 3 4 5
Soil conditions influence the timely and efficient harvest of quality crops Soil fertility affects harvest quality and storability.
Soil physical properties impact on machine harvest, i.e.. to wet, to dry Seasons altered slightly by microclimate determine periods of harvest Environment - particularly precipitation and temperature - influence soil conditions and harvest.
Determine the length of growing season; heat units.
L b 1 Microorganisms are the source of much economic loss during harvest and storage period.
L b 1 Micro-organisms are major mechanism of developing storability, i.e. fermented foods (wine, sausage, sauerkraut), fermented feed (silage) L b 2 Microorganisms alter the pH for longer shelf life.
L b 2 Microorganisms alter the composition for better nutrition.
L b 2 Microorganisms alter flavors.
L b 4 Microorganism's activity is affected by food source, temperature, and moisture.
All affect ease of storage in different environments.
L L L L L c c c c c 1 1 2 4 5 Cereal grains are the staples of human foods because of nutrients and east of storage.
Cereal grains are the staples of human foods because of nutrients and east of storage.
Chemicals may be applied to plants to delay ripening, hasten ripening, decrease loss of vitamins, retain or alter color.
Methods of plant storage differ with geography regions, climate.
Storage losses are related to temperature, moisture content of grain, relative humidity of air and prevalence of storage insects.
L d 1 Animals on the hoof represent walking bank accounts, a source of draft or power and have value for their milk, wool, hair or manure.
L d 2 Milk promoting hormone, BST, is natural hormone which when inject on a daily basis increase milk production with no change in quality L d 2 Cream is the butterfat separated from the rest of the milk.
L d 2 Milk solids consists of protein and Milk sugar (lactose) L d 2 Milk is sold on butterfat and milk solids content.
L d 3 Drying and freezing represent the most widely used method of storing meat cuts and products as well as dairy products.
L d 3 Modern slaughter and processing facilities utilize highly mechanized and automated systems.
L d 4 In the warm geographic regions harvest and consumption occur on the same day due to lack of cold storage.
L d 4 Animal distributions do differ with geography and local custom dictate the harvest, processing and storage methods.
L e 1 Non farm populations create greater need for agricultural products which can be stored for later distribution to urban centers.
L e 2 Quality of plant products are impacted by time of harvest and methods of storage.
L e 3 Conversion of plant and animal materials into industrial uses as alternative to non-renewable resource uses has increased the number of processes for production of non-food and alternative industrial uses, e.g. vegetable oil for paints and plastics, new technologies for wood chips and fibers.
L e 4 The raw materials for food and fiber production tend to be geographic specific and may not correspond to human population density.
L e 4 Demand for products is population density dependent and concentrated in the coast areas of the world resulting in storage, processing, distribution challenges.
M a 1 Soil is a fragile and vital natural resource to be protected and preserved M a 3 Soil texture and structure are mediated by the physical forces of climate, topography and time.
M a 5 Environment -physical, chemical and biological over time creates soil, 1" per 1000 years.
M M M M M M M M M M M M b b b b b b c c c c c c 1 1 2 3 4 5 1 1 2 3 4 5 Food processing and storage reduces spoilage and waste caused by microorganisms beneficial micro-organism have major impact on the economy, I.e. fermentation industry, bio-technology Acid preservation, wine, summer sausage Canning-the use of heat, pressure and anaerobic conditions prevents spoilage of plant and animal material Dehydration is an effective way of preserving against microbial attack.
Environment determines the yield and quality of product for microbial process based products Processing plants for storage may involve adding sugar, salts, vinegar, or spices to lessen losses to microorganisms.
Fresh foods have limited shelf life The majority of the worlds crops utilize chemicals e.g.sugar, salt as preservatives.
The majority of the worlds crops are processed-ground, rolled, popped, fermented, etc. before consumption.
Free water determines methods of storage and need for preservation Climate has determined the traditional methods of processing and preserving plant products.
M d 1 Animals are the tradition food on the hoof and walking bank account.
M d 2 Salting is a traditional method of preserving meat.
M d 3 Radiation has become an important means of preserving meat M 5 Fermented dairy products are traditional in warm to hot climates.
M e 1 Organic foods have become a niche market for many farmers because of attitudes toward how food is produced and processed.
M e 2 Flavor chemistry has significantly altered the food industry M e 2 Allergies may arise in humans due to natural or artificial chemicals added to protect or fortify food stuffs.
M e 3 Human preferences are determines by the physical texture of the food M e 4 People of different geographic regions exhibit different food preferences M a 2 Soils are difficult to duplicate synthetically because of chemical complexity.
M a 4 Soil properties are determined by parent material-type of rock from which they are derived.
M b 5 Environment dictates the need for preservation and methods used, i.e. drying, salting, freezing, canning, fermentation.
M d 4 Live animals are more common in extreme climates, eg.tundra and deserts M e 5 Food processing is greatest in the high income countries M e 1 Religion dictate when, how and in what form foods can be consumed N a 1 Soil cannot be treated as dirt.
It is living, dynamic and vital to humankind.
N a 2 Soil nutrients determine plant nutrients which in turn determine mineral nutrients available to humans and animals.
N a 2 Soil health is a measure of its biodynamic properties.
i.e..
Kinds and numbers of organisms, cation exchange capacity (CEC), available nutrients, organic matter content N a 2 Soils may accumulate heavy metals and other chemicals injurious to animals and humans N a 3 NA N a 4 Many soils are deficient in essential elements based on geology or degree of weathering.
N a 5 Soil borne pathogens and soil particulates (dust) can be human health problems.
N a 5 Water quality problems are affected by soil sediment.
N N N N N N N N N b b b b b b b b b 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 4 Microorganisms and insects are major causes of health, nutrition, and safety concerns in the food and fiber system.
Virus, bacteria and fungi cause diseases in plants, animals and humans and reduce productivity.
Quality of plant and animal products is related to freedom of microorganisms.
Sanitation systems are major issues associated with plant and animal production and processing systems.
Microorganisms produce toxins which when ingested by humans or animals cause illness or death.
Microorganisms used in fermented foods alter the vitamins, flavors, and palatability of foods.
Microorganisms are the most frequent contamination of water sources.
Microorganisms can be controlled through heat, i.e. pasteurization, sterilization - ionizing radiation.
There are a multitude of microorganisms in the eco-system performing many services, e.g. mineralization and breakdown of organic substances as a part of the carbon cycle.
N c 1 Modification of plants through breeding and selection is generally assumed to produce no health hazards to humans and is environmentally the most benign and economical pest management approach.
N c 1 Plants do modify the environment.
N c 1 Crop rotation is an important practice for plant health.
N c 1 Nutritional value of plants is modified by genetics, management and environment.
N c 2 Residual effects of pesticides are nearly nil for crops harvested for seed.
N c 2 Pesticides applied to plants have differing levels of toxicity to humans and animals, e.g. insecticides - most toxic, fungicides and bactericides are intermediary, herbicides are least toxic.
N c 2 Natural pest resistance chemicals in plants may be as toxic to humans as synthetic pesticides.
N c 3 Artificial drying to safe storage moisture, minimize storage aflotoxin development and storage losses due to fungi.
N c 3 Artificial drying to safe storage moisture, minimize storage aflotoxin development and storage losses due to fungi.
N c 3 Product packaging affect health and safety of products.
N c 4 Schiztosomiais is a major health problem associated with irrigation in tropical environments.
Land management influences soil erosion and plant species composition of a given site or location.
N c 4 Erosion is influenced by type of plant cover, slope, soil texture, and form and intensity of precipitation.
N c 5 Environments favorable to pests lower the quantity and nutritional quality of the crops harvested.
N c 5 Only a few plant diseases produce toxins that affect humans, aflotoxin, vomitoxin, ergot are a couple of examples.
N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N d d d d d e e e e e e e e e e 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 4 4 Calculate the percentage of fat in the food product using the label information.
Animals provide high quality, readily digestible proteins for human nutrition.
Animal health is a major concern of veterinarians and a major part of the medical field.
Zoonotic diseases are diseases transmitted from animals to humans.
Latitude and climate influence land use due to insects, i.e. tsetse fly.
Health and safety issues become major trading partner issues in the import/export of food products.
The number one global economic activity of humans is the food system.
The number one U.S. economic activity is medicine and health care.
Obesity is the number one health problem in the U.S. Food poisoning may occur with improperly prepared or stored foods.
Calories in our diets are primarily of plant origin.
Balanced diets implies variety of food origins.
Mineral deficiencies in soils lead to mineral deficiencies in plants, lead to mineral deficiencies in humans and animals.
Greatest perceived health threat in foods of plant origin is pesticide residues.
Food allergies are a major problem for a small percent of the population.
N e 4 State and federal through agencies such as EPA, FIFRA, USDA work to protect quality of food, human health and worker safety.
N O O O O O O a a a a a a 1 1 2 3 4 5 Nutrition/Health/Safety Sandy soils and shallow soils present more drought risk than silt or clay texture and deeper soils.
Flood plains present a crop production risk due to both flooding and prolonged wet soils.
Irrigation, low water quality, and poor management may lead to salinity or alkalinity build up.
Heavy machinery may compact wet soils increasing crop risk and/or reducing growth.
Old soils - geologically weathered are frequently "poor" soils.
Winter kill of taprooted perennials due to "heaving" is a risk in temperate climates and on poorly drained clay soils.
Risks associated with micro-organisms are primarily related to pests.
Pest problems are of economic importance but highly variable from season to season.
Storage of biological material implies potential loss risks due to microbe and insects unlike inorganic substances.
Risks among beneficial microorganisms and insects are associated with factors affecting quality of final products Variability in chemical composition of microbial altered products is a major concern, i.e. a part of quality control.
Maintaining standard conditions of temperature, moisture, pressure for processing is part of quality control.
Environmental variability especially weather significantly alters risk of crop lost due to microbes.
Environment influences the level of stress and susceptibility of animals to microbes.
Ob1 Ob1 b1 Ob1 Ob2 Ob3 Ob4 Ob4
O c 1 Financial risk for plants varies with crop and stage of growth when environmental or biological stress occurs.
O c 1 Exposed risk is high in crops due to major investments up front, i.e. start of growing season and limited salvage values for prematuration crop interrupted growth.
O c 1 Yield is environmentally dependent and not fully controlled, i.e. floods, drought, hail, frost, thus variable supply.
O c 1 Cheap food policy affects markets.
O c 1 Markets reflect supply, demand and quality of available raw commodities.
O c 1 The more perishable the commodity the greater the risk.
O c 2 Crop diversity affects biological risk.
O c 2 Crop quality (chemical composition) can not be totally controlled because of environmental interactions, i.e. excess rain, drought, frost, insects, diseases.
O c 2 World production influences ag-commodity prices and for grains productions is highly variable, leading to boom and bust cycles.
O c 3 Increasing demand or markets for specialty products which require processing O c 3 Access to processing facilities is critical O c 3 Transportation is a major factor affecting price of commodities.
O c 3 Water cheaper than train, train cheaper than truck, truck cheaper than air O c 4 A global food production and distribution system minimizes the impact of local disasters and short falls in production O c 4 Importation of food products increases risk of importing disease of domestic plants and animals O c 4 Imported foods may have higher health risks due to contaminates, eg. E. coli, pesticide residues O c 5 Environment provides the greatest risks in food and fiber production, i.e. drought
Declining number of processors limits access to markets for small producers.
Desire for chemical free (drugs and growth regulators) animals adds risk or creates opportunity for producers.
Preservatives may be carcinogenic in high concentrations.
Working animals presents a high physical risk to the workers - agriculture is second most hazardous profession.
Confinement livestock operations involve large capital investments, physical structures and mechanical failure potential.
NA Manure spills and feedlot runoff present major environmental hazard.
Human survival is directly related to stable food, fiber, environment and natural resource system.
Poverty and lack of access to land is the primary cause of malnutrition and starvation.
Modern production/processing systems expose people to more chemicals.
More people enjoy a healthy and safe food supply than anytime in history.
Urbanization separates people from the production system making societies increasingly vulnerable in the event of national disasters.
O e 4 Urbanization continues to concentrate people, placing stress on the environment to handle the human waste.
O e 5 Population pressure posses major environmental risk to: pollution, loss of habitat, water shortage, etc
