October 30, 1997 Q. Rep. Petri, the chaos in the international financial markets made it harder to notice, but we've had very good news in recent days about the federal budget deficit.
Yes, we have had good news about the federal budget deficit.
As late as March, this spring, the budget experts were predicting that the deficit for this year ending September 30th would be $120 billion.
Well, now the books have been closed, and the deficit isn't $120 billion, the deficit for the last federal budget year was $22.6 billion.
That's the lowest deficit we've had since 1974 -- over 20 years ago -- when the deficit was just slightly over $6 billion.
That contrasts with a record high deficit of over $290 billion in 1992.
Who gets the credit? Well, the strong economy really gets an awful lot of the credit for this good budget showing.
And some people also attribute the recovery that started back in the 1980s under President Ronald Reagan, due to his lower marginal tax rates, deregulation of the economy, emphasis on free trade and low inflation that all contributed to the stronger economy that we have now.
We've had since then 15 years of growth, interrupted only by one shallow eight-month dip in the early 1990s.
And that's the longest period of growth that our country has ever experienced.
Q.
Now that the deficit problem has been solved, what's next on Congress' agenda?
The deficit problem hasn't been solved.
We're going to have to continue working on it.
It's going to require discipline to bring the deficit down to zero because there are areas of the budget that are continuing to grow -- and it could overwhelm that progress that we've made if we aren't careful.
In addition to that, we have to hope that we'll have a strong economy so that revenue continues to come in as it has over the past several years so that we can make the progress on bringing the deficit down that we need to.
Q.
With such a small federal budget deficit in 1997, Congress has made tremendous progress.
So, what's the next priority Congress is going to tackle?
There's already a debate going on in the halls of Congress as to what we ought to be doing about the federal tax system.
Some people are saying that we should throw out the federal tax code.
It's 5.5 million words, riddled with loopholes and inequities.
But if we throw out the tax code we'd have to replace it with some sort of a new system -- hopefully a simpler tax system that would be fair and easy to understand and that will be pro-growth in the economy.
Q.
But of course, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, speaking for the Administration, says the notion of scrapping the tax code is simply unworkable.
It will be difficult.
Nothing's impossible.
We're going to have to debate a lot of different issues and try to figure out what is really acceptable and what the American people would like us to do in this area.
Some people are suggesting that we move from the current tax code to a simple flat income tax where everyone would pay the same rate -- with no loopholes and no exceptions except for standard deductions and deductions for dependent children so the average family wouldn't owe any federal taxes at all on the first $20,000 or $30,000 of income.
And that would help to make it progressive and fair.
Other people want to eliminate the income tax and hopefully the IRS, and instead have a federal sales tax -- with major rebates to compensate low and middle income people for the purchases of necessities like food and clothing.
The sales tax approach is one that has been taken in Europe and in Canada.
Q.
What approach do you favor?
I don't favor any particular approach yet.
I'm still trying to learn more about the different ideas that are being outlined.
But I do think it's time to have a debate on a major overhaul of the tax system.
It's clear that the system's in trouble.
It's unfair, it causes a lot of problems.
Taxes should be fair, they should be simpler, and they should be a lot more easily visible so that everyone will see clearly just how much that they are paying and have to pay in order to run our federal government.
Q.
Could you give me an example of how the current tax system is unfair?
It's very unfair to low income people who are trying to work their way out of poverty and provide for their families themselves.
They end up being caught in what I call the "poverty trap."
The way that works is that when people who are on welfare get a job and start earning money, as their income rises they lose their welfare, medical, housing and food stamp benefits and at the same time they start paying income taxes.
So by trying to work their way out of poverty their standard of living actually goes down until they reach a pretty significant income level.
But suppose we had a flat tax where there's a personal exemption of, say, $11,600 per adult and $5,300 per child.
Then, a low income family of four wouldn't have to pay any federal income taxes at all until the family's income got up over $34,000 a year.
There's another area that I think of as being very unfair, and that's what's called the marriage tax.
Today, when a working couple gets married, their taxes generally go up.
Here's an illustration: Suppose you have two working people with each earning about $30,000.
Maybe they're living together, and decide to get married.
Once they do, under our current tax laws that couple's taxes automatically go up by about $1,200 a year -- or $100 a month -- just because they got a marriage license.
It doesn't make much sense to punish people by requiring them to pay extra taxes just because they do the right thing and get married.
But that's what the current tax system does.
Moving to a flat tax or a federal sales tax would end this so-called marriage penalty.
Q. [Squealing pig sounds] That means it's time for your Porker Award, Rep. Petri.
What do you have this week?
More money down the Big Dig drain.
Federal taxpayers are paying 85 percent of the cost of Boston, Massachusetts' Central Artery project, also known as "The Big Dig."
At a projected cost of $11.6 billion to build two highway tunnels, the Big Dig is the most expensive highway project in the nation's history.
I fought the Big Dig when it was approved in the early 1980s, but I was only a junior congressman at the time, and the Big Dig had the strong support of Senator Ted Kennedy and House Speaker Tip O'Neill, who was from Boston.
The Big Dig requires major disruptions during construction.
So, to keep everybody happy and quiet, the administrators of the project have been spreading money around to all sorts of local government agencies, businesses, and educational institutions.
My latest case in point: Big Dig engineers have spent more than $400 million over the last decade to relocate electric, gas, water and telecommunications lines from the path of the underground expressway, its ramps and interchanges.
But they haven't simply relocated the lines.
The sprawling web of underground pipes, electric and telephone lines, some of them decades old, are being replaced with vastly improved, modern lines: fiber-optic telephone lines, $44 million to replace a Boston Edison electric substation built in 1915, new and improved sewage lines.
And, as John P. Sullivan Jr., chief engineer of the Boston Water and Sewer Commission put it -- quote --: "You now have this golden opportunity to make improvements, and to date, we haven't put in a penny."
-- unquote.
So, for turning a highway project into a costly opportunity for Boston's utilities to upgrade their infrastructures at no charge to them, Boston's Big Dig Central Artery project is the proud encore winner of my latest coveted Porker Award.
Return to: Radio Show Page | Rep. Petri's Home Page
