September 17, 1997 Q. Rep. Petri, you've just introduced legislation that's important to railroads and the businesses and employees who rely on them, and also that's important to everybody who cares about the environment.
So, what's the Railroad Tax Equity Adjustment Act of 1997 all about?
Well, this is pretty straightforward.
The nation's railroads currently pay 5.55 cents per gallon of diesel fuel in a tax specifically earmarked for deficit reduction.
But everybody else who uses diesel fuel or gasoline pays 4.3 cents per gallon for deficit reduction.
The railroads are willing to pay the same tax as everybody else for deficit reduction, but they argue it's unfair for them to have to pay more.
Making the railroads pay more penalizes a fuel-efficient mode of transportation.
And people worried about the environment -- to say nothing of highway congestion -- should not favor penalizing a more fuel-efficient, relatively environmentally friendly mode of transportation.
Now, we want to maintain our freight links through Wisconsin.
We want to maintain passenger service between Milwaukee and Chicago, and elsewhere.
And we'd sure like to provide passenger service through the Fox Valley to Green Bay, if only we could find a way to make that economically viable.
So one step in this direction is legislation which I have just introduced, the Railroad Tax Equity Adjustment Act of 1997, which would reduce the diesel fuel tax paid by the railroads for deficit reduction to the same level paid by everybody else.
Q.
Now, you're working on campaign finance reform, and the Senate hearings on Clinton Administration violations of the campaign laws last year are drawing attention to this subject.
So, what would your proposal do?
My campaign reform bill would allow individuals to contribute up to $200 per year to the candidates of their choice and receive tax credits for 50 percent of the amount of the contributions.
The idea is to get more middle class people involved in order to dilute the power of special interests.
And by using tax incentives to encourage small donations, we can help fund campaigns fairly without having the government dole out tax money according to some formula designed by incumbents and the major parties.
My proposal would also stop the practice known as 'bundling' -- where special interests get around the current $5000 limit on Political Action Committees -- or PACs -- on those contributions, by getting a bunch of checks from a lot of corporate or special interest supporters and then delivering the separate checks in a bundle.
Bundling allows PACs to deliver contributions far in excess of the contributions they could legally make out of their own checking accounts.
Also, my proposal would reduce allowable PAC contributions by 60 percent, to $2000 per election.
And it would require that at least 50 percent of the money raised from individual contributors be raised from within the state in which a candidate is running.
That's in order to prevent outside interests from easily getting around the PAC limit by converting their support into a lot of individual contributions.
Q.
But, what do you do about wealthy candidates who fund their own races?
The Supreme Court says that wealthy people have a free speech right to contribute as much as they want to their own campaigns.
Now, that's a problem because the Senate -- and to a lesser extent the House -- are becoming exclusive clubs for fabulously wealthy individuals who are able to spend virtually unlimited amounts to buy seats in Congress.
If we make it even more difficult for normally successful people to raise money for campaigns, middle class candidates will generally lose to rich people with deep pockets.
Now, a number of influential Democrats are proposing to amend the First Amendment -- to limit free speech rights in order to stop people from spending their personal money on their own campaigns.
But I think there's a better way.
My campaign reform proposal would strengthen the fundraising rules for the more traditional, regular campaigns.
But some wealthy candidates are willing to spend their own money not only to buy bumper strips -- but essentially to buy the cars to display them on as well.
So under my proposal, anyone running against such an individual would be able to raise money from individuals and from his or her political party in excess of the normal limits, up to the point of matching what the wealthy candidate is spending of his or her own money.
Q. Certainly the need to protect free speech -- especially political speech, which is the heart of the First Amendment -- presents a serious challenge to developing campaign reform that will both be effective, and that will be constitutional.
And so, -- well, you say that candidates and their party should be able to exceed spending limits if they find themselves running against a moneybags who's willing to buy his seat in Congress through lavish personal campaign spending.
But, how can candidates get information fast enough to know if a tycoon suddenly starts dumping huge amounts of money into his campaign?
Modern technology can make a big difference here.
I think we should look seriously at requiring candidates to list their campaign contributions on the World Wide Web within 24, or maybe within 48 hours of receiving the money.
And this should go both for contributions from other individuals, special interests, political parties and so on, and also for contributions that a person makes to his or her own campaign.
We should make it easy for everybody to find out who's contributing to campaigns, and how much.
And we should make the reporting of contributions so quick that it will be difficult for candidates to receive big, last minute donations that nobody knows about until after election.
Q.
You have a new employee working in your Washington office who should be of interest to people in the Two Rivers area, and also to anybody in Wisconsin's 6th District who needs help dealing with red tape in the federal government.
Let's let Sara Kornely speak for herself by rolling the tape.
I'm Sara Kornely.
I'm from Two Rivers, Wisconsin.
I graduated from Washington High School in Two Rivers in 1993.
I also just graduated from Marquette University in Milwaukee in 1997, May.
I'm the new caseworker in Cong.
Petri's Washington office.
And as a caseworker there's quite a few things that we are responsible for.
One of our biggest concerns is helping constituents who either write or call or visit the Congressman at Office Hours -- help understand other government agencies such as Social Security, or VA, or Medicare, or something like that.
We often help constituents understand where they are in the process.
We can help them get their military records, get in or out of the military, as the case may be.
We also work a lot with the Immigration and Naturalization Service helping constituents who are trying to come into the country or get visas or something like that.
We also help them understand -- we do research -- maybe understand what kind of benefits they may be entitled to as far as the Social Security Administration goes, or write letters on their behalf to other government agencies regarding policies, or petitioning on the constituent's behalf.
Q.
Any comments, Rep. Petri?
I'm happy to have Ms. Kornely on my staff, and I'm sure she'll do a great job.
Of course, she'll work closely with more senior caseworkers until she's learned what she needs to know about the job.
One of my caseworkers has 22 years of experience helping people get their Social Security checks, veterans benefits, passports, and the like.
It's a demanding, complicated job, and experience is important.
Q. [Squealing pig sounds] That means it's time for your Porker Award, Rep. Petri.
What do you have this week?
Shoveling even more money down Boston's "Big Dig" tunnel project.
Two weeks ago I reported on some of the waste in the Boston, Massachusetts Central Artery project to build two highway tunnels.
I said that the project was originally supposed to cost $2.5 billion, but the cost had grown to $10 billion.
Well, I'm sorry to report that my information was out of date.
Congress' General Accounting Office now estimates that the "Big Dig" -- as it's called -- will now cost not $10 billion, but an estimated $11.6 billion to complete, 85 percent of which comes from federal taxpayers.
The fact is, the Big Dig requires major disruptions during construction.
So, in order to keep everybody happy and quiet, the administrators of the project have been spreading money around to all sorts of local government agencies, local businesses, and local educational institutions.
For instance, the Boston Fire Department wanted a fire boat.
So project administrators had a contractor go out and buy a glorified dinghy at a cost of $230,000.
The state Inspector General says that was $100,000 too much, partly because the contractor took a $70,000 commission.
And there's more: After the purchase was made, the boat had to be redesigned because firefighters with their equipment on, couldn't get into the cabin.
And the fuel tanks were exposed -- meaning that the whole thing could blow up if the fire boat got near a fire.
So, for spending big money on Big Dig expenses that had little or nothing to do with the legitimate purposes of Boston's Central Artery highway project, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is the proud winner of my latest coveted Porker Award.
Return to: Radio Show Page | Rep. Petri's Home Page
