Dr. Sally Reis President Elect National Association for Gifted Children
"Elementary and Secondary Education Act - Educating Diverse Populations" Subcommittee on Early Childhood, Youth and Families Committee on Education and the Workforce July 15, 1999
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee,
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you to discuss a small, but significant federal program that addresses the needs of the nation's gifted and talented students.
My name is Sally Reis.
I am the President-elect of the National Association for Gifted Children, the nation's largest organization of parents, educators, and community leaders working together to address the needs of gifted and talented students.
I am a professor of educational psychology at the University of Connecticut and before that, I spent 15 years as a classroom teacher and gifted education coordinator.
I am also pleased to say that I am the parent of four children, one of whom is identified as gifted and another who is identified as having a learning disability.
On behalf of NAGC, I urge the Subcommittee and Committee members to reauthorize and expand the Jacob K. Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act, Part B of Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, and expand the program to meet the needs of our nation's gifted and talented students.
Gifted and Talented Students
Gifted and talented students make up approximately five to seven percent of the total student population in this country and there are approximately three million gifted students nationwide.
Gifted students come from all socioeconomic and culturally diverse groups; some also have disabilities and for others, English is not their first language.
These students are not simply "super smart" and contrary to popular myth, they do not always "succeed" without programs that challenge them and meet their educational needs.
These students differ from "average" achieving students in terms of the pace at which they learn, their depth and complexity of understanding, and their social and emotional needs.
The fact that they differ from the norm for their age group means that the regular education program for gifted students must be modified to meet their learning and social and emotional needs.
However, the majority of gifted students receive most of their K-12 education in a "regular" classroom where a "one-size-fits-all" environment predominates.
Many teachers have not been specially trained to teach high-ability students.
In fact, a recent study conducted by the National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented found that 61 percent of a national random sample of third and fourth grade classroom teachers had never received any training whatsoever about teaching gifted students.
Unfortunately, gifted students waste a great deal of the time they spend in school.
A recent national study found that a large percentage of these students have already mastered between 40 and 50 percent of curricular material before the school year even begins, and often spend large amounts of time being asked to do work they already know, or waiting for some accommodations to be made.
Indeed, the federal definition of gifted and talented student, first adopted in 1972, recognizes that this is a group of students who need different educational services that are often not provided in our schools.
As a result, our "advanced" students in twelfth-grade fared poorly compared to other advanced students from around the world on the Third International Mathematics and Science Study.
Our brightest students are not less smart than their peers in other nations, rather, many are not exposed to challenging, high-level curriculum by teachers who are prepared to meet needs of gifted and talented students.
When I was a gifted program coordinator, many of my efforts were directed at helping teachers learn how to provide different types of instruction for gifted students.
Some teachers were willing and able to learn to do this, while others were not.
It was difficult to see some students placed in classrooms where they already knew the content in reading and math with teachers who were not willing or able to provide for their special learning needs.
After several years of professional development, most of the teachers in my district learned how to provide services for gifted students.
In many other districts, this type of coaching is not available and gifted students continue to be given work they already know.
The greatest tragedy is that they learn how to expend minimum effort for top grades.
Some of these students learn to underachieve in school, and others drop out, or have other problems, such as low motivation and poor work habits.
Some gifted students from families who can afford it attend private school or are able to enroll in weekend and/or summer enrichment or acceleration programs.
NAGC believes that public schools should be meeting the needs of all students, including those who need high-end learning experiences.
By not challenging gifted students to achieve beyond even the highest standards set in some school districts, we do them a disservice.
We also fall far short of delivering the preparation necessary for those students who are our future leaders in virtually every field and profession.
We need strong gifted education programs in our public schools.
Without them, we fail to meet the needs of gifted students who depend on public schools for appropriate education, and in so doing, we fail to prepare the human capital that will help our nation maintain its economic and cultural advantage in the world.
Federal Commitment to Gifted Students
Since Sputnik, the nation has recognized the need to cultivate our brightest students.
In 1972 the Congress first adopted a federal definition of gifted and talented students, and between 1975 and 1981 the Congress intermittently provided some very limited funding for various gifted and talented programs.
In 1988 the current federal program for gifted students was adopted as part of the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act.
This program, the Javits Gifted and Talented Students Education Act, provides funds for the National Research Center on the Gifted and Talented and a limited staff presence in the U.S. Department of Education.
Originally authorized at $20 million, the Javits program is currently authorized at $10 million.
Appropriations for Javits hovered just under $10 million in the early 1990s, then dropped significantly; it has been funded at $6.5 million since FY 1998.
The Javits Program
Although small in size, the Javits Program is the only federal program devoted exclusively to the needs of gifted and talented students.
The program authorizes the Department of Education to fund demonstration project grants and sponsor The National Research Center.
The Javits Act does not fund local gifted education programs.
The primary focus of the Javits Act is to address the critical need to identify and serve gifted and talented children in underserved populations, including culturally diverse, children from low socioeconomic backgrounds, those with disabilities, and populations with limited English proficiency.
Currently, there are 32 Javits demonstration projects funded competitively by the Department of Education.
The National Research Center, headquartered at my own University of Connecticut, with other locations at the University of Virginia, Yale University, Stanford University and The City University of New York, City College, funds additional research and disseminates research findings.
The Javits Act grant program has had a number of success stories.
One well-known effort is Project CUE, a collaborative effort that included the College of New Rochelle and School District 9 in the South Bronx, which serves approximately 32,000 mostly poor and minority students.
The program was designed to institute high-level challenging content for elementary school students, and to identify and nurture those students whose interests and talents could be developed in mathematics and science.
Evaluation of the project indicated a significant improvement in the overall academic achievement of those students identified as potentially gifted, as well as increases in school attendance rates.
Additionally, the project resulted in a 20 percent improvement school wide in science and math achievement, as measured in both local and statewide standardized tests.
The Javits Act research and dissemination efforts, as reported in various evaluations, have resulted in new information about the effective use and benefits of several instructional strategies including curriculum compacting, instructional grouping, acceleration, and independent study.
Gifted and talented programs serve another major purpose.
Gifted education programs can increase challenge levels for all students, or as Joseph Renzulli, the Director of the Research Center on the Gifted and Talented has stated, "A rising tide lifts all ships."
Selected elements of effective programs for gifted and talented students can be used with other student populations.
However, many of them have not been implemented in regular education because educators have not realized their potential for other groups of learners, or have been resistant to change.
Now, however, many educators are realizing that the knowledge and experience that gifted education has gained from these programs can be used to upgrade the challenge level of general education.
As a gifted program coordinator, I brought at least a dozen programs and strategies to my district which were then adopted by classroom teachers to challenge both gifted and average achieving students in the classroom such as: Talents Unlimited, Future Problem Solving, Young Inventors, and Odyssey of the Mind.
Without my position in the district, most classroom teachers would not have known about these programs or had the opportunity to implement them.
The Javits Act research and demonstration grants have contributed to the knowledge base for improving and reforming our nation's schools.
Yet, much more remains to be done.
NAGC believes that conducting and disseminating research are proper roles for the federal government and that maintaining these important functions at the federal level is an efficient use of minimal research funds.
NAGC strongly supports retaining the research and demonstration project components of the Javits Act in the reauthorization of ESEA.
NAGC further urges the Committee to return the authorization level to its original $20 million.
As a brief aside, NAGC urges the Committee to exclude the Javits program from the education block grant strategies currently pending before the Congress.
Including the Javits program in any block grant program would be inconsistent with the Committee's decision to exempt the Office of Education Research and Improvement from the block grant, recognizing that research is an appropriate role for the federal government.
States and local school districts do not conduct research.
Without a separate Javits Act research program, all research on the needs of gifted and talented students would be effectively eliminated.
Grants to States
In addition to the national research effort, NAGC recommends that Part B of Title X of ESEA be expanded to include a categorical state block grant program to improve the ability of states and local school districts to provide an appropriate and challenging education for their gifted and talented students.
The U.S. Department of Education released National Excellence: A Case for Developing America's Talent in 1993, the first report in twenty years on gifted education.
The report offers an overview of the disparity among the 50 states, and within states, as to the programs, services, and levels of teacher preparedness in the gifted education field.
Gifted education programming decisions are made at the state level, or more often by local school districts.
There are many variations in programs and funding mechanisms across the country.
A few states have emerged as "leaders" in the gifted education field, based on funding, planning, leadership, or teacher preparation -- Texas, Kentucky, California, and North Carolina come to mind.
However, regrettably, a far greater number of states provide little, if any funding for this student population, leaving service delivery and funding issues to local school districts.
In these districts, advocates for one group of students are often pitted against advocates for other students, competing for scarce education resources.
Additionally, state laws and state and local identification and accountability mechanisms vary widely, resulting in a vast disparity of services for this special-needs population.
ESEA should be amended to help remedy this inequity by providing some resources to states to encourage them to strengthen programs and services for our most capable students.
NAGC supports an expanded Javits program that provides grants to states, based on school-age population, that would be spent on teacher preparation programs; innovative programs and services; emerging technologies, including distance learning; a limited amount of infrastructure support; and program evaluation.
A relatively small amount of federal funding for gifted education could prime the pump for many local school districts that do not have teachers trained to identify and meet the needs of gifted students and who do not have appropriate curriculum strategies in place.
Unfortunately, due to budget constraints, they need assistance to begin developing and implementing these programs.
The type of expanded program that we support has been introduced by Representative Elton Gallegly in his bill, H.R. 637.
Representative Gallegly's legislation recognizes that state and local decision makers are in the best position to determine what each state needs to support gifted and talented students.
For example, Connecticut, where there is no state-level financial support for gifted education, might choose to use federal funds to offer training for general education classroom teachers in how to differentiate instruction, rather than distributing small grants to a few school districts across the state.
H.R. 637 provides that flexibility.
H.R. 637 also permits states to use a small percentage of the federal funds to facilitate the critical role of coordinating programs, disseminating information, and responding to questions from parents and teachers - all crucial functions to an efficient use of funds and to a well-organized program.
Mr. Gallegly's bill also requires that the limited federal funds be used in addition to what states are already spending on gifted education programs.
His legislation ensures that the federal funds will expand rather than replace state funding.
Finally, recognizing the need for accountability, H.R. 637 requires that states evaluate the effectiveness of the programs funded by the legislation.
This ensures that the programs proven by research to be effective with gifted and talented students will be implemented and replicated.
The type of grant program created by H.R. 637 would demonstrate a federal leadership role and commitment to the needs of these exceptional children that has heretofore been lacking.
Our students deserve better, and our nation deserves better than what has been done for them thus far.
The federal money spent conducting research through the Javits program has been well spent.
During the past ten years we have developed solid information about what does work, and what can work with gifted students from all populations and backgrounds.
What we need to do now is to take advantage of this growing knowledge base to:
continue research into ways to identify and serve the diverse population of gifted students who are difficult to identify using traditional assessment measures and are therefore frequently underserved;
disseminate information on innovative programs for gifted students;
provide precious seed money to states to train teachers and to implement innovative programs, including advances in technology; and
collect data on the gifted student population and how they are being served which will assist education leaders to develop a national strategy to successfully address and meet the needs of this student population
Mr. Chairman, NAGC strongly supports H.R. 637 as means to assist states and school districts in meeting the special needs of our nation's gifted and talented students and urges the Subcommittee to incorporate it into Title X of ESEA to complement and augment the existing Javits research program.
Thank you so much for the opportunity to present our views.
