Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Oceans, Coasts, 
Invasive species can successfully invade any terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem, and may enter through a wide variety of introduction mechanisms.
Human activities, both intentional and non-intentional, are the chief cause of invasive species introductions.
* Assessing and Monitoring Floatable Debris
B * The Beach and Your Coastal Watershed * Biological Criteria for Coral Reefs This paper provides the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) with advice on the feasibility of establishing biological criteria for assessing coral reef ecosystems.
C * Caulerpa * Coastal America * Coastal Habitats The continued health and biodiversity of marine and estuarine systems depends on the maintenance of high-quality habitat.
The same areas that often attract human development also provide essential food, cover, migratory corridors, breeding/nursery areas for a broad array of coastal and marine organisms.
Habitat loss and degradation are key issues facing coasts and estuaries around the country.
* Coastal Watershed Fact Sheets * Coastlines Newsletter National Estuary Program Newsletter Information About Estuaries and Near Coastal Waters * Coral Reef Task Force Executive Order 13089 focuses on Coral Reef Protection "to preserve and protect the biodiversity, health, heritage, and social and economic value of U.S. coral reef ecosystems and the marine environment."
And established the Coral Reef Task force.
The Executive Order directs all federal agencies to protect coral reef ecosystems to the extent feasible, and instructs particular agencies to develop coordinated, science-based plans to restore damaged reefs as well as mitigate current and future impacts on reefs, both in the United States and around the globe.
* Coral Reefs Introduction to EPAs initiatives and activities in protecting coral reefs habitats.
* Coral Reefs Guidance Guidance letter from the Memorandum for the Field from the Corps of Engineers relating to special emphasis to be given to coral reef protection under the Clean Water Act, Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, Rivers and Harbors Act, and Federal Project Authorities.
* Coral Reefs Monitoring Charting a Course Toward Diagnostic Monitoring: A Continuing Review of Coral Reef Attributes and a Research Strategy for Creating Coral Reef Indexes of Biotic Integrity.
* Coral Reefs Monitoring A Coral Reef Symposium on Practical, Reliable, Low Cost Monitoring Methods for Assessing the Biota and Habitat Conditions of Coral Reefs.
* Coral Reefs - Video How to order the 54 minute video entitled The Fragile Ring of Life on coral reef ecosystems around the world.
* Coral Reefs and Your Coastal Watershed * Cruise Ship Discharges
D * Dredged Material Management * Dredged Material Management and State Coastal Management Programs: Lessons from a Workshop in New Orleans, Louisiana in January 1999 * Dredging Alternatives Environmental Effects of Dredged Material Management Alternatives -- a Technical Framework Document.
* Dredging Interagency Charter Dredging of U.S. harbors and channels is conducted in a timely and cost effective manner while meeting environmental protection/restoration/enhancement goals.
The National Dredging Team will facilitate communication, coordination, and resolution of dredging issues among the participating Federal agencies, and will serve as a forum for promoting the implementation of the recommendations in the Report to the Secretary of Transportation.
* Dredging MARAD Report The Dredging Process in the United States: An Action Plan for Improvement.
The Interagency Working Group On the Dredging Process, A Report to the Secretary of Transportation - December 1994.
E * Estuaries and Your Coastal Watershed * Estuaries: Where Rivers Meet the Sea: 10 Ways to Protect Estuaries * Estuary Restoration * Evaluation of Dredged Material Proposed for Ocean Disposal Testing Manual
F * Floating Debris Assessing and Monitoring Floatable Debris * Framework for Dredged Material Evaluations Evaluating Environmental Effects of Dredged Material Management Alternatives - a Technical Framework Document
G * "Green Book" Evaluation of Dredged Material Proposed for Ocean Disposal Testing Manual
I * Introduced Species The term "introduced species" can refer to any plants, animals, or other viable biological material that enter an ecosystem beyond its historic range.
Invasive species can successfully invade any terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem, and may enter through a wide variety of introduction mechanisms.
Human activities, both intentional and non-intentional, are the chief cause of invasive species introductions.
* Invasive Species The term "invasive species" can refer to any plants, animals, or other viable biological material that enter an ecosystem beyond its historic range.
Invasive species can successfully invade any terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem, and may enter through a wide variety of introduction mechanisms.
Human activities, both intentional and non-intentional, are the chief cause of invasive species introductions.
M * Marine Debris Abatement also: En Español * Monitoring Guidance for the National Estuary Program
N * National Coastal Condition Report Monitoring Assessment of Coastal Waters This report describes the overall condition of the U.S. coastal waters as fair to poor, varying from region to region.
The Report, primarily evaluates estuaries areas where rivers meet the ocean in the continental United States.
Indicators of coastal conditions were derived from data on water quality, sediment quality, biota, habitat, and ecosystem integrity, as they relate to ecological and human health.
* National Dredging Team Dredging- Team An interagency effort to promote dredging of United States harbors and channels in a timely and cost effective manner while meeting environmental protection/restoration/enhancement goals.
* Near Shore Waters and Your Coastal Watershed * Non Indigenous Species The term "non-indigenous species can refer to any plants, animals, or other viable biological material that enter an ecosystem beyond its historic range.
Invasive species can successfully invade any terrestrial or aquatic ecosystem, and may enter through a wide variety of introduction mechanisms.
Human activities, both intentional and non-intentional, are the chief cause of invasive species introductions.
O * OSV Anderson * Oceans and Coasts Month * Ocean Dumping + Keeping Our Oceans Clean 
P * Performance Indicators Visualization and Outreach Tool (PIVOT) Users can visually track the National Estuary Program's progress toward achieving its habitat restoration goals through interactive graphics and maps.
* Pfiesteria A toxic dinoflagellate associated with fish lesions and fish kills in mid-Atlantic Coastal Waters * Plastic Pellets in the Marine Environment Sources and Recommendations * Posters + Estuaries: Scenes of Transition + Keeping Our Oceans Clean 
R * Research vessel * Reducción/Disminución de la Basura Marina also: English Version
T * Testing Dredged Material Evaluation of Dredged Material Proposed for Ocean Disposal Testing Manual * Treasured Waters: Protecting Our Coastal And Marine Resources * Treaties
* Protocol Concerning Specially Protected Areas and Wildlife to the Convention for the Protection and Development of the Marine Environment of the Wider Caribbean Region Exit EPA Disclaimer * Ocean Dumping (Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution from the Dumping of Wastes and other Matter) Exit EPA Disclaimer
U * Using Your Head to Help Protect Our Aquatic Resources Addresses the impact of untreated sewage from boats.
V * Vessel Discharges * Vessel Sewage Discharge Program * Video Coral Reefs How to order the 54 minute video entitled The Fragile Ring of Life on coral reef ecosystems around the world.
* Volunteer Monitoring in Estuaries This manual focuses on volunteer estuary monitoring.
This document presents information and methodologies specific to estuarine waterquality.
Both the organizers of volunteer programs and the volunteers themselves should find it of use.
Y * Your Coastal Watershed
Z * Zebra mussels
Can't find what you want? Try our A-Z Index.
General Information 
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
