[USEMAP:hdr_Seal.gif] [hdr_maricopa.gif]
We sponsor several programs to help achieve this goal.
Many of our activities are designed to highlight the human-animal bond.
Whether it is a violence prevention program for at-risk youth, dog training class for pet guardians, or an interactive program at one of our Centers, AC
AC
Out therapeutic programs offer many options for families that are in crisis such as free spay/neuter surgery, and a pet food bank.
We also offer valuable inforamtion on how to keep companion animals safe during disasters, Preparing for Disasters.
These are all part of our larger committment to help people and animals stay together.
For a summary of our Public Programs, check out Human Animal Bond Programs.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Community Education
A main focus of our community education is to help create and reinforce the human-animal bond.
One way we do this is by working with youth groups.
If you interested in participating in one of our youth groups, call AC
Teaching Love and Compassion (TLC)
TLC is an innovative violence prevention program for children.
The program strives to be an integral component in preventing violence between humans and other animals.
We are aware that the causes and solutions to violence can be complex and multi-faceted.
Although the program alone cannot end violence, TLC does provide some of the most important components of the solution.
These components include developing and reinforcing values and behaviors such as compassion, empathy, responsibility, and respect for all living things.
[TLC.jpg] [tlc_1.jpg]
TLC targets youth deemed to be at risk by human service and school-based professionals.
Student participate in customized, age appropriate programs designed to identify and prevent the cycle of violence by building self-esteem and increasing respect for all living creatures.
The youth work with AC
Additionally, they participate in interactive lessons that include public speaking, anger management, conflict resolution, and animal cruelty issues.
As students experience the conflicts and challenges of working as a group to train shelter dogs they develop compassion, responsibility, and patience.
The participants learn new information and skills and also share their newfound knowledge with younger students when they go to elementary schools to conduct presentations on humane education and responsible animal care.
In addition to the benefits gained by the students, the shelter dogs receive lots of love, socialization, and training thereby making them highly adoptable by the end of the program.
TLC is funded by Mels fund.
Mels Fund was created to honor the life of the late Mel Brunner, who was a passionate animal welfare advocate and volunteer.
Deeply committed to ending the senseless euthanasia of adoptable animals in our community, he was particularly interested in educating children about responsible pet guardianship and supporting programs that foster the human/animal bond.
Mels goal when he worked with animal organizations was to help both animals and children, states Maria Brunner, Mels wife.
He believed that by learning to love and care for animals, we can learn to love and care for each other.
Our work in this area was something we did together and it was magic.
Mels Fund was designed to assist Friends of Animal Care 
If you would like help support TLC, you can make a donation to Mels Fund through FACCs, www.azfaccs.org.
For details about a successful TLC program, check out this article that appeared in the Arizona Republic in May 2002.
Here's some fun information for kids: Bite Prevention Workbook AnimalLand.org
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Media Pets
In an effort to find homes for the animals in our Centers, AC
Here's where you can see us:
·Channel 10 pet of the week - mentioned on Wednesday and Friday newscasts between 11:00 A.M. - 12:00 noon, www.fox10.com
·Channel 12 pet of the week - broadcast on Friday mornings between 5:00 A.M. - 7:00 A.M. and during the 11:00 A.M. - 12:00 noon show every two weeks, www.12news.com
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Feral Cats
What is the difference between a stray cat and a feral cat? Well, a stray cat is an un-owned animal that you see in your neighborhood that is friendly and enjoys human contact.
A feral cat has had little or no human contact during its natural life.
You see feral cats outdoors struggling to find food, using all their energy to stay warm and safe.
Many people consider feral cats to be nuisances because they exhibit annoying behaviors such as marking their territory, howling at night, fighting, and destroying your personal property.
Because feral cats are usually not spayed or neutered they reproduce at an alarming rate, which results in more cat problems and public health concerns.
AC
We have over 20 years of documented proof that the traditional ways of dealing with feral cats don't work.
The "catch and kill" method of population control, i.e., trap a cat, bring it to a shelter, and ask the shelter to euthanize the cat, has not reduced the number of feral cats.
Sure, that cat is gone, but now there is room for another cat to move in.
By creating that niche in a neighborhood feral cat colony we encourage fighting, spraying territory, and breeding.
In addition, female cats in distressed colonies tend to produce more offspring than those in stable colonies.
So you see, "catch and kill" makes the problem worse.
After many years of study AC
The Trap, Neuter, and Return (TNR) of feral cats is a proven, humane method of feral cat population control.
Through TNR, cats are humanely trapped and sterilized.
Feral cats are placed back into the environment in which they were living.
Volunteer caretakers then provide food, water, and clean, unobtrusive shelters for the cats.
Cats that have been sterilized are ear tipped - one centimeter is removed from the tip of the left ear - to identify that they are part of a managed colony.
AC
This program stablizes feral cat populations, reduces birth rates, and improves the overall health of cat colonies.
With the support of sympathetic neighborhood volunteers, the felines live safely and peacefully within their territory.
Typical feral problems are practically eliminated and the incidence of disease and malnutrition are greatly reduced.
Operation FELIX
Operation FELIX helps provide an effective solution to the free-roaming cat population problem that exists in Maricopa County.
The program is open to business, residential properties, homeowner associations, and cities/towns.
Operaton Felix offers many benefits to your community: * An opportunity to humanely solve your cat problem.
* The elimination or reduction of annoying cat behavior like spraying, yowling, and fighting.
* Community goodwill and cooperation generated by using a humane way to end the breeding cycle of feral or wild cats.
* Partnerships with others who are committed to finding real, long-term solutions to the free-roaming cat crisis in Maricopa County.
In August 2003 Maricopa County issued a resolution to make Operation FELIX the official means to solve feral cat-related problems in Maricopa County.
Please see FELIX Resolution for full details.
As a member of Operation FELIX, your group will participate in the Trap, Neuter, and Return of feral cats in your nieghborhood.
We invite you to join us in our efforts to control the free-roaming cat problem.
If you join Operation FELIX, AC
·Access to low-cost ($25) spay/neuter surgeries through AC
(We typically charge a $61 fee for every non-Operation FELIX feral cat that is brought to our Centers.
This is what it costs us to impound a cat, maintain it for three days, and euthanize - if unadoptable.)
·Assistance from knowledgeable community volunteers who work with AC
·Access to low-cost trap rentals along with training and information on trapping procedures.
·Access to a limited amount of cat food from our monthly Project Food Bank (for participants who cant afford to feed the cats).
·Prepared forms and flyers to make your job easier.
·Assistance with neighborhood communication.
·Access to educational materials that may help solve other animal-related problems you are experiencing in your neighborhood.
·A possible adoption outlet for tame, adoptable cats and kittens -AC
If your group would like to participate in Operation FELIX, please contact AC
At this orientation, we'll talk about the benefits of TNR and guidelines for participation (upcoming orientation dates).
If you are a citizen who would like to learn more about feral cats, TNR programs, or how you can get involved, contact AZ Cats (602-840-9118) www.azcats.org or Alley Cat www.alleycat.org.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Project Safety Net
[cathouse.gif] Are you finding it a challenge to care for your pet? You're not alone.
If you are thinking of turning your pet in to a shelter, please read on.
AC
Many of these animals are euthanized due to lack of space and homes.
We are asking for your help with this problem.
If you plan to turn in your own animal to the shelter, please reconsider.
AC
· If you are having a behavior problem, call the free behavior helpline at 602-273-6850.
· For low-cost dog training classes, call 602-789-1637 or visit Dog Training.
·If you are moving, call 602-506-PETS for a list of apartments that allow pets or see Pet Friendly and apartments that allow pets.
·If you need help feeding your dog, you may qualify for free pet food.
For more information about our Project Pet Food, see Pet Food Bank.
·For information on free spay/neuter services see Spay/Neuter Programs.
AC
If you have a need that is not described above, please call our Public Programs Department at 602-506-3471 and we will try to come up with a solution.
For full details about our Project Safety Net, please see Project Safety Net.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Project Pet Food
AC
We also recognize that families sometimes experience financial difficulties that make it tough to make ends meet.
That's why we have created Project Pet Food
Project Pet Food is a special animal food bank that offers free pet food to qualified families.
The Project is a partnership between AC
Once you join the program you can visit the animal food bank on the third Saturday of each month.
For full details, see Project Pet Food.
Return to top
[plain_34.gif] Inmate Dog Clean Up Program
The Inmate Dog Clean up Program, a joint effort with the office of Sheriff Joe Arpaio, is a vocational training and therapeutic opportunity for selected trustees.
In a combination of classroom and hands-on training, trustees spend sixty hours bathing and brushing dogs selected from the population at the West Valley AC
The program has three goals:
Vocational training for trustees - trustees learn the basics of bathing and brushing dogs in preparation for entry into the dog grooming industry as assistant groomers (aka bather/brushers).
Compassion training for trustees - trustees learn something about themselves and the importance of considering another beings perspective through training that focuses on:
Understanding the animals point of view (behavior and communication, psychological and physical needs, safe and humane handling, recognizing and reducing stress)
Teamwork, cooperation, and compromise
Staying focused - thorough attention to completing a task, pride in work
Communication - the animal acts as a bridge that allows the inmate to discuss personal experiences and feelings regarding a variety of issues
Benefits to AC
Dogs selected for the program receive one-on-one attention that leads to:
Cleaner, more adoptable dogs
Dogs that are more comfortable
Dogs showing more relaxed personalities - leading to more interest in people
The first session of the Inmate Dog Clean up Program, held in the summer of 2003, was a big success.
For more information, please see:
Arizona Republic article
AC
Return to top
[slice_introducing-our-pet-o.gif] [slice_pet-of-the-week-image.gif]
Site Map What's New
[footer_grad.gif]
Legal Information Privacy/Security Policy
© 2002 Maricopa County
