Nevada State Profile NV Counties state seal Immigrant Wagon Train We are a new Civil War 
We authentically portray 19th century American soldiers 
Our various military units portray the infantry, mounted cavalry, and artillery of both sides of the War Between the States and the Old West periods of the 19th century.
Our civilians work to admirably portray many specialist aspects of these times as well.
They currently have teamsters, musicians, and immigrant families.
A few of their offerings include ladies social events such as Victorian teas, a dance, and sewing bees.
The ACW
We do whatever is needed to help in making a public living history event a success.
Each member of our northern Nevada based group is dedicated to presenting living history of the American Civil War and Western Expansion time periods better, more fairly and accurately through the use of living historical personas than any other organization in Nevada.
We also travel out of state to engage in supporting other American Civil War groups with their battle reenactments.
The members of the Association work together to manage what it takes to enjoy this experience.
The ACW
We try to educate and raise the awareness of the public of the impact and contribution of these soldiers and civilians in the opening of the West, maintenance of our nations union, and the importance of States rights.
We also are working towards presenting the importance of the indigenous peoples of northern Nevada and it's surrounding areas and the contributions of their culture to today's Nevadans.
We're always searching for new ways to show just how folks lived during this fascinating period of our nation's history.
Our presentations cover many angles of the important issues of those wild and heady 19th century days gone by.
Hopefully this knowledge will not be lost.
Ive participated as a living historian with the State of California at Fort Tejon and as a member of other living history organizations in many states as a member of both artillery and infantry units for more than 25 years.
Our members have done movies such as 'Gods and Generals' and the 'Gray Knights'.
This is my second year riding with the cavalry, and I find it continues to be a rewarding and pleasurable learning experience.
There are few things to compare with the faces of children, who have been bored numb with school issued history books, when their eyes light up as history comes alive in front of them.
Historical reenacting's a rewarding hobby, not to mention a lot of fun! Those interested in committing themselves to such a gratifying experience as historical reenacting should contact Trooper Sam "Hardtack" Tyree via email at; grumbles@charter.net or call at (775)246-4043 
The pictures displayed here are from our September, 2002 Old West living history event.
We were asked by the coordinators of the Nevada Annual Immigrant Wagon Train which was traveling from Lovelock, Nevada to Carson City, Nevada to ride as an escort for a long desert portion of their journey as a company of the 1st U.S. Cavalry which had been stationed at Fort McDermott/McDermit in northern Nevada from 1866 through 1881.
It only rarely gets better than this for a living historian.
Greg Rumbles
Last updated: 04/16/03 09:53:09 AM Hit Counter
