State Links: Utah.gov | State Online Services | Agency List | Business.utah.gov | Search.
Division of Administrative Rules.
A Service of the Department of Administrative Services.
[Division of Administrative Rules Home]|[Utah Administrative Code List of Titles]
Rule R65-7.
Horse Racing.
As in effect on September 1, 2003
Table of Contents
* R65-7-1.
Authority.
* R65-7-2.
Definitions.
* R65-7-3.
Commission Powers and Jurisdiction.
* R65-7-4.
Racing Organization.
* R65-7-5.
Occupation Licensing and Registration.
* R65-7-6.
Racing Officials and Commission Racing Personnel.
* R65-7-7.
Entries and Declarations.
* R65-7-8.
Veterinarian Practices, Medication and Testing Procedures.
* R65-7-9.
Running the Race. * R65-7-10.
Objections and Protests; Hearing and Appeals.
* R65-7-11.
General Conduct.
* R65-7-12.
Fire Prevention and Security.
* R65-7-13.
Drugs and Medication Exceptions and Illegal Practices.
* KEY * Date of Enactment or Last Substantive Amendment * Notice of Continuation * Authorizing, Implemented, or Interpreted Law
R65-7-1.
Authority.
Promulgated under authority of Section 4-38-4.
R65-7-2.
Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in these rules unless otherwise indicated.
1.
"Act" means the Utah Horse Regulation Act.
2.
"Added money" means all monies added to the fees paid by the horsemen into the purse for a race.
3.
"Age" of a horse is reckoned as beginning on the first day of January in the year in which the horse is foaled.
4.
"Also Eligible" pertains to (a) a number of eligible horses, properly entered, which were not drawn for inclusion in a race, but which become eligible according to preference or lot if an entry is scratched prior to scratch time deadline; (b) the next preferred nonqualifier for the finals or consolation from a set of elimination trials which will become eligible in the event a finalist is scratched by the stewards for a rule violation or is otherwise eligible if written race conditions permit.
5.
"Arrears" means money past due for entrance fees, jockey fees, or nomination or supplemental fees in nomination races, and therefore in default incidental to these Rules or the conditions of a race.
6.
"Authorized Agent" means a person appointed by a written instrument, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner in whose behalf the Agent will act.
Said instrument must be on file with the Commission and its authorized representatives.
7.
"Bleeder" means a horse which during or following exercise or the race is observed to be shedding blood from one or both nostrils, or the mouth, or hemorrhaging in the lumen of the respiratory tract.
8.
"Breeder" of a horse is the owner or lessee of its dam at the time of breeding.
9.
"Closing" means the time published by the organization after which nominations or entries will not be accepted for a race.
10.
"Commission" means the Utah Horse Racing Commission.
11.
"Commissioner" means a member of the Commission.
12.
"Conditions of a race" are the qualifications which determine a horse's eligibility to enter.
13.
"Day" is a period of 24 hours beginning at midnight.
14.
"Race day" is a day during which horse races are conducted.
15.
"Declaration" means the act of withdrawing an entered horse from a race before the closing of overnight entries.
16.
"Drug (Medication)" means a substance foreign to the normal physiology of the horse.
17.
"Enclosure" means all areas of the property of an organization licensee to which admission can be obtained only by payment of an admission fee or upon presentation of proper credentials and all parking areas designed to serve the facility which are owned or leased by the organization licensee.
18.
"Entry" means a horse made eligible to run in a race.
19.
"Family" means a husband, wife and any dependent children.
20.
"Field" means all horses competing in a race.
21.
"Financial Interest" means an interest that could result in directly or indirectly receiving a pecuniary gain or sustaining a pecuniary loss as a result of ownership or interest in a business entity, or as a result of salary, gratuity, or other compensation or remuneration from any person.
22.
"Foreign Substances" are all substances, except those which exist naturally in the untreated horse at normal physiological concentration, and shall include but not be limited to all narcotics, stimulants, or depressants.
23.
"Foul" means an action by any horse or jockey that hinders or interferes with another horse or jockey during the running of a race.
24.
"Horse" means an equine of any breed and includes a stallion, gelding, mare, colt, filly, spayed mare or ridgeling.
25.
"Horse Racing" means any type of horse racing, including Arabian, Appaloosa, Paint, Pinto, Quarter Horse, and Thoroughbred horse racing.
26.
Horse Racing Types:
A. "Appaloosa Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing in which each participating horse is an Appaloosa horse registered with the Appaloosa Horse Club or any successor organization and mounted by a jockey.
B. "Arabian Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing in which each participating horse is an Arabian horse registered with the Arabian Horse Club Registry of America and approved by the Arabian Horse Racing Association of America or any successor organization, mounted by a jockey, and engaged in races on the flat over a distance of not less than one-quarter mile or more than four miles.
C. "Paint Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing in which each participating horse is a Paint horse registered with the American Paint Horse Association or any successor organization and mounted by a jockey.
D. "Pinto Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing in which each participating horse is a Pinto horse registered with the Pinto Horse Association of America, Inc., or any successor organization and mounted by a jockey.
E. "Quarter Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing where each participating horse is a Quarter Horse registered with the American Quarter Horse Association or any successor organization, mounted by a jockey, and engaged in a race over a distance of less than one-half mile.
F. "Thoroughbred Horse Racing" means the form of horse racing in which each participating horse is a Thoroughbred horse registered with the Jockey Club or any successor organization, mounted by a Jockey, and engaged in races on the flat.
27.
"Inquiry" means the stewards immediate investigation into the running of a race which may result in the disqualification of one or more horses.
28.
"Jockey" means the rider licensed to race.
29.
"Jockey Agent" means a licensed authorized representative of a jockey.
30.
"Lessee" means a licensed owner whose interest in a horse is by virtue of a completed Commission- approved lease form attached to the registration certificate and on file with the Commission.
31.
"Lessor" means the owner of the horse that is leased.
32.
"Maiden" means a horse that has never won a race recognized by the official race records of the particular horse's breed registry.
A maiden which has been disqualified after finishing first is still a maiden.
33.
"Minor" means any individual under 18 years of age.
34.
"Nominator" means the person who nominated the horse as a possible contender in a race.
35.
"Objection" means:
A.
A written complaint made to the Stewards concerning a horse entered in a race and filed not later than two hours prior to the scheduled post time for the first race on the day which the questioned horse is entered;
B.
A verbal claim of foul in a race lodged by the horse's jockey, trainer, owner, or the owners licensed Authorized Agent before the race is declared official.
36.
"Occupation License" means a requirement for any person acting in any capacity within the enclosure during the race meeting.
37.
"Occupation Licensee" means a person who has obtained an occupation license.
38.
"Utah Bred Horse" means a horse that is sired by a stallion standing in Utah.
39.
"Organization License" means a requirement of any person desiring to conduct a race meeting within the state of Utah.
40.
"Organization Licensee" means any person receiving an organization license.
Owner is any person who holds, in whole or in part, any rights title or interest in a horse, or any lessee of a horse who has been duly issued a currently valid owner's license as a person responsible for such horse.
41.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, syndicate, another association or entity.
42.
"Post Position" means the position in the starting gate assigned to the horse for the race.
43.
"Post Time" means the advertised time for the arrival of the horses at the start of the race.
44.
"Protest" means a written complaint, signed by the protester, against any horse which has started in a race and shall be made to the Stewards within 48 hours after the running of the race, except as noted in Subsection R65-7-10(8).
45.
"Race Meeting" means the entire period of time not to exceed 20 calendar days separating any race days for which an organization license has been granted to a person by the Commission to hold horse racing.
46.
"Allowance" means a race in which eligibility and/or the weight to be carried are based upon the horse's past performance over a specified time.
47.
"Handicap" means a race in which the weights to be carried by the entered horses are assigned according to the Racing Secretary's evaluation of each horse's potential for the purpose of equalizing their respective chances of winning.
48.
"Invitational" means a race in which the competing horses are selected by inviting their owners to enter specific horses.
49.
"Match" means a race contest between two horses with prior consent by the Commission under conditions agreed to by the owners.
50.
"Nomination" means a race in which the subscription to a payment schedule nominates and sustains the eligibility of a particular horse.
Nominations must close at least 72 hours before the first post time of the day the race is originally scheduled to be run.
51.
"Progeny" means a race restricted to the offspring of a specific stallion or stallions.
52.
"Purse Race (Overnight)" means any race in which entries close less than 72 hours prior to its running.
53.
"Schooling Race" means a preparatory race for entry qualification in official races which conform to requirements adopted by the Commission.
54.
"Stakes" means a race which is eligible for stakes or "black-type" recognition by the particular breed registry.
55.
"Trials" means a set of races in which eligible horses compete to determine the finalists for a purse in a nominated race.
56.
"Restricted Area" means any area within the enclosure where access is limited to licensees whose occupation requires access.
Those areas which are restricted shall include but not be limited to, the barn area, paddock, test barn, Stewards Tower, race course, or any other area designated restricted by the organization licensee and/or the Commission.
Signs giving notice of restricted access shall be prominently displayed at all entry points.
57.
"Rules" means the rules herein prescribed and any amendments or additions.
58.
"Scratch" means the act of withdrawing an entered horse from a race after the closing of overnight entries.
59.
"Scratch Time" means the deadline set by the organization licensee for the withdrawing of entered horses.
60.
"Starter" means the horse whose stall door of the starting gate opens in front of such horse at the time the starter (the Official) dispatches the horses.
61.
"Subscription" means the act of nominating a horse to a nomination race.
62.
"Week" means a period of seven days beginning at 12:01 a.m., Monday during which races are conducted.
R65-7-3.
Commission Powers and Jurisdiction.
1.
Description and Powers.
The Utah Horse Racing Commission is an administrative body created by Section 4-38-3.
The Commission consists of five members which are appointed by the governor, confirmed by the senate, and whose powers and duties are prescribed by the legislature.
The Commission appoints an executive director who is the administrative head of the agency, and the Commission determines the duties of the executive director.
The Commission shall have supervision of all race meetings held in the State of Utah, and all occupation and organization licensees in the State and all persons on the property of an organization licensee.
2.
Jurisdiction.
Without limitations by specific mention hereof, the stated purposes of the Rules and Regulations hereby promulgated are as follows:
A.
To encourage agriculture and breeding of horses in this State; and
B.
To maintain race meetings held in the State of the highest quality and free of any horse racing practices which are corrupt, incompetent, dishonest or unprincipled; and
C.
To maintain the appearance as well as the fact of complete honesty and integrity of horse racing in this State; and
D.
To generate public revenues.
E. Commission jurisdiction of a race meet commences one hour prior to post time and ends one hour following the last posted race.
3.
Controlling Authority.
The law, the rules, and the orders of the Commission supersede the conditions of a race meeting and govern Thoroughbred, Quarter Horse, Appaloosa, Arabian, Paint and Pinto racing, except in the event it can have no application to a specific type of racing.
In the latter case, the Stewards may enforce rules or conditions of The Jockey Club for Thoroughbred racing, the American Quarter Horse Association for Quarter Horse racing; the Appaloosa Horse Club for Appaloosa racing; the Arabian Horse Racing Association of America for Arabian racing; the American Paint Horse Association for Paint racing; and the Pinto Horse Association of America, Inc., for Pinto racing; if such rules or conditions are not inconsistent with the Laws of the State of Utah and the Rules of the Commission.
4.
Punishment By The Commission.
Violation of the Act and rules promulgated by the Commission, whether or not a penalty is fixed therein, is punishable in the discretion of the Commission by denial, revocation or suspension of any license; by fine; by exclusion from all racing enclosures under the jurisdiction of the Commission; or by any combination of these penalties.
Fines imposed by the Commission shall not exceed $10,000 against individuals for each violation, any Rules or regulations promulgated by the Commission, or any Order of the Commission; or for any other action which, in the discretion of the Commission, is a detriment or impediment to horse racing, according to Subsection 4-38-9(2).
5.
Extension For Compliance.
If a licensee fails to perform an act or obtain required action from the Commission within the time prescribed therefore by these Rules, the Commission, at some subsequent time, may allow the performance of such act or may take the necessary action with the same effect as if the same were performed within the prescribed time.
6.
Notice To Licensee.
Whenever notice is required to be given by the Commission or the Stewards, such notice shall be given in writing by personal delivery to the person to be notified or by mailing, Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested, such notice to the last known address furnished to the Commission; or may be given as is provided for service of process in a civil proceeding in the State of Utah and pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act.
7.
Location For Information Or Filing With Commission.
When information is requested or a notice in any matter is required to be filed with the Commission, such notice shall be delivered to an authorized representative of the Commission at an office of the Commission on or before the filing deadline.
Offices of the Commission are currently located at: State of Utah, Department of Agriculture and Food, 350 North Redwood Road, Salt Lake City, UT 84116.
8.
Public Inspection Of Documents.
All forms adopted by the Commission together with all Rules and other written statements of policy or interpretation; and all final orders, decisions, and opinions, formulated, adopted or used by the Commission in the discharge of its functions are available for public inspection at the above office.
9.
Forms And Instruction.
The following forms and instructions for their use have been adopted by the Commission:
Apprentice Jockey Certificate
Authorized Agent Agreement
Fingerprint Card
Identifier's Daily Report
Lease Agreement
Occupation Licensee Application(s)
Occupation License Renewal Application(s)
Open Claim Certificate
Organization's Daily Report
Organization Licensee Application
Petition for Declaratory Ruling
Petition for Promulgation, Amendment or Repeal of Rule
Petition in and before the Utah Horse Commission
Postmortem Examination Report
Stable Name, Corporation, Partnership or Syndicate Registration Form
Stewards' Daily Report
Stewards' Hearing Notice
Stewards' Hearing Reports
Subpoena (Steward and Commission)
Test Barn Diuretic Approval Form
10.
Forms for substituting petitions for promulgating or repealing of rules, and for requests for declaratory ruling are available at the Utah State Department of Agriculture and Food.
R65-7-4.
Racing Organization.
1.
Allocation Of Racing Dates.
The Commission shall allocate racing dates for the conduct of horse race meetings within this State for such time periods and at such racing locations as the Commission determines will best serve the interests of the people of the State of Utah in accordance with the Utah Horse Act.
Upon a finding by the Commission that the allocation of racing dates for any year is completed, the racing dates so allocated shall be subject to reconsideration or amendment only for conditions unforeseen at the time of allocation.
2.
Application For License And Days To Conduct A Horse Race Meeting.
Every person who intends to conduct a horse race meeting shall file such application with the Commission no later than August 1 of the preceding calendar year.
Any prospective applicant for license and days to conduct a horse race meeting failing to timely file the application for license may be disqualified and its application for license refused summarily by the Commission.
3.
Commission May Demand Information.
The Commission may require any racing organization or prospective racing organization to furnish the Commission with a detailed proposal and disclosures as to its proposed racing program, purse, program, financial projections, racing officials, principals or shareholders, plants, premises, facility, finances, lease arrangements, agreements, contracts, and such other information as the Commission may require to determine the eligibility and qualification of the organization to conduct a race meeting; all in addition to that required in the application form set forth in Subsection R65-7-4(4) and as required by Section 4-38-4.
4.
Application For Organization License.
Any person desiring to conduct a horse race meeting where the public is charged an admission fee shall apply to the Commission for an organization license.
The application shall be made on a form prescribed and furnished by the Commission.
The application shall contain the following information:
A.
The dates on which and location where the applicant intends to conduct the race meeting.
B.
The name and mailing address of the person making the application.
1.
If the applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of the Articles of Incorporation and Bylaws; the names and mailing addresses of all stockholders who own at least 3% of the total stock issued by the corporation, officers, and directors; and the number of shares of stock owned by each.
2.
If the applicant is a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement, and the names and mailing addresses of all general and limited partners with a statement of their respective interest in the partnership.
C. Description of photographic equipment, video equipment, and copies of any proposed lease or purchase contract or service agreement in connection therewith.
D. Copies of any agreements with concessionaires or lessees, together with schedules of rates charged for performance of any service or for sale of any article within the enclosure, whether directly or through the concessionaire.
E. Schedule of admission price(s) to be charged.
F. Applicants must submit balance sheets and profit and loss statements for each of the three fiscal years immediately preceding the application, or for the period of organization if less than three years.
If the applicant has not completed a full fiscal year since its organization, or if it acquires or is to acquire the majority of its assets from a predecessor within the current fiscal year, the financial information shall be given for the current fiscal year.
All financial information shall be accompanied by an unqualified opinion of a Certified Public Accountant; or if the opinion is given with qualifications, the reasons for the qualifications must be stated.
G.
A schedule of stall rent, entry fees, or any other charges to be made to the horsemen or public not mentioned above.
H.
Any other information the Commission may require.
For applicants requesting to conduct non pari- mutuel racing, the licensee fee shall not be less than $25.00.
A separate application upon a form prescribed and furnished by the Commission shall be filed for each race meeting which such person proposes to conduct.
The application, if made by a person, shall be signed and verified under oath by the person; and if made by more than one person or by a partnership, shall be signed and verified under oath by at least two of the persons or members of the partnership; and if made by an association, a corporation, or any other entity, shall be signed by the President, attested to by the Secretary under the seal of such association or corporation, if it has a seal, and verified under oath by one of the signing officers.
No person shall own any silent or undisclosed interest in any entity requesting an organization license.
No organization license shall be issued to any applicant that fails to comply with provisions of this Rule.
No incomplete license application shall be considered by the Commission.
I.
In considering the granting or denying of all organization's application for a license to conduct horse racing with the non pari-mutuel system of wagering, the following criteria, standards, and guides should be considered by the Commission:
1.
Public Interest
a.
Safety
b. Morals
c. Security
d. Municipal Comments
e. Revenues: State and Local
2.
Track Location
a.
Traffic Flow
b. Support Services (i.e., hotels, restaurants, etc.)
c. Labor Supply
d.
Public Services (i.e., police, fire, etc.)
e. Proximity to Competition
3.
Number of Tracks Running or Making Application
a.
Size
b. Type of Racing
c. Days
4.
Adequacy of Track Facilities
5.
Experience in Racing of Applicant and Management
a.
Length
b. Type
c. Success/Failure
6.
Financial Qualifications of Applicant, Applicant's Partners, Officers, Associates, and Shareholders ( To Include Contract Services)
a.
Financial History
(1) Records
(2) Net Worth
7.
Qualifications of Applicant, Applicant's Partners, Officers, Associates, and Shareholders (To Include Contract Services)
(1) Arrest Record
(2) Conviction Record
(3) Litigation Record (Civil/Criminal)
(4) Law Enforcement Intelligence
8.
Official Attitude of Local Government Involved
9.
Anticipated Effect Upon Breeding and Horse Industry in Utah
10.
Effect on Saturation of Non pari-Mutuel Market
11.
Anticipated Effect upon State's Economy
a.
General Economy
(1) Tourism
(2) Employment
(3) Support Industries
b. Government Revenue
(1) Tax (Direct/Indirect)
(2) Income (Direct/Indirect)
12.
Attitude of Local Community Involved
13.
The Written Attitude of Horse Industry Associations
14.
Experience and Credibility of Consultants, Advisors, and Professionals
a.
Feasibility
b. Credibility and Integrity of Feasibility Study
15.
Financial and Economic Integrity of Financial Plan
(1) Equity
a.
Source
b. Amount
c. Position
d. Type
(2) Debt
a.
Source
b. Amount
c.
Terms
d. Repayment
(3) Equity to Debt Ratio
a.
Integrity of Financing Plan
(1) Identity of Participants
(2) Role of Participants
(3) History of Participants
(4) Law Enforcement Intelligence
16.
Apparent or Non-Apparent Hope of Financial Success
5.
List Of Shareholders.
Each organization shall, if a corporation or partnership, maintain a current list of shareholders and the number of shares held by each; and such list shall be available for inspection upon demand by the Commission or its representatives.
The organization shall immediately inform the Commission of any change of corporate officers or directors, general or managing partners, or of any change in shareholders; provided, however, that if the organization is a publicly-held entity, it shall disclose the names and addresses of shareholders who own 3% of the outstanding shares of the organization.
The organization shall immediately notify the Commission of all stock options, tender offers, and any anticipated stock offerings.
The Commission may refuse to issue a license to, or suspend the license of, any organization which fails to disclose the real name of any shareholders.
6.
Denial Of License.
The Commission may deny a license to conduct a horse racing meeting when in its judgment it determines the proposed meeting is not in the public interest, or fails to serve the purposes of the Utah Horse Act, or fails to meet any requirements of Utah State law or the Commission's rules.
The Commission shall refuse to issue a license to any applicant who fails to provide the Commission with evidence of its ability to meet its estimated financial obligations for the conduct of the meeting.
7.
Duty Of Licensed Organization.
Each organization shall observe and enforce the rules of the Commission.
The license is granted on the condition that the organization, its officials, its employees and its concessionaires shall obey all decisions and orders of the Commission.
The organization shall not allow any wagering within the enclosure of the racing facility which might be construed as being in violation of the Laws of the State of Utah.
8.
Conditions Of A Race Meeting.
The organization may impose conditions for its race meeting as it may deem necessary; provided, however, that such conditions may not conflict with any requirements of Utah State Law or the Rules, Regulations and Orders of the Commission.
Such conditions shall be published in the Condition Book or otherwise made available to all licensees participating in its race meeting.
A copy of the conditions and nomination race book shall be published no later than 45 days prior to the commencement of the race meeting.
A proof of such conditions and nomination race book shall be filed with the Commission no later than 45 days prior to printing.
The conditions and nomination race book is subject to the approval of the Commission.
The organization may impose requirements, qualifications, requisites, and track rules for its race meeting as it may deem necessary; provided such requirements, qualifications, and track rules do not conflict with Utah State Law or the Rules, Regulations, and Orders of the Commission.
Such information shall be published in the Condition Book, posted on the organization's bulletin boards, or otherwise made available to all licensees participating at its race meeting.
All requirements, qualifications, requisites or track rules imposed by the organization require prior review and approval by the Commission, which reserves the right of final decision in all matters pertaining to the conditions of a race meeting.
9.
Right Of Commission To Information.
The organization may be asked to furnish the Commission, on forms approved by the Commission, a daily itemized report of the receipts of attendance, parking, concessions, commissions, and any other requested information.
The organization shall also provide a corrected official program, completed race results charts approved by the Commission, and any other information the Commission may require.
Such daily reports shall be filed with the Commission within 72 hours of the race day.
10.
Duty To Compile Official Program.
The organization shall compile an official program for each racing day which shall contain the names of the horses which are to run in each race together with their respective post positions, post time for first race, age, color, sex, breeding, jockey, trainer, owners or stable name, racing colors, weight carried, conditions of the race, the order in which each race shall be run, the distance to be run, the value of each race, a list of Racing Officials and track management personnel, and any other information the Commission may require.
The Commission may direct the organization to publish in the program any other information and notices to the public as it deems necessary.
11.
Duty To Maintain Racing Records.
The organization shall maintain a complete record of all races of all authorized race meetings of the same type of racing being conducted by the organization, and such records shall be maintained and retained for a period of five years.
This requirement may be met by race records of Triangle Publications, the American Quarter Horse Association, the Appaloosa Horse Club, the American Paint Horse Association, other breed registry associations' racing records department, or other racing publications approved by the Commission.
12.
Horsemen's Bookkeeper.
The organization shall employ a Horsemen's Bookkeeper who shall maintain records as the organization and Commission shall direct.
The records shall include the name, address, social security or federal identification number, and the state or country of residence of each horse owner, trainer, or jockey participating at the race meeting who has funds due or on deposit in the horseman's account.
The Horsemen's Bookkeeper shall keep the riding accounts of the jockeys and shall disburse the received fees to the proper claimants.
It shall be the duty of the Horsemen's Bookkeeper to receive and disburse the purses of each race and all stakes, entrance money, jockey fees, and other monies that properly come into his possession, and make disbursements within 48 hours of receipt of notification from the testing laboratory that drug tests have cleared unless an appeal or protest has been filed with the Stewards or the Commission.
The Horsemen's Bookkeeper may accept monies due belonging to other organizations or recognized meetings, provided prompt return is made to the organization to which the money is due; except upon written request, the Horsemen's Bookkeeper shall, within 30 days after the meeting, disburse all monies to the persons entitled to receive the same.
The Horsemen's Bookkeeper shall maintain a file of all required statements of partnerships, syndicates, corporations; assignments of interest; lease agreements; and registrations of authorized agents.
All records and monies of the Horsemen's Bookkeeper shall be kept separate and apart from any other of the organization and are subject to inspection by the Commission at any time.
13.
Accounting Practices And Responsibility.
The organization and its managing officers shall ensure that all purse monies, disbursements, and appropriate nomination race monies are available to make timely distribution in accordance with the Act, the Rules and Regulations of the Commission, the organization rules, and race conditions.
Copies of all nomination payment race contracts, agreements, and conditions shall be submitted to the Commission and related reporting requirements fulfilled as specified by the Commission.
Subject to approval of the Commission, the organization shall maintain on a current basis a bookkeeping and accounting program under the guidance of a Certified Public Accountant.
The Commission may require periodic audits to determine that the organization has funds available to meet those distributions for the purposes required by the Act, the Rules and Regulations of the Commission, the conditions and nomination race program of the race meeting, and the obligations incurred in the daily operation of the race meeting.
Annually, the organization shall file a copy of all tax returns, a balance sheet, and a profit and loss statement.
14.
Electronic Photo Finish Device.
All organizations shall install and maintain in good service an electronic photo finish device for photographing the finishes of all races and recording the time of each horse in hundredths of a second, when applicable, to assist the placing judges and the Stewards in determining the finishing positions and time of the horses.
Prior to first use, the electronic photo finish device must be approved by the Commission; and a calibration report must be filed with the Commission by January 1 of each year.
A photograph of each finish shall be promptly posted for public view in at least one conspicuous place in the public enclosure.
15.
Videotape Recording Of Races.
All organizations shall install and operate a system to provide a videotape recording of each race so that such recording clearly shows the position and action of the horses and jockeys at close enough range to be easily discernible.
A video monitor shall be located in the Stewards' Tower to assist in reviewing the running of the races.
Prior to first use, the videotape recording system and location and placement of its equipment must be approved by the Commission.
Every race other than a race run solely on a straight course may be recorded by use of at least two cameras to provide panoramic and head-on views of the race.
Races run solely on the straight course shall be recorded by the use of at least one camera to provide a head-on view.
Except with prior approval of the Commission, all organizations shall maintain an auxiliary videotape recording camera and player in case of breakdown and/or malfunction of a primary videotape recording camera or player.
16.
Identification Of Photo Finish Photographs And Videotape Recordings.
All photo finish photographs and video-tape recordings required by these Rules shall be identified by indicating thereon, the date, number of the race, and the name of the racetrack at which the race is held.
17.
Altering Official Photographs Or Recordings.
No person shall cut, mutilate, alter or change any photo finish photograph or videotape recording for the purpose of deceit or fraud of any type.
18.
Preservation Of Official Photographs And Recordings.
All organizations shall preserve all photographic negatives and videotape recordings of all races for at least 180 days after the close of their meeting.
Upon request of the Commission, the organization shall furnish the Commission with a clear, positive print of any photograph of any race, or a kinescope print or copy of the videotape recording of any race.
19.
Viewing Room Required.
The organization shall maintain a viewing room for the purpose of screening the videotape recording of the races for viewing by Racing Officials, jockeys, trainers, owners, and other interested persons authorized by the Stewards.
20.
Office Space For The Commission.
The organization shall provide within the enclosure adequate office space for use by the Commission and its authorized representatives, and shall provide such necessary office furniture and utilities as may be required for the conduct of the Commission's business and the collection of the public revenues at such organization's meetings.
21.
Duty To Receive Complaints.
The organization shall maintain a place where written complaints or claims of violations (objections) of racetrack rules, regulations, and conditions; Commission Rules and Regulations; or Utah State Laws may be filed.
A copy of any written complaint or claim filed with the organization shall be filed by the organization with the Commission or Commission representatives within 24 hours of receipt of the complaint or claim.
22.
Bulletin Boards Required.
The organization shall erect and maintain a glass enclosed bulletin board close to the Racing Secretary's Office in a place where access is granted to all licensees, upon which all official notices of the Commission shall be posted.
The organization shall also erect and maintain a glass enclosed bulletin board in the grandstand area where access is granted to all race day patrons, upon which all official notices of the Commission shall be posted.
23.
Communication Systems Required.
The organization shall install and maintain in good service a telephonic communication system between the Stewards' stand, racing office, jockey room, paddock, testing barn, starting gate, video camera locations, and other designated places.
The organization shall also install and maintain in good service a public address communication system for the purpose of announcing the racing program, the running of the races, and any public service notices, as well as maintaining communications with the barn area for the purpose of paddock calls and the paging of horsemen.
24.
Ambulance Service.
Subject to the approval of the Commission, the organization shall provide the services of an approved medical ambulance and its properly qualified attendants at all times during the running of the race program at its meeting and, except with prior permission of the Commission, during the hours the organization permits the use of its race course for training purposes.
The organization shall also provide the service of a horse ambulance during the same hours.
A means of communication shall be provided by the organization between a staffed observation point (Stewards' Tower and Clocker's Stand) for the race course and the place where the required ambulances and their attendants are posted for prompt response in the event of accident to any person or horse.
In the event an emergency necessitates the departure of a required ambulance, the race course shall be closed until an approved ambulance is again available within the enclosure.
25.
Safety Of Race Course And Premises.
The organization shall take cognizance of any complaint regarding the safety or uniformity of its race course or premises, and shall maintain in safe condition the race course and all rails and other equipment required for the conduct of its races.
26.
Starting Point Markers And Distance Poles.
Permanent markers must be located at each starting point to be utilized in the organization's racing program.
The starting point markers and distance poles must be of a size and in a position where they can be seen clearly from the stewards' stand.
The starting point markers and distance poles shall be marked with the appropriate distance and be the following colors: TABLE
1/16 poles . . . black and white horizontal stripes 1/8 poles . . . green and white horizontal stripes 1/4 poles . . . red and white horizontal stripes 220 yards . . . green and white horizontal stripes 250 yards . . . blue 300 yards . . . yellow 330 yards . . . black and white horizontal stripes 350 yards . . . red 400 yards . . . black 440 yards . . . red and white horizontal stripes 550 yards . . . black and white horizontal stripes 660 yards . . . green and white horizontal stripes 770 yards . . . black and white horizontal stripes 870 yards . . . blue and white horizontal stripes
27.
Grade And Distance Survey.
A survey by a licensed surveyor of the race course, including all starting chutes, indicating the grade and measurement of distances to be run must be filed with the Commission prior to the first race meeting.
28.
Physical Requirements For Non pari-Mutuel Racing Facility.
In order for an organization to be granted a license to conduct non pari-mutuel racing, the facility shall meet the following physical requirements:
A.
A regulation track shall be a straightaway course of 440 yards in length.
The straightaway shall connect with an oval not less than one-half mile in circumference; except that the width may vary according to the number of horses started in a field, but a minimum of twenty feet shall be allowed for the first two horses with an additional five feet for each added starter.
B.
The inner and outer rails shall extend the entire length of the straightaway and around the connecting oval; it shall be at least thirty inches and not more than forty-two inches in height.
A racetrack not approved by the Commission prior to January 1, 1993, shall otherwise have inner and outer rails of at least thirty-eight inches (38") and not more than forty-two inches in height.
It shall be constructed of metal not less than two inches in diameter, wood not less than two inches in thickness and six inches in width, or other construction material approved by the Commission.
Whatever construction material is used must provide for the safety of both horse and rider.
It must be painted white and maintained at all times.
C. Stabling facilities should be adequate for the number of horses to be on hand for the meet.
In no case will a track with less than 200 stalls be acceptable, without Utah Horse Commission approval.
D. Stands for Stewards and Timers shall be located exactly on the finish line and provide a commanding and uninterrupted view of the entire racing strip.
E.
The paddock shall be spacious enough to provide adequate safety.
The jockey's room shall be in or adjacent to the paddock enclosure and shall be equipped with separate but equal complete sanitation facilities including showers for both male and female riders.
This area must be fenced to keep out unauthorized persons and provide maximum security and safety.
The fence shall be at least four feet high of chain link, v-mesh or similar construction.
F.
A Test Barn with a minimum of two stalls shall be provided for purpose of collecting urine specimens.
The Test Barn and a walking ring large enough to accommodate several horses cooling out at the same time shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least eight feet high of chain link, v-mesh or similar construction.
There shall be only one entrance into the Test Barn enclosure which shall remain locked or guarded at all times.
Provisions shall be made in this area for an office to accommodate the needs of the Official Veterinarian and from which he can observe the stalls and the entrance into the Test Barn enclosure.
The organization shall provide facilities for the immediate cooling and freezing of all urine specimens, and shall make provisions for the specimens to be shipped to the laboratory packed in dry ice.
G.
A grandstand or bleachers shall be provided for the spectators and shall provide for the comfort and safety of the spectators.
Facilities must include rest rooms and a public water supply.
29.
Organization As The Insurer Of The Race Meeting.
Approval of a race meeting by the Commission does not establish said Commission as the insurer or guarantor of the safety or physical condition of the organization's facilities or purse of any race.
The organization does thereby agree to indemnify, save and hold harmless the Utah Horse Commission from any liability, if any, arising from unsafe conditions of track facilities or grandstand and default in payment of purses.
The organization shall provide the Commission with a certificate of adequate liability insurance.
R65-7-5.
Occupation Licensing and Registration.
1.
Occupation Licenses.
No person required to be licensed shall participate in a race meeting without their holding a valid license authorizing that participation.
Licenses shall be obtained prior to the time such persons engage in their vocations upon such racetrack grounds at any time during the calendar year for which the organization license has been issued.
A.
A person whose occupation requires acting in any capacity within any area of an enclosure shall pay the required fee and procure the appropriate license or licenses.
B.
A person acting in any of the following capacities shall pay the required fee and procure the appropriate license or licenses: (A list of all required fees shall be available at the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food.)
1.
Owner/Trainer Combination
2.
Owner
3.
Trainer
4.
Assistant Trainer
5.
Jockey
6.
Veterinarian
7.
Jockey Room Attendant
8.
Paddock Attendant
9.
Pony Rider
10.
Concessionaire
11.
Valet
12.
Groom
C.
A person whose license-identification badge is lost or destroyed shall procure a replacement license-identification badge and shall pay the required fee.
D.
The date of payment of all required fees as recorded by the Commission shall be the effective date of issuance of a continuous occupation license or registration shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
A license renewal shall be on an annual basis beginning January 1.
E.
All license applicants may be required to provide two complete sets of fingerprints on forms provided by or acceptable to the Commission and pay the required fee for processing the fingerprint cards through State and Federal Law Enforcement Agencies.
If the fingerprints are of a quality not acceptable for processing, the licensee may be required to be refingerprinted.
F.
All applicants for occupation licenses must be a minimum of 16 years of age.
However, this shall not preclude dependent children under the age of 16 from working for their parents or guardian if said parents or guardian are licensed as a trainer or assistant trainer and permission has been obtained from the organization licensee.
A trainer or his authorized representative signing a Test Barn Sample Tag must be licensed and a minimum of 18 years of age.
2.
Employment Of Unlicensed Person.
No organization, owner, trainer or other licensee acting as an employer within the enclosure at an authorized race meeting shall employ or harbor within the enclosure any person required to be licensed by the Commission until such organization, owner, trainer, or other employer determines that such person required to be licensed has been issued a valid license by the Commission.
No organization shall permit any owner, trainer, or jockey to own, train, or ride on its premises during a recognized race meeting unless such owner, trainer, or jockey has received a license to do so from the Commission.
The organization or prospective employer may demand for inspection the license of any person participating or attempting to participate at its meeting, and the organization may demand for inspection the documents relating to any horse on its grounds.
3.
Notice Of Termination.
Any organization, owner, trainer, or other licensee acting as an employer within the enclosure at an authorized race meeting shall be responsible for the immediate notification to the Commission and the organization conducting the race meeting of a termination of employment of a licensee.
The employer shall make every effort to obtain the license badge from the employee and deliver the license badge to the Commission.
4.
Application For License.
An applicant for license shall apply in writing on the application forms furnished by the Commission.
5.
License Identification Badge Requirements.
The license identification badge may consist of the following information concerning the licensee:
A. Full Name
B. Permanent Address
C. License Capacity
D. Date of Issue
E. Passport-Type Color Photograph
F. Social Security Number
G. Date of Birth
All license identification badges may be color coded as to capacity of occupation and eligibility for access to restricted areas.
All license holders, except jockeys riding in a race, must wear a current identification badge while present in restricted areas of the enclosure or as otherwise specified in Subsection R65-7-5(1).
6.
Honoring Official Credentials.
Credentials issued by the Commission may be honored for admission at all gates and entrances and to all places within the enclosure.
Automobiles with vehicle decals issued by the Commission to its members and employees shall be permitted ingress and egress at any point.
Credentials issued by the National Association of State Racing Commissioners to its members, past members, and staff shall be honored by the organization for admission into the public enclosure when presented therefore by such persons.
7.
License Subject To Conditions And Agreements.
A. Every license is subject to the conditions and agreements contained in the application therefore and to the Statutes and Rules.
B. Every license issued to a licensee by the Commission remains the property of the Commission.
C. Possession of a license does not, as such, confer any right upon the holder thereof to employment at or participation in a race.
D.
The Commission may restrict, limit, place conditions on, or endorse for additional occupational classes, any license, R65-7-5(9).
8.
Changes In Application Information.
Each licensee or applicant for license shall file with the Commission his permanent and his current mailing address and shall report in writing to the Commission any and all changes in application information.
9.
Grounds For Denial, Refusal, Suspension Or Revocation Of License.
The Commission, in addition to any other valid ground or reason, may deny, refuse to issue, suspend or revoke an occupation license for any person:
A. Who has been convicted of a felony of this State, any other state, or the United States of America; or
B. Who has been convicted of violating any law regarding gambling or controlled dangerous substance of this State, any other state, or of the United States of America; or
C. Who is unqualified to perform the duties required of the applicant; or
D. Who fails to disclose or states falsely any information required in the application; or
E. Who has been found guilty of a violation of any provision of the Utah Horse Act or of the Rules and Regulations of the Commission; or
F. Whose license for any racing occupation or activity requiring a license has been or is currently suspended, revoked, refused or denied for just cause in any other competent racing jurisdiction; or
G. Who has been or is currently excluded from any racing enclosure by a competent racing jurisdiction.
10.
Examinations.
The Commission may require the applicant for any license to demonstrate his knowledge, qualifications, and proficiency for the license applied for by such examination as the Commission may direct.
11.
Refusal Without Prejudice.
A refusal to issue a license (as distinguished from a denial of a license) to an applicant by the Commission at any race meeting is without prejudice; and the applicant so refused may reapply for a license at any subsequent or other race meeting, or he may appeal such refusal to the Commission for hearing upon his qualifications and fitness for the license.
12.
Hearing After Denial Of License.
Any person who has had his license denied may petition the Commission to reopen the case and reconsider its decision upon a sufficient showing that there is now available evidence which could not, with the exercise of reasonable diligence, have been previously presented to the Commission.
Any such petition must be filed with the Commission no later than 30 days after the effective date of the Commission's decision in the matter.
Any person who has been denied a license by the Commission may not refile a similar application for license until one year from the effective date of the decision to deny the license.
13.
Financial Responsibility Of Applicants.
Applicants for license as horse owner or trainer must submit satisfactory evidence of their financial ability to care for and maintain the horses owned and/or trained by them when such evidence is requested by the Commission.
14.
Physical Examination.
The Commission or the Stewards may require that any jockey be examined at any time, and the Commission or the Stewards may refuse to allow any jockey to ride until he has successfully passed such examination.
15.
Qualifications For Jockey.
No person under 16 years of age shall be granted a jockey's license.
A person who has never ridden in a race at a recognized meeting shall not be granted a license as jockey unless he has satisfactorily worked a horse from the starting gate in company, before the Stewards or their representatives.
Upon the recommendation of the Stewards, the Commission may issue a jockey's license granting permission to such person for the purpose of riding in not more than four races to establish the qualifications and ability of such person for the license.
Subsequently, the Stewards may recommend the granting of a jockey's license.
16.
Jockey Agent.
A jockey agent is the authorized representative of a jockey if he is registered with the Stewards and licensed by the Commission as the Jockey's representative.
No jockey agent shall represent more than two jockeys at the same time.
17.
Workers' Compensation Act Compliance.
No person may be licensed as a trainer, owner, or in any other capacity in which such person acts as the employer of any other licensee at any authorized race meeting, unless his liability for Workers' Compensation has been secured in accordance with the Workers' Compensation Act of the State of Utah and until evidence of such security for liability is provided the Commission.
Should any such required security for liability for Workers' Compensation be canceled or terminated, any license held by such person shall be automatically suspended and shall be grounds for revocation of the license.
If a license applicant certifies that he has no employees that would subject him to liability for Workers' Compensation, he may be licensed, but only for the period he has no employees.
18.
Program Trainer Prohibited.
No licensed trainer, for the purpose of avoiding his responsibilities or insurance requirements as set forth in these Rules, shall place any horse in the care or attendance of any other trainer.
19.
Qualifications For License As Horse Owner.
No person may be licensed as a horse owner who is not the owner of record of a properly registered race horse which he intends to race in Utah and which is in the care of a licensed trainer, or who does not have an interest in such race horse as a part owner or lessee, or who is not the responsible managing owner of a corporation, syndicate or partnership which is the legal owner of such horse.
20.
Horse Ownership By Lease.
Horses may be raced under lease provided a completed Utah Horse Commission, breed registry, approved pari-mutuel or other lease form acceptable to the Commission, is attached to the Registration Certificate and on file with the Commission.
The lessor(s) and lessee must be licensed as horse owners.
No lessor shall execute a lease for the purpose of avoiding insurance requirements.
21.
Statements Of Corporation, Partnership, Syndicate Or Other Association Or Entity.
All organizational documents of a corporation, partnership, syndicate or other association or entity, and the relative proportion of ownership interest, the terms of sales with contingencies, arrangements, or leases, shall be filed with the Horsemen's Bookkeeper of the organization and with the Commission.
The above-said documents shall declare to whom winnings are payable, in whose names the horses shall be run, and the name of the licensed person who assumes all responsibilities as the owner.
The part owner of any horse shall not assign his share or any part of it without the written consent of the other partners, and such consent shall be filed with the Horsemen's Bookkeeper and the Commission.
A person or persons conducting racing operations as a corporation, partnership, syndicate or other association or entity shall register the information required by Rules in this Article and pay the required fee(s) for the appropriate entity.
22.
Stable Name Registration.
A person or persons electing to conduct racing operations by use of a stable name shall register the stable name and shall pay the required fee.
A.
The applicant must disclose the identity or identities of all persons comprising the stable name.
B. Changes in identities must be reported immediately to and approval obtained from the Commission.
C.
No person shall register more than one stable name at the same time nor use his real name for racing purposes so long as he has a registered stable name.
D.
Any person who has registered under a stable name may cancel the stable name after he has given written notice to the Commission.
E.
A stable name may be changed by registering a new stable name and by paying the required Fee.
F.
No person shall register a stable name which has been registered by any other person with any organization conducting a recognized race meeting.
G.
A stable name shall be clearly distinguishable from that of another registered stable name.
H.
The stable name, and the name of the owner or managing owner, shall be published in the official program.
If the stable name consists of more than one person, the official program will list the name of the managing owner along with the phrase "et al."
I.
If a partnership, corporation, syndicate, or other association or entity is involved in the identity comprising a stable name, the rules covering a partnership, corporation, syndicate or other association or entity must be complied with and the usual fees paid therefore in addition to the fees for the registration of a stable name.
23.
Ownership Licensing Required.
The ownership licensing procedures required by the Commission must be completed prior to the horse starting in a race and shall include all registrations, statements and payment of fees.
24.
Knowledge Of Rules.
Every licensee, in order to maintain their qualifications for any license held by them, shall be familiar with and knowledgeable of the rules, including all amendments.
Every licensee is presumed to know the rules.
25.
Certain Prohibited Licenses.
Commission-licensed jockeys, veterinarians, organizations' security personnel, vendors, and such other licensees designated by the stewards with approval of the Commission, shall not hold any other license.
The Commission may refuse to issue a license to a person whose spouse holds a license and which, in the opinion of the Commission, would create a conflict of interest.
R65-7-6.
Racing Officials and Commission Racing Personnel.
1.
Racing Officials.
The racing officials of a race meeting, unless otherwise ordered by the Commission, are as follows: the stewards, the associate judges, the placing judges, the paddock judge, the patrol judges, the starter, the identifier/tattooer, and the racing secretary.
No racing official may serve in that capacity during any race meeting at which is entered a horse owned by them or by a member of their family or in which they have any financial interest.
Being the lessee or lessor of a horse shall be construed as having a financial interest.
2.
Responsibility To The Commission.
The racing officials shall be strictly responsible to the Commission for the performance of their respective duties, and they shall promptly report to the Commission or its stewards any violation of the rules of the Commission coming to their attention or of which they have knowledge.
Any racing official who fails to exercise due diligence in the performance of his duties shall be relieved of his duties by the stewards and the matter referred to the Commission.
3.
Racing Officials Subject To Approval.
Every racing official is subject to prior approval by the Commission before being eligible to act as a racing official at the meeting.
At the time of making application for an organization license, the organization shall nominate the racing officials other than the racing officials appointed by the Commission; and after issuance of license to the organization, there shall be no substitution of any racing official except with approval of the stewards or the Commission.
4.
Racing Officials Appointed By The Commission.
The Commission shall appoint the following racing officials for a race meeting: The board of three stewards and the identifier/tattooer.
The Commission may appoint from the approved stewards list one steward to serve as state steward.
5.
Racing Personnel Employed By The Commission.
The Commission shall employ the services of the licensing person for a race meeting.
6.
General Authority Of Stewards.
The stewards have general authority and supervision over all licensees and other persons attendant on horses, and also over the enclosures of any recognized meeting.
Stewards have the power to interpret the Rules and to decide all questions not specifically covered by them.
The stewards shall have the power to determine all questions arising with reference to entries, eligibility and racing; and all entries, declarations and scratches shall be under the supervision of the stewards.
The stewards shall be strictly responsible to the Commission for the conduct of the race meeting in every particular.
7.
Vacancy Among Racing Officials.
Where a vacancy occurs among the racing officials, the stewards shall fill the vacancy immediately.
Such appointment is effective until the vacancy is filled in accordance with the rules.
8.
Jurisdiction Of Stewards To Suspend Or Fine.
The stewards' jurisdiction in any matter commences 72 hours before entries are taken for the first day of racing at the meeting and extends until 30 days after the close of such meeting.
In the event a dispute or controversy arises during a race meeting which is not settled within the stewards' thirty-day jurisdiction, then the authority of the stewards may be extended by authority of the Commission for the period necessary to resolve the matter, or until the matter is referred or appealed to the Commission.
The stewards may suspend for not more than one year per violation the license of anyone whom they have the authority to supervise; or they may impose a fine not to exceed $2,500 per violation; or they may exclude from all enclosures in this state; or they may suspend and fine and/or exclude.
All such suspensions, fines, or exclusions shall be reported immediately to the Commission.
The Stewards may suspend a horse from participating in races if the horse has been involved in violation(s) of the rules promulgated by the Commission or the provisions of the Utah Horse Act under the following circumstances:
A.
A horse is a confirmed bleeder as determined by the official veterinarian, and the official veterinarian recommends to the stewards that the horse be suspended from participation.
B.
A horse is involved with:
i.
Any violation of medication laws and rules;
ii.
Any suspension or revocation of an occupation license by the stewards or the Commission or any racing jurisdiction recognized by the Commission; or
iii.
Any violation of prohibited devices, laws, and rules.
9.
Referral To The Commission.
The stewards may refer with or without recommendation any matter within their jurisdiction to the Commission.
10.
Payment Of Fines.
All fines imposed by the stewards or Commission shall be due and payable to the Commission within 72 hours after imposition, except when the imposition of such fine is ordered stayed by the stewards, the Commission, or a court having jurisdiction.
However, when a fine and suspension is imposed by the stewards or Commission, the fine shall be due and payable at the time the suspension expires.
Nonpayment of the fine when due and payable may result in immediate suspension pending payment of the fine.
11.
Stewards' Reports And Records.
The stewards shall maintain a record which shall contain a detailed, written account of all questions, disputes, protests, complaints, and objections brought to the attention of the stewards.
The stewards shall prepare a daily report concerning their race day activities which shall include fouls and disqualifications, disciplinary hearings, fines and suspensions, conduct of races, interruptions and delays, and condition of racing facility.
The stewards shall submit the signed original of their report and record to the Executive Director of the Commission within 72 hours of the race day.
12.
Power To Order Examination Of Horse.
The stewards shall have the power to have tested, or cause to be examined by a qualified person, any horse entered in a race, which has run in a race, or which is stabled within the enclosure; and may order the examination of any ownership papers, certificates, documents of eligibility, contracts or leases pertaining to any horse.
13.
Calling Off Race.
When, in the opinion of the stewards, a race(s) cannot be conducted in accordance with the rules of the Commission, they shall cancel and call off such race(s).
In the event of mechanical failure or interference during the running of a race which affects the horses in such race, the Stewards may declare the race a "no contest."
A race shall be declared "no contest" if no horse covers the course.
14.
Substitution Of Jockey Or Trainer.
A.
In the event a jockey who is named to ride a mount in a race is unable to fulfill his engagement and is excused by the stewards, the trainer of the horse may select a substitute jockey; or, if no substitute jockey is available, the stewards may scratch the horse from the race.
However, the responsibility to provide a jockey for an entered horse remains with the trainer; and the scratching of said horse by the stewards shall not be grounds for the refund of any nomination, sustaining, penalty payments, or entry fees.
B.
In the absence of the trainer of the horse, the stewards may place the horse in the temporary care of another trainer of their selection; however, such horse may not be entered or compete in a race without the approval of the owner and the substitute trainer.
The substitute trainer must sign the entry card.
15.
Stewards' List.
The stewards may maintain a stewards' list of those horses which, in their opinion, are ineligible to be entered in any race because of poor or inconsistent performance due to the inability to maintain a straight course, or any other reason considered a hazard to the safety of the participants.
Such horse shall be refused entry until it has demonstrated to the stewards or their representatives that it can race safely and can be removed from the stewards' list.
16.
Duties Of The Starter.
The starter shall have complete jurisdiction over the starting gate, the starting of horses, and the authority to give orders not in conflict with the rules as may be required to ensure all participants an equal opportunity to a fair start.
The starter shall appoint his assistants; however, he shall not permit his assistants to handle or take charge of any horse in the starting gate without his expressed permission.
In the event that organization starter assistants are unavailable to head a horse, the responsibility to provide qualified individuals to head and/or tail a horse in the starting gate shall rest with the trainer.
The starter may establish qualification for and maintain a list of such qualified individuals approved by the stewards.
No assistant starter or any individual handling a horse at the starting gate shall in any way impede, whether intentionally or otherwise, the start of the race; nor may an assistant starter or other individual, except the jockey handling the horse at the starting gate, apply a whip or other device in an attempt to load any horse in the starting gate.
No one other than the jockey shall slap, boot, or otherwise attempt to dispatch a horse from the starting gate.
17.
Starter's List.
The starter may maintain a starter's list of all horses which, in his opinion, are ineligible to be entered in any race because of poor or inconsistent performance in the starting gate.
Such horse shall be refused entry until it has demonstrated to the starter or his representatives that it has been satisfactorily schooled in the gates and can be removed from the starter's list.
Such schooling shall be under the direct supervision of the starter or his representatives.
18.
Duties Of The Paddock Judge.
The paddock judge shall supervise the assembling of the horses scheduled to race, the saddling of horses in the paddock, the saddling equipment and changes thereof, the mounting of the jockeys, and their departure for the post.
The paddock judge shall provide a report on saddling equipment to the Stewards at their request.
19.
Duties Of Patrol Judges.
The patrol judges, when utilized, shall be subject to the orders of the stewards and shall report to the stewards all facts occurring under their observation during the running of a race.
20.
Duties Of Placing Judges And Timers.
The placing judges, timers, and/or stewards shall occupy the judges' stand at the time the horses pass the finish line; and their duties shall be to hand time, place the horses in the correct order of finish, and report the results.
In case of a dead heat or a disagreement as to the correct order of finish, the decision of the stewards shall be final.
In placing the horses at the finish, the position of the horses' noses only shall be considered the most forward point of progress.
21.
Duties Of The Clerk Of Scales.
The clerk of scales is responsible for the presence of all jockeys in the jockey's room at the appointed time and to verify that all jockeys have a current Utah jockey's license.
The clerk of scales shall verify the correct weight of each jockey at the time of weighing out and when weighing in, and shall report any discrepancies to the stewards immediately.
In addition, he or she shall be responsible for the security of the jockey's room and the conduct of the jockeys and their attendants.
He or she shall promptly report to the stewards any infraction of the Rules with respect to weight, weighing, riding equipment, or conduct.
He or she shall be responsible for accounting of all data required on the scale sheet and submit that data to the horsemen's bookkeeper at the end of each race day.
22.
Duties Of The Racing Secretary.
The racing secretary shall write and publish conditions of all races and distribute them to horsemen as far in advance of the closing of entries as possible.
He or she shall be responsible for the safekeeping of registration certificates and the return of same to the trainers on request or at the conclusion of the race meeting.
He or she shall record winning races on the form supplied by the breed registry, which shall remain attached to or part of the registration certificate.
The racing secretary shall be responsible for the taking of entries, checking eligibility, closing of entries, selecting the races to be drawn, conducting the draw, posting the overnight sheet, compiling the official program, and discharging such other duties of their office as required by the rules or as directed by the Stewards.
23.
Duties Of Associate Judge.
An associate judge may perform any of the duties which are performed by any racing official at a meeting, provided such duties are assigned or delegated to them by the Commission or by the stewards presiding at that meeting.
24.
Duties Of The Official Veterinarian.
The official veterinarian must be a graduate veterinarian and licensed to practice in the State of Utah.
He or she shall recommend to the stewards any horse that is deemed unsafe to be raced, or a horse that it would be inhumane to allow to race.
He or she shall supervise the taking of all specimens for testing according to procedures approved by the Commission.
He or she shall provide proper safeguards in the handling of all laboratory specimens to prevent tampering, confusion, or contamination.
All specimens collected shall be sent in locked and sealed cases to the laboratory.
He or she shall have the authority and jurisdiction to supervise the practicing licensed veterinarians within the enclosure.
The official veterinarian shall report to the Commission the names of all horses humanely destroyed or which otherwise expire at the meeting, and the reasons therefore.
The official veterinarian may place horses on a veterinarian's list, and may remove from the list those horses which, in their opinion, can satisfactorily compete in a race.
25.
Veterinarian's List.
The official veterinarian may maintain a list of all horses who, in their opinion, are incapable of safely performing in a race and are, therefore, ineligible to be entered or started in a race.
Such horse may be removed from the Veterinarian's List when, in the opinion of the official veterinarian, the horse has satisfactorily recovered the capability of performing in a race.
The reasons for placing a horse on the veterinarian's list shall include the shedding of blood from one or both nostrils following exercise or the performance in a race and the running of a temperature unnatural to the horse.
26.
Duties Of The Identifier.
The identifier shall identify all horses starting in a race.
The identifier shall inspect documents of ownership, eligibility, registration, or breeding as may be necessary to ensure proper identification of each horse eligible to compete at a race meeting provide assistance to the stewards in that regard.
The identifier shall immediately report to the paddock judge and the stewards any horse which is not properly identified or any irregularities reflected in the official identification records.
The identifier shall report to the stewards and to the Commission on general racing practices observed, and perform such other duties as the Commission may require.
The identifier shall report to the racing secretary before the close of the race day business.
R65-7-7.
Entries and Declarations.
1.
Control Over Entries And Declarations.
All entries and declarations are under the supervision of the Stewards or their designee; and they, without notice, may refuse the entries any person or the transfer of entries.
2.
Racing Secretary To Establish Conditions.
The racing secretary may establish the conditions for any race, the allowances or handicaps to be established for specific races, the procedures for the acceptance of entries and declarations, and such other conditions as are necessary to provide and conduct the organization's race meeting.
The racing secretary is responsible for the receipt of entries and declarations for all races.
The racing secretary, employees of their department, or racing officials shall not disclose any pertinent information concerning entries which have been submitted until all entries are closed.
After an entry to a race for which conditions have been published has been accepted by the racing secretary or their delegate, no condition of such race shall be changed, amended or altered, nor shall any new condition for such race be imposed.
3.
Entries.
No horse shall be entered in more than one race on the same day.
No person shall enter or attempt to enter a horse for a race unless such entry is a bona fide entry made with the intention that such horse is to compete in the race for which entry is made except, if racing conditions permit, for entry back in finals or consolations involving physically disabled or dead qualifiers for purse payment purposes.
Entries shall be in writing on the entry card provided by the organization and must be signed by the trainer or assistant trainer of the horse.
Entries made by telephone are valid properly confirmed by the track when signing the entry card.
No horse shall be allowed to start unless the entry card has been signed by the trainer or his assistant trainer.
4.
Determining Eligibility.
Determination of a horse's eligibility, penalty or penalties and the right to allowance or allowances for all races shall be from the date of the horse's last race unless the conditions specify otherwise.
The trainer is responsible for the eligibility of his horse and to properly enter his horse in condition.
In the event the records of the Racing Secretary or the appropriate breed registry do not reflect the horse's most recent starts, the trainer or owner shall accurately provide such information.
If a horse is not eligible under the first condition of any race, he cannot be eligible under subsequent conditions.
If the conditions specify nonwinners of a certain amount, it means that the horse has not won a race in which the winner's share was the specified amount or more.
If the conditions specify nonearners of a stated amount, it means that the horse has not earned that stated amount in any total number of races regardless of the horse's placing.
5.
Entries Survive With Transfer.
All entries and rights of entry are valid and survive when a horse is sold with his engagements duly transferred.
If a partnership agreement is properly filed with the Horsemen's Bookkeeper, subscriptions, entries and rights of entry survive in the remaining partners.
Unless written notice to the contrary is filed with the stewards, the entries, rights of entry, and engagements remain with the horse and are transferred therewith to the new owner.
No entry or right of entry shall become void on the death of the nominator unless the conditions of the race state otherwise.
6.
Horses Ineligible To Start In A Race.
In addition to any other valid ground or reason, a horse is ineligible to start any race if:
A.
Such horse is not registered by The Jockey Club if a Thoroughbred; the American Quarter Horse Association if a Quarter Horse; the Appaloosa Horse Club if an Appaloosa; the Arabian Horse Club Registry of America if an Arabian; the American Paint Horse Association if a Paint; the Pinto Horse Association of America, Inc., if a Pinto; or any successors to any of the foregoing or other registry recognized by the Commission.
B.
The Certificate of Foal Registration, eligibility papers, or other registration issued by the official registry for such horse is not on file with the racing secretary one hour prior to post time for the race in which the horse is scheduled to race.
C.
Such horse has been entered or raced at any recognized race meeting under any name or designation other than the name or designation duly assigned by and registered with the official registry.
D.
The Win Certificate, Certificate of Foal Registration, eligibility papers or other registration issued by the official registry has been materially altered, erased, removed, or forged.
E.
Such horse is ineligible to enter said race, is not duly entered for such race, or remains ineligible to time of starting.
F.
The trainer of such horse has not completed the prescribed licensing procedures required by the Commission before entry and the ownership of such horse has not completed the prescribed licensing procedures prior to the horse starting or the horse is in the care of an unlicensed trainer.
G.
Such horse is owned in whole or in part or trained by any person who is suspended or ineligible for a license or ineligible to participate under the rules of any Turf Governing Authority or Stud Book Registry.
H. Such horse is a suspended horse.
I.
Such horse is on the stewards' list, starter's list, or the veterinarian's list.
J. Except with permission of the stewards and identifier, the identification markings of the horse do not agree with identification as set forth on the registration certificate to the extent that a correction is required from the appropriate breed registry.
K. Except with the permission of the stewards, a horse has not been lip tattooed by a Commission approved tattooer.
L.
The entry of a horse is not in the name of his true owner.
M.
The horse has drawn into the field or has started in a race on the same day.
N. Its age as determined by an examination of its teeth by the official veterinarian does not correspond to the age shown on its registration certificate, such determination by tooth examination to be made in accordance with the current "Official Guide for Determining the Age of the Horse" as adopted by the American Association of Equine Practitioners.
7.
Horses Ineligible To Enter Or Start.
Any horse ineligible to be entered for a race or ineligible to start in any race which is entered or competes in such race, may be scratched or disqualified; and the stewards may discipline any person responsible.
8.
Registration Certificate To Reflect Correct Ownership.
Every certificate of registration, eligibility certificate or lease agreement filed with the organization and its racing secretary to establish the eligibility of a horse to be entered for any race shall accurately reflect the correct and true ownership of such horse, and the name of the owner which is printed on the official program for such horse shall conform to the ownership as declared on the certificate of registration or eligibility certificate.
A stable name may be registered for such owner or ownership with the Commission.
In the event ownership is by syndicate, corporation, partnership or other association or entity, the name of the owner which is printed on the official program for such shall be the responsible managing owner, officer, or partner who assumes all responsibilities as the owner.
9.
Alteration Or Forgery Of Certificate Of Registration.
No person shall alter or forge any win sheet, certificate of registration, certificate of eligibility, or any other document of ownership or registration, no willfully forge or alter the signature of any person required on any such document or entry card.
10.
Declarations And Scratches.
Any trainer or assistant trainer of a horse which has been entered in a race who does not wish such horse to participate in the draw must declare his horse from the race prior to the close of entries.
Any trainer or assistant trainer of a horse which has been drawn into or is also eligible for a race who does not wish such horse to start in the race, must scratch his horse from the race prior to the designated scratch time.
The declaration or scratch of a horse from a race is irrevocable.
11.
Deadline For Arrival Of Entered Horses.
All horses scheduled to compete in a race must be present within the enclosure no later than 30 minutes prior to their scheduled race without stewards' approval.
Horses not within the enclosure by their deadline may be scratched and the trainer subject to fine and/or suspension.
12.
Refund Of Fees.
If a horse is declared or scratched from a race, the owner of such horse shall not be entitled to a refund of any nomination, sustaining and penalty payments, entry fees, or organization charges paid or remaining due at the time of the declaration or scratch.
In the event any race is not run, declared off, or canceled for any reason, the owners of such horses that remain eligible at the time the race is declared off or canceled shall be entitled to a complete refund of all the above payments and fees less monies specified in written race conditions for advertising and promotion.
13.
Release Of Certificates.
Any certificate of registration or document of ownership filed with the racing secretary to establish eligibility to enter a race shall be released only to the trainer of record of the horse.
However, the trainer may authorize in a form provided by the racing secretary the release of the certificate to the owner named on the certificate or his authorized agent.
Any disputes concerning the rights to the registration certificates shall be decided by the stewards.
14.
Nomination Races.
Prior to the closing of nominations, the organization shall file with the Commission a copy of the nomination blank and all advertisements for races to be run during a race meeting.
For all races which nominations close no earlier than 72 hours before post time, the organization shall furnish the Commission and the owners of horses previously made eligible by compliance with the conditions of such race, with a list of all horses nominated and which remain eligible.
The list shall be distributed within 15 days after the due date of each payment and shall include the horse's name, the owner's name and the total amount of payments and gross purse to date, including any added monies, applicable interest, supplementary payments, and deduction for advertising and administrative expenses.
The organization shall deposit all monies for a nomination race in an escrow account according to procedures approved by the Commission.
15.
Limitations On Field And Number Of Races.
No race with less than five horses entered, or three horses ultimately participating, shall be run, with the exception of a trial or the finals for a nomination race.
No more than 20 races may be run on a race day, except with permission of the Commission.
A race day may be canceled if less than 75 horses have been entered on the day's program, with the exception of days on which trials or finals for a nomination race are scheduled.
16.
Agreement Upon Entry.
No entry shall be accepted in any race except upon the condition that all disputes, claims, and objections arising out of the racing or with respect to the interpretation of Commission and track rules or conditions of any race shall be decided by the Board of Stewards at the race meet; or, upon appeal, decided by the Commission.
17.
Selection Of Entered Horses.
The manner of selecting post positions of horses shall be determined by the stewards.
The selection shall be by lot and shall be made by one of the stewards or their designee and a horseman, in public, at the close of entries.
If the number of entries to any race is in excess of the number of horses which may, because of track limitations, be permitted to start in any one race, the race may be split; or four horses not drawing into the field may be placed on an also eligible list.
18.
Preferred List Of Horses.
The racing secretary may maintain a list of entered horses eliminated from starting by a surplus of entries, and these horses shall constitute a preferred list and have preference.
The manner in which the preferred list shall be maintained and all rules governing such list shall be the responsibility of the Racing Secretary.
Such rules must be submitted to the Commission 30 days prior to the commencement of the meet and are subject to approval by the Commission.
R65-7-8.
Veterinarian Practices, Medication and Testing Procedures.
1.
Veterinary Practices - Treatment Restricted.
Within the time period of 24 hours prior to the post time for the first race of the week until four hours after the last race of the week, no person other than Utah licensed veterinarians or animal technicians under direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian who have obtained a license from the Commission shall administer to any horse within the enclosure any veterinary treatment or any medicine, medication, or other substance recognized as a medication, except for recognized feed supplements or oral tonics or substances approved by the Official Veterinarian.
2.
Veterinarians Under Supervision Of Official Veterinarian.
Veterinarians licensed by the Commission and practicing at an authorized meeting are under the supervision of the Official Veterinarian and the Stewards.
The Official Veterinarian shall recommend to the Stewards or the Commission the discipline to be imposed upon a veterinarian who violates the Rules, and he or she may sit with the Stewards in any hearing before the Stewards concerning such discipline or violation.
3.
Veterinarian Report.
Every veterinarian who treats any horse within the enclosure for any contagious or communicable disease shall immediately report to the official veterinarian in writing on a form approved by the Commission.
The form shall include the name and location of the horse treated, the name of the trainer, the time of treatment, the probable diagnosis, and the medication administered.
Each practicing veterinarian shall be responsible for maintaining treatment records on all horses to which they administer treatment during a given race meeting.
These records shall be available to the Commission upon subpoena when required.
Any such record and any report of treatment as described above is confidential; and its content shall not be disclosed except in a proceeding before the stewards or the Commission, or in the exercise of the Commission's jurisdiction.
4.
Drugs Or Medication.
Except as authorized by the provisions of this Article, no drug or medication shall be administered to any horse prior to or during any race.
Presence of any drug or its metabolites or analog, or any substance foreign to the natural horse found in the testing sample of a horse participating in a Commission- sanctioned race shall result in disqualification by the Stewards.
When a horse is disqualified because of an infraction of this Rule, the owner or owners of such horse shall not participate in any portion of the purse or stakes; and any trophy or other award shall be returned.
(See Drugs and Medications Exceptions, Section R67-7-13.)
5.
Racing Soundness Examination.
Each horse entered to race may be subject to a veterinary examination by the official veterinarian or his authorized representative for racing soundness and health on race day.
6.
Positive Lab Reports.
A finding by a licensed laboratory that a test sample taken from a horse contains a drug or its metabolites or analog, or any substance foreign to the natural horse shall be prima facie evidence that such has been administered to the horse either internally or externally in violation of these rules.
It is presumed that the sample of urine, saliva, blood or other acceptable specimen tested by the approved laboratory to which it is sent is taken from the horse in question; its integrity is preserved; that all procedures of same collection and preservation, transfer to the laboratory, and analyses of the sample are correct and accurate; and that the report received from the laboratory pertains to the sample taken from the horse in question and correctly reflects the condition of the horse during the race in which he was entered, with the burden on the trainer, assistant trainer or other responsible party to prove otherwise at any hearing in regard to the matter conducted by the stewards or the Commission.
7.
Intent Of Medication Rules.
It shall be the intent of these rules to protect the integrity of horse racing, to guard the health of the horse, and to safeguard the interests of the public and the racing participants through the prohibition or control of all drugs, medication, and substances foreign to the natural horse.
8.
Power To Have Tested.
As a safeguard against the use of drugs, medication, and substances foreign to the natural horse, a urine or other acceptable sample shall be taken under the direction of the official veterinarian from the winner of every race and from such other horses as the stewards or the Commission may designate.
9.
Pre-Race Testing.
The stewards may require any horse entered to race to submit to a blood or other pre-race test, and no horse is eligible to start in a race until the owner or trainer complies with the required testing procedure.
10.
Equipment For Official Testing.
Organizations shall provide the equipment, necessary supplies and services prescribed by the Commission and the official veterinarian for the taking of or administration of blood, urine, saliva or other tests.
11.
Taking Of Samples.
Blood, urine, saliva or other samples shall be taken under the direction of the official veterinarian or persons appointed or assigned by the official veterinarian for taking samples.
All samples shall be taken in a detention area approved by the Commission, unless the Official Veterinarian approves otherwise.
Each horse shall be cooled out for a minimum of 30 minutes after entry into the test barn before a sample is to be taken.
The taking of any test samples shall be witnessed, confirmed or acknowledged by the trainer of the horse being tested or his authorized representative or employee, and may be witnessed by the owner, trainer, or other licensed person designated by them.
Samples shall be sent to racing laboratories approved and designated by the Commission, in such manner as the Commission or its designee may direct.
All required samples shall be in the custody of the official veterinarian, his/her assistants or other persons approved by the official veterinarian from the time they are taken until they are delivered for shipment to the testing laboratory.
No person shall tamper with, adulterate, add to, break the seal of, remove or otherwise attempt to so alter or violate any sample required to be taken by this Article, except for the addition of preservatives or substances necessarily added by the Commission-approved laboratory for preservation of the sample or in the process of analysis.
The Commission has the authority to direct the approved laboratory to retain and preserve samples for future analysis.
The fact that purse money has been distributed prior to the issuance of a laboratory report shall not be deemed a finding that no chemical substance has been administered in violation of these Rules to the horse earning such purse money.
12.
Laboratories Approved By The Commission.
Only laboratories approved by the Commission may be used in obtaining analysis reports on urine, or other specimens, taken from the winners or other designated horses of each race meeting.
The Commission and the Board of Stewards shall receive reports directly from the laboratory.
13.
Split Samples.
As determined by the official veterinarian, when sample quantity permits, each test sample shall be divided into two portions so that one portion shall be used for the initial testing for unknown substances.
If the Trainer or owner so requests in writing to the stewards within 48 hours of notice of positive lab report on the test sample of his horse, the second sample shall be sent for further testing to a drug testing laboratory designated and approved by the commission.
Nothing in this rule shall prevent the commission or executive director from ordering first use of both sample portions for testing purposes.
The results of said split sampling may not prevent the disqualification of the horse as per R65-7-8-4 and 65-7-8-6.
All costs for transportation and testing of the second sample portion shall be the responsibility of the requesting person.
The official veterinarian shall have overall supervision and responsibility for the freezing, storage and safeguarding of the second sample portion.
14.
Facilitating The Taking Of Urine Samples.
When a horse has been in the test barn more than 1-1/2 hours, a diuretic may be administered by the Official Veterinarian for the purpose of facilitating the collection of a urine sample with permission of the stewards and the trainer or the trainer's authorized test barn representative.
The cost of administration of the diuretic is the responsibility of the trainer.
Prior to the administration of a diuretic, a blood sample may be taken from the horse.
15.
Postmortem Examination.
Every horse which dies or suffers a breakdown on the racetrack in training or in competition within any enclosure licensed by the Commission and is destroyed, may undergo, at a time and place acceptable to the official veterinarian, a postmortem examination to the extent reasonably necessary to determine the injury or sickness which resulted in euthanasia or natural death.
Any other horse which expires within any enclosure may be required by the official veterinarian to undergo a postmortem examination.
A.
The postmortem examination required under this rule will be conducted by a licensed veterinarian employed by the owner or his trainer in consultation with the official veterinarian, who may be present at such postmortem examination.
B. Test samples may be obtained from the carcass upon which the postmortem examination is conducted and shall be sent to a laboratory approved by the Commission for testing for foreign substances or their metabolites and natural substances at abnormal levels.
When practical, samples shall be procured prior to euthanasia.
C.
The owner of the deceased horse shall make payment of any charges due the veterinarian employed by him to conduct the postmortem examination.
D.
A record of such postmortem shall be filed with the official veterinarian by the owner's veterinarian within 72 hours of the death and shall be submitted on a form supplied by the Commission.
E.
Each owner and trainer accepts the responsibility for the postmortem examination provided herein as a requisite for maintaining the occupation license issued by the Commission.
R65-7-9.
Running the Race.
1.
Jockeys To Report.
Every jockey engaged to ride in a race shall report to the jockey room at least one hour before post time of the first race and shall weigh out at the appointed time unless excused by the stewards.
After reporting, a jockey shall not leave the jockey room until all of their riding engagements have been fulfilled and/or unless excused by the stewards.
2.
Entrance To Jockey Room Prohibited.
Except with permission of the stewards or the Commission, no person shall be permitted entrance into the jockey room from one hour before post time for the first race until after the last race other than jockeys, their attendants, racing officials and security officers on duty, and organization employees performing required duties.
3.
Weighing Out.
All jockeys taking part in a race must be weighed out by the Clerk of Scales no more than one hour preceding the time designated for the race.
Any overweight in excess of one pound shall be declared by the jockey to the Clerk of Scales, who shall report such overweight and any change in jockeys to the Stewards for immediate public announcement.
A jockey's weight includes the riding costume, racing saddle and pad; but shall not include the jockey's safety helmet, whip, the horse's bridle or other regularly approved racing tack.
A jockey must be neat in appearance and must wear a conventional riding costume
.
4.
Unruly Horses In The Paddock.
If a horse is so unruly in the saddling paddock that the identifier cannot read the tattoo number and properly identify the horse; or if the trainer or their assistant is uncooperative in the effort to identify the horse, then the horse may be scratched by order of the stewards.
5. Use Of Equipment.
No bridle shall weigh more than two pounds, nor shall any whip weigh more than one pound or be more than 31 inches in length.
No whip shall be used unless it shall have affixed to the end thereof a leather "popper."
All whips are subject to inspection and approval by the stewards.
Blinkers are not to be placed on the horse until after the horse has been identified by the official identifier, except with permission of the stewards.
6.
Prohibited Use Of Equipment.
Jockeys are prohibited from whipping a horse excessively, brutally, or upon the head, except when necessary to control the horse.
No mechanical or electrical devices or appliances other then the ordinary whip shall be possessed by any individual or used on any horse at any time a race meeting, whether in a race or otherwise.
7.
Responsibility For Weight.
The jockey, trainer and owner shall be responsible for the weight carried by the horse after the jockey has been weighed out for the race by the clerk of scales.
The trainer or owner may substitute a jockey when the engaged jockey reports an overweight in excess of two pounds
.
8.
Safety Equipment Required.
All persons, when mounted on a race horse within the enclosure or riding in a race, shall wear a properly fastened safety helmet and flak jacket.
The Commission or the stewards may require any other person to wear such helmet and jacket when mounted on a horse within the enclosure.
All safety helmets and flak jackets so required are subject to approval of the stewards or Commission.
9.
Display Of Colors And Post Position Numbers.
In a race, each horse shall carry a conspicuous saddle cloth number and a head number, and the jockey shall wear colors and a numbered helmet cover corresponding to the number of the horse which are furnished by the organization licensee.
10.
Deposit Of Jockey Fee.
The minimum jockey mount fee for a losing mount in the race must be on deposit with the horsemen's bookkeeper, prior to the time for weighing out, and failure to have such minimum fee on deposit is cause for disciplinary action and cause for the stewards to scratch the horse for which such fee is to be deposited.
The organization assumes the obligation to pay the jockey fee when earned by the engaged jockey.
The jockey fee shall be considered earned when the jockey is weighed out by the clerk of scales, unless, in the opinion of the stewards, such jockey capable of riding elect to take themselves off the mount without proper cause.
11.
Requirements For Horse, Trainer, And Jockey.
Every horse must be in the paddock at the time appointed by the stewards before post time for their race.
Every horse must be saddled in the paddock stall designated by the paddock judge unless special permission is granted by the stewards to saddle elsewhere.
Each trainer or their assistant trainer having the care and custody of such horse shall be present in the paddock to supervise the saddling of the horse and shall give such instructions as may be necessary to assure the best performance of the horse.
Every jockey participating in a race shall give their best effort in order to facilitate the best performance of their horse.
12.
Failure To Fulfill Jockey Engagements.
No jockey engaged for a certain race or for a specified time may fail or refuse to abide by his or her agreement unless excused by the stewards.
13.
Control And Parade Of Horses On The Track.
The horses are under the control of the starter from the time they enter the track until dispatched at the start of the race.
All horses with jockey mounted shall parade and warm up carrying their weight and wearing their equipment from the paddock to the starting gate, as well as to the finish line.
Any horse failing to do so may be scratched by the stewards.
After passing the stands at least once, the horses may break formation and warm up until directed to proceed to the starting gate.
In the event a jockey is injured during the parade to post or at the starting gate and must be replaced, the horse shall be returned to the paddock and resaddled with the replacement jockey's equipment.
Such horse must carry the replacement jockey to the starting gate.
14.
Start Of The Race.
When the horses have reached the starting gate, they shall be placed in their starting gate stalls in the order stipulated by the starter.
Except in cases of emergency, every horse shall be started by the starter from a starting gate approved by the Commission.
The starter shall see that the horses are placed in their proper positions without unnecessary delay.
Causes for any delay in the start shall immediately be reported to the stewards.
If, when the starter dispatches the field, the doors at the front of the starting gate stall should not open properly due to a mechanical failure of malfunction of the starting gate, the stewards may declare such horse to be a nonstarter.
Should a horse which is not previously scratched not be in the starting gate stall thereby causing such horse to be left when the field is dispatched by the starter, such horse shall be declared a nonstarter by the stewards.
15.
Leaving The Race Course.
Should a horse leave the course while moving from the paddock to starting gate, he shall return to the course at the nearest practical point to that at which he left the course, and shall complete his parade to the starting gate from the point at which he left the course.
However, should such horse leave the course to the extent that he is out of the direct line of sight of the stewards, or if such horse cannot be returned to the course within a reasonable amount of time, the stewards shall scratch the horse.
Any horse which leaves the course or loses its jockey during the running of a race shall be disqualified and may be placed last, or the horse may be unplaced.
16.
Riding Rules.
In a straightaway race, every horse must maintain position as nearly as possible in the lane in which he starts.
If a horse is ridden, drifts, or swerves out of their lane in such a manner that he interferes with or impedes another horse, it is a foul.
Every jockey shall be responsible for making his best effort to control and guide his mount in such a way as not to cause a foul.
The stewards shall take cognizance of riding which results in a foul, irrespective of whether an objection is lodged; and if in the opinion of the stewards a foul is committed as a result of a jockey not making his best effort to control and guide their mount to avoid a foul, whether intentionally or through carelessness or incompetence, such jockey may be penalized at the discretion of the stewards.
17.
Stewards To Determine Fouls And Extent Of Disqualification.
The stewards shall determine the extent of interference in cases of fouls or riding infractions.
They may disqualify the offending horse and place it behind such other horses as in their judgment it interfered with, or they may place it last.
The stewards may determine that a horse shall be unplaced.
18.
Careless Riding.
A jockey shall not ride carelessly or willfully so as to permit his or her mount to interfere with or impede any other horse in the race.
A jockey shall not willfully strike at another horse or jockey so as to impede, interfere with, or injure the other horse or jockey.
If a jockey rides in a manner contrary to this rule, the horse may be disqualified and/or the jockey may be fined and/or suspended, or otherwise disciplined.
19.
Ramifications Of A Disqualification.
When a horse is disqualified by the stewards, every horse in the race owned wholly or in part by the same owner, or trained by the same trainer, may be disqualified.
When a horse is disqualified for interference in a time trial race, it shall receive the time of the horse it is placed behind plus 0.01 of a second penalty, or more exact measurement if photo finish equipment permits, and shall be eligible to qualify for the finals or consolations of the race on the basis of the assigned time.
20.
Dead Heat.
When a race results in a dead heat, the heat shall not be run off.
The purse distribution due the horses involved in the dead heat shall be divided equally between them.
All prizes or trophies for which a duplicate is not awardable shall be drawn for by lot.
21.
Returning To The Finish After The Race.
After the race, the jockey shall return their horse to the finish and before dismounting, salute the stewards.
No person shall assist a jockey in removing from their horse the equipment that is to be included in the jockey's weight except by permission of the stewards.
No person shall throw any covering over any horse at the place of dismounting until the jockey has removed the equipment that is to be included in his weight.
22.
Objection - Inquiry Concerning Interference.
Before the race has been declared official, a jockey, trainer or their assistant trainer, owner or their authorized agent of the horse, who has reasonable grounds to believe that their horse was interfered with or impeded or otherwise hindered during the running of a race, or that any riding rule was violated by any jockey or horse during the running of the race, may immediately make a claim of interference or foul with the stewards or their delegate.
The stewards shall thereupon hold an inquiry into the running of the race; however, the stewards may upon their own motion conduct an inquiry into the running of a race.
Any claim of foul, objection, and/or inquiry shall be immediately announced to the public.
23.
Official Order Of Finish.
When satisfied that the order of finish is correct, that all jockeys unless excused have been properly weighed in, and that the race has been properly run in accordance with the rules of the Commission, the Stewards shall declare that the order of finish is official; and it shall be announced to the public, confirmed, and the official order of finish posted for the race.
24.
Time Trial Qualifiers.
When two or more time trial contestants have the same qualifying time, to a degree of .01 of a second, or more exact measurement if photo finish equipment permits, for fewer positions in the finals or consolation necessary for all contestants, then a draw by lot will be conducted in accordance with Subsection R65- 7-7(17).
However, no contestant may draw into a finals or consolation instead of a contestant which out finished such contestant.
When scheduled races are trial heats for futurities or stakes races electronically timed from the starting gates, no organization licensee shall move the starting gates or allow the starting gates to be moved until all trial heats are complete, except in an emergency as determined by the stewards.
R65-7-10.
Objections and Protests; Hearing and Appeals.
1.
Stewards To Make Inquiry Or Investigation.
The stewards shall make diligent inquiry or investigation into any complaint, objection or protest made either upon their own motion, by any Racing Official, or by any other person empowered by this Article to make such complaint, protest or objection.
2.
Objections.
Objections to the participation of a horse entered an any race shall be made to the stewards in writing and signed by the objector.
Except for claim of foul or interference, an objection to a horse entered in a race shall be made not later than two hours prior to the scheduled post time for the first race on the day which the questioned horse is entered.
Any such objection shall set forth the specific reason or grounds for the objection in such detail so as to establish probable cause for the objection.
The stewards upon their own motion may consider an objection until such time as the horse becomes a starter.
An objection concerning claim of foul in a race may be lodged verbally to the stewards before the race results are declared official.
3.
Grounds For Objections.
An objection to a horse which is entered in a race shall be made on the following grounds or reasons:
A.
A misstatement, error or omission in the entry under which a horse is to run.
B. That the horse which is entered to run is not the horse it is represented to be at the time of entry, or that the age is erroneously given.
C. That the horse is not qualified to enter under the conditions specified for the race, or that the allowances are improperly claimed or not entitled the horse, or that the weight to be carried is incorrect under the conditions of the race.
D. That the horse is owned in whole or in part, or leased by a person ineligible to participate in racing or otherwise ineligible to run a race as provided in these Rules.
E. That reasonable grounds exist whereby a horse was interfered with or impeded or otherwise hindered by another horse or jockey during the running of a race.
4.
Horse Subject To Objection.
The stewards may scratch from the race any horse which is the subject of an objection if they have reasonable cause to believe that the objection is valid.
5.
Protests.
A protest against any horse which has started in a race shall be made to the stewards in writing, signed by the protestor, within 48 hours of the race, except as noted in Subsection R65-7-10(8).
Any such protest shall set forth the specific reason or reasons for the protest in such detail as to establish probable cause for protest.
The stewards upon their own motion may consider a protest at any time.
6.
Grounds For Protest.
A protest may be made upon the following grounds:
A.
Any ground for objection set forth in R65-1-10(3).
B. That the order of finish as officially determined by the stewards was incorrect due to oversight or errors in the numbers designated to the horses which started in the race.
C. That a jockey, trainer or owner of a horse which started in the race was ineligible to participate in racing as provided in these rules.
D. That the weight carried by a horse was improper by reason of fraud or willful misconduct.
E. That an unfair advantage was gained in violation of the rules.
7.
Persons Empowered To File Objection Or Protest.
A jockey, trainer, owner or authorized agent of the horse which is entered or is a starter in a race is empowered to file an objection or protest against any other horse in such race upon the grounds set forth in this Article for objections and protests.
8.
No Limitation On Time To File When Fraud Alleged.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this Article, the time limitation on the filing of protests shall not apply in any case in which fraud or willful misconduct is alleged, provided that the stewards are satisfied that the allegations are bona fide and susceptible to verification.
9.
Frivolous Or Inaccurate Objection Or Protest.
No person shall knowingly file a frivolous, inaccurate, false, or untruthful objection or protest; nor shall any person present his objection or protest to the stewards in a disrespectful or undignified manner.
10.
Horse To Be Disqualified On Valid Protest.
If a protest against a horse which has run in a race is declared valid, that horse may be disqualified.
A horse so disqualified which was a starter in the said race, may be placed last in the order of finish or may be unplaced.
The stewards or the Commission may order any purse, award or prize for any race withheld from distribution pending the determination of the protest(s).
In the event any purse, award or prize has been distributed to a person on behalf of a horse which by protest or other reason is disqualified or determined not to be entitled to such purse, award or prize, the stewards or the Commission may order such purse, award or prize returned and redistributed to the rightful person.
Any person who fails to comply with an order to return any purse, award or prize previously distributed shall be suspended until its return.
11.
Notification Of And Representation At Hearing.
Adequate notice of hearing shall be given to every summoned person in accordance with the procedures set forth in Subsection R65-7-3(6).
Every person alleged to have committed a rule violation or who is called to testify before the stewards is entitled at the persons expense to have counsel present evidence and witnesses on his behalf and to cross-examine other witnesses at the hearing.
12.
Testimony And Evidence At Hearing.
Every person called to a hearing before the stewards for a rule violation shall be allowed to present testimony, produce witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and present documentary evidence in accordance with the rules of privilege recognized by law.
13.
Duty Of Disclosure.
It is the duty and obligation of every licensee to make full disclosure at a hearing before the Commission or before the stewards of any knowledge he or she possesses of a violation of any racing law or of the rules of the Commission.
No person may refuse to testify at any hearing on any relevant matter except in the proper exercise of a legal privilege, nor shall any person testify falsely.
14.
Failure To Appear.
Any licensee or summoned person who fails to appear before the stewards or the Commission after they have been ordered personally or in writing to do so, may be suspended pending appearance before the stewards or the Commission.
Nonappearance of a summoned person after adequate notice may be construed as a waiver of right to be present at a hearing.
15. Record Of Hearing.
All hearings before the stewards or Commission shall be recorded.
That portion at a hearing constituting deliberations in executive session need not be recorded.
A written transcript or a copy of the tape recording shall be made available to any person alleged to have committed a violation of the Act or the rules upon written request and payment of appropriate reimbursement cost(s) for transcription or reproduction.
16.
Vote On Steward's Decision.
A majority vote shall decide any question to which the authority of the stewards extends.
If a vote is not unanimous, the dissent steward shall provide a written record to the Commission of the reasons for such dissent within 72 hours of the vote.
17.
Rulings By The Stewards.
Any ruling or order issued by the stewards shall specify the full name of the licensee or person subject to the ruling or order; most recent address on file with the Commission; date of birth; social security number; statement of the offense charged including any rule number; date of ruling; fine and/or suspension imposed or other action taken; changes in the order of finish and purse distribution in a race, when appropriate; and any other information deemed necessary by the stewards or the Commission.
Any member of a Board of Stewards may, after consultation with and by mutual agreement of the other stewards, issue an Order or Notice signed by one steward on behalf of the Board of Stewards.
Subsequently, an Order containing all three stewards' signatures shall be made part of the official record.
18.
Summary Suspension Of Occupation Licensee.
If the stewards or the Commission find that the public health, safety, or welfare require emergency action and incorporates such finding to that effect in any Order, summary suspension may be ordered pending proceedings for revocation or other action, which proceedings shall be promptly initiated and held as provided in Subsection R65-7-10(19).
19.
Duration Of Suspension Or Revocation.
Unless execution of an order of suspension or revocation is stayed by the Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, a person's occupation license, suspended or revoked, shall remain suspended or revoked until the final determination has been made pursuant to the provisions of Section R65-7-5.
20.
Grounds For Appeal From Decision Of The Stewards.
Any decision of the stewards, except decisions regarding disqualifications for interference during the running of a race, may be appealed to the Commission; and such decision may be overruled if it is found by a preponderance of evidence that:
A.
The stewards mistakenly interpreted the law; or
B.
The Appellant produces new evidence of a convincing nature which, if found to be true, would require the overruling of the decision; or
C.
The best interests of racing and the State may be better served.
21.
Appeal From Decision Of The Stewards.
The Commission shall review hearings of any case referred to the Commission by the stewards or appealed to the Commission from the decisions of the stewards except as otherwise provided in this Article.
Upon every appealable decision of the stewards, the person subject to the decision or Order shall be made aware of his right to an appeal before the Commission and the necessary procedures thereof.
Appeals shall be made no later than 72 hours or the third calendar day from the date of the rendering of the decision of the stewards unless the Commission for good cause extends the time for filing not to exceed 30 days from said rendering date.
The appeal shall be in writing, signed by the appellant; shall contain his full name, present mailing address, and present phone number; and shall set forth the facts and any new evidence the appellant believes to be grounds for an appeal before the Commission.
Action on such a hearing request must commence by the Commission within 30 days of the filing of the appeal.
An appeal shall not affect a decision of the stewards until the appeal has been sustained or dismissed or a stay order issued.
22.
Appointment Of Hearing Examiners.
When directed by the Commission, any qualified person(s) may sit as a hearing examiner(s) for the taking of evidence in any matter pending before the Commission.
Any such hearing examiner shall report to the Commission Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, and the Commission shall determine the matter as if such evidence had been presented to the full Commission.
23.
Hearings On Agreement.
Persons aggrieved as of the result of a stewards' ruling in a preliminary or trial race may request a hearing before the executive director of the Commission to review same.
If all interested parties waive the right to receive ten day notice of hearing, such a hearing may be heard on a day certain within seven days after the preliminary or trial race in question.
All such appeals shall be heard on days set by the executive director of the Commission or anyone acting in his stead.
24.
Temporary Stay Order.
The Executive Director may, upon consultation with the direction of a minimum of three Commissioners, issue or deny a temporary stay order to stay execution of any ruling, order or decision of the stewards except stewards' decisions regarding disqualifications for interference during the running of a race.
Any application for a temporary stay shall be in writing, signed by the appellant; shall contain his full name, present mailing address, and present phone number; shall set forth the facts and any evidence to justify the issuance of the stay; and shall be filed with the Office of the Commission as specified in Subsection R65-7-3(7).
The granting of a temporary stay order shall carry no presumption that the stayed decision of the stewards is or may be invalid, and a temporary stay order may be dissolved at any time by further order of the executive director upon consultation with and the direction of a minimum of three Commissioners.
25.
Appearance At Hearing Upon Appeal.
The Commission shall notify the Appellant and the stewards of the date, time and location of its hearing in the matter upon appeal.
The burden shall be on the appellant to provide the facts necessary to sustain the appeal.
26.
Complaints Against Officials.
Any complaint against a racing official other than a steward shall be made to the stewards in writing and signed by the complainant.
All such complaints shall be reported to the Commission by the stewards, together with a report of the action taken or the recommendation of the stewards.
Complaints against any stewards shall be made in writing to the executive director of the Commission and signed by the complainant.
27.
Rulings On Admissibility And Evidence.
In all hearings, the chairperson, chief steward or such other person as may be designated, shall make rulings on admissibility and introduction of evidence.
Such a ruling shall prevail; except when a Commission member or a steward requests a poll of the panel, and the ruling overturned by majority vote.
R65-7-11.
General Conduct.
1.
Conditions Of Meeting Binding Upon Licensees.
The Commission, recognizing the necessity for an organization to comply with the requirements of its license and to fulfill its obligation to the public and the State of Utah with the best possible uninterrupted services in the comparatively short licensed period, herein provides that all organizations, officials, horsemen, owners, trainers, jockeys, grooms, farriers, organization employees, and all licensees who have accepted directly or indirectly, with reasonable advance notice, the conditions defined by these rules under which said organization engages and plans to conduct such race meeting, shall be bound thereby.
2.
Trainer Responsibility.
The trainer is presumed to know the "Rules of Racing" and is responsible for the condition, soundness, and eligibility of the horses he enters in a race.
Should the chemical analysis, urine or otherwise, taken from a horse under his supervision show the presence of any drug or medication of any kind or substance, whether drug or otherwise, regardless of the time it may have been administered, it shall be taken as prima facie evidence that the same was administered by or with the knowledge of the trainer or person or persons under his supervision having care or custody of such horse.
At the discretion of the stewards or Commission, the trainer and all other persons shown to have had care or custody of such horse may be fined or suspended or both.
Under the provisions of this rule, the trainer is also responsible for any puncture mark on any horse he enters in a race, found by the stewards upon recommendation of the official veterinarian to evidence injection by syringe.
If the trainer cannot be present on race day, he shall designate an assistant trainer.
Such designation shall be made prior to time of entry, unless otherwise approved by the stewards.
Failure to fully disclose the actual trainer of a horse participating in an approved race shall be grounds to disqualify the horse, and subject the actual trainer to possible disciplinary action by the stewards or the Commission.
Designation of an assistant trainer shall not relieve the trainer's absolute responsibility for the conditions and eligibility of the horse, but shall place the assistant trainer under such absolute responsibility also.
Willful failure on the part of the trainer to be present at, or refusal to allow the taking of any specimen, or any act or threat to prevent or otherwise interfere therewith shall be cause for disqualification of the horse involved; and the matter shall be referred to the stewards for further action.
3.
Altering Sex Of Horse.
Any alteration to the sex of a horse from the sex as recorded on the Certificate of Foal Registration or other official registration Certificate of such horse shall be immediately reported by the trainer to the racing secretary and the official horse identifier if such horse is registered to race at any race meeting.
4.
Official Workouts And Schooling Races.
No trainer shall permit a horse in his charge to be taken on to the track for training or a workout except during hours designated by the organization.
A trainer desiring to engage a horse in a workout or schooling race shall, prior to such workout or race, identify the horse by registered name and tattoo number when requested to do so by the stewards or their authorized representative.
5.
Intoxication.
No licensee, employee of the organization or its concessionaires, shall be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, the combined influence of intoxicating liquor and any controlled dangerous substance, or under the influence of any narcotic or other drug while within the enclosure.
No person shall in any manner or at any time disturb the peace or make themselves obnoxious on the enclosure of an organization.
6.
Firearms.
No person shall possess any firearm within the enclosure unless he is a fully qualified peace officer as defined in the laws of the State of Utah, or is acting in accordance with Title 53, Chapter 5, Part 7, Concealed Weapons Act and Title 76, chapter 10, Part 5, Utah Code.
A person carrying a concealed weapon may be asked to show a valid, current concealed weapons permit before being allowed to enter the facility.
7.
Financial Responsibility.
No licensee shall willfully and deliberately fail or refuse to pay any monies when due for any service, supplies or fees connected with his operations as a licensee; nor shall he falsely deny any such amount due or the validity of the complaint thereof with the purpose of hindering or delaying or defrauding the person to whom such indebtedness is due.
A commission authorized license may be suspended pending settlement of the financial obligation.
Any financial responsibility complaint against a licensee shall be in writing, signed by the complainant, and accompanied by documentation of the services, supplies or fees alleged to be due, or by a judgment from a court.
8.
Checks.
No licensee shall write, issue, make or present a bad check in payment for any license fee, fine, nomination or entry fee or other fees, or for any service or supplies.
The fact that such check is returned to the payee by the bank as refused is a ground for suspension pending satisfactory redemption of the returned check.
9.
Gratuity To Starter Or Assistant Starter.
No person shall offer or give money or other gratuity to any starter or assistant starter, nor shall any starter or assistant starter receive money or other compensation, gratuity or reward, in connection with the running of any race or races except compensation received from an organization for official duties.
10.
Possession Of Contraband.
No person other than a veterinarian or an animal technician licensed by the Commission shall have in his possession within the enclosure during sanctioned meetings any prohibited substance, or any hypodermic syringe or hypodermic needle or similar instrument which may be used for injection except as provided in Subsection R65-7-8(1).
No person shall have in his or her possession within the enclosure during any recognized meeting any device other than the ordinary whip which can be used for the purpose of stimulating or depressing the horse or affecting its speed at any time.
The stewards may permit the possession of drugs or appliances by a licensee for personal medical needs under such conditions as the stewards may impose.
11.
Bribes.
No person shall give, or offer or promise to give, or attempt to give or offer any money, bribe or thing of value to any owner, trainer, jockey, agent, or any other person participating in the conduct of a race meeting in any capacity, with the intention, understanding or agreement that such owner, trainer, jockey, agent or other person shall not use his best efforts to win a race or so conduct himself in such race that any other participant in such race shall be assisted or enabled to win such race; nor shall any trainer, jockey, owner, agent or other person participating at any race meeting accept, offer to accept, or agree to accept any money, bribe or thing of value with the intention, understanding or agreement that he will not use his best efforts to win a race or to so conduct himself that any other horse or horses entered in such race shall thereby be assisted or enabled to win such race.
12.
Trainer's Duty To Ensure Licensed Participation.
No trainer shall have in his custody within the enclosure of any race meeting any horse owned in whole or in part by any person who is not licensed as a horse owner by the Commission unless such owner has filed an application for license as a horse owner with the Commission and the same is pending before the Commission; nor shall any trainer have in his employ within the enclosure any groom, stable employee, stable agent, or other person required to be licensed, unless such person has a valid license.
All changes of commissioned licensed personnel shall be reported immediately to the Commission.
13.
Conduct Detrimental To Horse Racing.
No licensee shall engage in any conduct prohibited by law and by the rules of the Commission, nor shall any licensee engage in any conduct which by its nature is unsportsmanlike or detrimental to the best interest of horse racing.
14.
Denial Of Access To Private Property.
Nothing contained in these rules shall be deemed, expressly or implicitly, to prevent an organization from exercising the right to deny access to or to remove any person from the organization's premises or property for just cause.
15.
Tricks/Schemes.
No person shall falsify, conceal, or cover up by trick, scheme, or device a material fact; or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or representations; or make or use any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or entry regarding the prior racing record, pedigree, identity, or ownership of a registered animal in any matter related to the breeding, buying selling, or racing of such animal.
16.
Prearranging The Outcome Of A Race.
No licensed or unlicensed person may attempt or conspire to prearrange the outcome of a race.
R65-7-12.
Fire Prevention and Security.
1.
Security Control.
Every organization conducting a race meeting shall maintain security controls over its premises, and such security controls are subject to the approval of the Commission.
2.
Identification Required.
No person shall be admitted to a restricted area within the enclosure without a license, visitor's pass, or other identification issued by the Commission or the organization on his person.
Whenever deemed advisable, the stewards or the organization may require the visible display of the identification as a badge.
No person shall use the license or credential issued to another, nor shall any person give or loan his license or credential to any other person.
3.
Organization Credentials.
The racing organization shall establish a system or method of issuing credentials or passes to restrict access to its restricted areas or to ensure that all participants at its meeting are licensed as required by this Article; provided, however, that no such system or methods may exclude any investigator or employee of the Commission or any peace officer when on duty; nor shall any person be excluded solely on the basis of sex, color, creed, or national origin or ancestry.
4.
Organization To Prevent Unauthorized Access To Restricted Areas.
Unless granted exemption by the Commission, every organization shall prevent access to and shall remove or cause to be removed from its restricted areas any person who is unlicensed, or who has not been issued a visitor's pass or other identifying credential, or whose presence in such restricted area is unauthorized.
Nothing herein shall be construed to exclude members of the Commission and any staff members of the Commission in the conduct of official duties.
5.
Examination Of Personal Effects.
The Commission, its authorized officers or agents may enter the stables, rooms, or other places within the premises of a recognized meeting to inspect and examine the personal effects and property of any licensee or other person in or about or permitted access to any restricted area; and each licensee in accepting his license, and each person entering such restricted area does thereby consent thereto.
6.
Obedience To Security Officers And Public Safety Officers.
No licensee shall willfully ignore or refuse to obey any order issued by the stewards; the Commission; or any security officer of the organization; or any public officer of any police, fire or law enforcement agency when such order is issued or given in the performance of duty for the purpose of controlling any hazardous situation or occurrence.
No person shall interfere with public safety officers, security officers or any racing official in the performance of their duties.
R65-7-13.
Drugs and Medication Exceptions and Illegal Practices.
1.
Horses Tested.
The winner of every race and such other horses as the stewards or commission veterinarian may designate shall be escorted by the veterinarian assistant after the race to the testing enclosure for examination by the authorized representative of the Commission and the taking of specimens shall be by the commission veterinarian or his assistant.
2.
Trainer Present at Testing.
The trainer, or his authorized representative, must be present in the testing enclosure when a urine or other specimen is taken from a horse, the sample tag attached to the specimen shall be signed by the trainer or his representative, as witness of taking of the specimen.
Willful failure to be present at or a refusal to allow the taking of the specimen, or any act or threat to impede or prevent or otherwise interfere therewith, shall subject the person or persons doing so to immediate suspension and fine by the stewards and the matter shall be referred to the Commission for such further penalty as may be determined.
3.
Specimens Delivered to Laboratory.
All specimens taken by or under the direction of the commission veterinarian, or other authorized representative of the Commission, shall be delivered to the laboratory approved by the Commission for official analysis.
Each specimen shall be marked by number and date and may also bear such information as may be essential to its proper analysis; but the identity of the horse from the specimen was taken or the identity of its owner, trainer, jockey or stable shall not be revealed to the laboratory.
The container of specimen shall be sealed as soon as the specimen is placed therein and shall bear the name of the Commission.
4.
Medication.
The commission veterinarian, the Commission or any member of the Board of Stewards may take samples of any medicines or other materials suspected of containing improper medication, drugs or chemicals which would affect the racing conditions of a horse in a race and which may be found in stables or elsewhere on race track grounds or in the possession of such tracks or any person connected with racing and the same shall be delivered to the laboratory designated by the Commission.
5.
The Only Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drug Permitted.
Phenylbutazone shall be administered to the horse no later than 24 hours prior to the time the horse is scheduled to race.
6.
Phenylbutazone Levels Permitted and Penalty.
No urine sample taken from a horse shall exceed 165 micrograms of phenylbutazone or its metabolites per milliliter of urine or shall not exceed 5 micrograms per milliliter of blood plasma.
On a first violation period at phenylbutazone concentrations above 5 ug/ml but below 10 ug/ml plasma or serum: a minimum fine of $250.00; at concentrations above 10 ug/ml plasma: a fine of up to $500.00.
On a second violation within a 12 month period at phenylbutazone concentrations above 5 ug/ml but below 10 ug/ml plasma or serum: a minimum fine of $500.00; at concentrations above 10 ug/ml plasma: a fine of up to $1,000.00.
On a third or subsequent violation within a 12-month period: a fine of $1,000.00, a suspension of 30 days, and loss of purse.
7.
Administered under Direction of Commission Licensed Veterinarian.
Phenylbutazone must be administered under the direction of a commission licensed veterinarian.
8.
List Provided.
Horses which are on phenylbutazone shall not be indicated on the daily racing programs or any other publications except that a list of horses on phenylbutazone will be kept by the stewards.
9.
Lasix Treatment.
Any horse which exhibits symptoms of Epistaxis and/or respiratory tract hemorrhage is eligible for placement on the bleeder list and for treatment on race days with the approved medication to prevent or limit bleeding during racing.
10.
Bleeders Listing.
To be placed on the bleeders list, a horse must be found to have, during or immediately following a race or workout, shed free blood from one or both nostrils or bled internally in the respiratory tract.
A Commission licensed veterinarian, following his or her personal examination of a horse, or after consulting with the horses' private veterinarian, shall be allowed to certify a horse as a bleeder.
A universal bleeders certificate is required.
11.
License Required.
In any and all cases, private veterinarians must be licensed with the Utah Horse Racing Commission as a veterinarian in order to administer Lasix.
12.
Horse Removed From Bleeders List.
A Commission licensed veterinarian may remove a horse from the bleeders list, provided a request is made in writing and it is the recommendation of the veterinarian of the horse, or after an examination by the veterinarian, it is determined that the horse is not a bleeder or is no longer eligible for the bleeders list.
13.
Treatment Procedure.
Horses on the bleeders list must be treated at least four hours prior to post time with the bleeder medication furosemide, (i.e. Lasix).
No other treatment is permitted for bleeder treatment.
Bleeder medication must be administered by a Commission licensed veterinarian, such dosage not to exceed 250 mg.
The bleeder medication is administered by the trainers veterinarian, and must be witnessed by the trainer or his designee upon their request.
Administration of the bleeder medication must be reported in writing on a form designated by the Commission, to the track management no later than two hours prior to the scheduled post time of the last live race of the program.
14.
Lasix Levels Permitted and Penalty.
Any horse whose post race blood tests contains a level in excess of 80 nanograms of furosemide per milliliter of plasma will be said to be positive for Lasix overage and in violation of Utah Horse Racing Rules and Regulations.
Any horse whose post-race urine creatinine is less than 40 milligrams creatinine per 100 milliliters of urine, and the ratio of urine furosemide to urine creatinine does not exceed 0.15, with urine furosemide being measured in micrograms per milliliter of urine will be said to be positive for Lasix overage and in violation of Utah Horse Racing rules.
A.
A finding of a chemist of furosemide (Lasix) exceeding the allowable test levels given above shall be considered prima facia evidence that the medication was administered to the horse and carried in the body of the horse while participating in the race.
B.
In these cases, a fine and/or suspension will be levied to such horse trainer under the trainer responsibility rule and the horse will be disqualified from the race.
15.
Horses Designated.
The horses' trainer or designated agent is responsible to enter horses correctly indicating the prescribed medication for the horse.
Horses approved for Lasix medication will be designated on the overnight and the daily program with a Lasix or "L".
A list of horses approved for and using Lasix medication will be maintained by the stewards.
16.
Bleeder Disqualification.
Any horse that bleeds a second time in Utah shall not be able to race for a period of 30 days from the date of the second bleeding offense.
Any horse that bleeds for a third time shall be suspended from racing for a period of one year from the date of the third offense.
Any horse bleeding for the fourth time will be given a lifetime suspension from racing.
17.
Disqualification of Owner or Trainer.
A horse owner or trainer found to have committed illegal practices under this chapter or found to have administered any non-approved medication substances in violation of the rules in this chapter, shall be deemed disqualified and denied, or shall promptly return, any portion of the purse or sweepstakes or trophy awarded in the affected race, and shall be distributed as in the case of a disqualification.
If the affected race is a qualifying race for a subsequent race and if a horse shall be so disqualified, the eligibility of the other horses which ran in the affected race, and which have started in the subsequent race before announcement of such disqualification shall not in any way be affected.
18.
Hypodermic Instruments Prohibited.
Except by specific written permission of the presiding steward, no person within the grounds of the racing association where the horses are lodged or kept shall have possession of, upon the premises which he occupies or has the right to occupy or in any of his personal property or effects, any hypodermic instrument, hypodermic syringes or hypodermic needle which may be used for injection into any horse of any medication prohibited by this rule.
Every racing association is required to use all reasonable efforts to prevent the violation of this rule.
19.
Search Provisions.
Every racing association, the Commission or the stewards shall have the right to enter, search and inspect the buildings, stables, rooms and other places where horses which are eligible to race are kept, or where property and effects of the licensee are kept within the grounds of the association.
Any licensee accepting a license shall be deemed to have consented to such search and to the seizure of any non-approved or prohibited materials, chemicals, drugs or devices and anything apparently intended to be used in connection therewith.
20.
Daily Medication Reports.
All practicing veterinarians must submit daily to the commission veterinarian a medication report form furnished by the Commission containing the following:
A. Name, age, sex and breed of the horse.
B.
The permitted drug used (Bute or Lasix).
C.
The time administered.
D.
The route of the administration.
E.
The report must be dated and signed by the veterinarian so administering the medication.
Any such report is confidential and its contents shall not be disclosed except in a proceeding before the stewards or the Commission or in the exercise of the Commission's jurisdiction.
21.
Prima Facia Evidence.
If the stewards find that any non-approved medication, for which the purpose of definition shall include any drug, chemical, narcotic, anesthetic, or analgesic has been administered to a horse in such a manner that it is present in a pre-race or post-race test sample, such presence shall constitute prima facia evidence that the horse has been illegally medicated.
22.
Trainer Responsibility.
Under all circumstances, the horse of record trainer shall be responsible for the horse he trains.
KEY
horses
Date of Enactment or Last Substantive Amendment
June 9, 2003
Notice of Continuation
October 19, 2001
Authorizing, Implemented, or Interpreted Law
4-38-4 _________________________________________________________________
Rule converted into HTML by the Division of Administrative Rules.
For questions regarding the content or application of rules under Title R65, please contact the promulgating agency (Agriculture and Food, Marketing and Conservation).
A list of agencies with links to their homepages is available at http://www.utah.gov/government/agencylist.html.
For questions about the rulemaking process, please contact the Division of Administrative Rules.
Please Note: The Division of Administrative Rules is not able to answer questions about the content or application of these rules.
_________________________________________________________________
The HTML version of this rule is a convenience copy.
This information is made available on the Internet as a public service.
Please see this disclaimer about information available from www.rules.utah.gov.
_________________________________________________________________
[Division of Administrative Rules Home]|[Utah Administrative Code List of Titles]
State Links: Utah.gov Home | Utah.gov Terms of Use | Utah.gov Privacy Policy | Utah.gov Accessibility Policy.
