skip to page content SIMPLIFY - Missouri Department of Revenue ________________ Search DOR [BUTTON Input] (not implemented)____ ________________ Search Forms [BUTTON Input]
If you do not have a valid driver license, you may obtain one at any Department of Revenue branch or fee license office.
You must have a Missouri driver license if: * You live in Missouri, are 16 years of age or older, and plan to drive.
* You are a new resident of Missouri and want to drive, even if you have a driver license from another state.
* You are an out-of-state commercial driver who has moved to Missouri within the last 30 days.
(Download a copy of the Missouri Commercial Driver License Manual in PDF format.
Adobe Acrobat PDF )
[line.gif]
WHEN TO CARRY YOUR LICENSE
You must carry your driver license or permit when you drive.
If any law enforcement officer asks to see your driver license or permit, you must show it to him or her.
It is against the law for you to let anyone else use your license or permit.
[line.gif]
YOU DO NOT NEED A MISSOURI DRIVER LICENSE IF: * You are a member of the armed forces and you have a valid license from your home state.
* You are a full-time student, and you have a valid license from your home state.
* You operate or temporarily operate or move any farm tractor or implement on a highway for agri-related purposes.
[line.gif]
NONDRIVER LICENSE/ID CARD (Class ND)
You may obtain a photo nondriver license for identification purposes only.
Your new nondriver license will expire on your date of birth in the sixth year after the date you apply.
If 70 or over, your nondriver license will be nonexpiring.
Applicants age 65 and older may recieve a nondriver license without photo for $1.00.
[line.gif]
PARENT/GUARDIAN REQUEST TO DENY DRIVER LICENSE
The parent or guardian of a person who is under the age of 18 may request the Director of Revenue to deny that person a driver license.
If the person already has a driver license, the request will cancel the license.
When the request is received (form DOR-4811), the Department of Revenue will place a denial on the person's driving record.
The denial expires at the age of 18 or when the parent or guardian requests the driving status be cleared for licensing.
Form DOR-4811 may be obtained from your local branch or fee license office.
[line.gif] UNDER 21 LICENSES
If you are under 21 years of age, the Department of Revenue will issue you a license that identifies you as a minor.
When you become 21 years old, you may apply and pay for another driver license (without the minor indication) or wait until your Under-21 license expires.
[line.gif]
OUT-OF-STATE DRIVER LICENSE TRANSFER
If you have a driver license issued by another state that is valid or expired less than 184 days, and you are applying for a Missouri driver license, you must surrender your out-of-state license to the clerk.
You may also be asked to obtain a letter of clearance from the other state(s).
Refer to Chapter 2 to determine which tests you will be required to pass before applying for a Missouri driver license.
[line.gif]
COMMERCIAL DRIVER LICENSE (Class A, B or C)
Refer to the Missouri Commercial Driver License (CDL) Manual for information on Class A, B or C licenses.
You must be at least 18 years old to apply for a CDL, and at least 21 years old to obtain a hazardous materials endorsement.
Under Missouri's Graduated Driver License Law, you must still meet the "under 21" requirements for a full license at the time you apply for a CDL at age 18.
(Refer to the chart below)
[line.gif]
GRADUATED DRIVER LICENSE LAW (GDL)
Missouri's Graduated Driver License Law requires young drivers to complete three steps in the driver licensing process.
1.
First, at age 15, a person may apply for an instruction permit; 2.
At age 16, a person may apply for an intermediate driver license; and 3.
At age 18, a person may apply for a full driver license.
The GDL process is complete when a person has obtained a full driver license or reaches the age of 21.
Refer to the chart below for details about each stage of the Graduated Driver License law.
Sparky SPARKY SAYS:
YOU SHOULD ALWAYS WEAR YOUR SAFETY BELT!
[line.gif]
MISSOURI'S GRADUATED DRIVER LICENSE LAW
Instruction Permit Minimum Age: 15
Intermediate License Age: 16 to 18
Under 21 Full License Minimum Age: 18
Requirements: Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests
IMPORTANT: Your test paper alone is not legal for driving.
You must apply for an Instruction Permit at a Missouri driver license office in order to drive legally.
To meet the requirements for an Intermediate License, you must have an Instruction Permit for a minimum of 6 months.
This time is calculated as 182 days beginning the day after the issuance date of the Instruction Permit.
Parent or legal guardian* must accompany the teen to the license office to sign a permission statement
Driving Restrictions: If the permit holder is under 16 years old, the Instruction Permit may only be used when accompanied by a parent, grandparent, legal guardian*, or a qualified driving instructor
If the permit holder is 16 years or older, the person occupying the seat beside the driver must be at least 21 and have a valid license
Cost: $1** Valid for 12 months
Requirements: Pass the vision, road sign, and written tests if results are over a year old
Pass the driving test
IMPORTANT: Your test paper alone is not legal for driving.
You must apply for an Intermediate License at a Missouri driver license office in order to drive legally.
To meet the requirements for an Intermediate License, you must have held an Instruction Permit for a minimum of 6 months.
This time is calculated as 182 days beginning the day after the issuance date of the Instruction Permit.
Parent, grandparent or legal guardian* must accompany the teen to the license office to verify that the teen has received 20 hours of behind-the-wheel instruction with an Instruction Permit
No alcohol-related offenses in last 12 months; no traffic convictions in last 6 months
Driving Restrictions: Seat belts must be worn by the driver and all passengers
No driving alone between the 1:00 a.m. - 5:00 a.m. curfew except to and from a school activity, job, or an emergency as defined by the Director of Revenue, or unless accompanied by a licensed driver who is at least 21 years old
Cost: $5** Valid for 2 years
Requirements: Pass the vision and road sign recognition tests
Do not need to pass the written and driving tests if already completed
Driving privilege cannot be suspended, revoked, or denied when applying for a full driver license No alcohol-related offenses or traffic convictions within the last 12 months
Cost: $7.50** Valid for 3 years
**An additional processing fee may apply.
*NOTE: If the applicant is enrolled in a federal residential job training program, then a certified driver training instructor employed by that program may also fulfill the Graduated Driver License Law responsibilities of the parent/grandparent/legal guardian.
Any applicant between the ages of 18 and 21 may apply for an Under-21 full driver license, even if they have not had an Instruction Permit.
[line.gif]
TYPES OF PERMITS
INSTRUCTION PERMIT - Eligible Age 15
You may apply for an instruction permit when you turn 15 if your parent or guardian comes with you to a branch or fee office, provides written permission, and agrees to provide 20 hours of behind-the-wheel instruction.
You must pass the written, road sign and vision tests of the driver exam.
This permit will restrict you to driving when your parent, grandparent, legal guardian, or a qualified driving instructor is in the seat beside you and has a valid driver license.
If you are 16 years or older, the person occupying the seat beside you must be at least 21 and have a valid driver license.
If your parent, grandparent or legal guardian is physically disabled, he or she may designate a maximum of two persons to accompany you in the vehicle for the purpose of providing behind-the-wheel instruction.
The designee must be at least 21, must occupy the seat beside you, and must be a licensed operator for the type of motor vehicle being operated.
This permit may be renewed as many times as needed, without having to take additional written tests.This permit is good for 12 months and costs $1.
An additional processing fee may apply.
Free "PERMIT DRIVER" window signs are available at all Missouri driver license offices.
[line.gif]
MOTORCYCLE INSTRUCTION PERMIT Eligible Age 15 1/2 or 16
You may apply for a motorcycle instruction permit to operate a motorcycle or motortricycle.
* 15 1/2 years of age (15 years and 182 days) The motorcycle instruction permit will only be issued if you have successfully completed an approved motorcycle rider training course.
You must also pass the Class F and Class M written, vision and road sign tests.
You must also have the written consent of your parent or legal guardian.
The cost of the permit is $3.75 and is valid for 6 months ($2.75 of this fee applies to the motorcycle rider training course).
A renewal motorcycle instruction permit costs $1.
An additional processing fee may apply.
This permit allows daylight driving only, within a 50 mile radius of home, a motorcycle of no larger than 250cc, and no passengers.
* 16 years of age or older If you are at least 16 years of age you may also apply for a motorcycle instruction permit, but you do not have to take the motorcycle rider training course.
If you do not have a driver license, you must take the Class F and Class M written tests to receive a motorcycle permit (Class F permit with an M endorsement).
The cost of the permit is $1 and is valid for 6 months.
An additional processing fee may apply.
This permit allows daylight driving only, with no passengers.
When you are ready, you may take the motorcycle skills test and pay the appropriate fee to be motorcycle qualified.
For more information about Missouri laws on motorcycles, please obtain a copy of the Motorcycle Operator Manual at a Missouri State Highway Patrol testing station or a Missouri driver license office.
[line.gif]
SCHOOL BUS PERMIT
A separate permit is required for anyone transporting students in any school bus owned by, or under contract with, a public school or the State Board of Education.
You must be at least 21 years old to obtain either a Type 1 (transporting 16 or more persons including the driver) or Type 2 (transporting 15 or fewer persons including the driver) school bus permit.
Upon each renewal, medical screening including vision and hearing tests is required, and you must have an acceptable driving and criminal history.
If you are 70 years of age or older, you must renew this permit annually and pass the school bus permit written and road test examinations in addition to the medical screening, driving record check, and criminal history check.
A school bus permit can be suspended for one year if a person fails to pass any drug, alcohol or chemical test administered according to the requirements of any federal or state law, rule or regulation regarding the operation of a school bus.
You must apply for your school bus permit at the Central Office in Jefferson City, MO.
It is not available in the field offices.
The cost of the school bus permit is $3 and it is good for 3 years (if the driver is under 70 years old), or 1 year (if the driver is 70 years old or older).
[line.gif]
TYPES OF LICENSES
INTERMEDIATE LICENSE - Eligible Age 16 to 18
When you turn 16, you may apply for an intermediate license.
You must have driven with an instruction permit for a minimum of 6 months.
Your parent, grandparent, or legal guardian must go with you to the driver license office to verify that you have received at least 20 hours of behind-the-wheel instruction.
(refer to the Missouri Graduated Driver License table above).
When you apply for your intermediate license you:
* Must pass the vision, road sign and written tests if results are over a year old, and pass a driving test (behind-the-wheel).
* Cannot have any alcohol-related offenses in the last 12 months.
* Cannot have any traffic convictions, such as speeding tickets, in the last 6 months.
Once you have obtained your intermediate license, you must follow certain restrictions.
* You must wear your seat belt and make sure all passengers in your vehicle wear seat belts also.
* You must not drive a vehicle between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless you are driving to or from a school activity, job, or an emergency as defined by the Director of Revenue, or unless accompanied by a licensed driver who is at least 21 years old.
The intermediate license is good for 2 years and costs $5.
An additional processing fee may apply.
The intermediate license may be renewed.
The intermediate license looks different.
It has a purple header and watermark, and in the restriction area it will indicate "I" for intermediate.
When you turn 18, you may apply for a full driver license.
At the time you apply for your driver license, your intermediate license cannot be suspended, revoked or denied and you cannot have any alcohol-related offenses or any traffic convictions in the last 12 months.
You will need to pass the vision and road sign tests, but you do not need to pass the written and driving tests if already completed and your intermediate license has not expired for more than 6 months (calculated as 184 days).
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE (Class F) - Eligible Age 18
The Class F driver license is Missouri's basic driver license.
You must have a Class F license to operate any motor vehicle other than one requiring the driver to have a Class A, B, C or E license.
The holder of a Class F license may not drive a motorcycle unless the license shows an M endorsement.
You must be 18 years old and have passed the Class F written, vision, road sign and driving tests.
[line.gif]
FOR HIRE LICENSE (Class E) - Eligible Age 18
You must have a Class E license if you receive pay for driving a motor vehicle transporting 14 or fewer passengers (such as a driver for a day care center), or if you will transport property for pay or as part of your job (such as a pizza or florist delivery driver).
Anyone who regularly operates a motor vehicle for his or her employment, which belongs to another person and is designed to carry freight and merchandise, must also have a Class E license.
The vehicle driven must be 26,000 pounds or less gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) and not required to be placarded for hazardous materials.
You must be 18 years old and have passed the Class E written (includes Chapter 15), vision and road sign tests.
If you already have a valid Missouri license, a driving test is not required.
Under Missouri's Graduated Driver License Law, you must still meet the "under 21 requirements" for a full license at the time you apply for a For Hire License at age 18.
(Refer to the Graduated Driver License law chart).
[line.gif]
MOTORCYCLE LICENSE (Class M) - Eligible Age 16
You must have a Class M license or permit, or a driver license with the M endorsement if you operate a motorcycle or motortricycle on public roadways.
You must be 16 years old, and pass the Class F and Class M written, vision, road sign, and motorcycle skills test.
To receive a motorcycle license at age 16-18, you must have had an instruction permit for 6 months.
For more information about Missouri laws on motorcycles, please obtain a copy of the Motorcycle Operator Manual at a Missouri State Highway Patrol testing station or a Missouri driver license office.
[line.gif]
FEES FOR LICENSES (Fees shown do not include any applicable processing fee.)
Type of License
2-year License
3-year License
6-year License
Duplicate License
Intermediate License
$5.00
$5.00
Driver License
$7.50
$15.00
$7.50
Commercial Driver*
$20.00
$40.00
$20.00
For Hire License
$15.00
$30.00
$15.00
Motorcycle Only
$7.50
$15.00
$7.50
Nondriver (ID Card)
$3.00
$6.00
$3.00
*Fees for written and road tests are not included.
Back to Top
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE EXPIRATION
If your license is expired, you must not drive.
If you want to continue to drive, you must renew your license before it expires.
If you do not renew your license within 6 months (or 184 days) after its expiration date, you will have to take the written and road tests.
To determine when your license will expire, please refer to the following chart.
Selectyour age group and whether you are a new or renewal driver.
Age New Drivers Renewal Drivers* Ages 16 - 18 (Intermediate) Expires in the 2nd year after issuance Expires in the 2nd year after date of issuance Ages 18-20 (Full License) Expires on date of birth in the 3rd year after date of issuance Expires on date of birth in the 3rd year after date of issuance Ages 21 - 69 Expires on date of birth in the 6th year after date of issuance Expires on date of birth in the 3rd year after date of issuance(Odd numbered year of birth, such as 1941,1943) Expires on date of birth in the 6th year after date of issuance(Even numbered year of birth, such as 1940, 1942) *Beginning after the first renewal cycle (July 2003), all renewal driver licenses for ages 21-69 will expire in the sixth year after the date of issuance.
Ages 70 and over Expires on date of birth in the 3rd year after date of issuance Expires on date of birth in the 3rd year after date of issuance
Sparky SPARKY SAYS:
IF YOUR ADDRESS CHANGES, YOU MUST INFORM THE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE SO THAT YOUR RENEWAL NOTICE CAN BE MAILED PROPERLY!
[line.gif]
DUPLICATE DRIVER LICENSE TO REPLACE A LOST, STOLEN, OR DESTROYED MISSOURI DRIVER LICENSE
If your Missouri driver license is lost, stolen or destroyed, you must apply for a duplicate license.
If your current license expires within the next 6 months, you may renew early rather than obtain a duplicate license.
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE RENEWAL
To help you remember to renew your license, a reminder postcard will be mailed to you before your license expires.
The postcard will be mailed to the address on your driving record.
However, if you have completed a change of address with the U.S. Postal Service, the notice will be mailed to your new address.
When you move, be sure you send a written notice with your new address to the Customer Assistance Bureau, or e-mail us at dlbmail@mail.dor.state.mo.us, or you may not receive the notice to renew your license.
When you renew your license, you must pay the license fee shown on the front of your renewal postcard.
You can renew your license no earlier than 6 months before your license expires.
You are also required to take a vision test and a highway sign recognition test when you renew.
The highway sign recognition test will test your ability to understand highway signs that regulate, warn or direct traffic.
It is your responsibility to renew your driver license, even if you do not receive your reminder postcard.
Failure to do so may result in having to re-take the written/skills tests.
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE RENEWAL/REPLACEMENT WHILE OUT-OF-STATE
If your Missouri driver license expires or is misplaced/stolen while you are out-of-state (e.g., military, military dependent or student, etc.), you may request a Mail-In License Application (form DOR-4317), or download the form in PDF format from our website at: www.dor.mo.gov/mvdl/formorder/
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE RENEWAL WHEN SUSPENDED OR REVOKED
You may take the vision and road sign recognition tests and renew your driver license even while your driving privilege is suspended.
However, the only time you may renew your license during a period of revocation is when your revocation action resulted from a refusal to submit to a chemical test or from an abuse and lose court order.
NOTE: You will not receive your license until your action is over and your driving privilege is reinstated.
[line.gif]
MEDICAL REFERRAL
You may need a physician's statement when you renew or apply for a driver license if:
* You have had epileptic seizures, convulsions or blackouts within the previous 6 months of your license application, or * The driver examiner, licensing clerk or other responsible person believes you may have some other medical condition that would make you an unsafe driver and completes the Driver Condition Report (form DOR-4319).
Sparky SPARKY SAYS:
IT IS YOUR REPSONSIBILITY TO RENEW YOUR DRIVER LICENSE IN A TIMELY MANNER!
[line.gif]
DRIVER LICENSE RESTRICTIONS
If you have limited driving experience, or a medical condition that impairs your ability to drive safely, you may receive a restricted license that will let you drive only under specific conditions.
If you have a restricted license, it will have one or more of the restriction codes shown below.
You may be required to take a driving test in order to have a restriction removed from your driver license.
If you disobey the restriction(s), you can be charged with driving without a license and if you are convicted, the Department of Revenue will add points to your driving record.
If you receive too many points (see Chapter 11, The Point System), the Department of Revenue may also suspend or revoke your license.
RESTRICTION CODES A Corrective Lenses L Non-airbrake CDL B Outside Rearview Mirror M Ext. on Foot Device C Daylight Driving Only N Leg Brace(s) D Auto Trans/Power Steer O Foot Op Emerg Brake E Seat Cushion R Back Cushion P Accelerator Steering Column F Restricted to 45 MPH T Right Outside Mirror G 25 Mile Radius U Uncoded Restriction* H Special Hand Devices W 3-Wheel Motorcycle Only I Intermediate License Y Left Outside Mirror J Electrical Turn Z More than 5 Restrictions
*An uncoded restriction is any restriction not listed here.
Any law enforcement officer, judge or physician can ask the Department of Revenue to place restrictions on your license.
[line.gif]
PROOF OF IDENTIFICATION REQUIRED WHEN APPLYING FOR A NEW LICENSE/PERMIT
When you apply for your first Missouri driver license, you must bring two documents for proof of identity (two primary documents, or one primary and one secondary document) to show the Highway Patrol examiners when you take the written and/or driving tests.
You must also present proof of identity again when applying for your driver/nondriver license or permit at any Missouri driver license office.
Note: All documents must be U.S.-issued, unless otherwise specified.
PRIMARY DOCUMENTS must be in English and contain the applicant's full legal name (including middle name if the applicant has one) and date of birth.
Acceptable primary documents include the following:
* Certificate of birth (U.S. or Canadian issued, including the U.S. and Canadian territories).
Must be original or certified copy, have a seal, and be issued by an authorized government agency such as the Bureau of Vital Statistics or State Board of Health.
Certification of Report of Birth Abroad documents (FS-240 and DS-1350) are also acceptable.
Hospital issued certificates and baptismal certificates are not acceptable.
* U.S. or Canadian photo driver license (including the U.S. and Canadian territories) * U.S. or Canadian photo identification card/nondriver license (including the U.S. and Canadian territories) * Microfilm copy or image portfolio of a driver license or identification card/nondriver license certified by the issuing agency with an embossed seal of the issuing agency.
You may purchase a copy of your Missouri image portfolio or license negative at any branch or fee office.
The offices will charge an additional fax fee for a license negative.
* U.S. or Canadian issued instruction permit containing a photo (including the U.S. and Canadian territories) * Active Duty, Retiree or Reservist U.S. Military Identification Card * Valid Passport, U.S. or Canadian (including the U.S. and Canadian territories).
If foreign passport, appropriate INS document is also required.
* Immigration and Naturalization Services (INS) documents (must be a valid unexpired document) as follows: -Certificate of Naturalization (N-550, N-570 or N-578) -Certificate of Citizenship (N-560, N-561 or N-645) -Northern Marianas Card (I-551) -American Indian Card (I-551) -U.S. Citizen Identification Card (I-179 or I-197) -Resident Alien Card (I-551) -Temporary Resident Identification Card (I-688) -Record of Arrival and Departure (I-94) (in a VALID Foreign Passport, UNLESS that of a refugee, which will be stamped "Refugee" -Valid Foreign Passport containing an I-551 stamp or US Visa -U.S. Re-entry Permit (I-327) -Refugee Travel Document (I-571) -Employment Authorization Card (I-688A, I-688B, I-766) * Canadian Immigration Record and Visa or Record of Landing (IMM 100)
SECONDARY DOCUMENTS must contain the applicant's name and sufficient information validating all/part of the information contained on the primary document.
Acceptable secondary documents include the following: * Student identification card that contains a photo.
* Employee photo identification card that contains a photo.
* Marriage certificate/license * Social security card.
A metal card is not acceptable.
* Health insurance card * Non-English language birth certificate * School record/transcript that is certified with an embossed seal of the issuing school or Department of Education.
* Vehicle title.
Vehicle registration is not acceptable.
* Proof of vehicle insurance * U.S. Military dependant identification card * U.S. Military discharge/separation papers * Photo public assistance card issued by an approved State agency * INS documents listed under the Primary Document list.
Can be expired up to one year when used as a Secondary Document.
* Completed and signed IRS/state tax form.
W-2 is not acceptable.
* Medical records from doctor/hospital * Court order.
The order must contain full name, date of birth, and court seal.
Examples include, but may not be limited to, adoption document, name change document, and gender change document.
It does not include abstract of criminal or civil conviction.
* Parent/guardian affidavit (form DOR-4861).
Parent/guardian must appear in person, prove his or her identity, and submit a notarized affidavit regarding the child's identity.
This affidavit only applies to minors.
* Gun permit Document should be issued by county Sheriff's department.
* Pilot's license Valid documents will always be issued by the Federal Aviation Administration.
* Bureau of Indian Affairs Card/Indian Treaty Card.
Tribal issued cards are not acceptable.
* Prison release documents.
An Inmate ID card is also acceptable.
Additional documentation may be required if the documentation submitted is questionable, or if the license office staff or Missouri State Highway Patrol examiner has reason to question the validity or authenticity of the documents.
[line.gif]
PROOF OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
If you have a social security number, you must include it on your driver license application.
A driver license clerk may ask for proof of your social security number.
Documents acceptable as proof of social security number (SSN) include the following:
* Social security card.
A metal card is not acceptable.
* Recent payroll stub containing the SSN * Military identification card containing the SSN * IRS/state tax forms.
W-2 form is not acceptable.
* Financial statement, on company form/letterhead, containing the SSN.
[line.gif]
USE OF SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER
If you have a social security number but object to it being used or displayed as your driver license number, you must disclose it and sign a certified statement that you object to the display of the social security number on your license.
A different driver license number will be assigned to you.
If you do not have a social security number, you must sign an affidavit stating that you do not have a social security number.
A driver license number will be assigned to you.
You will not receive your permit/driver/nondriver license at the time of the transaction.
The final decision to issue the document will be made by the central office.
[line.gif]
ORGAN DONATION AND ATTORNEY IN FACT
On the back of the license, space is provided to allow you to designate any organs you wish to donate at the time of your death.
If you wish to donate, write the organ(s) you wish to donate, and sign and date in front of two witnesses.
Your next of kin will still be asked to give his or her permission for the organ donation.
Therefore, it is important to discuss your organ donation decision(s) with your next of kin.
There is also a place on the form to indicate your Attorney in Fact for health care decisions, including organ donation.
Your Attorney in Fact is someone to whom you give permission to act on your behalf if you are unable to do so.
If you include your blood type and any allergic reactions to medicines on the back of your license, this information could help medical personnel if you are in an accident.
[line.gif]
ORGAN DONOR PROGRAM FUND
When you apply for, or renew your driver license, state law requires the clerk to ask you if you would like to donate $1 to the state organ donor program fund, and whether you are interested in making an organ donation.
If you indicate that you are interested in making an organ donation, your name will be included in a state registry of organ donors.
Whether you donate to the fund or decide to make an organ donation is entirely up to you.
If you do not want to donate your organs, do not fill out the donor information.
Call (888) 497-4564 for more information.
[line.gif]
BLIND AWARENESS FUND
State law requires the clerk to ask you if you would like to donate $1 to the state blind awareness fund when you apply for a Missouri driver license.
[line.gif]
"J88" NOTATION FOR DEAF OR HARD OF HEARING APPLICANTS
An applicant for a driver license, nondriver license or instruction permit who is deaf or hard of hearing may ask that a "J88" notation be placed on his or her driver license, nondriver license, or instruction permit.
In the event of an emergency, this notation will allow law enforcement or emergency and medical personnel to readily determine that someone is deaf or hard of hearing.
This will assist in ensuring effective communications with someone who is injured and nonresponsive.
In order to obtain the "J88" notation, an applicant must request the notation when applying for a driver license, nondriver license or instruction permit at a Department of Revenue branch or fee license office.
You must have one of the following documents if you wish to have the "J88" notation placed on your document:
* Medical statement from a licensed medical professional * Certified affidavit.
The affidavit form (DOR-4942) can be obtained from a Department of Revenue branch or fee office.
* Statement from an approved or authorized agency listed below.
Agencies or programs authorized to provide documentation that a driver license, nondriver license or instruction permit applicant is deaf or hard of hearing impaired shall include but not be limited to the following:
* The Missouri Commission for the Deaf * Social Security Administration * A vocational rehabilitation program * A federal, state or county department of health * An Independent Living Center
The Director of Revenue shall have authorization to review and determine acceptability of any documentation from an agency or program not listed.
[line.gif]
SELECTIVE SERVICE REGISTRATION
Effective July 1, 2003, male applicants, age 18 to 26, may register with the Selective Service at the time of their permit/driver/nondriver license application.
Some offices may not be equipped to offer this service until late 2003.
In those cases, you may still register at your local post office.
[line.gif]
DRIVER'S PRIVACY PROTECTION ACT (DPPA)
Effective June 1, 2000, Missouri implemented an amendment to the Federal Driver's Privacy Protection Act.
The amendment requires all states to close the personal information contained on all motor vehicle and driver/nondriver license records.
A person or entity may only access the personal information if they are exempt under these same guidelines (Request for MV/DL Record(s)/Security Access Code, form DOR-4678) or have obtained express consent from the record holder (Request from Record Holder, form DOR-4681).
[line.gif]
KEEPING YOUR DRIVER LICENSE
In order to keep your driver license, you must drive safely at all times.
You can lose your license for:
* Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
(Chapter 10) * Refusing to let a police officer test you for alcohol or drugs.
* Leaving the scene of an accident.
* Failing to file an accident report (Chapter 9).
* Giving false information when you apply for a driver license.
* Failing to settle a court judgment made against you for damages resulting from a motor vehicle accident.
* Failing to keep insurance (financial responsibility) (Chapter 9).
* Changing the information on your license or using someone else's license when you attempt to buy alcohol.
* Failing to appear for an exam when requested by the Customer Assistance Bureau.
* Using a motor vehicle to commit a felony or causing the death of someone in a motor vehicle accident.
* Having too many points on your driving record (Chapter 11).
* Letting someone else use your driver license.
* Failing to appear or pay traffic tickets in Missouri and other states.
* Failing to pay child support.
* Failing to use an ignition interlock device when ordered by a court.
* Stealing fuel from a gas station.
Sparky SPARKY SAYS:
DRIVING IS A PRIVILEGE, NOT A RIGHT - SO DRIVE RESPONSIBLY!
[line.gif]
A CHECKLIST FOR YOU Checkmark
You must have the following documents with you when you apply for a Missouri driver license, instruction permit or nondriver license.Take all the documents with you to a Department of Revenue Branch or Fee License Office when you apply for your permit/driver/nondriver license.
NEW MISSOURI RESIDENT TRANSFERRING AN OUT-OF-STATE DRIVER LICENSE (valid or expired no more than 184 days) * Two acceptable documents for proof of identity* * Out-of-State driver license (valid or expired no more than 184 days) NOTE: If you are upgrading your driver license, take the above documents with you to a Missouri State Highway Patrol (MSHP) examination location when you take the written, vision and road sign tests and/or driving test.
FIRST-TIME APPLICANT * Two acceptable documents for proof of identity* * Driver Examination Record (DOR-100) indicating successful completion of tests (not required for Nondriver license)
RENEWAL/DUPLICATE * Your current Missouri driver license, instruction permit or Nondriver license, or another acceptable document for proof of identity* * Renewal postcard (optional)
*Please refer to the list of acceptable documents for proof of identity/SSN in this chapter.
Note: Additional proof of identity and proof of SSN may be required if the documentation submitted is questionable, or if the license office clerk or MSHP examiner has reason to question the validity or authenticity of the documents, or needs further verification.
[line.gif] TOC | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | 13 | 14 | 15 | QUESTIONS | PHONE [line.gif]
Forms 
Online Services · News 
Related Links · New to Missouri? · Join the DOR team! · DOR Home Page · State Home Page
