U.S. Department of State
The U.S. Role in the Future of Afghanistan: From Relief Efforts to the Treatment of Women Paula J. Dobriansky, Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs Remarks to the Hartford World Affairs Council Hartford, Connecticut May 7, 2002
Thank you, Bill.
I am pleased to be with you today.
For more than 75 years the Hartford World Affairs Council has lived up to its purpose of "bringing the world to Connecticut," and for that I commend your President Alex Carl and Executive Director Marjorie Anderson.
I am honored that have you invited me so that I might share with you some thoughts on the future of Afghanistan and the role that the U.S. will play in that future.
Through my position as senior coordinator for refugee and humanitarian assistance for Afghanistan as well as my oversight of the Office of International Womens Issues, I have seen that Afghan problems are complex.
But at the same time, I am heartened by the real progress I see being made toward assuring a new era of peace and stability for Afghanistan.
Interestingly, I am speaking to you about this subject on a day remembered by many -- May 7.
It was on this day in 1945 that the official surrender of Germany was signed in Reims, France.
When the cease-fire went into effect the next day (V-E Day), the long war in Europe ended.
On May 7, 1945, the people of Europe were finally able to emerge from their ravaged cities and towns and take their first steps toward rebuilding their shattered lives.
I imagine though, that the days following May 7, 1945, were bittersweet days for them.
For once the warm joy of peace faded, they were left with a cold reality: that many of their homes, factories, hospitals, schools, and government buildings had to be rebuilt; that their fields had to be reclaimed and planted; that their children had to be fed, clothed, and educated so that they might enjoy the inheritance that had been bought for them at such a dear price.
We can look back now and see that the future of Europe was to be a largely peaceful and prosperous one -- even though the peace and prosperity of Central and Eastern Europe would take a while longer to achieve.
But at the time, Europes future prospects were far from certain.
It was only with the implementation of the Marshall Plan in 1947 that Europes long-term peace and stability were assured.
Much like the people of postwar Europe, today the people of Afghanistan survey their war-weary country and face an uncertain future.
But in many ways, Afghanistans situation is more dire.
It has been a battleground for a good part of the last 23 years.
Its economy has been broken; its infrastructure has been decimated; its people have been beaten down by hunger, disease, war, and repression.
And making this already bleak picture even bleaker is a 3-year drought that has further crippled Afghanistans ability to support its own people.
In 1947, Secretary of State George Marshall outlined his plan for recovery in Europe, saying, "Our policy is directed not against any country or doctrine, but against hunger, poverty, desperation, and chaos.
Its purpose should be the revival of a working economy in the world so as to permit the emergence of political and social conditions in which free institutions can exist."
President Bush has recognized the need to approach the postwar problems of Afghanistan in the same way that Marshall approached the postwar problems of Europe and Japan -- an approach which brought about, as the President put it, "a moral victory that resulted in better lives for individual human beings."
Though unlike the Marshall Plan, ours will be an Afghan-led program with international support, it will share the aim of bringing better lives -- indeed a better country -- to Afghans through humanitarian aid to alleviate the immediate suffering of the people, a reconstruction plan to stabilize the economy, and the formation of a democratic government that will respect the human rights of all its citizens.
Thus far, our non-military role in Afghanistan has been dominated by efforts to meet the most immediate and acute needs of the Afghan people -- the needs for food, water, shelter, and medicine.
As we progress in meeting them, we will broaden our outreach to include long-term objectives for the reconstruction of the country.
Though the humanitarian crisis in Afghanistan has worsened in the last year, these are problems that the United States has been working to solve there for years.
Since 1979, we have contributed more than $1 billion in humanitarian assistance to the Afghan people.
It has been a focal point of our international humanitarian agenda, receiving more American humanitarian aid than any other country for fiscal year 2001 -- even before September 11.
Since September 11, our support has increased sharply to meet the tremendous needs of the population in the wake of our war against terrorism.
Since October 1, 2001, the U.S. has contributed $366 million to Afghan relief.
And though the U.S. is by far the largest single aid provider to Afghanistan, we are by no means alone.
At the Tokyo Conference in January, the international community pledged $4.5 billion for the long-term reconstruction of Afghanistan.
Clearly, rebuilding Afghanistan will be a global effort requiring global resources.
Now, lets talk about where we are headed and about how life in Afghanistan is improving.
We have four objectives in our reconstruction program: to repatriate and resettle Afghan refugees; to restore food security and health services; to repair the damaged Afghan infrastructure and stabilize political and economic conditions there; and to establish a lasting system of good governance for the Afghan people.
These goals start with the most basic and vital elements of reconstruction and then build upon one another as Afghanistan emerges from crisis to calm.
I am pleased to report that progress toward the first objective has exceeded even our own expectations.
While the consensus opinion was that we would see a tremendous outflow of refugees from Afghanistan once the Taliban fell, the reality is that we have recently seen mostly the opposite --an influx of displaced Afghans returning home.
According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, in the last 3 months, approximately 400,000 Afghans were assisted in returning to their homes.
While there are still refugee issues to be solved, particularly on the Pakistani border, this is a hopeful start to permanently solving a complex problem.
The objectives of restoring food security and health care services are daunting tasks that are made even more difficult by the extended humanitarian crisis Afghanistan has suffered.
Thus, we must attack these problems literally from the ground up by building health clinics to provide basic care and by reclaiming the Afghan soil so that it might again feed the people.
We are dedicating over $10 million to improve health care by setting up clinics and training providers to operate them, by making available primary care, and by establishing a working public health system.
We envision a public health system that will educate Afghans about basic health, nutrition, and hygiene and that will continue vaccination campaigns such as the cooperative effort slated for this month to immunize 9 million Afghan children against measles.
A special emphasis will be placed on sorely neglected womens health issues in hopes of lowering the high maternal mortality rates that plague Afghanistan.
After years of war and drought, the food situation in Afghanistan remains in a red zone of severe shortage.
Afghanistans harsh recent history has left more than 6 million people at least partially dependent on food aid.
But the delivery of unprecedented amounts of food in record time has saved many lives.
Together with other humanitarian relief, the death toll from hunger was greatly diminished.
Since October of 2001, the UN World Food Program, with the support of USAID, has delivered over 400,000 tons of food to Afghanistan, of which more than 340,000 tons have been distributed throughout the country.
While we will continue our efforts to distribute food aid, we also want to bring a more lasting assurance of food security to Afghanistan by rehabilitating Afghan agriculture.
A good first step in that regard was taken recently with the delivery of 7000 tons of wheat seed to Afghan farmers whose seed stocks were otherwise too depleted to plant a crop.
The provision of agricultural staples and equipment, along with education for farmers and a rehabilitation of irrigation systems will help Afghanistan regain its agricultural self-sufficiency.
More than 80% of Afghans earn their living through agriculture, making the restoration of the agricultural sector vital to economic rebirth as well.
Our long-term goals for Afghanistan depend heavily on revitalizing the Afghan infrastructure so that a solid political and economic framework can emerge.
Here, I would like to mention a few things about our efforts to build an educational system because that is an investment in human capital and will ultimately help insure a stable future for Afghanistan.
When Afghan schools reopened in March, they were supplied by the U.S. with almost 10 million textbooks in the Dari and Pashto languages to teach science, math, and reading, as well as with 4,000 teacher training kits.
In addition, the U.S. will fund teams of teacher-trainers who will help Afghan educators develop curricula.
We also encourage education through support for an innovative food distribution program whereby families who send their children to school will not only have their children fed for the day, but their children will also bring home food supplies for the entire family.
We find this to be an especially helpful incentive for families to send their girls to school, often for the first time.
While education and infrastructural repair are central to Afghanistans long-term progress, a precursor to any national or regional stability is ending the illicit trafficking of narcotics.
The U.S. strongly supports the Afghan Interim Authoritys poppy eradication plan to prevent the production of opium.
We have endorsed a program of partial compensation with short-term cash for work projects for laborers.
We also look to strengthen the law enforcement capabilities and judicial capacity of Afghanistan -- and its neighbors -- so that the flow of opium into international markets may be stemmed and the financing of criminal activities halted.
The permanent stability of Afghanistan will depend on the establishment of what is often called "good governance" which includes building democratic institutions, upholding the rule of law, and insuring a participatory role in government for all Afghan citizens.
A representative and functioning government must be created, as called for in the Bonn Agreement.
The Loya Jirga process which will yield the plan for a transitional government until elections are held 2 years further down the road is moving forward.
But while we work toward a permanent government incorporating democratic ideals, we are also working toward building the societal supports of democracy like a free press.
We have distributed more than 30,000 radios to the public.
We are also facilitating training programs for Afghan journalists and helping equip them to start local media outlets so that Afghans may be informed of the political, economic, and social issues that affect them.
In assisting Afghans with the formation of a permanent government, we do not intend to install a clone of American democracy.
Rather, we hope that the permanent government will be consistent with both the unique culture and traditions of Afghanistan as well as democratic ideals of accountability, inclusion, transparency, and equality.
Only a democratic government specifically tailored to the needs of Afghans will change Afghanistan from a country of violence and poverty to one of stability and prosperity.
But the transition to democracy cannot be made without instilling in society a respect for the basic human rights and dignities of all Afghans -- including Afghan women.
We all know the oppressive conditions Afghan women suffered under during Taliban rule.
Their roles in society were largely confined to the four walls of their homes as they had no opportunity to engage in the political, economic or social life of the country; They were deprived of their rights to private property and free speech; And they were barred from access to equal justice, education, and health care.
But as President Bush has said: "Now is the time for America and the world to demonstrate more than just sympathy for past injustices.
We must work together to offer [Afghan women] real support for a better future."
I want to outline to you some of the tangible ways in which we are heeding this call.
In addition to the humanitarian and reconstruction programs I just described that will benefit all Afghans, we are working to reintegrate women into Afghan society as decision makers, organizers, and political leaders.
Possibly the most visible sign of change in Afghanistan is the appointment of women to important political roles after a long period in which women were not permitted to have any part in public life.
With the encouragement of the U.S., two women were appointed to prominent posts in the Afghan Interim Authority.
Three women have been appointed to the commission organizing the Emergency Loya Jirga in June where the Transitional Administration will be established.
We expect a large number of Afghan women to participate in this historic meeting.
Another sign of the undeniable changes sweeping over Afghanistan is the return of female students to Afghan schools.
While we incorporate young girls into the school system, womens higher education is also being encouraged through measures such as the refurbishment of the womens dormitory at the University of Kabul.
Now women students can continue their education by remaining on campus in a safe environment.
We are also bringing women back into their local economies so that they might become self-sufficient.
In addition to programs which will help provide employment opportunities for women, vocational training will be supplied where women can learn the skills they need to support themselves and their families.
In a nation filled with war widows, this will make a meaningful difference in the quality of life of the nation.
We are also looking to open the ranks of entrepreneurship to women by extending womens access to micro-credit.
Finally, I want to discuss what I feel is one of the most promising developments in our reconstruction efforts -- the U.S.-Afghan Womens Council.
The Council is a public-private partnership bringing together the resources of government, NGOs, and the private sector to forge a bright future for Afghan women.
It reaches across borders to include representatives from both countries in the formulation of concrete improvements for Afghan women.
I co-chair this council along with my Afghan counterpart, Vice Chair of the Afghan Interim Administration and Minister of Womens Affairs, Dr. Sima Samar, and Foreign Minister Abdullah.
On April 24, we held our first meeting to discuss ways in which women can actively participate in Afghanistans recovery.
Among the proposals we are pursuing is a program to bring women from key Afghan government ministries to the United States for computer training.
Additionally, we are planning to introduce other international visitor programs for potential women leaders to obtain firsthand experience of the U.S., as well as academic exchanges for university-level study, teaching, and English language training.
As this administration continues to pursue its agenda for bringing lasting peace and prosperity to Afghanistan, there are many challenges still to be faced.
Security issues highly impact our humanitarian plans.
Moreover, the reconstruction of Afghanistan should be an Afghan-led effort because international assistance efforts can only work if they are acceptable to the Afghan people.
Local involvement identifying local needs is a necessity to any lasting improvements.
These are concerns that color all of our efforts.
Though there are many paths that Afghanistan can take to its future, the one absolutely unacceptable path is that which leads back to a country where terrorists can operate.
After World War II, George Marshall realized that it was in Americas best interest to flood Europe with assistance so that the encroaching forces of Communism would be swept away.
And it is still in our best interest today to help Afghanistan so that we never see a resurgence of terrorism there.
Thank you.
[End] Released on May 7, 2002
