[head2.gif] Clues and Helpful Hints from Around the Nation - Pursuing the Press __________________________________________________________________ Pursuing the Press | Beyond the Anecdote | The Word Is Out | Online | Also Check Out | Youth Prevention Programs __________________________________________________________________ Sometimes our best source of information comes from people who have already addressed a problem or an issue you or your community are presently addressing.
In an effort to keep you abreast of current successes, the following articles and helpful hints are presented: Pursuing the Press- A compilation of successful media relations strategies and ideas.
Pursuing the Press What if you gave a party but forgot to send the invitations and no one came? Obviously, letting your friends know what is going on is critical to the success of your party.
Similarly, unless you let people know about the problems, successes and issues associated with underage drinking, and what your group is doing about it, they'll often never know.
Using the media is one very important key to the success of your mission.
The following advice and information is compiled from various sources who are successful in the area of media relations.
It contains everything from planning tips to increasing public support to effective letter writing.
The following topics are covered in this article:
1.
Writing Effective Letters to the Editor 2.
How to Get an Opinion/Editorial Published 3.
Making Letters and Phone Calls More Effective 4.
Gaining a Foothold in Talk Radio 5.
Gathering Public Support
Writing Effective Letters to the Editor Letters to the editor are an easy way for you to voice your opinion to your policy makers, and to educate people in your community about the issues you face.
You can use letters to correct or interpret facts in response to an inaccurate or biased article which has appeared, to explain the connection between a news item and your organization's priority issues, or to praise or criticize a recent article or editorial.
Whatever your purpose, be assured your letter will reach many people in your community.
Without exception, the "letters" section is one of the most often read section of any newspaper.
The following tips will help you fine tune your letter writing skills, and will increase your chances of getting published.
The following Steps to Success are offered.
Know the Policy - Find out the newspaper's policy for printing letters.
Some have requirements for length of letters, some want letters to be typewritten, and almost all require that you include your name, address and phone number.
(Of course your address and phone number would never be printed - most publications will want to call you before they print your letter to confirm that you really did write the letter and that you want to have it published.)
If the paper doesn't publish the requirements next to the letters they print, call and ask to whom you should address your letter, if they have any length restrictions, and in what format they would like the letter.
Be Timely - Writing a letter to the editor in response to a recent article increases your chances of getting published.
(Be sure to mention the name of the article and the date it was written in the beginning of your letter.)
You can also capitalize on recent news, events, or anniversaries.
Keep It Simple - Write letters to that are concise, informative and personal at the same time.
Keep your points short and clear, stick to one subject, and as a general rule, try to keep your letters to under three to four paragraphs in length.
Make your first sentence short, compelling and catchy.
Be direct, engaging, and even controversial.
Get Personal - Newspapers, at their core, are community entities.
Editors will be much more likely to publish a letter, and the letter will have much more impact, if it demonstrates local relevance.
Use Local Statistics - Use personal stories.
For example, if you or someone in your family has been adversely affected because of some aspect of underage drinking, you might talk about your experience in a letter to the editor relating to lack of sanctions for point of sales violations.
Use Names - Legislative aides know if a letter to the editor mentions a Representative or Senator's name, the legislator will see it.
They care about how they are being perceived in the district.
The same holds true for local policy makers.
Urge your readers to support your position and to let their elected officials know their views.
Use your credentials.
If you have expertise in the area you are writing about, say it!
Remember the Follow-up - Don't be discouraged if your letter is not printed.
Keep trying.
You can even submit a revised letter with a different angle on the issue at a later date.
And if your letter is published be sure to clip your letter, attach a personal note, and send it to important policy makers.
Think Strategically - Think about a letter to the editor as a regular strategic tool.
Target several different papers, newsletters or magazines in your district or state at the same time and encourage others to explore different angles on the same issue.
(Adapted from 20/20 Vision, a grassroots organization dedicated to protecting the environment and promoting peace, and in assisting local grassroots organizations in advocacy.)
Writing and Publishing an Op-Ed Opinion/editorials, commonly known as "op-eds", are articles which appear opposite the editorial page of local, state and national newspapers.
They are written by local citizens, experts, leaders of organizations -- people like you.
And they are an extremely powerful and cost-effective tool to educate a large number of people about your issues, and to influence policy makers.
The following Steps to Success are emphasized:
Timing is everything - Timing is the most important factor in deciding to submit an op-ed.
Is Congress or the state legislature or the city council about to cast a controversial vote? Is there an appropriate holiday or anniversary? Can you tie the op-ed to the release of a new report, a recent article, a popular movie, or event (tragic or otherwise) in your community?
Think About Style - Writing, editing and distributing an op-ed is easier than you think.
Keep your text to between 500 and 800 words (about 3 pages double spaced).
Stay focused on one issue.
Think creatively and try to be original.
Highlight the issue's relevance.
Begin with a short vignette illustrating how the issue affects an individual or group of people to drive home why the newspaper's readers "need to know."
(Tip: read op-eds before starting so you see how they are styled.)
Use Local Statistics - In an op-ed focusing on Underage Drinking, you should mention the number of violations, citations, crashes and similar relevant data for your community, region or state.
Op-eds should, by their "biased" approach, provoke discussion, controversy and response.
This will be much more likely to occur if you use local data.
It's the Messenger and the Message - Finding the best author, or signer, of the op-ed is also critical in achieving the publication of the article in addition to maximizing its impact.
Ask a local doctor, business executive, local elected official to sign the op-ed ö- choose anyone who may be perceived as having an interesting perspective on the issues.
If you are trying to get policy makers to sponsor or vote for a particular piece of legislation, say so.
Mentioning the member's name guarantees s/he sees it.
In addition, op-eds should be informative and provide practical solutions for the problem(s) you have presented.
The Basic Questions
How do I format an op-ed? Double space your text.
Provide a suggested title, the author's name and identification.
You may want to include a short biographical paragraph about the author, including residence and experience relevant to the topic.
You can include a short cover letter, highlighting the most important aspects of the op-ed, but it is not required.
When should I send the op-ed? You will need to allow some time for the media to review and edit the piece, usually about one to two weeks.
If your op-ed is timed to parallel an important event or anniversary in your community, you will also want to make sure that the ideas in the op-ed have time to resonate with policy makers once the piece is published.
Allow just enough time for you to clip the article and send it with a letter to your local politician, legislator, business owner or whoever else in your community is a key individual.
Where do I send my op-ed? Identify the largest newspaper in your state or area, for maximum exposure.
Call the paper first to ask for the name of the op-ed page editor, or if it is a local paper with a circulation of less than 40,000, you may have to send it to the editorial page editor, or the chief editor.
Get the correct spelling and address and send it off.
How should I follow-up? After 3-10 days, you should call the editor and ask if your op-ed is under consideration.
Think of your follow-up call as an opportunity to educate the editor about the issue -- even if your op-ed is not published.
If your rapport is good, suggest a meeting, or ask if there is a reporter who should get a copy as background on the issue.
The result could be a relationship with the editor, which will prove helpful for the future.
What can I do with the op-ed after it is published? Make sure to clip your published op-ed, make a copy of it, including the name of the paper, the date it was published, and send it to key community leaders or policy makers as soon as possible.
Keep copies to use for your organization's promotion efforts.
(Adapted from "Op-Eds: A Cost-Effective Strategy for Advocacy," by Denice Zeck and Edmund Rennolds, published by the Benton Foundation and the Center for Strategic Communications.)
Making Letters and Phone Calls to Policy Makers More Effective Writing letters and making phone calls to government officials, corporate and community leaders and other policy makers are simple ways to impact policy.
Policy makers do pay attention when even a moderate number of people contact them about an issue.
Here are a few tips on how to make sure your letters and phone calls have the greatest impact.
When You Write - The more personal your letter is, the more influence it has.
Say what's on your mind and in your heart.
Use your own words; you don't have to write like an expert to have influence.
Describe briefly how the policy or legislation in question affects you personally or affects people where you live.
Consider handwriting your letter if your handwriting is legible.
Computer generated mass mail is getting so sophisticated that it often looks as if it has been done by an individual.
Handwritten letters assure the recipient knows the letter really comes from an individual.
If you prefer to type a letter, make sure you sign it with a handwritten post script.
Be brief, clear and specific.
Stick to one page if possible.
Begin by stating the reasons for your letter.
Then write about your personal concerns and experiences and add any other information you may have.
Close with a specific request -- that the policy maker state publicly his or her position on an issue, that s/he take a specific action or vote a particular way -- or make a strong summary statement.
Include your address on your letter as an envelope can get lost.
Use your business or organization letterhead stationery.
Be courteous and reasonable.
Show respect for the people you contact, even when you disagree with them.
When You Call - You might begin by saying, "This is Jane Doe calling from Anytown about Issue XYZ and I'd like to leave a message for Policy Maker Smith."
Ask to speak to the individual who deals with the issue about which you're calling.
If s/he is not available, leave a message.
When you leave a message, be sure to state what you're calling about.
Ask for a written response to your request.
Don't be intimidated.
You're a concerned citizen; you don't have to be an expert.
Some Optional Enhancements - Enclose an article that has a bearing on the issue, policy or legislation in question.
If you have any personal association with the policy maker, let her or him know.
Nothing is more effective in getting officials' attention than being able to say you've worked on their campaigns, or been active in support of a policy decision and so forth.
Write or call a second time.
Follow-up letters have a much stronger impact than an initial communication.
Thank the individual for taking a stand you agree with or ask a question about unsatisfactory answers.
A Word About Faxes and E-mail - Avoid faxes to Congress and the administration.
Many congressional offices find faxes intrusive and prefer letters that arrive by mail.
Faxes may be appropriate if there is an urgent action or a last minute vote.
Before you E-mail a legislative or administrative office, call to confirm the address.
Ask if the E-mail is checked daily.
Also ask for a response to your message once it has been received.
Use E-mail only when you are sure the decision makers you are targeting are reading and responding to the messages.
(Adapted from 20/20 Vision, a grassroots organization dedicated to protecting the environment and promoting peace, and in assisting local grassroots organizations in advocacy.)
Gaining a Foothold in Talk Radio According to the Radio Advertising Bureau, "Americans average about three hours of radio listening per day.
Two out of three Americans are listening to the radio during prime time, and radio is the first morning news source for most people."
Nearly half of all American adults now listen to talk radio for at least an hour a week and many name it as their principal source of current and political information.
Conservatives have long recognized radio as a powerful method of reaching Americans, and have developed targeted, strategic efforts to market their messages within this medium.
For example, a recent survey by Work Press Review estimated 15-20 million Americans listen to conservative talk show host Rush Limbaugh daily.
Characteristically, talk radio as a news or research source is not as factual or informative as print media, but there is no better way for you to support particular policies, refute common fallacies, advance overall ideas, or, most importantly, educate and inspire citizens to take action.
Research has shown that the listening audience for this medium is "remarkably non ideological," and in fact, tune in just to hear a diversity of opinion.
Those who typically call in are ten times more likely to claim an (usually conservative) ideological identity.
It is for this reason that your voice and ideas are of such critical importance.
Even more important, however, is the fact that every radio phone-in call increases the effectiveness of your group's letters and phone calls to policy makers.
Citizen activists can get involved in talk radio by calling in to talk programs, or appearing as guests.
The beginner's tips below are designed specifically for call-ins, but will make any foray into talk radio as easy and as effective as your letters to policy makers.
What Is This "Talk Radio Phenomenon?" - Defining radio is no simple task.
Most stations describe themselves as a particular format such as classical, country, rock, news, sports, Christian, talk or "other."
Even with these definitions, however, a single station can still have as many as 20 different programs at different times of the day and week that run the gamut of formats.
FM radio, on average, attracts more listeners.
Stations on the FM band are usually more mass marketed, and formats tend toward a greater percentage of music due to the stereo sound quality capabilities of the band.
AM radio usually specializes more, and the majority of the talk, all-news, all-sports and evangelical stations are found here.
The much talked about "talk radio phenomenon" is mostly occurring on the AM dial.
Some FM and AM stations are public, part of the federally-sponsored Corporation for Public Broadcasting, and rely upon government funding and listener donations for a substantial portion of operating costs.
Commercial stations typically depend on advertising revenue for operating costs.
The different programs on a station are produced nationally then syndicated by a radio network (similar in theory to a television network, but available on a show-by-show, paid basis) or produced locally.
You might remember that in 1987, the Reagan Administration rescinded the fairness doctrine for radio and television broadcasters.
In other words, this type of media is under no legal obligation to balance a political issue.
When participating in talk radio, you will most frequently be working with talk programs on the AM dial that utilize guest speakers, and question and answer sessions.
You will ideally be calling locally produced programs or national programs syndicated to your local stations.
Study the Subject - Knowing the ownership and format of the stations you listen to helps you target your actions for maximum effectiveness.
Michael Harrison, editor and president of Talkers, a leading industry publication states, "Know your show, know your host, know your station.
Not understanding where the listeners are coming from could actually hurt your cause."
Keep in mind, you don't have to call in to Rush Limbaugh your first time - or any time for that matter.
Friendly and neutral forums need to hear from listeners who agree in order to prove to station managers and sponsors that they are wanted programs.
Mobilizing call-ins to guests sympathetic to your causes is one important way to build support for your efforts.
Listen to as many programs as you can, on a number of your area stations.
Listen to the types of callers that make it on air.
Note to yourself which callers grab your ear, and remember their positive qualities.
Keep in mind that local stations and programs will be easier to contact than large market or nationally syndicated programs like "Larry King" and "Rush Limbaugh," which have a person who screens calls for the host, in addition to a regular busy signal.
When you think you have decided on a station and particular show to target, listen at least three times in order to determine format, style, political leaning.
Pay attention to announcements of upcoming guests that will address your priority issues.
In listening to your target, note any patterns the host seems to have.
Listen for the length of the initial presentation from the guest, the types of statements and questions that the host views as good lead-ins for a caller.
Define Your Goal - If you concentrate on your goal the entire time you are on the phone, your radio call-in will be much more effective.
Remember that you generally have less than two minutes to air your point of view.
Jot down your key points, keeping your most important fact or sound bite at the top.
Some Sample Call Types:
Encourage Participation in our Democracy - A guest is talking about the findings of a recent public opinion poll on citizen satisfaction with the recent crackdown on underage sales by retailers.
You call to relate your experiences writing to policy makers and legislators, encourage all citizens to regularly communicate with their policy makers and give phone numbers of key policy makers.
Inspire Action on an Upcoming Vote or Decision - The guest is talking about the budget.
You call to educate listeners about the need for adequate enforcement of local policies with respect to the underage drinking issue, and inform listeners that a vote is upcoming on the law enforcement budget, which speaks directly to the number of officers assigned to patrols.
Educate Citizens or Clarify Popular Fallacies - The guest is discussing federal regulations and the burden they impose on business and citizens.
You call to point out a "good news" regulation, Mandatory Server/Seller Training, and how it, like many other important protections for our health, is often under attack as a burdensome regulation without realizing how the regulation really saves community dollars by reducing crime, crashes and so forth.
Then ask the listeners to take action by calling or writing to policy makers to let them know their support or ask them to reconsider their stance.
Ready? Then Pick Up The Phone!
Once you have decided that you have something to say and you pick up the phone, be prepared for some potential delays.
You may get through the first time to a small local radio station, but in most markets, and especially on nationally syndicated shows, be prepared to be kept on hold, or to reach a busy signal numerous times.
Especially with the larger shows, you may want to begin calling 10-15 minutes prior to airtime in order to increase your chances of getting through.
When you do get through, you may be questioned about what you are going to say.
Offer your main point and identify yourself as a concerned citizen.
You may want to wait to identify your organizational affiliation and save it instead for your closing point on the air.
With a particularly conservative host, try to agree at least nominally with a recent point when you are being questioned about what you are going to say.
The listening audience will also be more receptive to ideas more directly related to the host's since they tune in for that host's program.
Some disagreement with the host's point of view is likely to help gain the host's attention and perhaps get you on air, but keep it minimal.
Crafting your message in populist terms, keeping in mind compassion, common sense and understanding, will help assure your message is well received.
(Adapted from "Is Anyone Listening?," a 20/20 Vision study that identified the most effective citizen lobbying techniques.
20/20 Vision is a grassroots organization dedicated to protecting the environment, promoting peace, and assisting local grassroots organizations in advocacy.)
Need to Gather Public Support but Unsure How?
Many effective advocacy organizations used to begin each campaign with a policy proposal, then work from the policy goals to eventually defining the public information and education needs, campaign by campaign.
Now most organizations believe it is more effective to begin with a media market, define the public education messages and themes, and thus create a foundation of public support and community dialogue for change.
That "grassroots" foundation then drives subsequent administrative action, legislative lobbying or advocacy.
The following consideration when doing your planning activities may prove helpful to your organizing efforts.
1.
Issue Focus: What is the main issue focus of the campaign and how does it relate to your organization's national or local priorities?
2.
Goals: When identifying your goals, ask yourself these questions: What are our long term objectives? What is a victory? What do we want to accomplish? What are our political goals? What are our organizational goals? Goals must be clear, shared and communicated, well articulated and capable of being translated into quantifiable objectives and actions.
You should also ask: How will this particular "issue focus" advance the overall goals of the organization?
3.
Central or Core Topic: What is the key message you hope to deliver through this campaign? What are the key themes you will use to reinforce the message? What story will you tell to reinforce the message and themes?
4.
Organizational Considerations: You should plan to come out of the issue campaign organizationally stronger than you went in.
List the resources you bring to the campaign.
In addition, list the specific ways you want your organization to be strengthened by the campaign.
For example, if your organization is looking for more leaders, more experienced volunteer base, more media visibility and/or new community partners, will this campaign help or hurt your efforts? You should also list any weaknesses and/or internal problems that may prevent you from conducting a successful campaign.
Come up with a plan to address those problems.
5.
Target Audiences: Which key audiences will your campaign, its themes and its organizing tactics emphasize? You should be as specific as possible.
For example, in a campaign designed to address underage drinking would you emphasize retail sales outlets, or parents and others concerned about youth, or young people and students, or none or all of these groups? To a large degree, your ultimate effectiveness depends on how well you define your target audience.
6.
Allies/Opponents: Who cares about your issue enough to join you in your campaign effort? Who can you bring in to help? Who else is affected by the issue you are working on? Also, who are your opponents? What are their strengths and weaknesses? What will they do/spend to oppose you? How can you counter their strengths?
7.
Targets: A target is always a person (or group of people) who has the power to grant your demands, not an institution or elected body.
You need to ask yourself what power you have over your target.
Is that person a friend, an enemy or neutral? Who besides your organization has power over your target? What motivates or interests your target?
8.
Tactics: Tactics are actions taken by your group that will bring the desired response from your target.
For each target, list the tactics that each constituent group can best use to make its power felt.
Tactics should be fun and demonstrate real power.
Tactics can raise the morale of your members, get media coverage and demonstrate power directly to your target.
Examples include radio spots, rallies, literature drops, scorecards, street theater, letters to the editor and petition presentations.
9.
Timelines: Make timelines and assign individual responsibilities for the campaign.
Include all major campaign events, tactics and deadlines.
10.
A Written Plan: There's an old organizing expression: "If it ain't written, it ain't a plan."
Put your campaign strategy on paper.
People need to see it, agree to it, and use it as a road map for their work.
Having a plan on paper keeps you on course and provides you with the means to hold everyone accountable.
(Adapted from the The Planet, May 1997, Volume 4, number 4, "Planning a Grassroots Campaign" by Alita Paine) __________________________________________________________________
Home | Resource Center | Project Planner | Jumplist | Helpful Hints | About UDPP | GHSA
