Frames | No Frames Celebrate Holidays In The USA [celebrate_holi_in_the_USA.jpg] Table Of Contents __________________________________________________________________ Introduction National Celebrations: Unit 1: New Year's Day (January 1) Unit 2: Martin Luther King Day (Third Monday in January) Unit 3: Abraham Lincoln's Birthday (February 12) Unit 4: George Washington's Birthday (February 22) Unit 5: Arbor Day (April 22) Unit 6: Mother's Day (Second Sunday in May) Unit 7: Memorial Day (Last Monday in May) Unit 8: Flag Day (June 14) Unit 9: Father's Day (Third Sunday in June) Unit 10: Independence Day (July 4) Unit 11: Labor Day (First Monday in September) Unit 12: Columbus Day (Second Monday in October) Unit 13: Veterans Day (November 11) Unit 14: Thanksgiving Day (Fourth Thursday in November) Unit 15: Christmas Day (December 25) Religious Celebrations: Unit 16: Passover (March/April) Unit 17: Easter (A Sunday in March or April) Unit 18: Hanukkah (November/December) Fun Days: Unit 19: St. Valentine's Day (February 14) Unit 20: April Fool's Day (April 1) Unit 21: Halloween (October 31)
Ethnic and Regional Celebrations: Unit 22: Chinese New Year (February) Unit 23: Mardigras (February/March) Unit 24: St. Patrick's Day (March 17) Unit 25: Cinco De Mayo (May 5) Unit 26: Native American Pow-Wows (March-August) Unit 27: Other American Celebrations
Introduction
Go Back
Happy New Year! April Fool! Trick or Treat! Merry Christmas!
CELEBRATE! HOLIDAYS IN THE U.S.A. is an introductory survey of the historical and social background of American holidays.
It is an upper-intermediate to advanced level English as a Foreign Language (EFL) reader for overseas students of American language and culture interested in the subject of American holidays.
People in every culture celebrate holidays.
Although the word "holiday" literally means "holy day," most American holidays are not religious, but commemorative in nature and origin.
Because the nation is blessed with rich ethnic heritage it is possible to trace some of the American holidays to diverse cultural sources and traditions, but all holidays have taken on a distinctively American flavor.
In the United States, the word "holiday" is synonymous with "celebration!"
In the strict sense, there are no national holidays in the United States.
Each of the 50 states has jurisdiction over its holidays.
In practice, however, most states observe the federal ("legal") public holidays, even though the President and Congress can legally designate holidays only for federal government employees.
Ten holidays per year are proclaimed by the federal government.
They are as follows: New Year's Day (January 1) Martin Luther King Day (traditional - January 15) (official - third Monday in January) George Washington's Birthday (traditional - February 22) (official - third Monday in February) Memorial Day (traditional - May 30) (official - last Monday in May) Independence Day (July 4) Labor Day (first Monday in September) Columbus Day (traditional - October 12) (official - second Monday in October) Veterans' Day (traditional - November 11) (official - second Monday in November) Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November) Christmas (December 25)
In 1971, the dates of many federal holidays were officially moved to the nearest Monday by then-President Richard Nixon.
There are four holidays which are not necessarily celebrated on Mondays: Thanksgiving, New Year's Day, Independence Day and Christmas.
When New Year's Day, Independence Day, or Christmas falls on a Sunday, the next day is also a holiday.
When one of these holidays falls on a Saturday, the previous day is also a holiday.
Federal government offices, including the post office, are always closed on all federal legal holidays.
Schools and businesses close on major holidays like Independence Day and Christmas but may not always be closed, for example, on George Washington's birthday or Veterans' Day.
Federal legal holidays are observed according to the legislation of individual states.
The dates of these holidays, and others, are decided upon by each state government, not by the federal (national) government.
Each state can agree on the same date that the President has proclaimed, such as Thanksgiving.
State legislation can also change the date of a holiday for its own special commemoration.
Waterloo, New York, for instance, always observes Memorial Day on May 30 rather than on the fourth Monday in May, as this was the original date on which Waterloo founded the commemoration.
Cities and towns can decide not to celebrate a federal legal holiday at all.
However, the majority of the states (and the cities and towns within them) usually choose the date or day celebrated by the rest of the nation.
There are other "legal" or "public" holidays which are observed at the state or local level.
The closing of local government offices and businesses will vary.
Whether citizens have the day off from work or not depends on local decisions.
Some "legal" or "public" holidays are specific only to an individual state.
For example, Nebraska always celebrates Arbor Day on April 22, the birthday of the originator of the holiday.
Since Arbor Day originated as a treeplanting day, different states change the date depending on the best season for planting trees in their region: Hawaiians plant trees on the first Friday in November.
You can thumb through an ordinary calendar and discover many special days i.e. "minor holidays" which are observed by a relatively small number of people or by a particular interest group.
For example, "Girl Scouts' Birthday" (March 12), "Citizenship Day" (September 17), "United Nations Day" (October 24) would have limited observance.
"Hog Callers' Day" would have even less.
Events involving famous Americans, living or dead have a wider appeal.
Many Americans may have forgotten the exact date when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated (November 22, 1963), but they remember exactly where they were and what they were doing when they first learned about his tragic death.
Other days commemorate events which may be personally significant for one generation but have loss relevance for another.
For example, Pearl Harbor Day (December 7) marks the day when Japanese Imperial Forces attacked Hawaii in 1941 and brought the US into World War II.
President Franklin D. Roosevelt in his address to the nation referred to the attack as "a day that will live in infamy".
Adults and children of the time have a personal recollection of the day.
The younger generations of today may know of the event from their history books only.
Other holidays such as "Groundhog Day" (February 2) are whimsically observed at least in the media.
The day is associated with folklore which has grown up in rural America.
It is believed by some, if the groundhog comes out of its hole in the ground and sees its shadow on that day it will become frightened and jump back in.
This means there will be at least six more weeks of winter.
If it doesn't see its shadow, it will not be afraid and spring will begin shortly.
Critics of the proliferation of holidays point an accusing finger at greeting card manufacturers and other entrepreneurs.
The critics say that "Holiday X" is simply promoted to get people to buy their wares.
"Secretary's Day", or "Grandparents Day" might fall into this category.
Obviously, no effort has been made to be comprehensive in treating all holidays that Americans would possibly celebrate.
Only "major" holidays, recognized if not celebrated by Americans in general, have been included here.
Each unit is introduced by a reading passage about the background of the American holiday or celebration.
When relevant, a speech, song, or poem pertaining to the holiday follows.
There might be a special feature about the holiday, such as regional or religious factors which make the celebration different.
Each unit has a glossary of words specific to the unit.
