U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service logo Partners HOME!
FEATURE STORIES OVERVIEW PROJECTS ACCOMPLISHMENTS PARTNERS CULTURAL RESOURCES TECHNIQUES
habitat restoration photos for Partners projects
SITE MAP WHO TO CONTACT
U.S. FISH 
HABITAT MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES grass, duck, frog and fish drawing
Seasonal Predator Management to Improve Duck Nest Success
Drawing of mallard ducks in a wetland
Introduction
Research has shown that intensive predator removal can improve waterfowl nest success, especially in a landscape of intensive agriculture and limited waterfowl habitat.
However, sustaining high nest success means annually removing large numbers of animals, with all the attendant costs and controversy.
Improving nest success on a large scale is better accomplished through wetland and grassland habitat restoration.
Direct predator removal is expensive, labor intensive, and controversial, but does have application in controlled situations.
Mammalian predator management was tested in a field trial conducted by the Fish and Wildlife Service through the Mid-Continent Waterfowl Management Project.
The following summary report was written by Jim Piehl and edited by Rick Dornfeld.
History
Lesser scaup chick The earliest directive for the Mid-Continent Waterfowl Management Project (MCWMP) identified the fact that "predator control is essential to maximizing waterfowl production."
It further pointed out that "other measures may not be effective without predator control when management areas become islands of habitat in intensive agricultural areas."
In their study of a highly productive dabbling duck nesting area in South Dakota, Duebbert and Lokemoen (1980) concluded that "the major environmental factors that contributed to the high nest density and hatching success included a complex of high quality natural wetlands; a field of undisturbed tall, dense vegetation for nesting; and rigid control of predators."
The MCWMP initiated a pilot predator management operation in three western Minnesota counties in an effort to increase duck nest success in upland grasslands.
The predator management project was designed to increase duck nest success on trial areas by removing predators during the nesting season.
The objectives of the Mid-Continent Waterfowl Management Plan (Plan) were to increase the number of Skunk drawing duck breeding pairs in the three-county pilot area by 50 percent (later changed to one duck nest per acre) and to increase observed duck nest success from less than 20 percent to 60 percent or more (later changed to 40 percent Mayfield success).
The Plan states that, "It has become increasingly apparent that heavy mammalian predation on duck nests posses a serious threat to satisfactory recruitment in many localities in the mid-continent region.
Predation by red fox, raccoons, raccoon drawing striped skunks, badgers and Franklin's ground squirrels is the main source of duck nest losses observed in recent studies."
In one of its objectives, the Plan proposed to increase dabbling duck nest success by seasonal reduction of predators.
This set the stage for the seasonal predator management program that was operated each spring and summer for seven years.
Striped skunks and ground squirrels were removed in the first and second years.
All of the above-mentioned predators were removed during the third through seventh years.
Results
First Year...
Baseline information on the project area showed nest success ranging from 0 percent to 32 percent without predator management.
(All nest success figures in this report are corrected with the 40 percent Mayfield method.)
Only the 47-square mile Mineral Lake Unit was trapped in the first year.
Prior to the start of the spring trapping program, landowners were contacted to secure permission to trap unprotected furbearers (skunks and Franklin's ground squirrels) on their land and to explain the predator management program to them.
Beginning in April, live traps were distributed throughout the unit on private as well as public lands in the Mineral Lake Unit.
This was done with the concurrence of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (MnDNR).
Live traps were set at a density of about two per square mile and moved periodically to ensure maximum exposure to predators.
They were set near roads to facilitate trap checking and to maximize the size of the trapline that each person could operate.
The traps were baited with sardines and chicken eggs and checked daily through early July.
The skunks and Franklin's ground squirrels that were captured were dispatched with firearms and buried.
All other animals that were captured were released.
From estimates of two skunks per square mile as a typical spring population in the project area, removal of 77 skunks represented a very high total catch for the unit when water acres were deducted from the total area.
In this regard, the effort was highly successful and landowner acceptance was unanimous--no complaints or refusals.
For maximum control, only U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service personnel were involved in the field work, even though local sportsmen's clubs indicated a willingness to participate.
The effectiveness of the seasonal predator management program was monitored by comparing duck nest success on predator management areas with success on areas without predator management.
Nests were located in upland grasslands with a three-person crew using two 4x4 vehicles dragging a 60-meter chain.
Two to four nest searches were conducted between mid-May and mid-July with intervals of about 20 days between searches.
Nests were followed until all of them had either hatched or been destroyed, which usually lasted until mid-August.
Duck nest success in the first year averaged 18 percent within the skunk removal area compared to 3 percent on nearby untrapped areas.
The first year of the organized trapping program proved that duck nest success could be increased by removing unprotected predators and that the program was acceptable to private landowners.
Second Year...
The adjacent 49-square mile Pomme de Terre Unit was trapped as well as the Mineral Lake Unit.
The skunks and Franklin's ground squirrels that were captured were dispatched with firearms and buried; the nontarget animals were released.
Nest success in the second year was 21 percent in trapped areas and 5 percent in untrapped areas.
A provisional Environmental Assessment (EA) was written at this time on Seasonal Predator Population Reduction to Enhance Duck Production.
This was written to satisfy agency program requirements and did not go through a formal review and comment procedure.
In the sixth year, the formal EA process was completed.
Third Year...
Coordination with the MnDNR resulted in mutually agreeable expansion of seasonal predator management both in area and target species for the third year.
The 49-square mile Solberg Lake Unit was added to the operation, bringing the total trapping area to 145 square miles, 24 square miles of which is water, roads, and buildings.
Trapping was extended to included protected small furbearers, namely red fox, raccoon, and badgers.
Removal of these species was limited to federally owned Waterfowl Production Areas (WPA's) within the trapping units (8.5 square miles), whereas skunks and Franklin's ground squirrels were removed from all public and private land throughout the trapping units.
Animals were disposed of with firearms or by injection of T-61, a euthanasia solution.
Live traps were used on both private and public lands.
The use of snares, off-set jaw leghold traps, digging out dens, and guns for the removal of small furbearers was confined to WPA's.
Also, control of Franklin's ground squirrels by baiting burrows with strychnine-treated milo was tested on one WPA.
All actions by the Service were carried out within the limits of Minnesota law.
Raccoon and fox were taken in the spring under the authority of Chapter 100.271, Subdivision 7, of the Minnesota Game and Fish laws.
The MnDNR agreed that under this provision, the Service has the authority to control the listed species.
The taking of badger in the spring is conditional, by use of a special permit issued by MnDNR.
Because of public interest in the taking of State-protected species, the concept of spring trapping of fox, raccoon, and badger was subjected to public scrutiny before the third year trapping season began.
At public meetings, coinciding with regular Game and Fish Club meetings in Fergus Falls, Ashby, Barrett, Evansville, Brandon, and Alexandria, the public was given the opportunity to react to the predator removal proposal.
Presentations were also made to the county commissioners in Ottertail, Grant, and Douglas Counties.
Local State legislators were given a personal briefing on the project.
Regular mail and telephone contact was maintained with MnDNR field personnel.
Landowners living next to WPA's in the trapping units were informed of trapping programs by direct mail and personal follow-up contacts.
Township chairmen in each affected township were also contacted by mail.
The third year seasonal predator management program is designed to address the concerns of people interested in the long-term consequences to furbearer populations caused by our taking of these predators in the spring.
Reduction of predator populations inside the three units was temporary at best.
Predator scent post survey data compiled by MnDNR showed that all species trapped during the April-June period were present inside the predator management units in September.
Population indices from scent post surveys for raccoon, skunk, and fox were similar on survey routes inside and outside predator management units.
Although the decrease in predator numbers did not last long after the traps were removed, there was a substantial increase in nest success by ground nesting ducks in the trapping units.
The baiting of Franklin's ground squirrel burrows with strychnine-treated milo was tested on one WPA within the Mineral Lake Predator Management Unit.
An attempt was made to locate all burrows on the WPA.
In accordance with Minnesota law, the treated milo had to be applied underground in the burrow rather than above ground beside the burrow.
It was applied by inserting a funnel device in the burrow and adding one-half teaspoon of treated milo to each burrow.
It proved to be very difficult to locate all the burrows in the tall dense grasslands.
In order to be effective, the milo had to be replaced after each significant rainfall or at least once per week during dry periods.
It appeared that egg predation by Franklin's ground squirrels did decrease on the treated WPA.
Based on this very limited test, it was concluded that unless a lot of cheap labor is available, this method of ground squirrel control is not practical.
The goal of 40 percent nest success was achieved in the Mineral Lake Unit in the third year after 3 years of predator management.
Nest success throughout the Fergus Falls Wetland Management District without predator management was calculated to be 14 percent overall.
This is up from the 6-9 percent.
A possible reason for the apparent increased nest success is the fact that the red fox population index is down 29 percent from second year levels (MnDNR Scent Post Surveys).
Raccoons were reported to be down 44 percent and skunks down 25 percent.
Many area trappers reported low catches of red fox in the area in the third year.
Some trappers have indicated a concern that our activities in predator reduction, especially our spring take of red fox, is impacting their trapping success.
Discussion continued with the area trappers.
Fourth Year...
Aboveground bait boxes were tested in an attempt to find a more efficient method of ground squirrel control.
Two WPA's within the Mineral Lake Unit were selected as trial areas.
Trapping data from previous years indicated that ground squirrels were present on both WPA's.
Black plastic boxes were placed at the rate of one per 5 acres and baited with zinc phosphide oat pellets.
One ounce of bait was placed loosely in the tray with approximately 8 ounces in plastic packages alongside.
Baited boxes were staked down with metal rods and locations were marked with willow switches.
Bait boxes were set out in mid-April, checked twice during the period of May-June, and removed by July 15.
Little or no use of bait was noted.
From this very limited trial, it appeared that the bait or method of distribution was not effective in reducing ground squirrel populations on the treated WPA's.
Travel lanes were mowed through residual vegetation in the fall of the third year on several WPA's in preparation for trapping and snaring during the spring of the fourth year.
This was done to facilitate early trapping and snaring of fox on these units before whelping occurred.
This early trapping was planned to reduce the destruction of early nests and predation on early nesting mallards and pintails.
Travel lanes were mowed in October and baited with parts of waste animal carcasses in January.
Aerial flights were conducted in February to determine the presence of fox and active den sites.
MnDNR rescinded the snaring permits, so fox trapping was delayed until the first week of April when weather conditions allowed the use of steel traps.
Off-set jaw steel traps were replaced with padded-jaw traps.
This was done to ensure that the steel trapping was done in the most humane manner possible.
Several difficulties were noticed with the padded-jaw traps.
First, they were more difficult to set because of the additional mechanical devices and the attachment of the chain.
Their response time was slower because of their increased mass.
Also, more animals pulled out of the padded-jaw traps, especially raccoons.
These characteristics were also reported by Linscombe and Wright (1988) in their evaluation of padded-jaw traps.
In the third year, there were some objections voiced by local trappers concerning springtime trapping of fox on WPA's.
By the end of the fourth year trapping season, these concerns were no longer heard.
The program by then was supported by most local citizens and politicians.
Many questions have been raised about the cost effectiveness of seasonal predator management.
The level of effort described in this report assumes one person working April through June at a U.S. Government GS-5 salary rate.
Costs were $7,000 for labor and equipment.
One person with limited trapping experience can cover 50 square miles a day if he or she traps skunks from all land within the 50-square mile block and traps protected species such as fox, raccoon, and badger only from 5 to 7 square miles of publicly owned land within the block.
The estimated cost per extra duck produced from this level of effort is $2.00, assuming the level of nest success achieved in the Mineral Lake Unit.
The fourth year spring reduction of predator populations within the three units appeared to be temporary, as it did in the third year.
The September predator scent post surveys indicated that all species trapped during the April-June periods were again present by autumn.
The impact of spring predator reduction on duck nest success, however, was apparent.
Fifth Year...
The seasonal predator management program was operated in the same manner in the fourth year, except that toxicants were not used to take Franklin's ground squirrels.
No efficient methods were found to distribute the toxicants over a relatively large area of grassland and still remain within the constraints of Minnesota State law.
Opposition was anticipated from national groups concerned with the humane treatment of animals, so they were kept informed about the program and were invited to visit the field operations.
In the fifth year, a representative of the Humane Society of America and Mr. Harvey Nelson, Regional Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, visited the predator management operation.
During the field trip, the scope and objectives of the operation were discussed.
The Human Society of America agreed the project was controlled and reasonable and confined to a specific period of time within a well-defined area.
The Humane Society of America voiced no complaints about the project after this field visit.
The results of the first five years of predator management were presented at the Eighth Great Plains Wildlife Damage Control Workshop in Rapid City, South Dakota (Doty and Rondeau 1987).
Sixth Year...
The seasonal predator management program was operated in the same manner as the third, fourth, and fifth years.
The project staff prepared an Environmental Assessment for Seasonal Predator Population Reduction to Enhance Duck Production.
The EA was submitted in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1970, as amended.
The EA required approval by the Regional Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3.
Specific policy guidelines were provided in the Service Policy and Implementation Guidelines for the Management of Predators to Benefit Breeding Waterfowl on Service Lands.
This EA proposed a strategy to reduce the impact of mammalian predation on nesting ducks on selected lands in western Minnesota.
The purpose was to increase duck production by increasing nest success.
The strategy requiring specific approval was the seasonal reduction in populations of protected mammals on Service land during the time that ducks are nesting.
Service policy is to manipulate predator activities or densities only in those habitats where the ability of a waterfowl population to meet station production objectives is in doubt.
Therefore, this policy was to be implemented as a site-specific application when definite results are desired, not for the range-wide reduction of predator populations.
The alternatives that were considered were set up with very tight parameters in order to fit into a reasonable seasonal predator management program.
They were: (1) the status quo seasonal predator population reduction inside barrier fences and on managed islands and management through State-regulated recreational trapping programs, (2) the status quo plus the springtime reduction in populations of striped skunks and Franklin's ground squirrels, and (3) the status quo plus the springtime reduction in populations of striped skunks, Franklin's ground squirrels, red fox, raccoons, and badgers.
Option 3 was the preferred alternative.
A deliberate solicitation of MnDNR and public input was used to obtain attitudes about this proposal.
Copies of the draft EA were sent to 19 groups and individuals.
Seventeen letters of comment were received in response to the draft EA.
These letters were available for public viewing.
Public reaction to seasonal predator population reduction was mostly favorable.
The final EA and the finding of no significant impact was signed by the acting Regional Director, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and mailed to the same organizations and to writers of comment letters for a final 30-day public review.
It was announced through the local newspapers that copies of the final EA were available for public review at Service field offices.
The Minnesota Trappers Association was kept informed about the trapping operation from the beginning of the program.
Several local representatives of the organization came into the Service field office to discuss the trapping operation and review the trapping records.
They were not concerned about the impacts once they understood the scope and objectives of the program.
In 1987, several members of the Minnesota Trappers Association did voice objections to the program.
They also wrote an article for their monthly magazine, "The Trapper," speculating that it would have a significant impact on their professional and recreational trapping operations.
The result of this publicity was that the Minnesota Trappers Association took an official stand against our seasonal predator management program.
It is possible that if we had dealt directly with the individuals that opposed the program and possibly hired some members of the group to assist in the predator management program, we may have been able to influence their decision.
Their stand did not affect our operation other than fostering some opposition for the program in the community.
Seventh Year...
The seasonal predator management program was conducted in the same manner as in the third through sixth years.
Conclusions
In areas of intensive agriculture and limited waterfowl habitat, seasonal predator management can be effectively used to increase duck nest success by using a relatively restrictive set of predator reduction procedures.
Some basic conclusions from these trials can be summarized as follows: * Nest success of wild ducks in nonuse grasslands can be increased from 10 percent to 30 percent with seasonal predator management utilizing seasonal employees that are trained on the job.
* Local populations of mammalian predators do not appear to be adversely impacted by this operation for more than a few months.
* The removal of striped skunks only or skunks plus incidental Franklin's ground squirrels is relatively easy to accomplish.
This procedure resulted in a moderate increase (about 10 percent) in duck nest success in idle grasslands.
* The removal of red fox, raccoons, and occasional badgers or mink, in addition to skunks and ground squirrels, on WPAs resulted in a significant increase in duck nest success in idle grasslands.
In several instances the increase was great enough to reach the MCWMP goal of 40 percent nest success.
* To increase or maintain elevated rates of nest success, additional predator management techniques that meet legal and policy constraints should be found to take targeted predators.
* A local predator management program with specific objectives and timeframe can be accepted by the local private sector provided an effort is made to inform them regularly about the program.
* Opposition to a seasonal predator management program can be overcome or prevented through an information and education process.
It is important to invite these groups or individuals out to see the operation and understand the scope and objectives of the project.
chick with egg divider line
BACK TO TOP
