Mailing Date: September 29, 1999 PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD HARRISBURG, PA 17124-0001 PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT : : : Citation No. 98-1849 v. : : : 18 
R-2844
Counsel for Licensee: Matthew Goldstein, Esquire Goldstein, Friedberg 
O P I N I O N
18 
("Licensee") appealed from the Adjudication and Order of Administrative Law Judge David L. Shenkle ("ALJ"), wherein the ALJ sustained the citation and imposed a fine of $300.00 against Licensee.
The citation charged Licensee with violating section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] and section 5513 of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.C.S. §5513]
Pursuant to section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471], the appeal in this case must be based solely on the record before the ALJ.
Where the decision of the ALJ is based upon substantial evidence, the Board must affirm the decision.
The Commonwealth Court defined "substantial evidence" to be such relevant evidence as a reasonable person might accept as adequate to support a conclusion requiring something more than a scintilla creating mere suspicion of the fact to be established.
Johnson vs. Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole, 706 A.2d 903 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1998); Chapman vs. Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole , 86 Pa.
Cmwlth.
49, 484 A.2d 413 (1984).
In its appeal, Licensee alleges that the ALJ erred and/or abused his discretion by failing to follow the Pennsylvania Supreme Court's decision in Commonwealth v. Irwin, 535 Pa. 524, 636 A.2d 1106 (1993) and instead, relied upon cases of inferior precedential value.
In addition, Licensee argues that the Pennsylvania State Police, Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement ("Bureau") officer never witnessed any payoffs, nor did the officer determine the value of the prize or the amount of tickets required to obtain the prize.
Finally, Licensee argues that the finding of a ticket dispenser and merchandise to be won in exchange therefor is not sufficient to constitute a gambling device per se without showing as to the element of reward.
The testimony in this matter revealed that on August 19, 1998, Enforcement Officer Robert Peterson visited the licensed premises to conduct a routine inspection.
(N.T. 4-5).
While inside the licensed premises, he observed an operational video slot machine.
(N.T. 5-6, 22; Ex. B-3).
He placed a dollar bill in the machine and received four credits on the screen.
(N.T. 7-9).
He played off one of the credits, but did not win.
(N.T. 8).
During his play of the machine, Officer Peterson discovered that he could play as many credits as he wished per game by pushing the "bet" button on the machine.
(N.T. 9-10; Ex. B-3).
To begin play, he hit the "start" button whereupon the nine square blocks on the screen rotated and placed fruits and bars in different positions in the formation of tic-tac-toe.
(N.T. 10-13, 38-39, 39-40).
Eventually, the figures would stop rolling and stop in a certain combination.
(N.T. 11).
Officer Peterson was then able to press the "cancel" button, which operated as a knockoff button and erased the remaining three credits on the screen.
(N.T. 7-8, 28).
The machine also had a "double" up button.
(N.T. 13; Ex. B-3).
Using the keys provided to him by John C. Brock, Officer Peterson opened the machine and conducted a limited inspection on the premises.
(N.T. 7-8).
After opening the machine, Officer Peterson found the money (i.e., $1.00) he had inserted to play the machine.
(N.T. 8).
Based on his limited inspection and play of the machine on August 19, he seized the machine.
(N.T. 8).
Also during his visit of August 19, 1998 to the licensed premises, Officer Peterson asked Mr. Brock if he made payoffs on the machine.
(N.T. 29).
Mr. Brock informed Officer Peterson that if a person accumulated enough points on the machine, he or she would receive tickets which could be used to obtain a watch.
(N.T. 22, 24).
The watches were displayed behind the bar area on the premises.
(N.T. 22).
A supply of tickets were found inside the machine.
(N.T. 42).
Officer Peterson testified that he observed no patrons playing the machine.
(N.T. 42).
On August 25, 1998, Officer Peterson conducted a further inspection of the machine.
He found that the machine had a ticket dispensing mechanism located inside.
(N.T. 14; Ex. B-3).
However, when he played the machine and canceled the credits, he received no tickets.
(N.T. 14).
There was also a red button located inside the machine which brought up the video accounting screen revealing the number of winning combinations and the number of games played on the machine.
(N.T. 14-15, 20, 32-33; Ex. B-3).
In addition, the machine had dip switches which allowed the winning percentage of the machine to be increased or decreased.
(N.T. 16; Ex. B-3).
Officer Peterson further found inside the machine a slip of paper which read "reset test $60 S.F. 4-18."
(N.T. 25-26).
Officer Peterson testified that the machine operated in the same manner as a regular slot machine.
(N.T. 10-13).
Based on his inspection, Officer Peterson determined that the machine was a gambling device per se.
(N.T. 21-22).
Section 5513 of the Crimes Code provides, in part, that a person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree if he/she intentionally or knowingly sets up or maintains a slot machine or any device to be used for gambling purposes.
[18 Pa.C.S. §5513(a)(1)].
In the case advanced by Licensee in its appeal, Commonwealth v. Irwin, 535 Pa. 524, 636 A.2d 1106 (1993), the Supreme Court again reinforced that a machine is a gambling device per se if it can be used for no purpose other than gambling.
Further, for a machine to be so intrinsically connected with gambling as to constitute a gambling device per se, the following three elements must be proved by the Bureau: (1) consideration, (2) a result determined by chance rather than skill, and (3) a reward.
Id.
As noted by the ALJ in his opinion, the Board agrees that the first two elements have been met in the instant case.
There is consideration since the slot machine only works if money is deposited therein.
Additionally, the result of the game is determined solely by chance.
There is no skill involved in playing the slot machine.
Thus, only the third element, reward, is at issue in this appeal.
Licensee argues that the ALJ erred by failing to rely on the Irwin case which found that the reward element was not satisfied if only free games were awarded to players.
Id. Licensee further contends that Irwin stands for the proposition that machines which dispense tokens as prizes, redeemable for merchandise which is of lesser value than the consideration required to play, are not considered gambling devices per se because the reward element is lacking.
The ALJ in his decision relied on the case of Commonwealth v. 9 Mills Mechanical Slot Machines, 437 A.2d 67 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1981), which held that the presence of a knock-down switch or a meter that allows the cancellation or recording of free games demonstrates that free games constitute rewards.
In response, Licensee opines that the Irwin Case is controlling in this matter and that the ALJ relied on cases of inferior precedential value such as 9 Mills.
In this matter, the evidence is clear that the seized slot machine possessed a "cancel" button which operated as a knock-off device.
The machine also had a video accounting mode.
As such, the Board finds that the ALJ properly held that the machine met the reward element.
In Irwin, no knock-down switches or accounting mechanisms were found on the seized machines.
Therefore, the Irwin case is distinguishable from the instant case.
It should also be noted that the Supreme Court in Irwin found that the reason why devices with knock-down switches or meters are gambling devices per se is that there is no legal use for these mechanisms otherwise.
Irwin, 636 A.2d 1106.
Finally, Irwin does not overrule all other gambling cases decided before it.
Therefore, the case relied upon by the ALJ, 9 Mills, is still good law.
Based on the foregoing, the decision of the ALJ is supported by substantial evidence and is affirmed.
O R D E R The decision of the ALJ is affirmed.
The appeal of Licensee is dismissed.
Licensee is ordered to pay a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) within 20 days of the mailing date of this Order.
Failure to do so will result in a suspension or revocation of this license.
Licensee must adhere to all other conditions set forth in the ALJ's Order.
___________________________________ Board Secretary Return to Citation No. 98-1849
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
