BATTLEFIELD U Fall 1998, No. 71
Newsletter of the American Battlefield Protection Program
PDATE
n behalf of the American Battlefield Protection Program, I am pleased to introduce you to the newly designed Battlefield Update.
It is organized to help you find specific information quickly and printed with improved illustrations and photos.
Each issue will continue to include stories of general interest about battlefield preservation in the United States, as well as several new features, such as "Capital Watch"--summaries of current legislation in the U.S. Congress and state legislatures that may affect battlefield preservation-and "ABPP News"--notices about ABPP programs and projects.
Please contact the ABPP staff if you have suggestions for further improvements to the newsletter.
Battlefield Update reaches more than 2,400 subscribers in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and three U.S. territories.
Our subscribers represent state and local government agencies, local historical societies and round tables, academic institutions, preservation consulting firms, and private citizens.
I encourage you to take advantage of this resource by sharing your battlefield preservation trials, tribulations, and triumphs with our readership.
The dissemination of ideas and information can only strengthen the American battlefield preservation community.
Thank you for your continued interest in Battlefield Update.
I look forward to hearing from you!
O
Landmark Mill Burns at Thoroughfare Gap by Tanya Gossett Chapman's Mill, the most significant historic structure on the Thoroughfare Gap battlefield in western Prince William County, Virginia, burned on October 22, 1998.
The fire broke out shortly after 4 p.m. and quickly consumed all floors, flour milling machinery, windows, and roofing materials.
Only the solid stone walls remain.
Local fire and police authorities suspect arson.
County officials indicated that on numerous, documented occasions, teenagers and other trespassers had broken into the vacant mill and vandalized the property.
Within a week of the blaze, several architectural historians and a structural engineer evaluated the stability of the ruins and the feasibility of restoration.
The experts have advised
Prince William County that the ruins are stable and that the structure can be restored.
Also known as Beverley's Mill, the original three story stone structure was built in the 18th century.
In 1858 it was enlarged to a commanding five-and-a-half stories.
During the Northern Virginia Campaign of 1862, Brig. Gen. James Ricketts' Union division seized Thoroughfare Gap to prevent Confederate Maj. Gen. James Longstreet's troops from joining Maj. Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson at Manassas Junction.
The Confederates engaged Ricketts on August 28.
The mill served as a blockhouse for both sides.
The Federals' early possession of the mill deflected several Georgia regiments into a point-blank firefight with Union infantrymen struggling to hold an adjoining, low ridge.
Another Georgia regiment later seized the building, which destabilized the Union position and helped
See Mill, page 4
H. Bryan Mitchell, Chief American Battlefield Protection Program
The charred ruins of Chapmans Mill on the Thoroughfare Gap battlefield in northern Virginia.
ABPP photo.
U.S. Department of the Interior
National Park Service
Heritage Preservation Services
CAPITAL W Washington, DC President Clinton signed the 1999 Omnibus Appropriations Act for the Federal government on October 19.
The Act and the Congress' conference report, which provides an explanation of the intent of the legislative language as well as specific dollar amounts for each program, include two significant directives that affect battlefield preservation.
Congress stipulated that "up to $8,000,000 of funds available in fiscal years 1998 and 1999 shall be available for grants, not covering more than 33 percent of the total cost of any acquisition to be made with such funds, to States and local communities for purposes of acquiring lands or interests in lands to preserve and protect Civil War battlefield sites identified in the July 1993 Report on the Nation's Civil War Battlefields prepared by the Civil War Sites Advisory
ATCH Revolutionary War and the War of 1812, to be modeled on the previous similar study of Civil War sites.
While the original legislation authorized additional funds amounting to $750,000 to conduct the study, those funds were never actually appropriated by Congress.
The 1999 budget language requires the National Park Service to begin this study by reducing or eliminating other activities in order to fund the study.
As above, Department officials are currently studying how best to fulfill these instructions.
Finally, the ABPP carries out its normal activities--including its annual grant awards--from the general funds appropriated to the NPS for a variety of historic preservation-related activities.
Those funds for 1999 are essentially equal to the 1998 level.
Commission.
Lands or interests in lands acquired pursuant to this section shall be subject to the requirements of ... the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965."
This stipulation does not appropriate any additional funds for this purpose.
Instead, it is intended to make it possible to use a portion of the money appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Fund in 1998 and 1999 for the specific purpose of assisting states and localities in acquiring Civil War battlefield land.
Department of the Interior officials are currently determining how best to implement this language.
The new budget also requires that, "within available funds, $250,000 is provided to initiate a Revolutionary War Study".
In 1996 Congress enacted legislation calling for a historic preservation study of battlefield sites associated with the
NPS to Restore Ft. Duncan by Doug Stover The C
Ft. Duncan served as the left anchor of an extensive series of fortifications along Maryland Heights, known as the Bernard Line, that protected Harpers Ferry from attack.
The primary function of Ft. Duncan was to flank Bolivar Heights, which guarded approaches to Harpers Ferry from the west.
It was constructed during the winter of 1862-1863, following the siege and capture of Harpers Ferry in September 1862 by Confederate Maj. Gen. Thomas J. "Stonewall" Jackson.
With the exception of Lt. Gen. Jubal Early's demonstration against Union troops commanded by Maj. Gen. Franz Sigel in July The park's 1998 Ft. Duncan Study pro1864, the Maryland Heights fortifications vides a framework for addressing the were never attacked.
cultural resource management issues at the site.
The plan calls for creating and Ft. Duncan sits on a high knoll known as improving interpretive trails to the site to Huckleberry Hill, along a sweeping bend ensure an informative and safe visitor of the Potomac River a short distance experience at the fort.
Cultural resource upstream from Harpers Ferry.
Access is management recommendations include gained from Pleasantville Road, off of clearing the earthworks of possibly harmHarpers Ferry Road.
The National Park ful vegetation and encouraging growth of Service acquired more than 300 acres at adjacent trees to form a protective this location in the 1970s. canopy above the fort.
Several management issues exist within The park began restoration work on Ft. the Ft. Duncan area.
These include sta- Duncan this fall. bilizing the fortifications, protecting environmentally sensitive forest habitat, Doug Stover is Chief of Cultural Resources, Chesapeake 
2
Battlefield Update
The Spanish-American War in Puerto Rico by Mark R. Barnes If you are interested in visiting an area containing some of the most varied and historic battlefields in America, look no further than the islands of the American Caribbean: Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Through the efforts of the Southeast Regional Office, National Park Service, and the Puerto Rico and U.S. Vi r gin Islands State Historic Preservation Offices (SHPOs), several areas of conflict in the American Caribbean have been documented.
These include the Salt River Bay Site on St. Croix, where the first recorded conflict between Europeans and Native Americans occurred in 1493; the First Line of Defense of San Juan, where the British besieged the Spanish city in 1797; and Fort Frederick, scene of an 1848 slave revolt against Danish rule.
Most recently, the NPS and its partners have focused on identifying and documenting cultural resources related to the Puerto Rico Campaign of the SpanishAmerican War.
Although less well known than Teddy Roosevelt's charge up San Juan Hill in Cuba, the Puerto Rico Campaign was one of the most successful military initiatives of the 113 day war.
The Puerto Rico Campaign lasted only 19 Register nomination of Spanish-American War sites on the island.
Historians Frank Miele and Jose Marrull have visited and photographed numerous sites on the south side of the island, and the author and Puerto Rico SHPO staff have studied a Spanish colonial lighthouse near Guánica, where the American army first landed on July 25, 1898.
These efforts have produced a Multiple Property National The effort to study Spanish-American Register nomination of sites associated War properties began with a National with the campaign that the Puerto Rico Historic Landmark (NHL) nomination for SHPO will submit to the NPS this winter.
the shipwreck of the SS Antonio López.
The U.S. Navy sank the late-19th-century One of the more interesting projects of steamship off the north coast of Puerto this joint effort has been the creation of a Rico when it attempted to run the computerized, illustrated history of the American naval blockade of San Juan.
Puerto Rico Campaign.
The objective The site was designated an NHL in 1997.
was to re-create a slide presentation, with This summer, at a formal presentation at popular period music, typical of what a La Fortaleza, the NPS presented Puerto person in 1898 might have seen in theaters Rico Governor Pedro Rosselló with a of the time.
NHL bronze plaque.
Later, Governor Rosselló dove to the shipwreck to secure NPS historians studied hundreds of origithe plaque on the ocean floor.
Plans call nal photographs and documents to for developing an underwater diving tour develop the video sequences and script, but we lacked period music.
Fortunately, of the shipwreck.
Glenn Sage, of Portland, Oregon, kindly NPS and Puerto Rico SHPO staff have shared with the NPS his collection of realso been conducting field surveys and corded music taken from 100 year old preparing documentation for a National wax cylinders for the musical portion of the illustrated history.
A copy of the computer program has been provided to the Puerto Rico SHPO, and plans call for making the electronic history more widely available.
days, but our joint surveys have identified six battlefield and skirmish sites, three landing beaches, two lighthouses, several historic roads and bridges, and the American headquarters related to this campaign.
In short, more extant SpanishAmerican War properties exist in Puerto Rico than in any other area of the United States.
In sum, because the NPS has committed to a long-range program of direct technical assistance to the SHPO offices of the American Caribbean, a number of important Spanish-American War sites have been documented and honored.
The NPS and the Puerto Rico SHPO hope the recognition of these battlefields will draw attention to these nationally significant cultural properties and foster a commitment to their long-term preservation.
(Inset) The 2nd Wisconsin marches past Gen. Nelson A. Milles' headquarters in Ponce, Puerto Rico, in 1898.
(Above) Today the building is a U.S. Customs house.
NPS photos.
Mark Barnes is Senior Archeologist, National Register Programs Division, Southeast Regional Office, National Park Service.
Battlefield Update
3
Mill, from page 1
convince Ricketts to abandon the area.
The next day, Longstreet's men marched through the gap and joined Jackson in time to participate in the Battle of Second Manassas.
The mill remained operational into the 1940s.
In 1970, concerned citizens and state and Federal highway officials agreed that Interstate 66 would be designed to avoid the mill.
Chapman's Mill has been documented by the Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS), is listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and is a Prince William County landmark.
The north half of the Thoroughfare Gap battlefield (just above the mill) is protected by the Bull Run Mountains Natural Area.
The Friends of Bull Run, Inc., which manages the conservation area, has provided limited interpretation along several trails on the high ground north of the mill, the scene of the most intense fighting and the significant Confederate flanking maneuver.
For more information about Chapman's Mill or about hiking the battlefield, contact the Friends of Bull Run at P.O. Box 210, Broad Run, VA 20137 or (703) 7532631.
ABPP N Healthy Competition Expected for '99 Grants by Ginger Carter The ABPP anticipates an increase in battlefield preservation grant applications for its 1999 funding round as more organizations representing more diverse sites enter the competition.
Again this year the ABPP will consider projects at battlefields of all wars fought on American soil, from colonial conflicts to World War II.
To be eligible for ABPP grants, project sites must be 1) listed in the CWSAC Report; or 2) listed in the National Register of Historic Places; or 3) eligible for listing in the National Register according to the appropriate State Historic Preservation Officer.
Please note that Civil War sites with a preservation priority ranking of I or II (according to the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission) will be favored over projects at other Civil War battlefields.
EWS
The ABPP seeks projects that lead directly to the long-term preservation of battlefield lands.
We strongly encourage projects involving multiple partners and/ or matching funds, although neither is required.
Completed applications are due back to the ABPP by close of business December 31, 1998.
If you have not received an application and would like one, please contact us at (202) 343-9583 or download the application and guidelines from our web site at www2.cr.nps.gov/abpp/.
The ABPP will contact successful applicants no later than February 28, 1999.
Grant agreements take at least three months to process.
Therefore, projects should not be scheduled to begin earlier than June 1, 1999.
If you are considering applying for ABPP grants but are unsure if your proposed project meets the ABPP's guidelines, please contact Ginger Carter, Grants Manager, at (202) 343-1210.
Examples of Eligible Projects Site Identification and Documentation Historical research National Register nominations Archeological and cultural resource surveys n n n n n n n n n n n
Ineligible Projects Acquisition of properties or land in fee or interest Payment of rent on properties or land Fund raising Lobbying Academic scholarships Battle reenactments New construction or reconstruction of historical resources Permanent staff positions Ongoing object or material culture curation Capital construction or improvements Any project limited to land or resources owned by the National Park Service
Now Available from the Central Maryland Heritage League Fire on the Mountain: The Battle of South Mountain Battlefield Guide This full-color driving tour brochure interprets the discrete battles that raged on South Mountain on September 14, 1862, and how they affected the course of the Maryland Campaign.
For copies contact the CMHL at P.O. Box 721, Middletown, MD 21769.
They can also be reached at (301) 371-7090 or info@cmhl.org.
n n n
Planning and Consensus Building n Preservation plans n Preservation advocacy projects Education and Interpretation* n Public workshops n Developing signs and brochures *If your organization plans to apply for an education or interpretation project, be especially careful to clearly describe how the project will lead to the preservation of land.
4
Battlefield Update
Notes on Charleston by Hampton Tucker The staff of the American Battlefield Protection Program would like to thank its partners, the Association for the Preservation of Civil War Sites (APCWS), The Civil War Trust (CWT), Fort Sumter National Monument, and the National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers, as well as all the enthusiastic battlefield preservationists who attended the Fourth National Conference on Battlefield Preservation: Defining Battlefields--Why, How, and What Then...? Each sponsor and participant was instrumental in making the conference a great success.
Held in Charleston, South Carolina, from September 16-19, the conference attracted a record 230 participants from every corner of the United States.
Attendees represented battle sites associated with the Revolutionary War, the War of 1812, the Civil War, Indian wars, and World War II.
APCWS launched the conference with a one-day workshop on land acquisition strategies and techniques.
APCWS staff and six guest speakers presented a thorough overview of the entire acquisition process, including successful legal strategies, fund raising techniques, real estate tips, and the integral role of local friends groups.
Special thanks to APCWS' Jeff Driscoll and Bob Edmonston for coordinating a great workshop.
Conference highlights included an entertaining and provocative keynote address by Tony Horwitz, author of Confederates in the Attic: Dispatches from the Unfinished Civil War.
Horwitz discussed the enduring legacy of the Civil War in the late-20th-century American South, and the importance of preserving battlefields as tangible reminders of our unique history as citizens of a country becoming increasingly homogenized by the spread of commercial development.
On September 18, The Civil War Trust presented a morning seminar entitled TEA-21: How You Can Use Transportation Enhancement Funds for Battlefield Preservation.
TEA-21 (Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century) enhancement funds comprise transportation investments that protect the environment, preserve cultural and historic resources, and provide significant community benefits.
Since 1992, more than $45 million in enhancement funds have been used to protect threatened battlefields and related resources.
The workshop facilitators explained the TEA-21 guidelines and application process and helped participants define eligible battlefield projects.
The CWT's Elliot Gruber, Julie Fix, Carole Mahoney, and Melissa Meisner, and consultant Susan Braselton, organized this important session.
The conference concluded with a sunset cruise on Charleston Harbor to Fort Sumter, where historian Rick Hatcher gave a twilight oration of the fort's military history.
Superintendent John Tucker then invited his 200 guests to wander the fort at night, a rare treat.
The next day, participants had a choice of two battlefield tours.
Forty set out for Civil War sites on James Battlefield Update
Island, including Battery Pringle, Fort Johnson, and the Secessonville battlefield.
An intrepid group of 25 Revolutionary War enthusiasts struck out for the fort at Old Dorchester and the Quinby Plantation battlefield.
Near Moncks Corner, the group had an especially unique tour of a well-preserved British earthen fort, complete with moat and makeshift drawbridge.
Many thanks to the tour coordinators and guides, Dan Bell, Oliver Buckles, Skipper Keith, Dana MacBean, and David Reuwer.
Participants will receive a letter in the next several weeks asking them to elaborate on opinions they expressed on their conference evaluation forms.
We are especially interested in your ideas for improving session content and organization, identifying future conference themes and locations, instituting smaller, technical workshops, and nominating speakers for the next National Conference in 2000.
The ABPP was pleased to see a wide variety of sites represented at this year's conference.
We look forward to continuing our work within the Civil War community and to establishing new relationships among organizations striving to protect battlefield sites representing all wars on American soil.
CWT Bestows Battlefield Awards (from Civil War Landscape, Fall 1998, with permission)
During the Charleston conference, The Civil War Trust presented awards to three grassroots organizations for their "outstanding accomplishments" in battlefield preservation, community leadership, and visitor services.
The Central Virginia Battlefields Trust (CVBT) received the CWT's 1998 Preservation Award for "saving vital Civil War battlefield lands from development."
Only two years old, the CVBT emerged during the successful acquisition of Willis Hill at Fredericksburg, and has saved more than 100 acres of land at Chancellorsville, including "McLaws Wedge" and part of Jackson's Flank Attack.
The CWT bestowed upon the Mill Springs Battlefield Association (MSBA) its 1998 Community Leadership Award for "mobilizing its local community to recognize and support the preservation of Civil War battlefields."
Since 1992, the MSBA has rallied local citizens and public officials to protect the battlefield and has leveraged that support into Federal, state, and private funds for land acquisition and preservation projects at Mill Springs.
The Siege and Battle of Corinth Commission accepted the CWT's 1998 Interpretation and Visitor Services Award.
Using ISTEA funding, the Commission created more than 20 miles of trails and self-directed tours of the Corinth battlefield and earthworks, developed its own interpretive film, and opened a visitors center.
For more information about the CWT's Preservation Award program, call 800-CW-TRUST.
5
RICH M History
OUNTAIN help in protecting the site.
This initiated a relationship between the two organizations that resulted in the Forest Service dedicating a limited amount of staff-time and guidance for battlefield preservation efforts.
By the end of the year, the Forest Service, the RMBF, and the Randolph County Development Authority had developed a conceptual plan for the battlefield.
In 1994 and 1995, 346 acres were acquired--in part with ISTEA funds--through a partnership among the RMBF, the Conservation Fund, the State of West Virginia, and the Benedum Foundation.
The RMBF then submitted a National Historic Landmark nomination to the National Park Service (the nomination remains under consideration).
The RMBF also received two ABPP grants that funded the development of local support for the Staunton-Parkersburg Turnpike Corridor Coalition, a group concerned with the preservation of historic resources along the turnpike, including battlefields associated with the 1861 Western Virginia Campaign.
The Civil War Trust (CWT) added the site to its Civil War Discovery Trail in 1995.
During 1996, several acquisitions increased the amount of land protected at the battlefield.
The CWT, the Conservation Fund, and the RMBF acquired 14 acres.
Due to the threat of strip mining at the site, the CWT allocated Civil War Commemorative Coin funds to acquire the mineral rights to 57.5 acres.
They also funded the appraisal of a 12-acre tract being considered for future acquisition.
That same year, the RMBF applied for and received a third ABPP grant to continue developing plans for the preservation and interpretation of the Staunton-Parkersburg Turnpike, and to develop educational resources for the Rich Mountain battlefield.
The West Virginia Division of Culture and History began an archeological survey of the battlefield.
In 1997, the RMBF made significant steps toward reaching out to the local community.
It purchased the Bushrod Crawford Building in Beverly and established a new visitor center in the building, which had served as McClellan's headquarters after the battle.
The RMBF also received a fourth ABPP grant to fund an educational campaign focusing on interpretation and stabilization of resources, expanding existing interpretation, developing a multi-media computer presentation, and systematically monitoring endangered battlefield resources.
Battlefield Preservation Profile
On July 11, 1861, Union troops under the command of Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan routed the Confederates holding the pass over Rich Mountain near Beverly, Virginia (now West Virginia).
This battle was one of the earliest engagements of the Civil War.
Both the Confederacy and the Union hoped to gain control of northwestern Virginia where many residents opposed secession from the Union.
This battle gave the Union control over much of the region and allowed the counties in the area to form the government that later established the state of West Virginia.
McClellan's victory greatly enhanced his military reputation.
In less than two weeks, the shocking defeat of the Union army at First Manassas, Virginia, on July 21, 1861, prompted President Lincoln to appoint McClellan as commander of the Army of the Potomac, replacing Brig. Gen. Irvin McDowell.
Preservation Activity In 1981, a local group placed a historical marker commemorating the battle on the crest of Rich Mountain.
Additional efforts to protect the site have increased greatly since 1990, the same year that the Secretary of the Interior established the American Battlefield Protection Program (ABPP) and Congress and the Secretary appointed the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission to study and rank the nation's Civil War battlefields.
In 1991, local residents established the Rich Mountain Battlefield Foundation (RMBF) and protected 14.32 acres at Camp Garnett.
The next year, 215 acres of the site were listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and the RMBF secured an Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) grant to fund the acquisition of battlefield land.
The Association for the Preservation of Civil War Sites (APCWS) acquired 40 acres in 1992.
The Civil War Sites Advisory Commission completed its report in 1993; the report classified Rich Mountain as one of the 50 most threatened Civil War battlefields in the country.
Later that year, the RMBF approached a local unit of the USDA Forest Service and asked for
Today 471.8 acres of this 1,626-acre* battlefield are protected.
His victory at Rich Mountain helped launch Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan to command of the Army of the Potomac in August 1861.
National Archives.
*Acreage represents the study area of the battlefield as defined in a survey completed during the Civil War Sites Advisory Commission Study.
Site Contact For more information about this site contact the Rich Mountain Battlefield Foundation, Inc., P.O. Box 227, Beverly, WV, 26253, (304) 637-RICH, richmt@neumedia.net.
6
Battlefield Update
R
ECOMMENDED
READING
B
Allatoona Battlefield Master Preservation Plan
ATTLEFIELD UPDATE Robert Stanton Director Katherine H. Stevenson Associate Director, Cultural Resources Ronald M. Greenberg Assistant Associate Director, Cultural Resources
Prepared by Robert and Company, Atlanta, and William R. Scaife for the Etowah Valley Historical Society and the ABPP.
September 1998.
64 pages, with color photographs and appendices.
Copies available from EVHS, P.O. Box 1886, Cartersville, GA 30120.
The plan includes a battlefield site inventory of historic, natural, and scenic features, land use, and existing infrastructure.
It notes significant properties within the battlefield and discusses land preservation strategies that can be implemented by the local government and the private sector.
The document also contains a master site plan with recommendations for park development and interpretation, and a tourism impact and benefit study that identifies potential economic impacts in the region.
Civil War Ordnance of Mirror Lake, Calais, Washington County, Vermont
ing the cast iron sphere, wooden sabot, pewter Bormann fuse, rubber gasket, cast iron plug, and gunpowder--of this antipersonnel device.
The report also includes a thorough history of the design and manufacture of spherical case shot.
Reconnaissance Survey of Indian-U.S. Army Battlefields of the Northern Plains
Published by the National Park Service
Prepared by Jerome A. Greene, Intermountain Support Office, NPS, Denver, for the ABPP.
September 1998.
193 pages with black and white illustrations.
Copies available from the ABPP.
This report contains survey data gathered at 23 battle and skirmish sites where the U.S. Army and various Indian tribes clashed on the Northern Plains of Montana, Wyoming, South Dakota, and Nebraska.
The selected sites represent several periods of conflict, ranging from the 1850s through the 1880s.
The report begins with a concise, wellresearched history of warfare on the Northern Plains.
The opening chapters place the surveyed sites in historical context of major events such as the Fetterman Massacre, the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1868, and the Battle of Little Bighorn, allowing the reader to discern the role each surveyed site played in U.S.Indian relations.
Through historical research, site visits, and structured methodology, Greene provides consistent base data for the 23 sites, 17 of which were undocumented previously.
Historical information includes battle date, principal leaders, units and tribes involved, number of combatants, estimated casualties, event summary, and statement of significance.
On-site notes record current land use and zoning, threats to the battlefield, burial sites, monumentation, viewsheds, contributing natural and cultural resources, and interpretive potential.
de Teel Patterson Tiller Chief, Heritage Preservation Services H. Bryan Mitchell Chief, American Battlefield Protection Program Tanya M. Gossett Editor Kathleen J. Madigan Design Services Jerry Buckbinder Production Manager Battlefield Update is published quarterly and is available free of charge.
Please send articles, news items, and correspondence to the address below or electronically to tgossett@hps.cr.nps.gov.
American Battlefield Protection Program Heritage Preservation Services National Park Service 1849 C Street, NW (NC330) Washington, DC 20240 PHONE (202) 343-3941 FAX (202) 343-3921 For more information about the American Battlefield Protection Program, visit us on-line at www2.cr.nps.gov/abpp/.
Prepared by the Lake Champlain Maritime Museum, Ferrisburgh, Vermont, for the ABPP, the Lake Champlain Basin Project, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the U.S. Naval Historical Center, and the Vermont Division for Historic Preservation.
September 1998.
189 pages, black and white illustrations, and appendices.
Copies available from the VDHP, 135 State Street, Drawer 33, Montpelier, VT 05633-1201.
This report recounts the remarkable recovery, disarmament, curation, and interpretation of 65 intact Civil War spherical case shot, which had been dumped in shallow water along the steep west bank of Mirror Lake in north-central Vermont after the war.
The Lake Champlain Maritime Museum's examination of the shot provides an excellent analysis of the component parts--includBattlefield Update
Regulations of the U.S. Department of the Interior strictly prohibit unlawful discrimination in departmental Federally Assisted Programs on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, or disability.
Any person who believes he or she has been discriminated against in any program operated by a recipient of Federal assistance should write to: Director, Equal Opportunity Program, U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Washington, DC 20240.
7
BATTLEFIELD UPDATE National Park Service Heritage Preservation Services American Battlefield Protection Program 1849 C Street, NW (NC330) Washington, DC 20240 FIRST CLASS MAIL POSTAGE AND FEES PAID USDI - NPS PERMIT No.
G-83
OFFICIAL BUSINESS PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE $300
www2.cr.nps.gov/abpp/
