._ _ offke 0especid B-m666 August4,1999- Invetstigations ,.
: -- The Honorable Henry A Waxman Ranking Minority Member Committee on Government Reform ._ House of Representatives The.Honorable Rod R. Blagojevich House of Repr
At that time, : peixkikd those present `
Baaed on Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and F'ireanns tracing inform
We will make copies of this letter available to others on request.
If you have any questions, ple
A ' `, Rob
BRIEFING PAPER Criminal Activity Assuciated~with 30 Caliber Semiautomatic Rifles .
- For the House Committee on Government Reform c nuTER~ws _- .
Law Enforcement Agencies - ATF, FBI, U.S. Customs Service, Department of Justice, Indiana State Police, West Virginia State Police, Los Angeles Police Department, Royal Canadian Mounted Police ._ - Ai+ .r;Ocaliber 
We have established a nexus to terrorist groups, outlaw motorcycle gangs,international drug cartels, domestic drug dealers, religious cults, militia groups, potential assassins,and violent criminals.
l HIGHLIGHTS OF FINDINGS manufactured by +rrett Fire-.
Dev$?ped in the early 198(xs,it came into wide use by U.S. military forces duting the Gulf War and was primarily used against longrange targets, such as vehicles, aircraft, and bunkers U.S. military explosive ordinancedisposalteamsalsousetheModel82Altodestroylandminesand The most pOpular $0 caliber semiautomatic rifle is the Barrett 
All branches of the U.S. military, some U.S. law enforcement wencies, and numerous foreign miMary units currently use the Model 82Al.
According to Bureau.of Alcohol, Tobacco and Fireamm (ATF) records, Barrett reported mauufacturing and selIing 2,839 rifles in the domestic (civilian) market.
excluding rifles sdd to U.S. government agencies, between 1987and 1998.
However.
ATF records do not reflect the model number or caliber of the rifles Barrett manufactured or sold.
(ATF admits that the forms used to collect data from firearms manufacnwrs lead to some confusion, and inaccurate reporting) According to manufoct;utwl.50 caliber semiautomatic or bolt-action rifles tip to 1998,when it introduced Model 98, a .338 semiautixnatic tie.
EIarrett FIrearms refused to cooperate with our inquiry.
Therefore, the ,exact number of 50 caliber semiautomatic ri!Ies sold in the domestic civilian market cannot be detentLied.
Ban-ett Firearms literature and available material on the Internet, Barrett only 2 GAOK)SI-99-1 SF1 30 Callbor Rlfh Crima Enclosure I .
ATP routinely conducts gun traces for law enforcement agencies.
The fact that a trace hssbeen conducted does not necessarily mean that the firearm was involved in criminal actitity.
ATP provided OS1with a list of 36 tirearm trace requests generated between November 1!492 Mardh 1999concerning 56 caliber rifies.
However, 2 of the and requests were duplicates, leaving 26 separate weapons on which traces were conducted.
All of the traces involved Darrett SOcaliber rifles, of which 27 were the semiautomatic model 
One trace request appearedto involve a Barrett model 96, but effortsto.develop additional information on this-trace were unsuccessful.
Of the 27 traces involving Barrett semiautomatic model 82Al rifles, we found that 18 were associated with crimina! activity and 3 were not associated with criminal activity.
`No determination could bemade regarding 6 t
The Barrett model S
use of 50 p The followingpending
I . were identified: ,,.Alleg Castro Assassination Plot - The U.S. Attorney in San Juan, Puerto Rico, is prosecuting seven Cuban-AmeMuts who have been charged in a plot to m Cuban President FMel Castro during a 1997visit to Margarita, an island off,the coast of Venexuela.
?Lvo 56 c
l Terrorist OrganM
Another mvesQ+ion is tageting the movement of 50 caliber semiautomatic riflesfrom theUnited!
The weapons were recovered following the execution of a search warrant.
: The following closed cases were identified: l Religious Cult -
In 1989,two members of a church, described by ATP as a doomsday religious cult, were arrested and charged with federal firearms violations.
The church followers had built underground bunkers in Gardner, Montana, to await the end of the world.
The two suspects had used false 3 QAoms4s-1 SR so c8libef Rifh Crime EnclosukI 1 0 ider
Tax, pO$esters - In a 1996case in Georgia, ATF and Internal Revenue Service agents arksted a survivalist/tax protest
Using -false identification, he had purchased over I15 firearms, including 2.50 caliber semiautomatic rifles.
Agents seizedthese weapons; over 100,OC rounds of ammunition; silencers; qd over $400,000in go!d Krugerrands, jewelry, and cash.
In another 1996case, this time in Louisiana, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agents arrested a white supremacist/tax protester who fled across state lines to avoid paying child support- The subject confronted the arresting agents with a shotgun.
A standoff ensued for a number of days and the subject eventually surrendered without loss of life.
Agents recovered over 40 firearms from the subject's residence, including a .50 ca
Drug Dealers - hi casesin California, Missouri, and Indiana, iaw enforcement officers exvuting search warrants recovered 30 caliber.semiautomatic rifles in the possession of drug dealers.
Mentally Ill Individual - In a 1998case in Michigan, an apparently mend
Following the subject's arrest, police recovered over 15firearms from hik residence, including a 50 caliber semiautomatic rifle.
He was aQleto purchase these w.eapons legally . `kaus;e hehaa.hdprioirriniii;alrecod* " -.
Mexican Drug Cartel Multiple Homicide - The ~XSAngeles Police Department, at the reqtiizst of Mexican authorities, requested that ATF trace a SO caliber semiautomatic rifle in October 1996.
It was determined that the weapon was purchased legally in Wyoming.
The weapon; along with ovfir ,100AKA7s, was recovered by Mi+anauthorities at the sceneof a multiple homicide.
involving a. @
Stolen Weapon - ATF in Houston arrested a subject for .possessionof a -50 caliber semiautomatic ritle that had beenstolen from the legitimate owner who'resided in ., MO
Group in West Vll - A member of the Mountaineer Militia in' West was armsted in a plot to bomb a FBI office in Clarksburg, West Virginia In a subczequent search of his home, agents recovered one .50 caliber semiautomatic rifle and numerow other firearms.
Branch,Davidians at Waco - According to ATF, the B'ranchDavidians at Waco !hed a 50 caliber semiautomatic rifle at the ATF agents attempting to exkcute a search waRBnt at their compound in Waco, Texas.
During the investigation, ATF suspected that Vernon Wayne Howell, aka David Koresh, had acquired 50 caliber rifles.
ATF therefore requested from the Department of Defense Bradley Fighting Vehicles, which were believed to have sufficient armor to withstand $0 caliber fke.
Those vehicles were to be used during the execution of the search warrant.
However, according to the `Report of the Department of the Treasury Investigation of Vernon Wayne Howell + known as David Koresh," ATF did not *usethe armored vehicles during the execution of the search warrant.
Four agents were killed.
one 50 United Militia Vll Militia Group in Canada- In l!X%,the Royal Canadian Mounted Police recovered , GAomSCQ9.15R .5oc8liberRineCrime Ordering Information The mt copy of each GAO report and testimony is free.
Additional copies are $2 each.
Orders should be sent to the following address, accompanied by a check or money order m
VISA and Mastercard credit cards are accepted, also.
Orders for 100 or more copies to be mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent.
Orders by mail: U.S.
General Accounting Office P.O. Box 37050 `Waslihigton, DC 22oi)l3 -. or visit: Boom 1100 700 4th SL.
NW (cover of 4th and G St+ NW) U.S.
General Accounting-OfYfice .
waIshhgwn,Dc - _ Ordem,may also b placed by calling (202) 512-66QO or by using fax number (202) 512-6061, or TDD (202) 512-2537.
beh day, GAO issues a list of newly available reports and testimony.
To receive facsimile copies of the daily list or any list fkom the past 30 days, please call (202) 512-6000 using a touehtone phone.
A recorded menu will provide informadon on how td obtain these lists.
For information on how to access GAO reports on the INTERNET, send au e-mail message with "info" in the body to: id-.gao.gov or viait GAO's World httpfIwww.gao.gov Wide Web Home Page at: .
United States General Accounti~! WPice Mhshhgton, D.C. 255 ~48-0001' Ol3ciai Business Penalty for Private Address Correction _- `, I -- Bulk Rate Posuge aa-Fees Paid 
GlOO I* I Use $300 R'equested `.
