Window on State Government Carole Keeton Strayhorn, Texas Comptroller __________ [search_blu.gif]-Submit Texas School Performance Review Texas School Performance Review _________________________________________________________________ Dripping Springs Independent School District August 2002 Chapter 2 EDUCATIONAL SERVICE DELIVERY This chapter reviews the Dripping Springs Independent School District's (DSISD) educational service delivery system and student performance in four sections: A. Organization and Management B. Student Performance C. Instructional Resources D. Special Programs
D. SPECIAL PROGRAMS
School districts offer educational programs and services other than the regular education curriculum to meet the needs of students.
Those programs include special education, G/T, career and technology education (CATE), counseling and guidance services, library services and health services.
Special Education
The federal Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) requires districts to provide a free and appropriate public education for all children with disabilities regardless of the severity of their disabilities.
This education must be provided in the least restrictive environment.
The act also requires that students with disabilities be included in state and district assessment programs.
Based on these findings, IDEA directs districts to develop an individual educational plan (IEP) for each child receiving special education services.
The IEP must include input from regular education teachers and parallel educational plans for children with disabilities in regular education classrooms.
To comply with IDEA requirements and to serve the diverse needs of all students with disabilities, a special education program should feature the following: * Pre-referral intervention in regular education.
When a student experiences an academic problem in the regular education program, the regular education teacher should intervene to resolve the problem.
If these steps do not yield satisfactory results, the problem should be referred to special education staff.
* Referral to special education for evaluation.
Referrals to special education require an official written request supported by documentation.
The referral must include an explanation of steps that have been taken in regular education to solve the student's problems prior to the referral.
* Nondiscriminatory full individual evaluation.
After a student has been referred to special education, the district must provide a comprehensive nondiscriminatory evaluation or assessment within a prescribed amount of time.
* Initial placement through an Admission, Review and Dismissal (ARD) committee.
After the evaluation or assessment is complete, an ARD committee meets to discuss the results and determine whether the student qualifies for special educational services in one of 13 categories.
If the student qualifies, members of the ARD committee write a plan for the student's education.
* Provision of educational services and supports according to a written IEP.
The ARD committee must develop an IEP specifying the classes, subject areas, development areas and life skills courses in which the student will be instructed.
The IEP also should include information on the amount of time the student will spend in regular educational settings as well as related services needs such as counseling, physical therapy or occupational therapy.
* Annual program review.
Each year after a student's initial qualification and placement, the ARD committee should conduct a review to ensure that the student's IEP is appropriate.
* Three-year re-evaluation.
Every three years, the student should be considered for a full individual evaluation.
An ARD committee should meet to discuss the results of the re-evaluation, which should determine whether the student still qualifies for special education services in the same category.
* Dismissal from the special education program.
If and when a student no longer meets the criteria for eligibility, the student is dismissed from special education.
The ARD committee must make this decision.
DSISD has been part of the Hays-Blanco Special Education cooperative since 1975.
The present membership of the cooperative includes Blanco ISD, Johnson City ISD and Wimberley ISD.
Since 1999-2000, DSISD has served as the fiscal agent and housed the cooperative's administrative offices.
Funding for the cooperative comes from federal, state and local funds.
Annual federal funds received are based on a formula using the official student count according to TEA PEIMS data submissions from the previous October.
Participating districts receive their federal funds through the cooperative.
State funds are allocated to the district based on a formula using instructional arrangements and attendance.
The districts support the balance of funding needed after federal funds are allocated.
Each district's share of funds is based on the number of students served.
Funds flow back to the districts according to their needs.
DSISD complies with the federal regulations regarding IDEA.
DSISD uses a pre-referral process to determine alternatives or prevention strategies such as behavior modification or remedial academic programs before referring students to special education.
If a student is referred for special education, the referral is initiated at the student's school.
Once the referring paperwork is completed, it is forwarded to the cooperative.
A cooperative staff member tests the child within 60 calendar days.
The ARD meeting is conducted within 30 days of the evaluation report to review the information and determine eligibility for special education.
The ARD committees are located at each school and include a representative of the cooperative.
If a child is eligible for special education, the ARD committee develops the child's IEP, including the instructional modifications that are appropriate for the child and identification of the least restrictive environment for instruction.
As required by law, IEPs are reviewed a minimum of once a year.
Each child placed in special education is assigned to a cooperative staff member for case management.
The case management model allows the cooperative to monitor the child, coordinate with district special education staff as necessary and prevent children from "slipping through the cracks."
DSISD ranks second highest among its peer districts in the percent of students enrolled in special education.It has roughly one percent more students enrolled in special education than Region 13 and almost two percent more than the state as a whole (Exhibit 2-27).
Exhibit 2-27 Special Education Students by Number and Percent Enrolled DSISD, Peer Districts, Region 13 and the State 2001-02
District Number Enrolled Percent Enrolled DSISD 452 13.6% Eanes 770 10.6% Lake Travis 468 10.7% Marble Falls 445 12.1% Burnet Consolidated 475 16.1% Wimberley 201 11.6% Region 13 34,649 12.4% State 486,725 11.7%
Source: TEA, PEIMS, 2001-02.
DSISD had the second-highest percentage of total budgeted expenditure spent on special education and the third-highest percent per pupil expenditure.
As in the case of all its peer districts, DSISD spent less as a percentage of its total budgeted expenditure and less per pupil than the state as a whole (Exhibit 2-28).
Exhibit 2-28 Number of Special Education Students Enrolled, Budgeted Expenditures, Percent Spent on Special Education and Amount Spent Per Pupil DSISD, Peer Districts and the State 2001-02
District Number of Students Enrolled in Special Education Budgeted Special Education Expenditures Percent of Total Budgeted Expenditure Expenditure Per Special Education Student DSISD 452 $1,708,121 7.3% $3,779 Eanes 770 $4,573,054 6.8% $5,939 Lake Travis 468 $1,472,470 3.7% $3,146 Marble Falls 445 $1,647,516 5.9% $3,702 Burnet Consolidated 475 $1,604,679 7.3% $3,378 Wimberley 201 $988,593 7.2% $4,918 State 486,725 $2,753,628,704 9.6% $5,657
Source: TEA, PEIMS, 2001-02.
FINDING
DSISD delivers special education services through a cost-effective cooperative to provide quality services to students.
The Hays-Blanco cooperative is staffed by 30.5 positions: a director, an instructional supervisor, four secretaries, two behavior specialists, one vocational adjustment coordinator, one half-time physical therapist, one occupational therapist, one certified occupational therapy assistant, one teacher of the visually impaired, three special education counselors, six speech pathologists and nine appraisal staff, diagnosticians and licensed specialists in school psychology.
The cooperative contracts for neurological, psychological, audiological and medical examinations.
These contractors are paid on a per test basis.
The Hays-Blanco cooperative also participates in the cooperative Regional Day School Program for the Deaf, which was created by the Texas Legislature in 1973 and supervised by TEA Division of Services for the Deaf.
The cooperative coordinates with a variety of social service programs, some informally and some by Memorandum of Understanding, to supplement its services.
These programs include the local Community Resource Coordinating Group (CRCG), the Austin Resource Center for Independent Living (ARCIL), the Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation (MHMR), the Hays-Caldwell Alcohol and Drug Abuse Program, Early Childhood Intervention (ECI), Hays County Family Support Network, the ARC of Texas, the Texas Rehabilitation Commission and the Hays County Juvenile Probation department.
The services provided by the cooperative staff and its contractors support the district's special education teachers and instructional assistants.
They also support the regular education teachers who have special education students in their classes as part of the inclusion model to provide the least restrictive environment possible for the child.
The cooperative staff and its contractors provide evaluation services, speech therapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, music therapy, psychological services, special education counseling, orientation and mobility services, audiological services and assistive technology for the students as components of the classroom instruction.
Through faculty meetings and all-day trainings, the cooperative conducts staff development for DSISD on modifications and on specific disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, childhood depression and anxiety disorders.
Training sessions have also included presentations on federal and state special education laws/requirements, how special education funds are budgeted and channeled back into programs and the costs generated by "high needs" special education students.
The cooperative also offers two-day certification training in nonviolent crisis intervention and special summer training for administrators, including school board members.
In addition, the cooperative offers training for non-teaching staff in contact with special education students, such as food service staff and bus drivers, to help them understand and manage the students and their needs.
Customized training also is available.
Membership in the Hays-Blanco cooperative affords the district access to a wide array of special education services and resources for its special education teachers and students it could not otherwise afford due to size and funding limitations.
Teachers and administrators in the cooperative and the district said the special education program reputation has drawn families with special needs children to the district.
One parent of a special needs student said that her daughter would not have gone on to college had it not been for the district's special education program.
COMMENDATION
The district uses a cooperative to provide cost effective and quality services to students with special needs.
Gifted And Talented Education
Since 1987, state law has required all Texas school districts to offer educational programs to serve the needs of gifted and talented (G/T) students.
Gifted and talented students are individuals who show the potential to excel in one or both of the following areas: intellectual ability and subject matter proficiency.
The State Board of Education (SBOE) has adopted a state plan, the Texas State Plan for the Education of Gifted/Talented Students.
The state plan serves as a guide for meeting the law's requirements and includes acceptable, recognized and exemplary criteria in the areas of student assessment, program design, curriculum and instruction, professional development and community involvement.
Districts are required to have a systematic process for identifying gifted and talented students.
TEA issues guidelines for the identification of gifted and talented students in an effort to ensure all of these students receive a quality education.
In 1998, DSISD hired a consultant to evaluate its G/T program.
The consultant's final report outlined recommendations for the program in five areas: assessment, program design, curriculum and instruction, staff development and family/community involvement.
To address the recommendations, the district developed a five-year plan for the G/T program.
The school G/T coordinators, along with the assistant superintendent for Human Resources and Learning, are continuing to address the recommendations for improvement.
Exhibit 2-29 lists the district's gifted and talented program management objectives and Exhibit 2-30 lists the district's program objectives for gifted and talented students.
Exhibit 2-29 DSISD Gifted and Talented Program Management Objectives
* To identify students in grades Kindergarten through grade 12 (K-12) to be served by the programs.
* To understand the abilities and needs of each gifted and talented student.
* To provide teachers at each school with knowledge and skills necessary to implement programs for the gifted and talented.
* To develop appropriate curricula and identify instructional materials to support program goals.
* To involve parents and community members in the implementation of the G/T programs.
* To implement evaluation procedures for effective programming and for program continuation, refinement and possible expansion.
Source: DSISD Gifted and Talented Program Handbook Revision, September 2001.
Exhibit 2-30 DSISD Gifted and Talented Program Objectives for Students
* Gifted and talented students will develop their abilities in higher level, more complex thinking skills (including critical, creative and productive thinking) in activities that are extensions of the regular curriculum.
* Gifted and talented students will study advanced-level content and master the major concepts, skills and processes of specific disciplines in which they demonstrate ability (subject matter knowledge and skills).
* Gifted and talented students will develop the skills necessary for self-directed learning and will conduct independent studies and research projects that extend the regular curriculum and result in advanced-level products.
* Gifted and talented students will gain an understanding and respect for each person's abilities, recognize the similarities and differences between themselves and others, increase interpersonal relationships and will develop their own unique abilities for the betterment of both themselves and society.
Source: DSISD Gifted and Talented Program Handbook Revision, September 2001.
Students can be referred to the district's gifted and talented program beginning in the second semester of kindergarten.
Referrals in grades 1 through 12 can be made in early spring of each year.
To refer a student for a school's gifted and talented programs principal(s), teacher(s), parent(s) or guardian, student(s), self or peers, psychologists, counselors, librarians, administrators or community members must complete and submit a form to the appropriate school office A parent survey/checklist also must be completed before the student is tested.
After the appropriate testing and evaluation is completed, a school assessment committee consisting of the school principal or assistant principal, the G/T coordinator, counselor(s), classroom teacher(s) and/or G/T teachers who have had training in the nature and needs of gifted students, meets to determine if the child is eligible for placement.
The school notifies parents in May whether or not their child qualifies for participation.
If an individual is not satisfied with the decision of the school assessment committee, he/she may make a request for reconsideration under certain appeals criteria.
The individual must first meet with the school G/T coordinator to review the student's file prior to beginning the appeals process and then file a formal reconsideration with the school principal.
The school assessment committee will review the request within 10 days of its filing.
Decisions regarding the appeal will be made within 20 working days of the initial appeal.
If dissatisfied with the decision of the school assessment committee on appeal, an individual may appeal to the superintendent.
The last line of appeal is the school board.
Once a student qualifies as gifted and talented, the child does not need to be re-assessed for continuation in the program.
Students can be exited or furloughed from the program at any time during the year.
The school assessment committee is responsible for the furlough and exit procedures.
Students may be placed on furloughs if they are not maintaining satisfactory performance in the program.
The purpose of a furlough is to give the student an opportunity to reach performance goals set by the school assessment committee.
The furlough may last up to one calendar year.
At the end of the furlough, the student either re-enters or is exited from the program.
At the high school level, failure to participate in an identified G/T program offering constitutes a furlough.
The district exits students from the program based on performance if the school assessment committee determines it is in the student's best interest.
Parents can request a removal in writing.
At the high school level, a student may also request, in writing, to be exited from the program (TEC, Section Subchapter A).
DSISD ranked third highest among its peer districts in the number of students and fourth highest in the percentage of students enrolled in G/T education.
The district enrolled a slightly lower percentage of students in the G/T program than the state as a whole (Exhibit 2-31).
Exhibit 2-31 Gifted and Talented Education Students By Number and Percent Enrolled DSISD, Peer Districts and the State 2001-02
District Number Enrolled Percent Enrolled
DSISD 249 7.5%
Eanes 837 11.0%
Lake Travis 423 9.6%
Marble Falls 189 5.1%
Burnet 213 7.2%
Wimberley 157 9.0%
State 339,270 8.1% Source: TEA, PEIMS, 2001-02.
The state plan for gifted education specifies that districts "assure an array of learning opportunities that are commensurate with the abilities of gifted/talented students, and that emphasize content in the four (4) core academic areas."
DSISD gifted and talented students receive services in the four core academic areas of English language arts, mathematics, science and social studies.
A G/T resource teacher serves students in grades 2-5 in both language arts and math in their classrooms.
The G/T resource teacher serves both kindergarten students who come to the district previously identified as G/T and students in grade 1 in a non-subject specific program.
In addition to developing basic skills and concepts in social studies and science, teachers enhance and enrich the curriculum to nurture further development in these content areas and ensure adequate time for students to work with other children of advanced abilities.
At the middle school, students are self-contained in G/T classes for math and English/language arts.
There are clusters grouped within the regular classroom for science and social studies.
Teachers enhance and enrich the curriculum to nurture further development in these areas and to meet the students' diverse needs.
Extra opportunities are provided to gifted students through academic competitions and University Interscholastic League (UIL) academic competitions.
At the high school, gifted/talented students have an option for additional courses through Pre-Advanced Placement (Pre-AP) and AP classes.
All teachers of G/T programs are certified or endorsed in gifted education.
FINDING
DSISD students in Pre-AP and AP classes score significantly higher on AP tests than Region 13 students and the state as a whole.
All Pre-AP and AP classes are designated G/T courses and serve as the G/T program at the high school.
The pre-AP and AP classes also have open enrollment for any student who wishes to register.
All pre-AP and AP teachers are certified as gifted and talented teachers.
In addition, G/T students are encouraged to enroll in G/T electives such as debate, humanities and/or the G/T independent study course.
G/T students also have the opportunity to enroll in dual credit courses at Austin Community College (ACC), correspondence courses or the G/T summer academy.
The summer academy is designed to provide experiences that will qualify for college credit (Exhibit 2-32).
The percent of DSISD students participating in AP tests was seven points higher than Region 13 and 13 points higher than the state as a whole--almost double the percent of students taking AP tests throughout the state.
In addition, a significantly higher percentage of DSISD students scored at or above criterion than students in the region or state (Exhibit 2-32).
Exhibit 2-32 Percent of Students Taking AP Tests And Percent Scoring At or Above Criterion DSISD, Region 13 and the State 2000-01
Percent Taking Test Percent Scoring At or Above Criterion DSISD 27.9% 82.9% Region 20.2% 56.9% State 14.3% 50.1%
Source: TEA, AEIS, 2000-01.
In 2000, a Newsweek magazine article titled "The 100 Best High Schools" ranked DSISD 116th in the nation for students taking AP exams.
For this ranking, public schools are evaluated according to a ratio determined by dividing the number of all students taking advanced placement or International Baccalaureate (IB) tests by the number of graduating seniors.
Advanced placement and IB tests are the only two international high school programs that consistently demand wide reading and thought.
The Newsweek ranking indicates that the district is among those inspiring first-rate academic work by its students.
COMMENDATION
DISD combines counseling and course offerings identified to encourage critical thinking and independent study to enhance student performance on Advanced Placement and International Baccalaureate tests.
Career And Technology Education
Section 29.181 of the TEC requires school districts to provide a curriculum that affords each student the opportunity to "master the basic skills and knowledge necessary for managing the dual roles of family members and wage earner, and gaining entry-level employment in high-skill, high-wage jobs or continuing the student's education at the post-secondary level."
SBOE rules [Texas Administrative Code, Section 74.3(b)(2)(I)] require school districts to offer school-to-career education courses selected from at least three of eight career and technology educational areas: agricultural science and technology, business education, career orientation, health science technology, home economics, industrial technology, marketing and trade and industrial.
CATE gives students an opportunity to make informed occupational choices and develop marketable skills.
CATE is a curriculum designed to prepare students to live and work in the future by providing training in areas such as health sciences and technology, marketing, industrial technology and trade and industrial occupations.
The CATE curriculum is designed primarily for students who do not intend to enroll in college.
The high school principal manages the CATE program in DSISD as part of his overall responsibilities.
FINDING
DISD does not offer any courses through distance learning and only offers nine of 35 CATE courses as dual-credit courses through ACC.
According to the high school principal, DSISD has the capability to offer courses through distance learning, but the district presently does not offer any CATE courses this way.
The district does offer dual credit courses through agreements with ACC.
The district sets minimum enrollments of 15 students for its high school CATE courses.
The principal reports that, for financial reasons, the district adopted the 15 student enrollment option.
Each year, the high school principal conducts a survey to determine which CATE courses students desire.
However, the high school principal said that often the CATE courses do not achieve the minimum number of registrants.
The principal attributes this to the fact that the overwhelming majority of DSISD high school students are college bound and either do not have elective opportunities or seek electives that will complement their graduation and college preparation plans.
Distance learning allows students to take a course through a televised class broadcast through a telecommunications network.
DSISD offers CATE courses in family and consumer science, agricultural science and technology, automotive technology, industrial technology and business education.
The 2002-03 course catalog includes offerings in each of the CATE areas, but the principal expects that many of the offerings will not have sufficient registrations for the courses to actually become offered classes.
Many Texas districts with low CATE enrollment offer dual credit courses through articulation agreements with local community colleges or through distance learning.
A minimum of two students and a facilitator are required for a course to be offered through distance learning.
There is no minimum number of students from the high school required to register for a dual credit course at ACC.
Recommendation 13:
Increase Career and Technology Education course offerings through Austin Community College as dual credit courses or through distance learning.
The high school principal should consider student survey results when making decisions to offer additional courses through ACC as dual credit courses or through distance learning.
IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES AND TIMELINE
1.
The high school principal surveys high school students to determine areas of greatest interest.
September - October 2002 2.
The high school principal researches whether courses of interest are offered through ACC or distance learning opportunities.
October 2002 3.
The high school principal arranges to offer the courses for the 2003-04 year as dual credit through ACC or through distance learning.
November 2002 4.
The high school principal presents proposed course offerings to the superintendent and school board for approval.
December 2002
FISCAL IMPACT
This recommendation can be implemented with existing resources.
Counseling and Guidance
TEC Subchapter A, Chapter 33, establishes requirements for school district counseling and guidance services.
Major provisions include that: * A district shall employ at least one certified counselor for every 500 students.
* The school board shall adopt guidelines to ensure written consent is obtained from the parent, legal guardian, or person entitled to enroll the student for the student to participate in those activities for which the district requires parental consent.
* Each school shall conduct a preview of material used in the program annually; counselors shall work with faculty, staff, students, parents and community to plan, implement and evaluate the program, which includes: 1.
a guidance curriculum to help students develop their full educational potential; 2.
an intervention services component needed for students' personal concerns or problems that put educational, career, personal, or social development at risk; 3.
individual planning systems for education, career, personal and social development; and 4.
support for teacher, staff, parents and other members of the community to promote the educational, career, personal and social development of students.
TEC Section 33.006 describes the responsibility of the school counselor as "... to fully develop each student's academic, career, personal and social abilities."
The statute gives specific direction to districts' guidance and counseling programs.
Districts have flexibility with regard to the assignment, training and funding of counseling personnel, but must ensure that students are provided effective academic, career, personal and social development counseling services.
FINDING
The district's guidance and counseling program offers a full menu of services for students.
Students can access the counseling and guidance services in a variety of ways: self-referral, teacher referral, parent referral, administrative referral, special services referral or referral by a friend.
Services provided are age appropriate and thus vary by school.
Exhibit 2-33 summarizes the counseling and guidance services provided by DSISD at each school.
Exhibit 2-33 DSISD Counseling and Guidance Services 2001-02
School Services Primary School * Individual and Small Group Counseling * Classroom Guidance Lessons * Consultations with Teachers, Parents, Principals and Staff Members * New Student and Parent Orientation * Parenting Groups * Individual Problem Solving * Coordination of Referrals * Scheduling and Attending Student Support Team (SST) and 504 meetings
Intermediate School * Individual and Small Group Counseling * Classroom Guidance Lessons * Coordination of Transition Activities for Grades 3 and 5 * Special Education, Reading and ESL Referrals * Participation in Crisis Response Counseling District Team * Individual Problem Solving * Provision of Outside Referrals * Coordination of SST and 504 Meetings * Sponsorship of Texas Red Ribbon Week, Anti-Drug Education and Career Day
Middle School * Individual and Group Counseling * Group Guidance Self Concept Classroom Activities * Coordination of Transition Activities for Grades 6 and 8 * Sponsorship of School Wide Projects * Utilization of Community Referral Resources * TAAS Test Coordination
High School * Individual and Small Group Counseling * Special Education Referrals * Parent Consultations, Information and Referral Services * Academic Guidance * Career Guidance * College Guidance * College, Scholarship, Financial Aid and College Entrance Exam Applications, Information and Assistance * Coordination of Standardized Testing Programs
Source: DSISD Primary School Counseling Brochure, DSISD Intermediate School Counseling Brochure, DSISD Middle School Counseling Brochure, DSISD High School Counseling Brochure, 2001-02.
The primary school's program offers individual and small group counseling for issues such as divorce, grief, school work, anger control and difficulty getting along with others; classroom guidance lessons on topics such as self esteem, conflict resolution, decision making, drug resistance and peer pressure, stress management and taking responsibility; consultations with teachers, parents, principals and other staff members concerning children who are having difficulties; orientation for new students and parents; parenting groups; individual problem solving for immediate concerns that interfere with learning; coordination of referrals with other school specialists and outside agencies and scheduling and attending student support team (SST) and 504 meetings.
In addition, the primary school has a full-time behavior specialist who supports the counselors, administrators and teachers with disciplinary matters.
Students from regular education classrooms who are identified as at risk for behavior problems attend small group sessions with the specialist for discipline adjustment and social skills development.
The specialist communicates with the classroom teachers regarding students' progress while they are attending the sessions.
The principal reports that both reactive discipline management and office referrals to him and to the assistant principal for discipline problems decreased after the program was established.
This has allowed them to devote more time to administrative matters and instructional leadership.
Both primary school counselors report that having the position at the school has freed them from receiving behavior referrals, allowing them to do more work in needed areas such as grief, divorce and self-esteem counseling.
The intermediate school offers individual and small group counseling for issues such as divorce, grief, anger control, social skills, study skills and goal setting; guidance classes in all classrooms on citizenship and social skills; individual problem solving for immediate concerns that interfere with learning; provision of referrals to outside agencies; coordination of the SST and 504 meetings, special education and reading programs and ESL referrals; coordination of transition activities for third and fifth grade students; participation in a district team trained to provide crisis response counseling; sponsorship of Texas Red Ribbon Week, anti-drug education and career day.
The middle school offers individual and group counseling, sponsorship of school-wide projects, classroom activities in self-concept through group guidance, coordination of transition activities for sixth and eighth graders, TAAS testing coordination and utilization of community referral resources.
The high school offers individual and small group counseling; special education referral services; academic guidance through four year plans, scheduling and transcript analysis; career guidance through occupational exploration, career pathways choice; assessments, such as interest inventories; college guidance through information on post-secondary training and universities; application information and assistance, scholarship applications and assistance, financial aid information, applications and referral and college entrance exams applications (SAT, ACT, TASP); coordination of standardized testing programs, such as TAAS, Preliminary SAT (PSAT), AP, Credit By Exam and parent consultation, information and referral services.
The primary and middle schools are each staffed with two full-time counselors.
The intermediate school has one full-time counselor and the high school has three.
All schools are at or within the state-mandated counselor to student ratio of 1:500.
All counselors said that the district places priority on their services and does not re-assign them to fulfill other administrative duties that would interfere with primary responsibilities.
COMMENDATION
The district provides a strong continuum of counseling and guidance services from primary through high school supporting the educational, career, personal and social development of its students.
Library Services
TEC Subchapter B, Chapter 33, establishes that the Texas State Library and Archives Commission (The State Library), in consultation with the SBOE, shall adopt standards for school library services.
A school district shall consider the standards in developing, implementing or expanding library services.
The State Library's mission for school library programs is to ensure that students and staff are effective users of ideas and information, enabling them to be literate life-long learners.
This mission is to be accomplished, with sufficient funding and resources, by the school library staff, in collaboration with the school community by: * providing instruction to foster competence in acquiring and using information and ideas and in evaluating information resources; * stimulating interest in reading and appreciation of literature through group instruction and individual guidance; * providing intellectual and physical access to materials in multiple formats; and * working with other educators to design and carry out learning experiences to meet the needs of individual students.
The State Library has established guidelines for three levels of school library programs that meet or exceed standards: Exemplary, Recognized and Acceptable.
A fourth set of guidelines describes a library program that would be considered Below Standard.
A model school library program has five major components: library learning environment, curriculum integration, resources, library program management and facilities.
FINDING
Recognizing a need in the area of library services, DSISD dedicated additional funds and used state guidelines as a basis for future improvements.
The district dedicated $618,049 in 2001-02 to library and resource services, a 162 percent increase in expenditures from the $236,075 budgeted expenditures in 1997-98.
Exhibit 2-34 shows DSISD's budgeted expenditures from 1997-98 through 2001-02 and the percent increase of funds.
Exhibit 2-34 DSISD Library and Educational Resources Budgeted Expenditures 1997-98 through 2001-02
Descriptor 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02 Libraries and Educational Resources* $236,075 $374,310 $418,288 $433,360 $618,049 Percent Change from Prior Year N/A 59% 12% 4% 43%
Source: TEA, PEIMS, 1997-98 through 2001-02.
*Function 12 is used for expenditures/expenses that are directly and exclusively used for resource centers, establishing and maintaining libraries and other major facilities dealing with educational resources and media.
In 2000-01, the district conducted a self-assessment of its libraries using the state's library guidelines.
Exhibit 2-35 shows the results of the assessment presented to DSISD's board.
Exhibit 2-35 DSISD School Library Ratings by Component State Library Guidelines
Component Primary School* Intermediate School Middle School High School Learning Environment Recognized Below Standard Recognized Recognized Curriculum Integration Acceptable-Recognized Below Standard Acceptable-Recognized Acceptable Resources Recognized Acceptable Acceptable Below Standard Program Management Acceptable Below Standard Acceptable Acceptable Facilities Recognized Exemplary Exemplary Exemplary
Source: DSISD Librarians, May 2001.
*Assessment conducted on primary school library prior to mold infestation and closure of the school.
The district rated Exemplary, Recognized or Acceptable in 16 of 20 ratings.
The district rated Exemplary in three of the 20 ratings and all three were for facilities.
There were five Recognized ratings, three of these for learning environment.
There were two ratings showing a transition from Acceptable to Recognized, both of these in curriculum integration.
There were six Acceptable ratings, five of these in the resources and program management components.
Resources are the items acquired for the library's collection that instruct or support learning and the curriculum, including print, electronic and non-print materials, such as audio-visual materials, games, models, posters and kits.
Program management includes staffing allocation and budget.
There were four Below Standard ratings, one each in resources, program management, curriculum integration and learning environment.
In the category "resources," the primary school had a Recognized rating.
The primary librarian said that the Parent Teacher Association (PTA) has made significant contributions to increase their collection.
The primary book fair provided profits to purchase collection additions.
The primary librarian also said that books at the primary level are not as expensive as the reference and non-fiction materials needed at the high school level.
Due to Acceptable ratings, the intermediate and middle school librarians have focused attention on building their collections since being hired by the district three and four years ago.
The high school's collection received a Below Standard rating.
The librarian said that the average age of the high school collection is the late 1970s to early 1980s.
Because of the dated material, a collection's age is important, particularly in the areas of science, technology, world geography and general reference.
The librarian reported that the high school students regularly use the library for research, to prepare reports and for writing exercises that include narrative, personal essay, fiction and UIL essays.
The staffing allocations of one full-time equivalent librarian and one full-time equivalent library aide for the size of the student population in the primary, middle and high schools were responsible for its Acceptable ratings in the program management component.
The staffingallocation of one full-time equivalent librarian and one part-time equivalent library aide for thesize of the student population in the intermediate school was responsible for its Below Standard program management rating.
The librarians all use parent and student volunteers to supplement staffing levels.
DSISD plans to continually assess itself using state guidelines to measure improvements in this area.
COMMENDATION
DSISD combines self-assessments with staff and volunteer efforts and increased funds to identify deficiencies and provide improved library services to students and staff.
Health Services
Through two registered nurses (RNs) and two nurse assistants, DSISD's Health Services program provides services designed to support the medical needs of its students.
The services provided by the program are: vision and hearing screening in pre-K, first, third and fifth grades; AN screenings in third, fifth and seventh grades; spinal screenings at sixth and ninth grades; first aid; maintenance of all students' medical and immunization records; dispensation of daily medications and distribution of health problem information to teachers on a "need to know" basis.
FINDING
The district has an effective system for ensuring students maintain current immunizations to comply with state regulations for school attendance.
In collaboration with the Hays County Emergency Medical Services and Health Departments, the district sponsors two or three immunization clinics a year.
Coordination of the clinics by the district health services personnel at timely intervals, based upon their monitoring of students' computerized immunization records, assists parents in having their children immunized on time.
EMS visits designated schools and provides the opportunity for parents to have their children immunized.
Parents pay for the immunizations, but the district provides the service in a convenient location.
COMMENDATION
The district facilitates the maintenance of current immunizations for students through school immunization clinics.
FINDING
Although the district's staffing level of nurses to students does not meet nationally recommended ratios, the district recognized the importance of student health services and uses nurse assistants to narrow the disparity.
The National Association of School Nurses (NASN) recommends a student to nurse ratio of no more than 750:1.
The district's student to nurse ratio in 2001-02, including nurse assistants in the calculations, was 830:1.
Without the nurse assistants, the ratio increases to 1,660:1.
The assistants are trained in first aid and cardiopulmonary resuscitation and are certified to conduct vision, hearing, spinal and acanthosis-nigricans screenings as appropriate for their respective grade levels.
One nurse serves as the lead nurse for the district and also is responsible for the middle school and high school.
The nurse assistant who works with her is assigned to the middle school.
The second RN and nurse assistant are assigned to the primary and intermediate schools.
All four staff members are district employees.
The RN spends her day at the primary school until 2 p.m., when she switches schools with her assigned nurse assistant and goes to the intermediate school until 3:30 p.m., the end of the school day.
The nurses report to their respective school principals.
The district recognizes that if it continues to grow as its demographic studies project, the student population will grow within the next eight years to an enrollment between 5,100 and 7,432.
Administrators are aware that enrollment growth affects other areas such as health services.
COMMENDATION
DSISD uses nurses and nurse assistants to provide a variety of health services to students.
_________________________________________________________________
Carole Keeton Strayhorn Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts Window on State Government Contact Us Privacy and Security Policy
