LETTER FROM THE DIRECTOR Bequests The Gift of Life By Don Jordan PET THERAPY A Dog's Perspective by Curtiss, as told to mom Each year, the Seattle Animal Shelter gratefully accepts bequests and donations from car ing people who want to support our mission of protecting animals and promoting animal welfare.
There are many ways to help the animals in our care.
Making a bequest to the shelter through the Help The Animals Fund, the Off-Leash Area Fund or the Pet Population Control Fund is one of the easiest.
Here are answers to some popular questions: What is a bequest? A bequest is a transfer, by will, of property to an individual or a char itable organization.
What are the donor benefits to making a bequest to the Seattle Animal Shelter? A bequest is an opportunity to make a more substantial gift than would be possible dur ing the donor's lifetime.
It also has potential for rounding out a lifetime of giving with a lasting legacy to the Seattle Animal Shelter.
There are also tax advantages.
When you make a bequest to one of the three Seattle Animal Shelter funds, assets from your estate that would otherwise go directly to the gover nment are used instead to meet the needs of people and animals in our community.
What may I bequeath to the Seattle Animal Shelter? Most commonly, fr iends and volunteers of the Seattle Animal Shelter bequeath cash.
But gifts of real estate (such as a personal residence), life insurance proceeds, works of art, valuable antiques, secur ities or other tangible personal property may also be left to the shelter.
What are the different types of bequests? In the most common type of bequest, donors direct cash or specific assets to the char ity.
Sometimes the bequest has a fixed amount or value; other times it may be a percentage of your estate.
With a residuary bequest, you give all or part of your estate remaining after other specific bequests and expenses related to settlement of your estate have been paid.
Are there other ways to give to the Seattle Animal Shelter after my death? Yes.
In a testamentary trust, your will provides upon your death income to your spouse and/or other beneficiar ies dur ing their lifetimes.
After they die, the remaining assets of the trust go to the Seattle Animal Shelter.
With a contingent bequest, you name the Seattle Animal Shelter as the recipient of your estate only if others listed in your estate plan are not living at the time of your death.
You may also designate the Seattle Animal Shelter as the beneficiary of the remainder of your IRA, Keogh plan, tax-sheltered annuity, or qualified pension, profit-shar ing, or life insurance plan.
Does the Seattle Animal Shelter want to know my bequest intentions? The Seattle Animal Shelter recognizes that your bequest intentions are a very personal matter and that you may wish to keep them confidential.
If you decide to infor m us, however, that knowledge would be very helpful in our long-range planning.
This infor mation should not take the place of legal advice.
Please seek the advice of your own legal counsel and tax advisor for analysis of your specific circumstances and recommended estate planning, including the preparation of documents.
If you would like more infor mation on planning a bequest to the Seattle Animal Shelter, please feel free to contact me directly at 206-386-4286.
SHELTER NEWS EMERGENCY RELIEF FOR NEW YORK CITY PETS By Katherine Schubert-Knapp The impact of the tragedy of September 11 continues to reverberate.
The pets of the victims and survivors were themselves victims of these senseless acts of violence.
Dur ing the week of September 17th, the Seattle Animal Shelter and PAWS (the Progressive Animal Welfare Society) asked the Puget Sound community to donate toys, blankets, water bowls and pet food to help the pet owners and animals of New York City.
In typical fashion, you opened your pocketbooks and poured out your hearts.
On Sept. 19, 2001, Chr istine Titus and Robbin Jones, representing, respectively, the Seattle Animal Shelter and PAWS, left Seattle for New York, where they presented two tons of pet supplies and $3,000 to the Humane Society of New York.
Titus and Jones stayed on to help distr ibute the donations to people and animals affected by the terror ist attacks.
In true community spir it, the Bellevue, Washington, and New York City offices of Federal Express shipped and delivered the supplies free of charge.
"On behalf of the Seattle Animal Shelter and PAWS, we'd like to thank Federal Express and everyone who contr ibuted to this effort," says Seattle Animal Shelter Volunteer Programs Coordinator Chr istine Titus.
The Humane Soceity of New York was thr illed to have us there offer ing help.
I went into this thinking I was deliver ing pet supplies, but it tur ned out I delivered an important message instead: that the people of Puget Sound care deeply for the people and animals in New York City.
They were impressed, moved and even a little stunned that people from Puget Sound would bother to send these donations all the way across the country."
In addition to the Seattle Animal Shelter and PAWS, an animal welfare agency from Michigan also offered their assistance.
My name is Curtiss.
I'm a proud graduate of the Seattle Animal Shelter.
I was lucky enough to be adopted in December 1999.
In May of 2000, after we completed obedience school, my mom and I joined the Pet Therapy team.
We visit long-term care facilities in the Seattle area.
We dogs bring our parents, who have all been to the shelter's Volunteer Orientation.
Virginia Dalton, Animal Care Supervisor, tests us for temperament to make sure we are suitable for the program.
I was nervous about the test, but I passed with flying colors!
We make our Pet Therapy visits a few times a month.
It's called Pet Therapy because of the enormous benefits animals have on people.
And they're just now beginning to see this? Duh!
We lower heart rates and stress, and even can improve mobility and motivation in sick and injured people.
Personally, I think we Therapy dogs are pretty lucky.
I get to visit with all these great people who give me love! They tug on my ears, pat my nose, and occasionally I even get a belly rub.
Sometimes they have crumbs left over in their lap from lunch and they don't mind me nibbling on a few.
The residents definitely look forward to our visits.
While they are petting and cooing over me, they often tell my mom about dogs they grew up with or what they used to do for a living.
One of my human buddies used to be an animal control officer! Others are retired doctors, ballroom dancers, and more.
I like hearing their stories, especially while cleaning up their crumbs and getting ear rubs.
My fellow therapy dogs come in all shapes and sizes.
There are several mutts like me and lots of purebred dogs, too.
My canine friend Tigger does fancy tricks like balancing a treat on his nose for several minutes.
The Pet Therapy teams have a St. Bernard, a Great Dane, Cocker Spaniels, a miniature poodle, a Border Collie, a Bernese Mountain Dog, and more! The residents like seeing all us animals, and I like being able to visit with my canine and human friends.
My job is rewarding, mostly in seeing the residents' smiles when they feel my soft fur.
And did I mention that I get to nibble the crumbs off their laps? If you are interested in joining us on the volunteer Pet Therapy team, just come to the next shelter orientation and find out how you can be a Pet Therapy partner! WISH LIST The shelter is in need of the following items for our animals.
Any and all donations are gratefully accepted: Airline Animal Crates Bird Toys Blankets- halved or quartered (no electric blankets, please) Catnip Cat Toys Citronella Bark Collar Couch (in good condition) Fishy and/or Tuna Cat Food Guinea Pig Food Hot Water Bottle New Age or Classical CD Nylon Slip/Choke Collars (Promise Collars) Rabbit Food Salt Licks for Rabbits Towels Wash Cloths THANK YOU! Acknowledgments S H E LT E R S TAT S April 1August 31 2000 459 869 446 2001 383 742 497 We at the Seattle Animal Shelter continue to be impressed by the generosity and compassion of Seattle citizens who care about the health and welfare of our animals.
We'd like to say thanks...
Donations ...to everyone who dropped off pet food, blankets, toys and other supplies for the the New York Humane Society and the pets of New York City after the September 11 tragedy. ... to a good samar itan for donating many quality collars and leashes for our volunteers to use when walking our shelter dogs. ... to Shaun and Marco Prozzo, who asked the guests at their wedding reception to donate to our Help the Animals Fund in lieu of br inging a wedding gift.
Over $1,000 in donations were received! DOGS ADOPTED CATS ADOPTED ANIMALS RETURNED TO THEIR OWNERS ADOPTABLE DOGS EUTHANIZED* ADOPTABLE CATS EUTHANIZED* 2 ... to Bruce Small for contr ibuting $500 to help pay for behavioral modification training for a dog that had been removed from a neglectful home and needed to lear n socialization skills. ... to Lilly Chin who donated her expert sewing skills to alter our kennel officers' unifor ms. ... to Kar in Helmich and Noel Yates of Art Partners for designing and painting our Pet Cam Run and small cr itter adoption area.
Special Volunteers ... to the countless volunteers who've worked at all of our special adoption events this year.
Without you, many more pets would be waiting for homes! 1 1 0 0 7
