Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-1
Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem Besides California Department of Water Resources Fish Passage Improvement Program there are many public and private efforts to solve the problem of fish passage outlined in Chapter 1.
(Some of these are described in Appendix B).
A short history of fish passage improvement in California helps put FPIP in context.
Historical perspective of fish passage improvement There are many public and private efforts to solve the problem of fish passage.
Fish passage improvement has included removal of dams and other obstructions, building fish ladders over and around dams or other man-made or natural obstructions, replacing or retrofitting culverts where roads cross streams, screening diversions, and reclaiming gravel-mining pits.
The California Department of Fish and Game has broad jurisdiction over man-made or natural fish barriers, fishways, dam modifications and other barriers.
Since the early 1900s, DFG's regional offices and fish-screen shops, have installed hundreds of fish screens at water diversions and has built many fish ladders at dams or other man-made or natural obstructions to fulfill its mandate to ensure fish passage in streams.
Since 1992, DFG's Statewide Fish Screen and Fish Passage Program, part of the Inland Fisheries Division's Salmon, Steelhead Trout and Anadromous Fisheries Restoration and Enhancement Program, has been performing the following activities: 1) inventory of water diversion and fish passage problems; 2) evaluation and prioritization of fish screening and fish passage problems; 3) implementation or coordination of fish protection activities; 4) evaluation of existing and proposed fish protective installations; and 5) review of fish screening and fish passage literature.
To date, 469 dams have been removed nationwide for reasons including fish passage, safety, erosion control, and habitat restoration (American Rivers 2000).
In California, at least 77 dams have been removed since 1922.
(Since there are no centralized records, that number may be low.)
From 1990 to 1999, 10 dams were removed, and in 2000 at least 18 dams were removed, including Saeltzer Dam and several small check and diversion dams.
Table 2-1 lists dams that have been removed in California for which documentation could be obtained.
Appendix B describes other federal and state programs addressing fish passage.
Examples of recent or current fish passage improvement projects ­ some already completed, some in progress ­ are summarized in Appendix C. Dams that have been removed or are in progress include Saeltzer Dam on Clear Creek; Point Four, Western Canal, McGowan, and McPherrin Dams on Butte Creek; and Matilija Dam on Matilija Creek.
Woodbridge Dam on the Mokelumne River is an example of a modified dam and the Ratzlaff gravel pit on the Merced River is an example of gravel-pit pond isolation.
As a result of removing dams on Butte Creek, the number of adult spring-run Chinook slamon spawners went from 14 in 1987 to 20,000 in 1998.
Since the removal of Saeltzer Dam from Clear Creek in 2000, state biologists have documented spring-run and fall-run Chinook salmon and steelhead spawning in the 12 miles of creek previously inaccessible above the old dam site.
Also, spawning riffles have formed in the creek where the dam and reservoir were located.
Finally, state and federal agencies have funded studies detailing anadromous fish population recovery and stream restoration.
Restorations include screening diversions, augmenting spawning gravel, installing fish ladders, increasing flows, controlling water temperatures, restoring riparian vegetation, rehabilitating stream channels, and eliminating instream gravel pits and gravel mining (DFG 1990, 1993, 1996; United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) 1995, 1998).
In addition, many municipal and agricultural water agencies are trying to improve the way they use streams.
They know that further declines in biodiversity and fish populations, and delays in recovery of threatened or endangered species, will further hamper their ability to deliver or use water.
For example, the Santa Clara Valley Water District, serving urbanized Santa Clara County, has constructed several fish ladders and fish screens at dams and a drop structure, and removed two barriers on streams in its watershed, Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Table 2-1.
Dams Removed in California
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-2
opening miles of river for migrating Chinook salmon and steelhead for the first time in perhaps six decades.
The district has incorporated stream stewardship practices to help protect and resotre fish habitat, introducing new approaches in the District's flood control and water delivery operations.
The Stockton East Water District, in largely agricultural San Joaquin County, is cooperating in several first-ever studies on the Calaveras River, from which it draws water, to evaluate fish passage and salmon and steelhead life history.
The district hopes the studies will help it better manage, protect and enhance the river's steelhead fishery and continue to serve its customers.
Fish Passage Improvement Program The Department of Water Resources Fish Passage Improvement Program was started in 1999 as part of an integrated suite of CALFED water supply investigations: Integrated Storage Investigations.
Water supply development and its associated infrastructure impact fish, particulary anadromous fisheries in the Central Valley and Bay-Delta watersheds.
FPIP's primary objective is to identify and support projects that resolve fish migration problems at man-made structures.
These structures can include dams, road crossings, bridges, culverts, flood control channels, erosion control structures, canal and pipeline crossings, and gravel mining pits.
FPIP identifies structures that may impede anadromous and other fish during emigration or immigration to native watersheds, and supports projects that modify or remove those barriers.
This is a critical step toward improving riverine habitat and ultimately increasing native fish populations.
The program will help implement projects that alter or remove structures that impede migration by developing partnerships with local individuals and agencies.
Priority watershed basins will include those where stream restoration projects are already funded and coordinated.
The program will focus on identifying passage improvements that have mutual benefits for fish and people who depend on the stream.
FPIP will help DWR and CALFED meet their ecosystem restoration and water management goals by identifying barriers that might be modified or removed.
DWR's mission includes protecting, restoring and enhancing the natural environment.
Inclusion of the Fish Passage Improvement Program within DWR helps DWR implement its mission and meet its local assistance goals.
Working with local water agencies to improve fish passage may result in increased flexibility in managing state water supplies.
CALFED, a program of 23 state and federal agencies, was established to solve the problems in ecosystem, water quality, water supply reliability, and levee and channel integrity.
CALFED's plan for restoring the health of the Delta will be done in stages over the next 30 years.
Restoring access to critical spawning habitat for anadromous fish is an integral part of the Ecosystem Restoration Program, a component of CALFED.
The ERP is designed to maintain, improve, and increase aquatic and terrestrial habitats and improve ecological functions in the San Francisco Bay and Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta (CALFED 2001).
The ERP has several goals.
Goal No. 4 includes identifying fish passage needs and opportunities.
Dams and other structures are identified as stressors in several of CALFED's regions, including the Sacramento Valley and San Joaquin Valley Regions, and the eastside tributary streams of the Delta Region.
The ERP is also designed to recover at-risk species dependent on the Delta and Suisun Bay, as identified in the CALFED's Multispecies Conservation Strategy.
It also supports the recovery of at-risk species in San Francisco Bay and in the watershed above the estuary (CALFED 2001).
The MSCS helps ensure that CALFED conforms to provisions of the Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973, California Endangered Species Act, and California Natural Community Conservation Planning Act of 1991.
Anadromous fish species included in the MSCS are Central California Coast steelhead evolutionarily significant unit, Central Valley steelhead ESU, Central Valley spring-run Chinook salmon ESU and Central Valley winter-run Chinook salmon ESU, and associated critical habitat for each.
Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-3
The geographic scope of FPIP is primarily the Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys and Bay Area below major flood control and water supply reservoirs -- so-called rim reservoirs.
FPIP has divided its efforts into four areas: the Sacramento River and tributaries, the lower Sacramento River and eastern Delta tributaries, the Bay Area and western Delta, and the San Joaquin River and tributaries (Figure 1).
This scope corresponds to geographic areas where CALFED MSCS anadromous fish species are found, as well as with most of the geographic scope of the ERP including several of CALFED's Ecological Management Zones as described in Volume II of the Ecosystem Restoration Program Plan (CALFED 2000).
In addition, the FPIP scope incorporates the East Bay and South Bay regions of San Francisco Bay, areas within the ERP but not designated as EMZs, and the San Joaquin Valley from the San Joaquin River south to the Kings River, an area outside of the ERP.
These areas represent a historical range of anadromous fish below rim reservoirs and present appropriate opportunities for partnerships with local agencies on anadromous fish passage projects, so were included in the FPIP scope.
The FPIP does not currently incorporate the ERP watersheds above Lake Shasta because these are above a rim dam.
In 2002, FPIP agreed to assist both the California Coastal Conservancy and CalTrans with barrier inventory or assessment within and outside the original CALFED geographic scope.
FPIP is assisting the California Coastal Conservancy with its coastal barrier inventory through an interagency agreement.
The Conservancy, with $750,000 provided by state legislation, is developing a comprehensive assessment of barriers to fish passage in coastal watersheds.
The assessment will compile and standardize existing data into an Internet accessible GIS database.
A final report of the program is due in Feb 2003.
FPIP is also assisting CalTrans, through an interagency agreement, with a statewide fish passage assessment of state highway culverts.
In 2000, Caltrans began implementing a Statewide Passage Barrier Assessment and Correction Program in each of its districts.
The assessment started on the Northern California coast (District 1) and is progressing to the northeast and Central Coast (Districts 2, 4, 5).
Humboldt State University is doing the field assessment and analysis of state highways in Northern California.
FPIP will assess culverts along the remainder of the state's highways.
Priorities for Fish Passage Projects The Environmental Coordination, Assessment, and Review Team aided FPIP in developing criteria ­ defined by CALFED Ecosystem Restoration Program goals and objectives (CALFED 1997) ­ that could be used by the program to decide the priority of structures or projects it will support.
The team recommended the following be considered in setting priorities: · · · · · · · · · · Geographic scope The biological basis for selection Endangered Species concerns Flood control issues Water supply issues Habitat conditions Natural versus man-made barriers Definition of barriers to migration (upstream and downstream) Implemented or ongoing restoration activities Any existing fish passage facilities
Figure 1.
Fish Passage Improvement Program Geographic Scope
Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-4
·
Public safety issues related to structural barriers to fish migration
Following discussions and feedback on program goals, the criteria for project prioritization were further refined.
Criteria for prioritizing projects were divided into two levels identified as Level I and Level II (See sidebar, on Page 2-6).
Level I criteria considers FPIP objectives and scope.
These are the primary program criteria used to set project priorities.
Projects must meet Level I criteria to be included in the Fish Passage Improvement Program.
Level I also includes identifying benefits to ESA-listed salmonids and actions within designated Critical Habitat as set forth by the regulatory agencies of the state and federal governments.
There must also be no significant impacts to flood control and it must be possible to mitigate water supply issues.
Level II criteria provide additional prioritization standards for a project based on supporting objectives and goals of the program.
Level II criteria, like Level I, also take into account habitat conditions, structural or physical features, as well as program support and coordination activities that assist in achieving program objectives.
These criteria consider in more detail project benefits to be gained by implementing an action to improve fish passage.
Any one or all of the criteria may be met by any specific project; however, the more criteria that are met, the higher priority that is assigned.
Coordination with other agencies and the public FPIP mirrors the CALFED principles.
For example, FPIP relies on local leadership and community participation in selecting and implementing fish passage projects or studies; participates in opportunities to increase public knowledge of fish passage problems and proposed projects by holding general workshops and project specific public meetings; and encourages diverse stakeholder involvement in project decision making.
FPIP coordinates closely with CALFED agencies such as the USFWS, DFG, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
An Environmental Coordination, Assessment, and Review Team provides guidance to FPIP.
Members of the team come from the Department of Fish and Game, DWR, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Marine Fisheries Service, CALFED, USBR, South Yuba River Citizens League, and Friends of the River, Northern California Water Association and the Yuba County Water Agency.
The team assisted in refining FPIP goals and approach; identifying overlaps with other government programs; providing coordination of efforts; and developing criteria for determining which structures in streams should be modified or removed.
The interagency coordination team will continue to provide guidance to the program, including prioritizing streams, structures and projects.
FPIP involves the public through forums such as the Coordinated Resource Management Planning programs, public workshops, and cooperative meetings with water users and agency representatives.
In addition, the program will participate in or help identify basin workgroups of landowners and water users to coordinate with DFG and other aquatic resources groups such as the Fish Passage Forum to define and develop projects.
In cooperation and conjunction with DFG's statewide Fish Passage Coordinator, it will also help on fish passage restoration projects in the form of coordination or project oversight.
The program can do project planning, environmental documentation, engineering design, feasibility studies, surveys, and barrier evaluations.
Stream Structures Inventory FPIP will inventory potential fish migration barriers in all historical anadromous fish drainages of the Central Valley and the Bay Area and Delta.
The program's first phase of the inventory began in early 2000.
The inventory database, see Appendix A, will provide a tool that public agencies, watershed groups, and others can use to guide resources to where they will do the most good.
Data for the inventory were collected using mostly existing state and federal agency or private data files and published reports.
Pertinent documents generated by CVPIA, CALFED, and state resources agencies were reviewed.
Additionally, DFG files were reviewed for unpublished data, and program staff conducted interviews with regional Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-5
biologists from state, federal and local water agencies, established watershed Coordinated Resource Management Planning groups, local environmental or stream advocacy groups, and consultants.
Inventory data consist of the structure's name or identifying descriptor; river mile; latitude and longitude; physical description and present use; stream name; and condition of fish passage facilities.
Appendix A describes more than 500 structures in streams in the Central Valley and Bay Area.
Other reports have already identified some of these structures as partial or complete barriers to migrating anadromous fish, and some structures remain to be evaluated.
The inventory provides information that public agencies, watershed groups, and others can use in watershed management strategies to recover declining salmonid populations.
The inventory can be used to: 1.
Identify potential barriers to fish migration.
2.
Consider watershed basins for assessment of barrier remediation or removal and prioritization based on restoration programs and potential benefits to migratory salmonid populations.
3.
Prioritize barriers in each watershed for future modification or removal based on criteria developed by stakeholders, watershed groups and others.
Barriers to fish migration occur in many ways.
Fish migration and instream movement can be impeded by lack of water, poor water quality, poor habitat, natural occurrences such as landslides, waterfalls, boulder cascades, and man-made structures.
Identifying natural and man-made conditions that create potential and obvious fish migration barriers was key in developing program objectives.
FPIP's primary objective is to identify and support projects that resolve fish migration problems at man-made structures, which can include dams, road crossings, bridges, culverts, flood control channels, erosion control structures, canal and pipeline crossings, and gravel mining pits.
The program does not have the authority to initiate water acquisitions as a primary objective.
Therefore, directly acquiring water for streams and rivers where there is little or no water over most water years due to over-allocation is outside the purview of FPIP.
However, the program supports finding solutions to limited surface water supplies and will participate in forums to discuss and implement workable water supply alternatives.
The program will treat water quality issues the same way.
Other state and federal agency programs exist that address surface water quality issues.
Local Assistance FPIP is already supporting several priority fish passage improvement projects with identified benefits to listed anadromous species.
These priority projects are detailed in Chapter 4.
Chapter 3 presents descriptions of riverine habitat conditions, the status of Chinook salmon and steelhead populations, and current restoration projects on streams and rivers in the program area.
Fish passage improvement options at a structure can include removal, partial removal, new or improved fish ladders, or major structural redesign.
Examples of some of these include removing Saeltzer Dam on Clear Creek, or eliminating gravel pits on the Merced River (see Chapter 3).
Decisions to remove barriers or modify structures, such as improving fish ladders, will be made using the best available data and science.
While ultimately, the decision regarding remediation will be addressed during environmental reviews of each project, the Fish Passage Improvement Program will base its support on: · Quantified estimates and comparisons of fish numbers and habitat utilization between removal alternatives and structural improvement alternatives.
Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-6
· · ·
Identification of environmental impacts and mitigation measures between removal and structural improvement alternatives.
Impacts to flood control, water use, or power under removal or structural improvement alternatives.
Long-term maintenance and repair costs associated with structural improvement alternatives, and identification of who will be responsible for long-term maintenance.
Comparison of costs between removal and structural improvement alternatives.
Monitoring to determine if structural improvements have been effective and to provide subsequent remediation through removal if they prove to be ineffective.
· ·
FISH PASSAGE IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM CRITERIA Level I (First Priority) 1.
Central Valley/Bay Area within CALFED solution area.
2.
Below "rim" dams (major flood control, water, power supply facilities) 3.
Benefits native salmonids 4.
Located within Critical Habitat 5.
First downstream impediment 6.
Established program or stakeholder supported Level II (Supporting Considerations) 1.
Barrier has existing non-functional passage facility 2.
Will not impact flood protection 3.
Water supply impacts can be mitigated 4.
Benefits ESA listed salmonids 5.
Historical habitat for listed species 6.
Identified interagency priority action 7.
Existing good quality habitat above barrier 8.
Significant habitat gain within historical/Critical Habitat
Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement Program Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem
2-7
Literature Cited American Rivers.
2000.
Database of Completed Dam Removal Projects.
Dam Programs.
http://www.american rivers.org/default.asp (17 Oct. 2000) CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
1997.
Ecosystem Restoration Program.
Sacramento, CA. CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
2000.
Ecosystem restoration program plan.
Volume II: Ecological management zone visions.
July 2000.
Sacramento, CA. CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
2001.
Ecosystem restoration program.
Draft stage 1 implementation plan.
August 2001.
Sacramento, CA. California Department of Fish and Game (DFG).
1990.
Central Valley salmon and steelhead restoration and enhancement plan.
California Department of Fish and Game (DFG).
1993.
Restoring Central Valley streams: a plan for action.
November 1993.
Sacramento, CA. California Department of Fish and Game (DFG).
1996.
Steelhead restoration and management plan for California.
February 1996.
Sacramento, CA. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS).
1998.
Central Valley Improvement Act tributary production enhancement report.
Draft to Congress prepared by the USFWS Central Valley Fish and Wildlife Restoration Program.
Sacramento, CA. Working paper on restoration needs: habitat restoration actions to double natural production of anadromous fish in the Central Valley of California.
Volumes 1, 2, 3.
May 1995.
Public Review Draft v. 2, February 2003
Table 2-1.
Dams Removed in California Year Removed 1922 1925 1927 1936 1946 1946 1946 194 194 194 194 194 194 194 195 195 195 195 195 195 197 198 7 7 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 1 1 0 5 Dam Russell (Hinkley) Dam Hessellwood Dam Henry Danninbrink Dam Anderline Dam D.B. Fields / Johnson Dam Bonally Mining Co.
Dam Dam D.B. Fields Dam Altoona Dam Three C. Picket Dam Big Nugget Mine Dam Moser Dam Todd Dam Smith Dam Clarissa V. Mining Dam Bennet-Smith Dam Barton Dam North Fork Placers Dam Red Hill Mining Co.
Dam Quinn Dam Sweasey Dam Diversion dam Rock Creek dam Diversion dam (3 total) Happy Isles Dam Diversion dam (2) Lake Christopher Dam (breached) Upper Dam Unnamed dam #1 Unnamed dam #2 C-Line Dam #1 Point Four Dam Diversion dam River Hayfork Creek Hayfork Creek Canyon Creek Rush Creek Indian Creek Salmon River Trinity River Indian Creek Kidder Creek Beaver Creek Horse Creek Swillup Creek Trinity River Whites Gulch Redding Creek Salmon River Scoitt River Trinity River Canyon Creek Trinity River Mad River Oristimba Creek drainage (Henry Coe State Park) Rock Creek Coyote Creek drainage (Henry Coe State Park) Merced River (Yosemite National Park) Pacheco Creek drainage (Henry Coe State Park) Cold Creek Lost Man Creek Wildcat Creek Wildcat Creek Tributary to MacDonald Creek Butte Creek Reason Owner
Trinity City Water and Power Co.
Erosion/failure
City of Eureka California State Parks Pacific Gas and Electric Co.
California State Parks National Parks Service
1985 1986 1987 1987 1989 198 199 199 199 9 2 2 3
Erosion/failure
Erosion/failure Safety hazard
California State Parks City of South Lake Tahoe
Habitat improvement Fish passage
1993 1993
Ritchie Creek Fish passage (Bothe-Napa Valley State Park)
National Parks Service Redwood National Park Western Canal Water District California State Parks
Table 2-1 (continued).
Dams Removed in California Year Removed 1998 1998 1998 1998 1998 1998 2000 2000 Dam McGowan Dam McPherrin Dam Western Canal East Channel Dam Western Canal Main Dam Unnamed small dam #1 (weir) Unnamed small dam #2 (weir) Diversion dam McCormick ­ Saeltzer Dam Concrete check dams (13 total) Diversion dam Concrete check dam Wilder Creek Dam Crocker Creek Dam Haypress Pond Dam River Butte Creek Butte Creek Butte Creek Butte Creek Guadalupe River Guadalupe River (Bothe-Napa Habitat Valley State Park) improvement Clear Creek Fish passage California State Parks Townsend Flat Water - Ditch Company California State Parks Reason Fish passage Fish passage Fish passage Fish passage Owner
McPherrin Family Western Canal Water District Western Canal Water District
2000
2000 2000 2000 2002 2002
Fife Creek (Armstrong Redwoods State Reserve) Mill Creek (San Mateo County) Sausal Creek (Alameda County) Wilder Creek (Wilder Ranch State Park) Crocker Creek (Sonoma County) Unnamed tributary (Golden Gate National Recreation Area) Unnamed tributary (Point Reyes National Seashore) Solstice Creek Ferrari Creek (Santa Cruz County) York Creek (Napa County) Big Creek Monkey Creek Unnamed Lost Man Creek
Sedimentation, erosion Erosion, habitat improvement Habitat improvement Erosion, habitat improvement Erosion/failure, fish passage Safety, habitat improvement Safety, habitat improvement Fish passage Habitat improvement, fish passage Fish passage
California State Parks City of Oakland California State Parks Sonoma Co.
Water Agency National Park Service
2002
Horseshoe Pond Dam
National Park Service
2002 2002 2002 (scheduled ) Unknown Unknown Unknown Unkown
Unnamed road crossing Unnamed dam St. Helena diversion Big Creek Mfg. Dam Trout Haven Dam Merry Mountain Guzzler Dam Arco Pond Dam
National Park Service Trust for Public Land City of St. Helena
Safety Fish passage
Whiskeytown-ShastaTrinity National Recreational Area National Parks Service Redwood National Park
Unkown
John Muir #1 Dam
Alhambra Creek Tributary
Safety
Table 2-1 (continued).
Dams Removed in California Year Removed Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Unknown Dam Small diversion dam Minnie Reeves Dam Salt Creek Dam Dam Lone Jack Dam River Green Valley Creek (Sonoma County) Indian Creek Salt Creek San Luis Obispo Creek Trinity River Reason Owner
Figure 1
Bulletin 250: Fish Passage Improvement
Other Chapters Chapter 1.
The Problem: Fewer Salmon and Steelhead in the Central Valley and San Francisco Bay Area Chapter 2.
Solving the Problem Chapter 3.
Existing Habitat Conditions and Status of Fish Populations Chapter 4.
Current Program Activities Appendix A Known Structures Within CALFED ERP Geographic Scope Appendix B: Applicable Laws and Examples of Fish Passage Programs at Other Agencies Appendix C: Structure Removal Examples and Challenges Appendix D: Evolutionarily Significant Units, Critical Habitat, and Essential Fish Habitat Appendix E: Literature Cited
