APPENDIX D ­ VEGETATION COMMUNITIES AND ASSOCIATED WILDLIFE SPECIES Each vegetation community is fully described by Brown (1982a, 1994).
The Brown classification for the American Southwest is based on biogeography delineators such as climate, vegetation physiognomy, and plant dominants.
Upper Sonoran Desertscrub The Upper Sonoran Desertscrub vegetation is at times referred to as the Arizona Desert or PaloverdeCacti Desert.
This vegetation is mainly associated with the Lower Sonoran Desertscrub.
It occurs on BLM land in the western part of the state and is the largest vegetation community at 3,280,602 acres.
Cacti plants are characteristic of this desertscrub and include buckhorn cholla, cane cholla, chain fruit cholla, teddy bear cholla, desert Christmas cactus, pencil cholla, Klein cholla, Devil's club ground cholla, fishhook pincushion, Thornber pincushion, fish-horn barrel cactus, compass barrel cactus, and saguaro.
Non-cactus dominant woody plants are blue pale verde, foothill palo verde and ironwood, creosotebush, white bursage, whitethorn acacia, limber bush, ocotillo, jojoba, little-leaved ratany, crucifixation thorn, and bush buckwheat.
Fire is not common in this vegetation community.
The Desired Future Conditions are for an adequate cover and mix of natural plant species that have good vigor.
In terms of fire management and fire ecology, the Desired Future Conditions are for fire to control or reduce the exotic annual weeds such as red brome, Arabian grass, and Mediterranean grass, and to limit woody vegetation to non-hazardous levels.
A great majority of this vegetation occurs on slopes and broken ground giving it the name of Upper Sonoran Desertscrub.
Elevations range between 300­1000 m. Average annual precipitation is unreliable and bi-seasonal which averages 200-425 mm with approximately 30­60% occurring during summer months.
Temperatures are warm and characteristic of subtropical deserts with a winter temperature range of 9­19 ºC and summer range of 22­27 ºC. Soils are variable but predominately sand characteristically covered with desert pavement.
Historic fire had a return interval of decades to hundreds of years and was probably not common in this vegetation community (Rogers and Steele 1980).
However, today the risk of wildfire may increase after abnormally high annual precipitation which encourages abundant growth of red brome and buffelgrass (McAuliffe 1995).
Numerous small mammals occupy this prevalent vegetation community, including California leaf-nosed bat (Macrotus californicus), California myotis (Myotis californicus), black-tailed jack-rabbit (Lepus californicus), desert cottontail (Sylvilagus audubonii), Arizona pocket mouse (Perognathus amplus), Bailey's pocket mouse (Chaetodipus baileyi), cactus mouse (Peromyscus eremicus), white-throated wood rat (Neotoma albigula), gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), and the endemic Harris antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilus harrisii).
This paloverde-cacti-mixed scrub series supports diverse bird communities, including many species associated with other vegetation communities that extend into suitable habitats in the Arizona Upland Sonoran Desertscrub.
These species include typical thornscrub species such as Harris' hawk (Parabuteo unicinctus), white-winged dove (Zenaida asiatica), inca dove (Columbina inca), elf owl (Micrathene whitneyi), and pyrrhuloxia (Cardinalis sinuatus), the "cactus" woodpeckers (gila woodpecker (Melanerpes uropygialis), northern flicker (Colaptes auratus), and ladderbacked woodpecker (Picoides scalaris) ), and other "desert" birds (e.g., curve-billed thrasher (Toxostoma curvirostre) and cactus wren (Campylorhynchus brunneicapilus)).
Many Sonoran and other desert reptiles also add to the wildlife diversity of this vegetation community, including species with more limited ranges such as western whiptail (Cnemidophorus tigris), gila monster (Heloderma suspectum), Arizona coral snake (Micruroides euryxanthus), and tiger rattlesnake (Crotalus tigris) (Brown 1994).
Appendix C-1
Lower Sonoran Desertscrub The Lower Sonoran Desertscrub vegetation on BLM land occurs mainly in western Arizona.
It is the second most common vegetation type on BLM land as it occupies 2,727,540 acres.
This vegetation type is relatively species rich in comparison with the Great Basin Desertscrub as there is a mixture of different shrub species throughout this type.
The Sonoran Desertscrub vegetation is associated with Mohave Desertscrub and Upper Sonoran Desertscrub.
Characteristic shrubs are creosotebush, whitebursage, octillo, brittlebrush, foothill palo verde, fourwing saltbush, and Ironwood.
Saguaro is a characteristic cactus.
Western honey mesquite, ironwood, catclaw acacia, blue palo verde, desert willow, and smoketree are usually associated with washes.
Big galleta grass is an important grass species.
Invasive weedy species include exotic annuals such as Mediterranean grass, red brome, filaree, prickley lettuce, Russian thistle, and London rocket.
Fire is not common in this vegetation community.
The Desired Future Conditions are for an adequate cover and mix of natural plant species that have good vitor.
In terms of fire management and fire ecology, the Desired Future Conditions are for fire to control or reduce the exotic annual weeds such as red brome, Arabian grass, and Mediterranean grass, and to limit woody vegetation to non-hazardous levels.
As a result of high temperatures and low precipitation, plant growth is typically opened and simple reflecting intense competition for soil water among individuals.
Annual precipitation varies between 40­ 200 mm.
Winter temperatures are mild but summer months are hot, and desert pavement is common.
Vegetation tends to occur along washes and small drainages.
Sand dunes are common in some areas.
Historic fire had a return interval of decades to hundreds of years and was probably not common in this vegetation community (Rogers and Steele 1980).
However, today the risk of wildfire may increase after abnormally high annual precipitation which encourages abundant growth of red brome and buffelgrass (McAuliffe 1995).
Mammals typical to this arid region are generally small burrowing mammals, such as kit fox (Vulpes velox), white-tailed antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilus leucurus), desert pocket mouse (Chaetodipus penicillatus), and desert and Merriam Kangaroo rats (Dipodomys deserti and D. merriami), as well as the ubiquitous coyote (Canis latrans).
This vegetation community is the poorest of the Sonoran Desert for birds, because of its sparsely vegetated and structurally shorter habitats.
Typical bird species include lesser numbers of arid-adapted species, such as the LeConte's thrasher (Toxostoma lecontei).
In contrast, this vegetation community supports a diverse and productive community of reptiles.
The sandy plains and dunes of the Lower Colorado River Sonoran Desertscrub support a number of unique sand-adapted lizards and snakes, such as fringe-toed lizards (Uma inornata), banded sand snake (Chilomeniscus cinctus), and sidewinder (Crotalus cerastes).
Rocky outcrops, bajadas, talus slopes, washes, and gravel plains each support varied and often different herpetofauna communities ­ chuckwalla (Sauromalus ater), desert spiny lizard (Sceloporus magister), western whiptail (Cnemidophorus tigris), desert glossy snake (Arizona elegans eburnata) (Brown 1994).
Great Basin Conifer Woodland Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation is wide spread throughout Arizona and grows on 1,533,012 acres of BLM land.
It is associated with Upland Sonoran Desertscrub and Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation.
The Great Basin Conifer community is a cold-desert, evergreen woodland that is characterized by juniper and pinyon pine trees.
Juniper trees tend to dominate at elevations below 2,000 m while pinyon pine dominates at the higher elevations.
These trees are short-growing and rarely exceed 12 m in height.
The canopy cover is mostly opened except on higher elevations or mesic sites where tree limbs may interlock.
Understory shrubs, forbs, and grasses are usually sparse due to aridity and intense competition for soil water from the juniper and pinyon pine trees.
Important juniper species are Rocky Mountain juniper and Great Basin juniper.
The Rocky Mountain pinyon pine dominates in Arizona.
Appendix C-2
Associated grasses may include blue gramma, galleta grass, Indian ricegrass, western wheatgrass, Junegrass, and several muhleys or dropseeds.
Dominant shrubs are big sagebrush, snakeweed, rabbitbrush, winterfat, black sagebrush, blackbrush, cliffrose, Apache plume, Mormon-tea, fourwing saltbrush, antelope bitterbrush, and yucca.
Forbs include several gilias, buckwheats, penstemons, lupines, and globemallows.
The mixtures of grasses, shrubs, and forbs depend on soil, precipitation, temperature, and disturbance.
Cacti include several different species of hedgehogs, prickleypears, and chollas.
The Great Basin Conifer Woodland is cold-temperate woodland characterized by cold winter temperatures with freezing temperatures occurring approximately 150 days per year.
Summer temperatures are warm.
Annual precipitation ranges between 250­500 mm, is distributed evenly throughout the year, and mainly occurs as snow in winter months.
Soils are characteristically shallow and rocky.
Juniper trees have invaded large areas of former grasslands and sagebrush dominated rangelands.
Several factors, including fire suppression, climate change, and livestock grazing, may be responsible for the juniper invasion.
Efforts to remove the invading trees have not been successful.
Historic wildfire was not common.
The sparse understory and openness of the pinyon­juniper woodlands did not support the spread of fire expect on mesic areas where fuel was sufficient (Paysen et al. 2000).
However, in modern times, many of these woodlands have sufficient fuel loads to support fire because of increased tree densities and the establishment of cheatgrass, red brome, buffelgrass and other annual weeds.
The Desired Future Conditions are that annual weeds such as cheatgrass are controlled, ladder fuels and downed woody debris are limited or not present, and juniper and piñon pine tree densities and cover occur at their historic range of variation.
Only a few vertebrate species are closely tied to or centered within this vegetation community, such as pinyon mouse (Peromyscus truei), bushy-tailed woodrat (Neotoma cinerea), pinyon jay (Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus), gray flycatcher (Empidonax wrightii) Gray vireo (Vireo vicinior), black-throated gray warbler (Dendroica nigrescens), Scott's oriole (Icterus parisorum), and the plateau whiptail (Cnemidophorus velox).
A somewhat larger number of the more adaptable, and therefore, more widely distributed species also may be found in these habitats year-round or seasonally (Brown 1994).
Mohave Desertscrub Mohave desertscrub vegetation is located on 1,165,687 acres.
The Mohave Desertscrub vegetation mixture is intermediate between Great Basin Desertscrub and Sonoran Desertscrub.
The characteristic shrubs include creosotebush, Joshua tree, all-scale atriplex, brittlebush, desert holly, white burrobrush, shadscale, blackbrush, and many more shrubs.
Cacti are well represented and include Engelmann hedgehog, silver cholla, Mohave pricklypear, beavertail cactus, many-headed barrel cactus.
Ephemeral plants, many of which are endemic (approximately 90 out of 250 species), are characteristic of Mohave Desertscrub.
These short-lived plants that complete their life cycle in one growing season are divided into two major groups: winter and summer annuals.
The winter and summer annuals respond to winter and summer precipitation, respectively.
The Mohave desertscrub is a warm­temperate desert with scanty precipitation that occurs mainly during winter months.
Elevation for the Mohave desertscrub is broad in Arizona and ranges from below 300 m to 1,220 m. Precipitation is low with annual values ranging between 65­190 mm and occurs with a predominately winter and summer bi-modal pattern.
Temperatures are relatively low in the winter and high in the summer.
Temperatures can range from approximately 0 ºC in the winter months to 40 ºC in summer months.
Dry lakes are common.
Historic wildfire was probably not common in this vegetation community.
The Desired Future Conditions are for an adequate cover and mix of natural plant species that have good vigor.
In terms of fire management and fire ecology, the Desired Future Conditions are for fire to control or reduce the exotic annual weeds such as red brome, Arabian grass, and Mediterranean grass, and to limit woody vegetation to non-hazardous levels.
Appendix C-3
Coyotes are one of the few large mammals occupying this vegetation community, while smaller, less wide-ranging mammals abound, including Merriam's kangaroo rat (D. merriami), little pocket mouse (Perognathus longimembris), white-tailed antelope squirrel (Ammospermophilus leucurus), desert woodrat (Neotoma lepida), southern grasshopper mouse (Onychomys torridus), long-tailed pocket mouse (Perognathus formosus), cactus mouse (Peromyscus eremicus), and canyon mouse (Peromyscus crinitus).
Many of the bird and reptile species typical of this vegetation community are subspecies or subpopulations of species found in other desert vegetation communities in Arizona (Brown 1994).
Great Basin Desertscrub Great Basin Desertscrub vegetation occurs on 1,058,401 acres of BLM land in the Arizona Strip, Phoenix, Kingman, and Safford Field Offices.
The Painted Desert is predominately Great Basin Desertscrub vegetation.
It is associated with Upland Sonoran Desertscrub and Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation.
Species diversity is low with dominant shrubs occupying vast tracts of land.
Characteristic vegetation is low­growing, widely space hemispherical, non-sprouting shrubs with widely spaced bunchgrasses.
Dominant shrubs include big sagebrush, black sagebrush, Bigelow sagebrush, shadescale, fourwing saltbush, rabbitbrush, winterfat, hopsage, horsebrush, blackbrush, and greasewood.
Associated grasses may include blue gramma, galleta grass, Indian ricegrass, western wheatgrass, Junegrass, and several muhleys or dropseeds.
Forbs include several gilias, buckwheats, penstemons, lupines, and globemallows.
Cacti number and species in Great Basin Desertscub are relatively few in comparison to those found in warm deserts.
Cactus plants are small in stature or prostrate and include several species of prickly pears, hedge hogs, and chollas.
The mixtures of the different plants depend on soil, precipitation, temperature, and disturbance.
Introduced weeds such as cheatgrass, medusahead, red brome, Russian thistle, halogeton, filaree, tumble mustard occur on disturbed sites.
The introduced woody plants, Russian olive and saltcedar are commonly found present in riparian corridors.
Historic fire intervals range between 5-100 years depending on the shrub community type and fuel build-up (Paysen et al. 2000).
Annual weeds such as cheatgrass, red brome, and buffelgrass have caused an increase in fire reoccurrence and fuel flammability.
The Desired Future Conditions are for fire to naturally reduce annual weed densities and cover, limit or reduce the invasion of juniper, and for the densities of shrubs, such as big sagebrush, to be maintained within their historic range of variability.
The Great Basin Desertscrub is part of the Great Basin Desert which is a cold desert characterized by cold, harsh winters, hot summers, and low precipitation.
Elevation ranges between 1,200­2,200 m. Average annual precipitation is approximately 250 mm with the majority occurring during the winter months as snow.
Maximum daily temperature values may remain below freezing during many days of December, January and February--the three coldest months of the year.
For much of the area, increasing spring and summer temperatures coincides with decreasing soil water supplies which limits plant growth.
A distinct fauna is centered in this vegetation community.
Townsend's ground squirrel (Spermophilus townsendi), Dark kangaroo mouse (Microdipodops megaephalus), and Sagebrush vole (Lagurus curtatus) are associated with sagebrush communities of the Great Basin Desertscrub.
Large ungulates are poorly represented here, however several birds such as the Sage thrasher (Oreoscoptes montanus) and Sage sparrow (Amphispiza belli) are characteristic of sagebrush communities.
The Chuckar partridge (Alectorus chuckar) has also become well established following introduction.
The Sagebrush lizard (Sceloporus graciosus) and Great Basin spadefoot toad (Scophiopus intermontanus) are common representative species.
A number of reptilian subspecies such as Northern Desert horned lizard (Phrynosomo platyrhihnos platyrhinos), and Great Basin and Northern whiptails (Cnemidophorus tigris tigris and C. Tigris septentrionalis) are indicative of Great Basin desertscrub and a history of evolutionary separation (Brown 1994).
Appendix C-4
Plains and Great Basin Grasslands The Plains and Great Basin Grassland vegetation occupies 747,509 acres of BLM lands and is located on scattered, small land parcels on BLM land mainly in eastern Arizona.
This grassland vegetation is associated with Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation at higher elevations and with Semi-Desert Grasslands or Great Basin Desertscrub at lower elevations.
The plains grasses are representative of the tall, medium, and short prairies of the central plains region.
The Great Basin grasses are the southern extension from the Great Basin.
These grasslands are much altered now but once were a continuous cover dominated by various grass species and interspersed with shrubs and forbs.
Grazing and other agricultural practices have greatly influenced the cover and composition of these grasslands.
Fire with moderate return intervals was important in the ecology of these grasslands (Paysen et al. 2000).
However, grazing and fire suppression has altered the historic natural fire regime.
The Desired Future Conditions are for a predominance of perennial grass cover, reduced cover of annual grasses, and for fire to naturally inhibit the invasion of woody shrubs such as rabbitbrush, snakeweed, and big sagebrush.
The Plains Grassland vegetation can be divided into tall, medium, and short grassland fractions depending on general grass height.
Tall grasses occur on sandhills and are dominated by big bluestem and little bluestem, and Indian grass, switchgrass, western wheatgrass, needle and Thread grass, galleta, and sand dropseed.
Shinnery oak and midget oak are common shrubs.
The short grass areas are dominated by blue grama, buffalo-grass, Indian rice grass, galleta grass, prairie Junegrass, plains lovegrass, and alkali sacaton.
Associated shrubs in both the tall and short grass vegetation may include four­wing saltbush, big sagebrush, winterfat, soapweed, prairie sumac, rabbitbrush and snakeweed depending on the degree of past grazing and other disturbances.
Associated forbs may include primrose, bahia, spiderflower, fouro'clock, gaura, mallow, coneflower, bricklebush, and aster.
Associated cacti include plains prickleypear, hedgehogs, pin cushion, and gramma-grass cactus.
Plains and Great Basin grasslands are cold-temperate vegetation and vary in elevation between 1500­ 2300 m. Precipitation within the plains grasslands occurs mainly during summer-month thunderstorms and averages between 300­460 mm.
The Great Basin grasses occur on drier and colder sites than the Plains grasses.
Average precipitation for the former ranges between 180­300 mm and occurs mainly during winter and spring months.
Grassland vegetation provides a beneficial food source for larger grazing mammals such as the Pronghorn (Antilocapra Americana) and Bison (Bison bison).
Smaller burrowing mammals include prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicinanus (plains) and C. gunnisoni (Great Basin)), Thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Spermophilus tridecemlineatus), Plains pocket gopher (Geomys bursarius), and Plains harvest mouse (Reithrodontomy's montanus).
The open landscape of the grasslands provides suitable habitat for bird species such as Meadowlarks (Sturnella magna) and the Prairie falcon (Falco mexicanus).
The burrows created by small mammals are often co-habited by reptiles such as the Bullsnake (Pituphis melanoleucus sayi), Corn snake (Elaphe guttata) Western coachwip (masticophis flagellum testaceus), Western Plains milksnake (Lampropeltis triangulum celoenops), Prairie rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis viridis) (Brown 1994).
Semidesert Grassland The Semidesert Grassland is located on 757,668 acres of BLM land mainly in east-central and southeast Arizona.
This vegetation type is associated with Plains and Great Basin grassland, Madrean Evergreen Woodland, and Chihuahuan Desertscrub.
Originally the grasses were perennial bunchgrasses but grazing has encouraged the increased growth of sod grasses on areas with deep soil and heavy to moderate rainfall.
The bunchgrasses have been replaced by annual grasses in areas with low precipitation with low Appendix C-5
precipitation.
In some areas with deep soils and well protected from erosion bunchgrasses still cover large areas in association with a few shrubs and cacti.
However, there are areas where grass cover has been reduced as a result of woody plant and cacti colonization.
Fire with moderate return intervals was important in the ecology of these grasslands (Paysen et al. 2000).
However, grazing and fire suppression has altered the historic natural fire regime.
The Desired Future Conditions are for perennial grasses to cover its historic range of variability, annual grass cover is reduced, and fire naturally inhibits the invasion of woody plants such as juniper, tarbush, whitethorn, and creosotebush.
Tobosa grass and black grama are the most dominant species in the Semidesert Grassland.
Tobosa grass is generally found growing on heavy soils that are subject to flooding.
Black grama is usually found of gravelly, upland soils.
The other grasses are numerous and include black grama, side-oats grama, black grama, slender grama, chino grama, bush muhly, three awn, Arizona cottontop, vine mesquite grass, buffalo­grass, plains bristlegrass, plains lovegrass, wolftail, and little bluestem.
Lehmann love grass was introduced for its forage value but apparently it is expanding at the expense of more palatable grass species.
The assorted shrubs that are intermixed among the grasses include mesquite, one-sided juniper, lotebush, althorn, Mormon tea, false mesquite, catclaw acacia, desert hackberry, barberry, and ocotillo.
Tarbush, whitethorn, and creosotebush have invaded extensive areas.
Cacti and succulents are important in this vegetation type and they include several yucca, the sotols, beargrasses, several agrave, barrel cactus, Turk's head, cane cholla, desert Christmas cholla, rainbow cactus, and several prickleypears and hedgehogs.
The important forbs include the mallows, lupines, buckwheats, filarees, spiderlings, whitemats, amaranths, and devils claw.
Important weedy grasses include red brome, bristlegrass, and wild oats which are increasing as a result of past grazing practices.
The Semidesert grassland is a warm temperate grassland ranging in elevation from 1500­1900 m. Most of this grassland receives an annual precipitation between 250­450 mm with the majority coming during the spring and summer.
Winters are mild and freezing temperatures occur generally less than 100 days during the year.
Summers are warm with several days over 38 ºC.
The Pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) and White-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) are the primary large grazing mammals associated with the Semidesert Grassland.
The Javelina (Dicotyles tajacu), also known as the Collared peccary, can be found in the Semidesert Grassland.
Small burrowing mammals are primarily represented by the Black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus) and various burrowing rodents, including the Spotted ground sqirrel (Spermophilus spilosoma) and the Hispid pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus).
Numerous bird species include Swainson's hawk (Buteo swainsoni), Mourning dove (Zenaido mocroura), Roadrunner (Geococcyc californianus), Say's phoebe (Sayornis saya) Cactus wren (Campylorhynchus brunneicapillus), Gambel's quail (Lophortyx gambelii), and Blackthroated sparrow (Amphispiza bilineata).
Reptiles include the Western yellow box turtle (Terrapene ornate luteola), Desert-grassland hognose snake (Heterodon nasicus kennerlyi), the all-female Desertgrassland whiptail (Cnemidophorus uniparens), and Southwestern earless lizard (Holbrookia texana scitula) (Brown 1994).
Interior Chaparral Interior Chaparral vegetation represents 425,287 acres of BLM land mainly in western Arizona.
It is associated with Upper Sonoran Desertscrub, Lower Sonoran Desertscrub, Mohave Desertscrub, and Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation.
The vegetation is dominated by shrubs with small, thick, evergreen leaves and wide-spreading, deep root systems.
Historic fire was an important component of the ecosystem (Pase and Brown 1982a).
As such, the shrubs are well adapted to fire and reproduce readily from heat-scarified seed that is stored in soil for decades.
Some species readily sprout from root crowns after fire.
The dense compacted leafy growth of the shrubs are naturally flammable which leads to a high fire hazard.
The dominant plant is shrub live oak.
Other shrubs are birchleaf mountain mahogany, Appendix C-6
skunkbush sumac, silktassels, desert ceanothus, hollyleaf buckthorn, cliffrose, desert olive, sophoras, and Arizona rosewood.
Shrub cover is approximately 60­70% which allows grasses such as sideoats grama, hairy grama, cane bluestem, plains lovegrass, wolftail, and three awn grass to grow in the inter-shrub spaces.
Forbs are not common except after fire and include penstemons, Wright's verbanum, goldenrod, purple nightshade, hoarhound, and scarlet starglory.
Occasionally, one-seeded juniper, emory oak, or pinyon pine may occur.
Weedy species include filaree and red brome which are increasing because of disturbances such as grazing and fire.
The Desired Future Conditions are that fire naturally maintains shrub cover while reducing annual grass cover, the invasion of woody plants such as juniper and piñon pine are controlled, and the average age of chaparral stands is reduced through controlled fire or mechanical treatment.
Interior Chaparral vegetation is considered a warm-temperate scrubland with elevations mainly between 1,050­1,850 m but higher sites occur on drier and warmer slopes.
The climate is characterized by cool, moist winters and hot, dry summers.
The majority of precipitation occurs during winter months when plants are dormant or nearly so.
Small mammals associated with the Interior Chaparral include the Cliff chipmunk (Eutamias dorsalis), White-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), Rock mouse (P. diffcilis), and White-throated woodrat (Neotoma albiguld).
Nesting birds include the Spotted towhee (Pipilo maculatus), Virginia's warbler (Vermivora virginiae), Scrub jay (Aphelocoma californica), and Crissal thrasher (Toxostoma dorsale).
Reptiles common to the Interior Chaparral include the Side blotched lizard (Utastansburiana), Western blind snake (Leptotyphlops humilis), Glossy snake (Arizona elegans) Western black-headed snake (Tantilla planiceps) Western rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis), Western fance lizard (S. occidentialis), Arizona alligator lizard (Gerrhonorus kingi), and Sonora mountain kingsnake (Lampropeltis pyromelana) (Brown 1994).
Chihuahuan Desertscrub Chihuahuan Desertscrub is part of the vast Chihuahuan Desert and grows on 447,398 acres of BLM land.
This vegetation is associated with Semidesert Grassland and Upper Sonoran Desertscrub vegetation on BLM land in southeast Arizona.
Annual precipitation ranges between 200­300 mm with the majority received during the summer.
Temperatures are hot in the summer and commonly over 40 ºC and freezing temperatures occurring during winter months.
Elevation varies between 700­1500 m.
The Chihuahuan Desertscrub is shrub dominated but herbaceous and succulent plants are also an important part of its structure.
The dominant shrubs are creosote, tarbush, and whitehorn acacia cover large expanses of outwash plains, low hills, and valleys.
Saltbushes occur on fine grained soils and open stands of mesquite grow on sandy, wind eroded hummocks.
Secondary important plains plants are mariola, guayule, goldeneye, desert zinnias, dogweeds, candelilla, lecheguilla, ocotillo, and ratany.
On the upslopes, succulents such as several agrave and yucca species are present along with ocotillo, coldenia, catclaw, cenizo, condalia, and many more species.
Cacti are low growing, prostrate and clumped and they include several chollas, prickle pears, hedgehogs, Turk's heads, pin cushions, and fishhooks.
Semidesert grasses occur within this desertscrub with importance increasing near their common boundary.
Fire is not common in this vegetation community.
The Desired Future Conditions are for an adequate cover and mix of natural plant species that have good vigor.
In terms of fire management and fire ecology, the Desired Future Conditions are for fire to control or reduce the exotic annual weeds such as red brome, Arabian grass, and Mediterranean grass, and to limit woody vegetation to nonhazardous levels.
Desert pocket gopher (Geomys arenarius), Yellow-faced pocket gopher (Pappogeomys castanops), Nelson's kangaroo rat (Dipodomys nelsoni) Nelson's pocket mouse (Perognathus nelsoni) Southern grasshopper mouse (Onychomys torridus), and Goldman's woodrat (neotoma goldmani) dominate the Appendix C-7
mammal populations of the Chihuahuan Desertscrub.
Scaled quail (Callipepla squamata) and Whitenecked raven (Corvus cryptoleucus) are considered to be the characteristic bird species of the Chihuahuan Desertscrub.
Reptiles include the exas Banded gecko (Coleonyx brevis), Reticulated gecko (C. reticulates), Greater earless lizard (Cophosaurus texanus), Round-tail horned lizard (Phyrnosoma modestum), Fringe-footed lizard (Uma exsul), Little striped and Marbled whiptails (Cnemidophorus inornatus, C. tigris marmoratus), Trans-Pecos ratsnake (Elaphe subocularis), Western hooknose snake (Gyalopion canum), and Texas black-headed snake (Tantilla atriceps).
The Bolson tortoise (Gopherus flavomarginatus), while more characteristic of a grassland habitat, inhabits less than ideal conditions in the Chihuahuan Desertscrub (Brown 1994).
Riparian Riparian vegetation is found on 176,927 acres of BLM land in association with streams and rivers.
The area occupied by riparian vegetation is relatively small in relationship with other vegetation types but their biological and ecological importance is larger than their limited geographic occurrence.
Riparian vegetation is important to wildlife as forage, cover, breeding, and migration corridors.
Riparian corridors have been greatly disturbed by a variety of activity such as grazing, mining, tree harvesting, and stream flow alteration.
The Desired Future Conditions are that annual weed cover and density is controlled and ladder fuels and downed woody debris are limited or not present.
Disturbances such as livestock grazing, mining, and off road vehicle travel, that can potentially reduce natural vegetation cover and vigor, are managed to maintain adequate cover and mix of natural plant species.
The nature and species composition of the riparian vegetation changes depending on elevation and associated upland vegetation community.
For example, at high elevation stream gradients are steep with relatively high precipitation and cool temperatures, while at low elevations stream gradients are gentle, low precipitation, and warm temperatures.
At the higher elevations Pacific willow, bigtooth maple, narrowleaf cottonwood, box elder, black cherry, sycamore, Arizona walnut, velvet ash and western soapberry and red willow are the woody plants.
At lower elevations mesquite, Gooddings willow, netleaf hackberry, western soapberry, velvet ash, Wright's Sycamore, and black cherry characterize riparian vegetation.
Russian olive and saltcedar are two invasive woody plants that have colonized large expanses of low- to mid-elevation riparian corridors.
Large mammals characteristic of riparian woodlands include White-tailed deer and Black bear (Ursus americanus).
Small rodents include Arizona gray squirrel (Sciurus arizonesis) and Apache fox squirrel (S. nayaritensis).
The River otter (Lutra canadensis) is a rare species found in woodlands adjacent to streams.
Small carinovres such as Ringtailed cat (Bassaricus astutus) and Skunk (Mephitus spp, spilogale putorius) are also found in woodlands containing streams.
Red bats (Lasiurus borealis) are found in riparian woodlands.
Riparian habitats typically host the greatest variety, and often numbers, of birds in Arizona, with many being riparian-obligate species.
Examples of bird species inhabiting riparian woodlands include the Zone-tailed hawk (buteo albonotatus), Northern (Bullock's) oriole (Icterus galbula), Belted kingfisher (Ceryle alcyon), Yellow-billed cuckoo (Coccyzus americanus), Black phoebe (Sayornix nigricans), and the Federally endangered Southwestern willow flycatcher (Empidonax traillii extimus).
California newt (Taricha torosa) is found in riparian deciduous forests, while Arizona treefrog (H. Wringtorum) and Tarahumara frog (Rana tarahumarae) are found more in interior forest.
Ringnecked snake (Diadophis punctatus) is most often found in riparian woodlands.
Cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidis), White-footed mouse (peromyscus leucopus), Desert pocket mouse (Perognathus penicillatus) are commonly found in the Riparian Scrub, as well as in other communities.
Phainopepla (Phainopepla nitens), Crissal thrasher (Toxostoma dorsale), Verdin (Auriparus flaviceps) and Black-tailed gnatcatcher (Polioptila melanura) are representative of nesting birds.
Red-spotted toad (Bufo punctatus), though found in various communities, is quite common to the Riparian Scrub.
Appendix C-8
Madrean Evergreen Woodland The Madrean Evergreen Woodland is a warm­temperate forest located on 67,731 acres of BLM land in the southeast and west­central Arizona.
This vegetation type is associated with Semidesert grassland and interior chaparral at low elevations and Montane Conifer Forests at high elevations.
Elevations range from 1,200 to 2,200 m. Annual precipitation usually exceeds 400 mm with over half received during the growing season.
The climate of the Madrean Evergreen Woodland is favorable and thus has supported human habitation for hundreds of years.
Trees at lower elevations include Emory oak, Arizona white oak, alligator bark juniper, one-seeded juniper, and Mexican Pinyon.
At the higher elevations Apache pine, Arizona pine, pino triste, and Durango pine become prevalent along with the oaks.
The important grasses are several muhly species, cane bluestem, little bluestem, plains lovegrass, blue grama, sideoats grama, hairy grama, tanglehead, and green sprangletop.
Forbs include penstemons, lupines, bricklebushes, sages and many others.
The shrubs are indigobushes, buckwheats, rose­mallows, and Louisiana sagebrush.
Cacti and succulents include many that are found in the Semidesert Grassland.
The Desired Future Conditions are that annual weeds such as red brome and buffle grass are controlled, ladder fuels and downed woody debris are limited or not present, a high percent of large trees are maintained, and tree stand vigor is maintained through controlled fire and mechanical treatments.
White-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) is a common game species found in the Madrean Evergreen Woodland.
Common small mammals include Southern pocket gopher (Thomomys umbrinus), Apache squirrel (Sciurus nayaritensis), Bailey's pocket mouse (Perognathus baileyi), and Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus).
A number of bird species are characterisic of this community, including include Montezuma quail (Cyrtonyx montezumae), Acorn woodpecker (Melanerpes formicivorus), Buff-breasted flycatcher (Empidonax fulvifrons), Mexican jay (Aphelocoma ultramarina), Bridled titmouse (Parus wollweberi), Bushtit (Psaltriparus minimus), Hutton's vireo (Vireo huttoni), and Black-throated gray warbler (Dendroica nigrescens).
The Madrean Evergreen Woodland also has a variety of reptilian species, including Rock rattlesnake (Crotalus lepidus), Ridgenose rattlesnake (C. willardi), Mountain skink (Eumeces callicephalus), Sonora mountain kingsnake (Lampropeltis pyromelana), Clark's spiny lizard (Sceloporus clarki), and Huachuca blackhead snake (Tantilla wilcoxi wilcoxi) (Brown 1994).
Petran Montane Conifer Forest The Petran Montane Conifer Forest is a cold-temperate forest occurring on 19,067 acres of BLM lands at an elevation range of 2,000­3,000 m on mountain slopes and ridge tops.
Mean annual precipitation ranges from 460 to 760 mm with more than 50% being received during the growing season.
Snow is common during the winter.
Ponderosa pine forest is located at the lower elevations and Douglas-fir, white pine, limber pine, and aspen grow at the higher elevations in canyons and north-facing slopes.
At it lower limit, this vegetation is associated with Madrean Evergreen Woodland and Great Basin Conifer Woodland vegetation.
Ponderosa pine is the most common forest-type on BLM land.
Old-growth ponderosa pine forests are often park-like with scattered large, old trees and occasional clumps of younger trees.
The understory is mostly grass, forbs, and a few shrubs.
Frequent light fires probably kept the forests in this park-like structure as the older trees were relatively fire resistant.
The fires would burn every three to five years and remove the herbaceous understory and younger trees (Pase and Brown 1982b).
Crown cover of these forests was approximately 50­70%.
With the absence of fire, many ponderosa pine stands are composed of multi-aged trees with the young trees growing in "dog-hair thickets".
The Desired Future Conditions are that "dog-hair thickets" are controlled, ladder fuels and downed woody debris are limited or not present, a high percent of large trees are maintained, and tree stand vigor is maintained through controlled fire and mechanical treatments.
Appendix C-9
Mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus), White-tailed deer (O. virginianus), and Rocky Mountain elk (Cervus elaphus) are the primary large mammals in the Petran Montane Conifer Forest.
Bats, such as Southwestern myotis (Myotis auriculus), Long-eared myotis (M. evotus), Big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus), are common.
Small mammals characteristic of this forest community include Merriam shrew (Sorex merriami), Nuttall's cottontail (Sylvilagus nuttalli), Tassel-eared squirrel (Sciurus aberti), Porcupine (Erethizon dorsatum), and Deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus).
The large number of bird species includes Goshawk (Accipiter gentiles), Flammulated owl (Otus flammeolus), Broad-tailed hummingbird (Selasphorus platycercus), Western flycatcher (Empidonax difficilis), Steller's jay (Cyanocitta stelleri), Brown creeper (Certhis familiaris), Western bluebird (Sialia mexicana), Solitary vireo (Vireo solitarius), Yellow-rumped warbler (Dendroica coronata), and Chipping sparrow (Spizella passerina).
The Tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum) is one of only a few amphibians found in the Petran Montane Conifer Forest.
Characteristic lizards include Western skink (Eumeces skiltonianus), Arizona alligator lizard (Gerrhonotus kingi), Gopher snake (Pituophis melanoleucus), and Western rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) (Brown 1994).
Game Species and Furbearers Table D-1 lists Big game species and their habitats occurring on BLM-administered lands in Arizona, while Table D-2 lists small game, predator, and furbearing species and their habitats occurring on BLMadministered lands in Arizona.
Sportfish Common sportfish in Arizona include Apache trout (Oncorhynchus gilae apache), cutthroat trout (O. clark), rainbow trout (O. mykiss), brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis), brown trout (Salmo trutta), smallmouth bass (Micropterus dolomieui), largemouth bass (M. salmoides), striped bass (Morone saxatilis), white bass (M. chrysops), yellow bass (M. mississippiensis), arctic grayling (Thymallus arcticus), desert sucker (Catostomus insignis), bigmouth buffalo (Ictiobus cyprinellus), flathead catfish (Pylodictis olivaris), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), tilapia (Tilapia nilotica), black bullhead (Ameiurus melas), yellow bullhead (A. natalis), bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus), green sunfish (L. cyanellus), redear sunfish (L. microlophus), walleye (Stizostedion vitreum), black crappie (Pomoxis nigromaculatus), white crappie (P. annularis), northern pike (Esox lucius), roundtail chub (Gila robusta), and yellow perch (Perca flavescens).
Appendix C-10
Table D1 - Big Game species and their habitats occurring on BLM-administered lands in Arizona Species Mammals Bighorn Sheep Vegetation Community Sonoran Desertscrub, Mojave Desertscrub, Great Basin Desertscrub (rarely) General Habitat Description Historically, desert bighorn occurred on all mountain ranges and plateau slopes in the southern, northern, and western sections of Arizona.
Desert Bighorn's occur from 90 to 4,500 feet elevation, found on desert mountain ledges and grassy basins of southern and western AZ.
The breeding season extends from early June through October, but the peak rutting activity takes place in August.
The gestation period is about six months, and most lambs are born in late winter or early spring.
Native grasses are important in the bighorn's diet, although the animals also feed heavily on jojoba and other woody plants.
Pincushion, barrel, and saguaro cactuses provide moisture.
Preferred plants vary with habitat quality, locality, and species availability.
Found in southern portions of Arizona.
Phoenix Tucson Yuma Lake Havasu Arizona Strip Kingman Phoenix Lake Havasu Safford Arizona BLM Field Offices(s)
Desert Bighorn Sheep Ovis canadensis mexicana
Sonoran Desertscrub
Desert Bighorn Sheep Ovis canadensis nelsoni Rocky Mountain Bighorn Sheep Ovis canadensis Collared Peccary Pecari tajacu
Mojave Desertscrub
Found in northeastern portions of Arizona
Great Basin Desertscrub
Found predominantly on Forest Service lands in high elevation, eastern portions of Arizona.
Future reintroductions are being considered (AGFD Strategic Plan) to expand the current range of Rocky Mountain Bighorn's.
The collared peccary, or javelina, is of tropical origin, and is thought to have expanded northward as scrub and cactus have replaced Arizona's native grasslands.
Javelina are opportunistic feeders, eating flowers, fruits, nuts, and berries of a great variety of plants.
Prickly pear cactus makes up the major portion of their diet however, along with agaves, yucca roots, and other desert succulents.
Appendix C-11
Sonoran Desertscrub (AZ Upland subdivision), Semi-desert Grasslands
Arizona Strip Kingman Safford Tucson Phoenix Lake Havasu Yuma
Species Rocky Mountain Elk Cervus elaphus nelsoni
Vegetation Community Petran Montane Conifer Forest; Great Basin Conifer Woodlands (winter)
General Habitat Description Native elk, eliminated sometime prior to 1900, were reintroduced back into Arizona in the 1920's.
Mountain meadows, ponderosa pine woodlands, spruce-fir forests, and other high-elevation habitats between 7,000 and 10,500 feel elevation constitute the elk's principal summer range.
Elk are rarely found more than one-half mile from water and tend to stay on the summer range as long as possible, arriving early in the year and remaining until forced down by deep snow.
Their winter range, which is usually between 5,500 and 6,500 feel elevation, is more limited in extent and may only comprise about 10 percent of the animal's total habitat.
Calves are born between late May and early June after an 8-month gestation period.
Elk are grass feeding animals.
Mule deer are the most abundant big-game animal in AZ.
They can be found in most areas of the state, from sparsely vegetated deserts upward into high, forested mountains.
Mule deer are primarily browsers, although they feed largely on forbs and new grass growth in the spring and summer.
Other major diet items are twigs, bark, buds, and oak in northern AZ, with jojoba, buck brush, and mountain mahogany being favored in southern AZ. White-tailed deer are most common in the state's southeastern mountains, but range northward to the edge of the Mogollon Rim and up into the White Mountains.
Whitetails require areas of predictable summer precipitation and are most common in oak woodlands and on chaparral covered hillsides with oaks and pines.
Pronghorn antelope are native to the prairies of North America.
In Arizona, antelope persist primarily in the northern plains, inhabiting high elevation meadows between forested areas.
Scattered herds are also found in the grasslands of central and southeastern Arizona.
Antelope breed in August and September, and the young are born in May and June.
Fawns remain hidden until they are about two to three weeks old and strong enough to travel with adults.
Black bears in AZ are found in a variety of habitats, including subalpine and montane conifer forests, riparian forests, evergreen woodlands, and chaparral.
Cubs are born in winter dens during January.
Most Arizona bears hibernate from November through March.
Arizona BLM Field Offices(s) Arizona Strip Tucson Phoenix
Mule Deer Odocoileus hemionus
AZ Upland Sonoran Desertscrub, Semi-desert grassland, Interior chaparral, Petran montane conifer forest, Mojave Desertscrub edges, Great Basin conifer woodlands (winter) Madrean Evergreen woodland, Petran Montane conifer Forest, Riparian Plains 
White-tailed Deer Odocoileus virginianus
Pronghorn Antelope Antilocapra americana
Arizona Strip Kingman Safford Tucson Phoenix Lake Havasu Yuma Safford Tucson Phoenix Lake Havasu Yuma Arizona Strip Kingman Safford Phoenix Lake Havasu Arizona Strip Safford Tucson Phoenix
Black Bear Ursus Americanus
Appendix C-12
Species Mountain Lion Puma concolor
Vegetation Community Various (AZ Upland Sonoran Desertscrub, Great Basin conifer woodlands, Interior chaparral, Madrean evergreen woodland, Petran montane conifer forest) Petran Montane Conifer Forest, Riparian
General Habitat Description In AZ, mountain lions are absent only from the southwest and those areas heavily impacted by In general, the distribution of mountain lions in with the distribution of the animal's major prey and white-tailed deer. extremely arid human development.
the state corresponds species ­ the mule
Arizona BLM Field Offices(s) Arizona Strip Safford Tucson Phoenix Lake Havasu Yuma Tucson Safford
Birds Gould's Turkey Meleagris gallopavo mexicana
Merriam's Turkey Meleagris gallopavo merriami
Petran Montane Conifer Forest, Riparian
Gould's turkeys have been transplanted and occur currently in low numbers in the Galiuro Mountains, and from recent releases in the Chiricahua Mountains.
Gould's turkeys in the Huachuca Mountains are hunted on a very limited basis.
They occasionally are found along the San Pedro River, as they are well adapted to mature cottonwood riparian habitats.
The Merriam's race of wild turkey is found in ponderosa pine forests and in riparian deciduous forests and other vegetation types at elevations ranging from 3,500 to 10,000 feet.
During the winter, turkeys congregate in the pinyon pine-oak habitats just below the interface with the ponderosa pine forest.
During the summer months, hens and poults spend much of their time searching for bugs and seeds in small meadows and forest openings.
As winter approaches, the turkeys feed increasingly on acorns, pinyon nuts, and other mast crops.
Later, with the onset on winter, the birds follow pine stringers downslope to snow-free areas where they feed on the seeds of ponderosa pine juniper, pinyons, and other plants
Arizona Strip Safford Tucson Phoenix Lake Havasu Yuma
Appendix C-13
Table D2.
Small game, predator, and furbearing species and their habitats occurring on BLM-administered lands in Arizona.
Species Small Game Mammals Tree Squirrels Abert's (Tassel-Eared) Squirrel Sciurus aberti Kaibab Squirrel Sciurus aberti kaibabensis Abert's Chuska Squirrel Sciurus aberti chuscensis Arizona Gray Squirrel Sciurus arizonensis Chiricahua Fox Squirrel Sciurus nayaritensis chiricahuae Red (Chicaree) Squirrel Tamiasciurus hudsonicus Cottontails Desert Cottontail Sylvilagus audubonii Eastern Cottontail Sylvilagus floridanus Mountain Cottontail Sylvilagus nuttalli Small Game Birds Pigeons and Doves Band-Tailed Pigeon Columba fasciata General Habitat Description No fewer than four species and eight subspecies of tree squirrels can be found in Arizona's forests.
Throughout the summer, squirrels feed on the seeds of developing cones as well as on underground fungi or truffles that grow under mature pine trees.
These foods are the most nutritious for the squirrel, and only when they are exhausted does the animal resort to feeding on the inner bark of pine twigs.
Most widespread.
Exclusively inhabitants of ponderosa pine forests.
Close relatives include the blackbellied and white-tailed Kaibab squirrels.
Kaibab Squirrels are a subspecies of tassel-eared squirrels.
Exclusively inhabits ponderosa pine forests of northwestern Arizona.
Chuska squirrels are a subspecies of tassel-eared squirrels.
Found in isolated populations in extreme northeastern Arizona on Navajo Reservation.
Inhabits riparian deciduous forests and oak woodlands south of the Mogollon Rim.
Inhabits riparian deciduous forests and oak woodlands south of the Mogollon Rim.
Restricted to the higher forests of spruce and fire above 8,500 feet elevation.
Although able to breed most of the year, most young are produced in spring when the new growth of plants is most available.
At other times of the year, selected foods include twigs, newly emerging grasses, weeds, and even cacti.
Most abundant, the desert cottontail is found in every county in the state up to elevations exceeding 7,000 feet.
Found in the mountains of southeastern and central Arizona where it occupies may of the same habitats as the white-tailed deer.
Largely restricted to elevations above 7,500 feet from the Mogollon Rim northward.
Bandtails are birds of the mountains and usually nest in mixed conifer forests, ponderosa pine forests, or in dense stands of evergreen oaks and pines between 4,500 and 9,100 feel elevation.
As migratory birds, bandtails are usually only present in AZ from late March through mid-October.
After feeding on acorns and other fall mast crops, most AZ bandtails migrate southward to the Sierra Madre Occidental in Mexico.
Appendix C-14
Species Mourning Dove Zenaida macroura
White-winged Dove Zenaida asiatica
General Habitat Description This is the most common and widely occurring game bird in AZ. Mourning doves occur from the lowest elevations along the Colorado River upward through forests of ponderosa pines to 8,500 feet.
Their staple foods throughout the year are primarily small seeds and cultivated grains.
Although some doves can be found nesting on the ground in open prairies, the best nesting habitats are brushlands and woodlands within the Sonoran Desert.
There are two types of white-winged dove populations in AZ, a thinly scattered population found throughout the Sonoran Desert and the surrounding countryside, and colonial populations that nest collectively along river bottoms adjacent to agricultural areas.
Feeding sites are often composed of standing crops of barley, maize, and safflower.
Occurs in semidesert grasslands and the Chihuahuan desert preferring open plains and foothills.
Breeding occurs in spring after wet winters, but also during the summer months after the monsoons.
Found throughout the Sonoran and Mojave deserts upward in elevation through semidesert grassland and chaparral to the edges of pinyon-juniper woodland and pine forest ­ wherever mesquites and other brushy cover occur.
Breed only in spring and early summer, breeding intensity and success are directly related to the amount of rainfall received during the previous October through March.
Prefers oak woodlands and oak savannas in the southeastern potions of the state where grass cover is abundant enough to conceal its presence.
Nest only after the summer monsoon season, often postponing breeding until after the summer solstice when the days are getting shorter.
Introduced into Arizona in the 1960's.
Range is small, generally found in higher elevations, in eastern portions of Arizona.
Chukar were introduced into Arizona in the 1940's and 1970's, and originated from Turkish stock.
Chukar are cheatgrass obligates, and currently only persist on game farms and on the Arizona Strip (although are occasionally found in other parts of the state).
Recent fires on the Arizona Strip have expanded cheat grass, causing an upswing in chukar populations.
Portions of three distinct populations of sandhill cranes winter in AZ. Cranes from both the Rocky Mountain and Mid-Continent populations winter in the Sulphur Springs and Gila River valleys in southeastern Arizona.
Other sandhills from the Lower Colorado River Valley population winter along the lower Colorado River, primarily on the Colorado River Indian Reservation, Cibola National Wildlife Refuge, and Below Gillespie Dam on the Gila River.
Wintering areas feature shallow-water roosting sites with low or sparse vegetation including playa lakes and sandbars along shallow, braided river channels.
Another requirement is the close proximity of harvested fields of grain.
Migration to wintering areas begins in September, with cranes arriving on their wintering areas between late September and mid-October.
Quail Scaled Quail Callipepla squamata Gambel's Quail Callipepla gambelii (Mearn's) Montezuma Quail Cyrtonyx montezumae California Quail Callipepla californicus Other Upland Game Birds Chukar Alectoris chukar Sandhill Crane Crus canadensis
Appendix C-15
Species Ring-Necked Pheasant Phasianus colchicus
Blue Grouse Dendragapus obscurus
Waterfowl
General Habitat Description Pheasant populations persisting in AZ are largely confined to agricultural areas having relatively high humidity (Yuma and Mesa areas) or high enough in elevation to escape the desiccating heat of Sonoran Desert Summers (Virgin River and Verde River valleys).
Most hens nest by mid-May.
Pheasants roost on the ground or the low branches of trees.
Primary foods are cultivated greens and grains ­ alfalfa, barley sprouts, and kernels of maize, barley, and corn.
Blue grouse in AZ do not migrate downhill during the winter months as they do in the more northern states.
Instead, they spend the winter roosting in Douglas fir trees, subsisting on needles until spring.
The peak of mating activity usually takes place during the last part of May or the first week of June.
In fall, hens and poults feed at the edge of mountain meadows and in old burns on forbs.
Arizona's waterfowl can be grouped into two general classes ­ ducks, geese, and coots that nest in the state; and those that merely winter here or migrate through.
Arizona's principal waterfowl nesting grounds are the natural and modified marshes found above the Mogollon Rim and in the White Mountains.
Most of these marshlands depend on winter precipitation and snowmelt rather than groundwater, and are generally seasonal, and are mostly located 7,000 feet elevation.
Farm ponds and other small wetlands in the southeastern part of the state are also inhabited by species of Mexican ducks.
The principal duck species nesting in AZ are mallards (especially in the White Mountains), pintails, cinnamon teal, redheads, and ruddy ducks.
Additionally, smaller numbers of gadwall, green-winged teal, blue-winged teal, and ring-necked ducks are also found in northern marshes.
Less common are canvasbacks, shovelers, and American widgeons.
Found throughout the state in broken and brushy country.
Their principal prey is cottontail rabbits and jackrabbits, but they also take both smaller and larger mammals, as well as snakes and lizards.
The bobcat is also classified as a furbearer.
Coyotes are widespread opportunists, feeding mainly on small mammals, but also on carrion, bird eggs, insects, and vegetable matter such as manzanita and juniper berries.
Most common fox in AZ, occurring wherever there is wooded country and broken terrain.
Favor brushy habitats, rock piles and desert washes, although they also will climb trees.
Uncommon in AZ, occurring only in the northeast potions of the state.
Found in valleys and on sandy plains it the southwestern deserts, spending much of their day underground.
All skunks are generally omnivores, feeding on grasshoppers, worms, mice, lizards, bulbs, carrion, and garbage.
Occurs primarily in southeastern AZ. Breeds in late winter and produces young in April or May.
Generally confined to southeastern Arizona.
Breeds in late winter and produces young in April or May.
Predators Bobcat Felis rufus Coyote Canis latrans FOXES Common Gray Fox Urocyon cinereoargenteus Red Fox Vulpes vulpes Kit Fox Vulpes macrotis SKUNKS Hog-Nosed Skunk Conepatus leuconotus leuconotus Hooded Skunk Mephitis macroura
Appendix C-16
Species Striped Skunk Mephitis mephitis Western Spotted Skunk Spilogale gracilis Furbearers American Badger Taxidea taxus American Beaver Castor canadensis Common Raccoon Procyon lotor Long-Tailed Weasel Mustela frenata Muskrat Ondatra Zibethica Ringtail Bassariscus astutus River Otter Lontra canadensis
General Habitat Description Most common in AZ, with a widespread distribution, living everywhere but the most extreme deserts, and are often found near water.
Breeds in late winter and produces young in April or May.
Mostly occurs in rocky, mountainous areas.
Breeds in late September or early October.
Widely distributed, the badger occurs almost anywhere in AZ having ground suitable to dig and excavate cavities.
Badgers feed primarily on burrowing rodents such as prairie dogs and ground squirrels, but also will take snakes, lizards, and insects on occasion.
Breeding season is in summer, with young not being born until the following spring.
Beavers, at one time found nearly everywhere in AZ, now occur only along some permanent streams, certain shallow lakes, and a few dirt-lined canals.
Diet is almost exclusively plant material with the bark of cottonwoods, aspen, and willow trees being especially important.
Other reported foods include tamarisk, mesquite, and the roots of aquatic plants such as cattail and bulrush.
A relatively common animal along Arizona's perennial streams, lakes, and reservoirs.
Raccoons are omnivores, eating whatever food is available ­ aquatic insect larvae, beetle grubs, fish, frogs, crayfish, wild fruits, and carrion.
There is only one species of weasel in Arizona, restricted to high elevation sites such as those on the Kaibab Plateau, Mogollon Rim, Chuska-Lukachukai Mountains, and southern Arizona's sky islands.
Predators, feeding on cottontails, rodents, birds, snakes, and lizards.
Weasels breed in midsummer, with young not born until the following spring.
Muskrats can be found along most of Arizona's perennial rivers and permanent marshes.
Primarily a vegetarian, the muskrat feeds on aquatic grasses, pondweed, cattail roots, and the leaves of seep willows.
Muskrats in AZ are reported to breed year round, but most of the young are born between March and October.
Most common in the rocky regions of southern and western AZ with the Grand Canyon being especially favored.
The only areas devoid of ringtails are flat, alluvial valleys, as the animal prefers boulder-strewn hillsides, canyons, rock-walled houses, and mine shafts.
Diet consists of small mammals, birds, lizards, and insects, as plant fruits.
Once found throughout the Salt, Verde, LCR, and probably also the Gila and Colorado River systems, this species is now confined to the Verde River and its major tributaries where it was reintroduced in the early 1980's.
Diet includes fish, water birds, turtles, eggs, and crayfish.
All habitat information for Tables D1 and D2 was summarized from: Hunt Arizona 2002 Edition ­ Survey, Harvest and Hunt Data for Big and Small Game.
Arizona Game and Fish Department.
Additional range information on Bighorn Sheep, Gould's Turkey, Tassel-Eared Squirrels, Chukar, and California Quail was derived from pers.comms.: Brian Wakeling, Big Game Specialist, Arizona Game and Fish Department Mike Rabe, Small Game Specialist, Arizona Game and Fish Department
Appendix C-17
