Vision Statement Maryland's vision is to implement dynamic and effective nonpoint source pollution control programs.
These programs are designed to achieve and maintain beneficial uses of water; improve and protect habitat for living resources; and protect public health through a mixture of water quality and/or technology based programs; regulatory and/or non-regulatory programs; and financial, technical, and educational assistance programs.
Report Structure Maryland's Nonpoint Source Program assembled this document in accordance with guidance contained in the Nonpoint Source Program and Grants Guidance for Fiscal Year 1997 and Future Years and the Final Administrative Changes to the Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Guidance.
The document was developed to comply with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) requirements, but was also written for the public to describe what is being done in Maryland to control or prevent nonpoint source pollution.
The report is broken down into six chapters: Introduction, Resource Assessment and Monitoring, Watershed Management Programs and Initiatives, NPS Programs and Initiatives, Public Outreach and Assistance Programs, and Future Directions.
The NPS Programs and Initiatives chapter is the core component of the Nonpoint Source Management Plan document.
This chapter is divided into the following nonpoint source pollution categories: agriculture, developed lands, forestry, marinas and recreational boating, hydromodification, wetlands, atmospheric deposition, and mining.
Maryland's NPS Management Plan has been arranged into six chapters, all of which are linked to a particular aspect of the State's nonpoint source pollution control or prevention approach.
The first chapter provides background information on the Clean Water Act, Section 319 program, and other related nonpoint source initiatives such as the State's Clean Water Action Plan and Coastal NPS Program.
Chapter two-- Resource Assessment and Monitoring, describes the State's landscape and land use, water quality problems, pollution types and sources, as well as the State's monitoring and assessment programs.
The third chapter provides a detailed description of the State's many watershed management programs and initiatives.
Examples of programs discussed in this chapter are the Chesapeake Bay Program, the Anacostia River Initiative, and the Tributary Strategy Program.
The core component of the State's NPS Management Plan update is chapter four - Maryland's Nonpoint Source Programs and Initiatives.
This chapter describes all of Maryland's nonpoint source programs along with their goals.
The nonpoint source programs are divided into source categories: agriculture, urban, forestry, hydromodification, marinas and recreational boating, air deposition, wetlands, and mining.
For the first time, the Statewide Nonpoint Source Management Plan and the Coastal Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Program have been combined through the integration of the Coastal Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Program's management measures.
Management measures are defined as economically achievable measures to control the addition of nonpoint pollution to coastal waters.
These measures reflect the greatest degree of pollution reduction achievable using the best available nonpoint pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting criteria, operating methods, or other alternatives.
For each source category in Chapter four (agriculture, developed lands, etc.), the appropriate management measures are listed and along with their enforceable policies.
The lead agency responsible for each management measure is listed along with the agency's goal in implementing the measure.
Chapter five provides a detailed description of the State's nonpoint source education, outreach, and financial assistance programs by source category.
The document concludes with the State's fifteen year strategy to reduce or prevent nonpoint source pollution.
Clean Water Act and the Nonpoint Source Section 319(h) Program
Federal Clean Water Act In 1972, Congress enacted the Federal Water Pollution Control Act in response to growing public concern for serious and widespread water pollution.
The 1972 law built upon previous federal water pollution statutes.
In 1977 the act was amended and renamed the Clean Water Act.
The Clean Water Act was reauthorized in 1991.
The Clean Water Act is the primary federal law that protects our nation's waters, including lakes, rivers, aquifers and coastal areas.
The Clean Water Act's primary objective is to restore and maintain the integrity of the nation's waters.
This objective translates into two fundamental national goals: * eliminate the discharge of pollutants into the nation's waters, and * achieve water quality levels that are fishable and swimmable.
The Clean Water Act focuses on improving the quality of the nation''s waters.
It provides a comprehensive framework of standards, technical tools and financial assistance to address the many causes of pollution and poor water quality, including municipal and industrial wastewater discharges, polluted runoff from urban and rural areas, and habitat destruction.
For example, the Clean Water Act: * requires major industries, to meet performance standards to ensure pollution control; * charges states and tribes with setting specific water quality criteria appropriate for their waters and developing pollution control programs to meet them; * provides funding to states and communities to help them meet their clean water infrastructure needs; and * protects valuable wetlands and other aquatic habitats through a permitting process that ensures development and other activities are conducted in an environmentally sound manner.
The 1987 Clean Water Act and the development of the Section 319(h) Nonpoint Source Management Program
Congress amended the Clean Water Act (CWA) in 1987 to establish the section 319 Nonpoint Source (NPS) Management Program to help focus state and local NPS control efforts.
Nonpoint source pollution is runoff caused by stormwater (rainfall or snowmelt) or irrigation water moving over and through the ground.
As this runoff moves, it picks up and carries away pollutants, such as sediments, nutrients, toxics, and pathogens.
Potential sources of nonpoint pollution are agricultural runoff, urban stormwater runoff, mining, forestry, septic systems, recreational boating, and construction.
As noted in the following pie-charts, agriculture and urban lands comprise 53% of Maryland's land use and generate significant amounts of nonpoint pollution (especially nitrogen and phosphorus).
These pollutants are eventually deposited into ground water, lakes, rivers, wetlands, and coastal waters.
Figure 1.1: Maryland Land Use Distribution
pie chart that shows land use distribution for 1996
Figure 1.2: Maryland Nutrient Load Sources*
pie chart that shows the total nitrogen for 1996
Total Load for all Sources 65.7 Mlbs
a pie chart that shows the total phosphorus sources of 1996
Total Load for all Sources 4.01 Mlbs
*Data referenced from the Phase IV Model and the Integrated Watershed Analyses and Management Systems (IWAMS).
The reported statistics include all of Maryland lands within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed except the main body of the Bay.
Under section 319, states, territories and Indian Tribes (hereinafter referred to as just "States") must follow a two-step process to qualify for grant money under section 319(h).
First, states must complete a NPS assessment report, identifying NPS water quality problems.
Second, states are to develop NPS management programs describing how they will address their nonpoint source water quality problems.
By the end of fiscal year 1996, EPA had awarded about $470 million nationwide in grants to states to implement NPS management programs.
These funds support a wide variety of activities including nonregulatory or regulatory programs for enforcement, technical assistance, financial assistance, education, training, technology transfer, demonstration projects, and monitoring to assess the success of specific NPS implementation projects.
Since the beginning of the grant program, EPA has issued guidelines governing the awarding of grant funds.
As the grant program has developed, these guidelines have been modified to give states greater flexibility in managing their NPS programs.
Specifically, states have been given greater flexibility to use a portion of their grant funds to improve their nonpoint source assessments, upgrade their nonpoint source management programs, and set their own priorities.
Redesign of State Nonpoint Source Programs - NPS Program and Grant Guidance for Fiscal Year 1997 and Future Years
In 1996, EPA and state lead nonpoint source agencies considered more fundamental changes to the national nonpoint source program.
The results of these efforts are reflected in the FY97 grant guidance.
The guidance contains two components.
First, it establishes a framework for reviewing, revising, and approving enhanced state nonpoint source management programs.
Second, it establishes a new framework for the national nonpoint source grants program.
One key component of this new framework was the movement towards the watershed approach to help combat nonpoint source pollution.
The watershed approach is a coordinating framework for environmental management that focuses public and private sector efforts to address the highest priority water-related problems within geographic areas, considering both surface and ground water flow.
The watershed approach is commonly characterized by four principles: a) well integrated partnerships, b) a specific geographic focus, c) action driven by environmental objectives and by strong science and data, and d) coordinated priority setting and integrated solutions.
The guidance intent was to clarify state and EPA goals and responsibilities and to hasten the change in focus to this new approach.
Another key feature of this new framework was to recognize and reward states that adopt nine key elements into their NPS Management Program document and have a proven track record of effectively implementing nonpoint source programs.
EPA intends that the states will be formally recognized as Nonpoint Source Enhanced Benefit States.
Enhanced benefits include priority for multi-year grant work plans, streamlined review of grants applications, increased technical assistance, reduced reporting requirements, and reduced EPA oversight.
It is EPA's goal that within the next few years, all or most states will have improved their programs to the extent that they are recognized as Nonpoint Source Enhanced Benefits States.
EPA will focus its available resources on helping states achieve and maintain this advanced level of program development and implementation.
Additional Section 319(h) Funding
To commemorate the 25^th anniversary of the Clean Water Act, the White House asked federal agencies to develop and implement a comprehensive plan that would help revitalize the nation's commitment to our valuable water resources.
The result was the Clean Water Action Plan.
This initiative will help give the U.S. cleaner water by strengthening public health protections, targeting watershed protection efforts at high priority areas, and providing communities with new resources to control polluted runoff and enhance natural resources stewardship.
The Action Plan was initiated with a five year funding proposal to provide approximately $2.5 billion in new funds to address the critical problems facing our watersheds which include additional funding for the Section 319(h) grant.
Since the announcement of this additional Section 319(h) funds, EPA's regional offices have been working with their states, territories, and eligible tribes towards the award of the incremental $100 million.
Maintaining steady progress in reducing water pollution into the next century will require a renewed commitment to clean water by all levels of governments, the private sector, and the public.
The Clean Water Act's Section 319 Program is ready for the challenge.
Maryland's Section 319 Nonpoint Source Program
Introduction Maryland's Section 319 Nonpoint Source Program has been evolving ever since it's inception in 1987.
This section will describe the Section 319 Nonpoint Source Program from it's beginnings in 1987 to the Program's current initiatives and future goals.
The Water Quality Act of 1987 contained a new section, Section 319, which established a nationwide requirement that each state evaluate the nature and extent of its water quality problems caused by nonpoint source pollution and then prepare a management program for addressing its priority nonpoint source pollution problems.
Section 319 envisioned the initial efforts as a two step process which began with the preparation of a statewide NPS Assessment report, followed by the preparation of a statewide NPS Management Program document.
Maryland's first NPS Assessment report was prepared in the spring and summer of 1988 and was sent to EPA Region III on August 4, 1988 as a draft document.
The draft Assessment report was provided to a subcommittee of the State Water Quality Advisory Committee (SWQAC) in late August and received concurrence from EPA and SWQAC in September.
The Assessment report addressed the four components required specifically under Section 319 at that time: 1.
identification of those Maryland waters where NPS controls are necessary to the attainment or maintenance of water quality standards; 2.
identification of the various types of nonpoint sources which contribute to the identified water quality problems; 3.
description of the process employed within Maryland to select the "best management practices" and other controls to reduce as much as possible the various nonpoint source types identified; and 4.
identification and description of Maryland's state-level and local programs for the control of NPS pollution.
The second requirement of Section 319 was for states to prepare a Nonpoint Source Pollution Management Program document.
Maryland's first NPS Pollution Management Program document was developed by the Maryland Department of the Environment and submitted to EPA in April 1989.
The document provided detailed information on thirteen different NPS control programs, including the types of control measures used, agency functions and roles, expected annual accomplishments, and anticipated annual budgets.
The documents also described the State Clearinghouse mechanism which State agencies employ to review federally assisted programs and projects, as well as development projects in Maryland of federal agencies, for their water quality impacts.
The report also indicated the types of NPS program areas for which the state needed federal NPS program funds, when they became available under Section 319.
Transfer of Nonpoint Source Program to MD Department of Natural Resources
In 1995, the Department of the Environment and Department of Natural Resources were re-organized which resulted in the Section 319 Nonpoint Source Management Program moving to the Department of Natural Resources.
The Section 319 Nonpoint Source Management Program now resides under the Coastal Zone Management Division in the Chesapeake and Coastal Watershed Service of the Department of Natural Resources.
In 1996, EPA and state lead nonpoint source agencies felt that fundamental changes needed to be made to the national nonpoint source program.
Those changes were reflected in the document titled "Nonpoint Source Program and Grant Guidance for Fiscal Year 1997 and Future Years."
One key component of the guidance was for state's to update their Nonpoint Source Management Program document to include the nine key elements of an effective State NPS program, which are discussed more in depth in another chapter of this document.
If a state successfully adopts these nine key program elements in their updated NPS Management Program and have a proven track record of effectively implementing nonpoint source programs, that State will be formally recognized as a Nonpoint Source Enhanced Benefits States.
Enhanced benefits will include priority for multi-year grant work plans, streamlined review of grant applications, increased technical assistance, reduced reporting requirements, and reduced EPA oversight.
Maryland has been developing their updated Nonpoint Source Management Program document since this grant guidance was announced in 1997.
Maryland's Statewide Nonpoint Source Management Program Document contains all nine key elements of an effective NPS Program.
Renewed Commitment to Clean Water
On October 18, 1997, the 25th anniversary of the enactment of the Clean Water Act, Vice President Gore called for a renewed effort to restore and protect water quality.
The Vice President asked that the Secretary of Agriculture and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) work with other affected agencies and develop a Clean Water Action Plan that builds on clean water successes and addresses three major goals: 1.
enhanced protection from public health threats posed by water pollution; 2.
more effective control of polluted runoff; and 3.
promotion of water quality protection on a watershed basis.
With development of the Clean Water Action Plan, there was a renewed focus, as well as a grant requirement, for State's to continue the development of their updated NPS Management Program document which should include the nine key elements stated in the 1997 Grant and Program Guidance.
Along with this renewed focus on the updated Program document came additional grant funds for selected states.
On October 21, 1998, the President signed the 1999 appropriations bill for EPA to allocate $200 million for states to implement their nonpoint source management programs under Section 319 of the Clean Water Act.
This large increase in Section 319 funding provided a major opportunity for states to make significant progress in resolving their remaining water quality problems.
These new incremental funds have been made available to all states and territories that have completed their Unified Watershed Assessments (UWA) and have developed preliminary
watershed restoration action strategies (WRAS).
The State of Maryland completed and received approval of their Unified Watershed Assessment in the fall of 1998.
A detailed description of Maryland's Unified Watershed Assessment is located in Chapter 2.
Maryland's Nonpoint Source Management Program staff developed watershed restoration action strategies for seven of the ten major tributary basins.
Those tributary basins are the Upper Potomac, Lower Eastern Shore, Lower Western Shore, Upper Eastern Shore, Choptank, Patapsco/Back and Middle Potomac.
Besides the incorporation of the nine key elements, another essential feature of an effective nonpoint source program document will be the coordination and integration with other closely related state- and tribal-managed water quality programs, such as coastal nonpoint pollution control programs under section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990, source water protection programs under the Safe Drinking Water Act, and total maximum daily load programs under section 303(d) of the Clean Water Act.
The strengthening of partnerships as described above will ensure that all appropriate programs, authorities, and resources are used effectively and consistently to solve shared problems.
Maryland's Section 319(h) Grant
The Maryland's Section 319 Nonpoint Source Program provides reimbursable grants to state and local governments, non-profit organizations, and institutions of higher learning to implement nonpoint source pollution control projects and programs in accordance with Section 319(h) of the CWA.
Maryland has been providing reimbursable grants since FFY90.
Projects may be located in any part of the state, with either a statewide or local scope.
The control of nonpoint source pollution through prevention, education, planning or restoration must be the focus of the project.
Maryland Nonpoint Source Program staff ensure that projects are well designed with sufficient detail to ensure effective implementation.
Protocols established as part of the Department's Quality Management Plan are followed, as appropriate.
Selection Process - A Request for Proposals is distributed in the winter of the year to representatives on the NPS Program's comprehensive mailing list and posted on DNRs' web page.
Once the deadline is reached and all proposals are received, they are distributed to the NPS Steering Committee for review and ranking.
The NPS Steering Committee is composted of representatives from federal, state and local agencies as well as Tributary Team representatives.
These representatives have a strict list of criteria which they must follow to review and rank the proposals.
The Steering Committee uses this ranking process to select projects for funding.
Once the final selection is complete, the sponsoring agencies are notified that their project was selected for Section 319(h) funding.
Maryland's Nonpoint Source Management Program receives approximately $1.3 million/year for base funding which is used to sponsor 10-20 projects.
Project Tracking - The progress of all Section 319(h) projects are tracked on EPA's Grants Reporting and Tracking Systems (GRTS).
The Nonpoint Source Program staff inputs a multitude of variables into the GRTS systems on a bi-annual basis (January and July).
Some examples of inputted variables are funding amount, project sponsor, project period, functional category, type of pollutant, water bodies affected, location (MD's 8-digit HUC), project tasks, and project expenditures.
Four standard reports can be generated from the GRTS system: NPS Grants Report, the Projects and Tasks Report, the NPS Budget Expenditures Report, and the NPS Functional Category Report.
This systems not only helps States track their projects, but reports generated from the database are used by EPA for their reporting to Congress.
This tracking system also aids Maryland in the development of their annual Section 319 reports which are submitted to EPA.
NPS Program Goals and Future Directions
Over the past few years, Maryland's Nonpoint Source Management Program has been moving from a predominately grants administering program to a multi-disciplinary program providing not only financial assistance, but nonpoint source related policy, technical and educational assistance.
Keys to the Program's success rely on creating open partnerships with other nonpoint source entities and developing long and short term goals that will advance the Program in the nonpoint source pollution control arena.
Some key programmatic goals for the NPS Program staff are to continue to submit information bi-annually through the Grants Reporting and Tracking System, to submit an annual project report to EPA, to maintain a user friendly webpage, to ensure that Section 319(h) grant projects result in measurable environmental results, and to better educate the public about the causes and remedies of nonpoint source pollution.
One of the long-term goals for Maryland's program will be to continue to work closely with EPA and NOAA to evaluate and revise the State's Nonpoint Source Management Plan.
Statewide Nonpoint Source Program Goals
Maryland is involved in multi-agency, multi-jurisdictional partnerships such as the Chesapeake Bay Program, the Coastal Bays Program and the Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement (EnPA).
Through these partnerships, Maryland works cooperatively with its partners to achieve specified environmental goals.
A discussion of Maryland's EnPA goals/priorities is located in Chapter one.
Details on the Chesapeake Bay and Coastal Bays Program's environmental goals are provided in Chapter 3.
The following is an compilation of Maryland's nonpoint source pollution control and prevention goals and benchmarks.
The goals are broken out into seven categories: * Meet 100% of designated uses in all waters of the State; * Ensure Adequate Protection and Restoration of Maryland's Wetland Resources; * Protect and Maintain Maryland's Natural Resource Land Base and Encourage Smart Growth; * Prevent Degradation of Tidal Aquatic Systems and Restore Impaired Systems; * Prevent Non-Tidal Aquatic System Degradation, Fragmentation, or Isolation and Restore Impaired Systems; * Promote Pollution Prevention; and * Assure the Efficient and Effective Operation of the State's Environmental Programs.
Goal: Meet 100% of designated uses in all waters of the State.
Improving water quality is the most critical element in the overall restoration and protection of the Chesapeake Bay, the Coastal Bays and their tributaries.
Good water quality is necessary to support living resources and to ensure safe drinking water supplies.
Nutrients and bacteria from nonpoint source pollution affects portions of the State's surface waters.
In some areas of the State, acidic waters from abandoned mines and atmospheric deposition, as well as toxic substances in urban watersheds and sediments may effect aquatic life and limit uses of these waters.
Chemical contaminants enter the Bays from nonpoint source pollution.
An estimated 55% - 74% of nutrient inputs to the Chesapeake Bay system are contributed by nonpoint sources, including contaminated runoff from urban areas, runoff from agricultural land uses, nutrient-enriched ground water, and deposition from the atmosphere.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: (Please note that the italicized benchmarks are draft.
They have been developed by the Chesapeake Bay Program partners with the assistance of thousands of citizens, scientists and policy makers from throughout the Chesapeake Bay region.
Public comment will be received through March 31, 2000.
Final benchmarks should be established by June, 2000.
Numeric commitments (acreage, mileage, etc.), unless otherwise noted, reflects the Chesapeake Bay region as a whole.
Maryland has committed to achieving its share of the benchmark.)
* Continue efforts to achieve and maintain the 40 percent nutrient reduction goal agreed to in 1987.
* By 2010, correct all nutrient-related problems in the Chesapeake Bay and its tidal tributaries sufficient to remove the Bay and the tidal portions of its tributaries from the list of impaired waters under the Clean Water Act.
In order to achieve this: +
* By 2012, implement the Section 6217 management measures in the Maryland Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Management Area.
Goal: Ensure Adequate Protection and Restoration of Maryland's Wetland Resources
Although natural processes like sea level rise and shoreline erosion contribute to the loss of wetlands, the primary stressors of this natural terrestrial system are largely human-induced.
Extensive conversion of wetlands has occurred for crop production, residential housing, commercial and industrial development, and highways.
Wetlands protect water quality by naturally processing the pollutants before they enter the water.
Long-term protection of this natural infrastructure is essential.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * Develop a state wetland conservation plan.
* Restore and create 60,000 acres of tidal and non-tidal wetlands on a voluntary basis.
* Achieve a no net loss of jurisdictional wetland acreage and function through regulatory programs.
*
By 2002, complete a public process to develop and begin implementation of revised Tributary Strategies to achieve and maintain the assigned loading goals; and,
By 2003, the jurisdictions with tidal waters will use their best efforts to adopt new or revised water quality standards consistent with the defined water quality conditions.
Once adopted by the jurisdictions, the EPA will work expeditiously to review the new or revised standards, which will then be used as the basis for removing the Bay and its tidal rivers from the list of impaired waters.
* By 2010, correct all sediment-related problems in the Chesapeake Bay and the tidal portion of its tributaries sufficient to remove the Bay and the tidal portions of its tributaries from the list of impaired waters under the Clean Water Act.
In order achieve this:
* Using a process parallel to that established for nutrients, determine the load reductions to achieve the water quality conditions necessary to protect aquatic living resources and assign load reductions for sediment to each major tributary by 2001; * Complete tributary strategies to achieve the reductions by 2002; and, *
Integrate sediment reductions in order to develop water quality standards for tidal waters by 2003, based upon the defined water quality conditions.
* Achieve dissolved oxygen water quality standard of 5 mg/l, or better, in all State waters.
*
By 2000, implement nutrient management plans for 1.285 million acres.
Acreage goals for nutrient management are included in the tributary nutrient reduction strategies.
* By 2000, establish voluntary integrated pest management practices on 75% (1.215 million acres) of cropland in the state.
* By 2000, reclaim 240 additional acres of abandoned mines sites, making the sites safe for humans and environmentally productive.
*
By 2010 re-establish 600 miles of forest buffer, or 43 miles per year.
* By 2005, establish active local programs that implement wellhead protection management practices for 182,000 Marylanders (or 66%) served by vulnerable sources.
* By 2005 ensure that 3.4 million Marylanders served by vulnerable surface water systems will have adequate protection.
*
By 2003, establish appropriate areas within the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries as "no discharge zones' for human waste from boats.
By 2010, expand by 50% the number and availability of waste pump-out facilities.
* By 2012, implement the Section 6217 management measures in the Maryland Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program Management Area.
Goal: Ensure Adequate Protection and Restoration of Maryland's Wetland Resources
Although natural processes like sea level rise and shoreline erosion contribute to the loss of wetlands, the primary stressors of this natural terrestrial system are largely human-induced.
Extensive conversion of wetlands has occurred for crop production, residential housing, commercial and industrial development, and highways.
Wetlands protect water quality by naturally processing the pollutants before they enter the water.
Long-term protection of this natural infrastructure is essential.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * Develop a state wetland conservation plan.
* Restore and create 60,000 acres of tidal and non-tidal wetlands on a voluntary basis.
* Achieve a no net loss of jurisdictional wetland acreage and function through regulatory programs.
*
Achieve a net resource gain by restoring 25,000 acres of tidal and non-tidal wetlands by 2010 in the entire Chesapeake Bay Basin.
To do this, the signatories commit to achieve and maintain an average restoration rate of 2,500 acres per year basin wide by 2005 and beyond.
The signatories will evaluate their success in 2005.
* Provide information and assistance to local governments and community groups for the development and implementation of locally generated community or watershed-based wetlands preservation plans.
The goal is to have such plans implemented in 25% of the land area of each state's Chesapeake Bay watershed by 2010.
The plans would preserve key wetlands that are locally identified and address surrounding land use so as to preserve wetland functions.
Goal: Protect and Maintain Maryland's Natural Resource Land Base and Encourage Smart Growth
Human population growth, exacerbated by decreasing household sizes, continuing trends toward large lot sizes, and out-migration from existing communities, has spurred the rapid conversion of natural areas to residential, commercial and industrial uses.
Low density development (i.e.,sprawl), characteristic of much of what has occurred in recent years, is a stressor of aquatic systems as well as terrestrial: it is a major contributor of nutrients to local waterways.
Septic systems are the predominant form of sewage treatment in low density areas.
Newer system designs, which allow for nutrient removal, are expensive and rarely utilized.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * A downward trend in the ratio of septic permits to total building permits issued, consistent with the State's overall effort to encourage "Smart Growth."
* Protect open space at a level equal to or greater than the rate land is converted to non-open space uses.
* By 2010, reduce in each state the rate of conversion of forest and agricultural lands to development by at least 30 percent.
Goal: Prevent Degradation of Tidal Aquatic Systems and Restore Impaired Systems
Tidal aquatic systems are degraded chemically by the input of various pollutants from nonpoint sources like urban and farm runoff and atmospheric deposition.
Toxic materials from a variety of sources may also affect aquatic organisms.
These aquatic systems are altered or degraded physically by erosion and efforts to control erosion, by sedimentation, temperature and salinity changes, dredging, filling and channel modifications.
Some of these impacts are naturally occurring; some are due entirely to human activity; most are aggravated by human activities.
High nutrient levels have been identified as the major water quality problem causing degradation of tidal aquatic systems in Maryland.
They cause algal blooms and epiphytic growth which harm SAV by reducing the amount of light reaching the plants.
As the algae decay, they use dissolved oxygen in the water, stressing or outright killing necessary benthic organisms and other desirable species.
Changes in the landscape, like increasing urban development and additions to the transportation system, often accelerate nutrient and toxics delivery to aquatic habitats and lead to physical degradation as well.
Particularly important are the increases in hydraulic efficiency provided by paving large areas and providing storm sewers and ditches to speed the movement of water, and associated nutrients and contaminants, away from building or other human use areas.
To address this goal, the following benchmark has been established: * By 2005, increase submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV) coverage in Maryland to approximately 61,700 acres.
Goal: Prevent Non-Tidal Aquatic System Degradation, Fragmentation, or Isolation and Restore Impaired Systems
Non-tidal aquatic systems are degraded chemically by essentially the same mechanisms as tidal aquatic systems are: water pollution which results in depressed dissolved oxygen levels, toxic inputs, bacterial contaminants, changes to the food chain, and sediment.
They are perhaps even more susceptible to physical degradation than tidal systems are: in addition to erosion and sedimentation, dredging and channel modifications, physical degradation includes reductions in base flow, the amount of water flowing in streams between rain events, and thermal effects from removal of forests along shorelines.
Hundreds of miles of stream tributaries to the Chesapeake Bay are currently blocked by dams, culverts and other obstructions.
Loss of riparian forests to agricultural or residential uses results in a lack of buffering of both ground and surface water from impacts of adjacent land use activities, promoting the addition of sediments and nutrients to lakes and streams.
Water quality and physical habitat conditions in non-tidal streams and rivers are influenced by land use and land cover patterns in the watershed, such as increasing the area of impervious land cover like roads, roof-tops and parking lots.
Significant sources of environmental stress in Western Maryland includes abandoned mines that contribute acid and metals to receiving waters as well as suspended solids and sediments.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * By 2005, reduce degraded stream miles to 370 miles, this will result in 20 additional miles restored over 2000 levels
* By 2010, re-establish 600 miles of forest buffers, or 43 miles per year.
* Achieve physical habitat index (PHI) scores of Good plus Fair in 75% of Maryland's stream miles.
*
By 2003, ensure that measures are in place to meet the Chesapeake Bay Basin's riparian forest buffer restoration goal of 2,010 miles by 2010 and determine the potential to significantly expand this goal
.
Goal: Promote Preventing Pollution
By reducing or preventing the production of pollution, we can reduce the amount of nonpoint source pollution effecting our waterways.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * Maintain at least a 33% statewide recycling rate.
* Increase Green School awards rate by 5% annually.
By 2002, 20% of Maryland Schools will be Green Schools.
* By the year 2002, there will be an increase of 10% in the number of county Envirothon (a problem-solving competition to educate high school students about natural resource issues) participants.
Goal: Assure the Efficient and Effective Operation of the State's Environmental Programs
Making the connection between all of Maryland's environmental programs is essential for the State to achieve its water quality and natural resources goals.
This particular section illustrates how the state addresses these overarching issues: 1) effective and efficient reporting and evaluation of environmental concerns/issues, 2) strengthening the state's legal framework, 3) promoting watershed focused initiatives and projects, and 4) improving technical assistance and capacity building skills.
To address this goal, the following benchmarks have been established: * By the year 2005, implement natural resource conservation and restoration action strategies in 20 priority communities that are committed to achieving a balance with the natural system.
* Collect Section 319 project final reports and analyze the impacts of these projects on the reduction of nonpoint source pollution in Maryland.
This annual report will be submitted to EPA by Maryland's Nonpoint Source Program.
* Bi-annually ( January and June) submit grants status information through the Grants Reporting and Tracking System (GRTS).
* Work in partnership with local governments and communities to encourage the adoption of local stream corridor protection plans that include provisions for riparian forest conservation and restoration, with a goal of 50 percent local governments and community participation by 2010.
* Continually improve monitoring programs for evaluating the aquatic health of stream corridors and the success of protection and restoration efforts.
Ensure that the monitoring networks address the critical impacts of ground water on surface water flow and quality.
* Provide analytical tools to local governments and communities for watershed-based assessment of the impacts of growth, development and transportation decisions.
Make available information to encourage the development community and others to champion the application of sound use practices.
* By 2002, develop information and guidelines to assist local governments and communities to limit impervious cover on undeveloped and moderately developed watersheds and reduce the impact in highly developed watersheds.
* By 2001, develop and maintain a clearinghouse for information on local watershed restoration efforts, including financial and technical assistance.
NOTE: Additional source category benchmarks (agricultural, developed lands, etc) and their five year goals are located in Chapter 4 at the end of each source category discussion.
Maryland's Coastal Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Program - Section 6217
Program Background In the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (CZARA), Congress recognized that nonpoint source pollution is a key factor in the continuing degradation of many coastal waters and established a new program (CZARA - Section 6217) to address this problem.
Congress further recognized that the solution to nonpoint pollution lies in state and local action.
As such, Congress called upon states, with approved coastal zone management programs, to develop state Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Programs with the mission "to develop and implement management measures for nonpoint source pollution to restore and protect coastal waters."
State programs, developed pursuant to Section 6217 must be approved by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and EPA.
Congress did not intend for the states to replace existing nonpoint source pollution (NPS) programs but to update and expand their existing programs.
Failure to submit an approvable program to NOAA and EPA would result in a reduction of federal grant dollars under the nonpoint source and coastal zone management programs.
Nationally, water pollution continues to deprive coastal economies of millions of dollars that might otherwise be generated by tourism, fishing, and wildlife watching along America's waterways.
Wildlife-associated recreation in Maryland brings in 1.1 billion dollars annually.
Sport fishing alone brings in almost $500 million a year.
In 1997, commercial fishermen in Maryland landed 76.6 million pounds of fish valued at $64.3 million at the dock.
According to data from the National Shellfish Registry, over 71 thousand acres of potential shell fishing beds were closed in Maryland in 1995, the most recent year for which data are available.
According to NOAA, polluted runoff contributed to 49 percent of these closures.
Additional closures that occurred in 1997 were associated with the harmful algal blooms of Pfiesteria.
This impairment will likely worsen as more people settle in the coastal areas.
It is projected that Maryland's coastal population will increase by 11 percent in the 20 years between 1990 and 2010 from about 3.3 million to roughly 3.6 million people.
In Maryland, 69 percent of the population lives along the coast.
Already, with the current coastal population size, degradation of water quality is undeniable.
This situation can only worsen as population increases, unless an improved system is put in place.
In this document, for the first time, the state NPS Program (CWA Section 319) and the Coastal NPS Program (CZARA Section 6217) are merged together.
Working within the framework of the state's Clean Water Action Plan, Tributary Strategies Program, Chesapeake Bay Agreement, Total Maximum Daily Load Program, and others, the integration of these programs strengthens the state's ability to move strategically forward in the effective implementation of the state's NPS pollution control activities.
Many coastal states, including Maryland, are now in the process of combining their Coastal and Statewide NPS Programs.
This combination of programs will result in a stronger NPS program capable of targeting funding for the application of specific NPS management measures and addressing place based needs.
The future of this program looks promising with the ability to channel resources, implement BMPs, and track success.
The success of Maryland's Clean Marinas Initiative is one example of how the programs work together.
Program development and staffing was promoted through the Section 6217 Program and financial incentives have been provided to the marina owners through the Section 319(h) grant.
Maryland's Coastal Nonpoint Source Pollution Control Program
Recognizing that other nonpoint programs already existed, CZARA has focused on strengthening the links between federal and state coastal zone management and water quality programs.
For Maryland, this resulted in a net-worked program that interfaces with state and local authorities.
The program is active in Maryland's coastal zone, which includes the Atlantic shore, the coastal bays, the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries, as well as, the towns, cities and counties which contain and help govern the coastline.
Maryland's coastal zone is defined in Figure 1.1.
Figure 1.3: Maryland's Coastal Zone a map of Maryland's Coastal Zone
The backbone of the program is the application of management measurements, developed by EPA and NOAA.
Management measures are defined as economically achievable measures to control the addition of nonpoint pollution to coastal waters.
These measures reflect the greatest degree of pollution reduction achievable using the best available nonpoint pollution control practices, technologies, processes, siting criteria, operating methods, or other alternatives.
Management measures focus on five major categories of nonpoint source pollution: * agricultural runoff * urban runoff * silvicultural (forestry) runoff * marinas and recreational boating * stream channelization and channel modification, dams, and streambank and shoreline erosion.
The state has also developed management measures for wetlands, riparian areas, and vegetated treatment systems that apply generally to various categories of nonpoint source pollution.
The federal program requires that each state program have enforceable policies and mechanisms for most of the management measures, this insures the authority to implement the Best Management Practices (BMPs).
The state is also required to track the program's implementation and effectiveness.
The following list identifies the 56 NPS pollution management measures that the state is required to implement on all applicable land uses within the coastal boundary.
Each management measure has associated enforceable policies and mechanisms (or backup authority) to insure implementation.
If these original management measures fail to produce the necessary water quality improvements, the state then must implement additional management measures to address remaining water quality problems.
For a complete definition of each of the management measures please see the Management Measures descriptions included in Chapter IV.
The reader will also find 5-Year Implementation Plans attached to each of the Chapter IV program descriptions.
These 5-Year Plans outline how the state intends to implement the management measures over this course of time.
Inventory of Management Measures
AGRICULTURE 1.
Erosion and Sediment Control 2.
Confined Animal Facility (Large Units) 3.
Confined Animal Facility (Small Units) 4.
Nutrient Management 5.
Pesticide Management 6.
Grazing Management 7.
Irrigation Water Management
FORESTRY 8.
Forestry Preharvest Planning 9.
Streamside Management Areas 10.
Road Construction / Reconstruction 11.
Road Management 12.
Timber Harvesting 13.
Site Preparation and Forest Regeneration 14.
Fire Management 15.
Revegetation of Disturbed Areas 16.
Forest Chemical Management 17.
Wetlands Forest Management
URBAN Urban Runoff in Developing Areas 18.
New Development 19.
Watershed Protection 20.
Site Development
Construction Activities 21.
Construction Erosion and Sediment Control 22.
Construction Site Chemical Control
Existing Development 23.
Existing Development
Onsite Disposal systems 24.
New Onsite Disposal System 25.
Operating Onsite Disposal Systems
Pollution Prevention 26.
Pollution Prevention
Roads, Highways and Bridges 27.
Planning, Siting and Developing Roads and Highways 28.
Bridges 29.
Construction Projects 30.
Construction Site Chemical Control 31.
Operation and Maintenance 32.
Road, Highway, and Bridge Runoff Systems
MARINAS Siting and Design 33.
Marina Flushing 34.
Water Quality Assessment 35.
Habitat Assessment 36.
Shoreline Stabilization 37.
Stormwater Runoff 38.
Fuel Station Design 39.
Sewage Facility Marina and Boat Operation and Maintenance 40.
Soil Waste Management 41.
Fish Waste Management 42.
Liquid Material Management 43.
Petroleum Control 44.
Boat Cleaning 45.
Public Education 46.
Sewage Facilities Maintenance 47.
Boat Operation
HYDROMODIFICATION Channelization and channel Modification 48.
Physical and Chemical Characteristics of Surface Waters 49.
Instream and Riparian Habitat Restoration
Dams and Levees 50.
Erosion and Sediment Control 51.
Chemical and Pollutant Control 52.
Protection of Surface Water and Instream and Riparian Habitat Shoreline Erosion 53.
Streambank and Shoreline Erosion Wetlands 54.
Protection of Wetlands and Riparian Areas 55.
Restoration of Wetlands and Riparian Areas 56.
Vegetated Treatment Systems
Program Status
Following the technical guidance, Maryland submitted it's Coastal Nonpoint Pollution Control Program for approval by EPA and NOAA in July 1995.
The program was developed by the Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), Maryland Department of Agriculture (MDA), and the Maryland Office of Planning (MOP).
In October of 1997, NOAA and EPA granted conditional approval to Maryland's Program.
Conditions were placed on Maryland's agricultural, on-site sewage disposal, and marinas programs.
Maryland submitted supplemental information to NOAA and EPA in September 1998 to address agency conditions on the program.
The Coastal NPS Pollution Control Program has fulfilled the conditions imposed on it through a combination of adopted laws, program refinement, and the development of new programs.
On December 13, 1999, Maryland was the first of twenty-nine state and territory coastal nonpoint programs to receive full approval.
The following discussion explains how Maryland has met the conditions.
Agriculture
Maryland has satisfied the condition by undertaking a number of activities that will ensure implementation of the agricultural management measures for nutrient management, pesticide management, confined animal facilities, and grazing management.
Nutrient Management
Perhaps the biggest step forward for Maryland agriculture occurred in April 1998, when the Governor's Water Quality Improvement Bill of 1998 (Senate Bill 178) was passed by the Maryland Legislature.
The new law applies to all agricultural operations with annual gross incomes in excess of $2,500, or more than eight animal units (one animal unit equals 1,000 pounds live animal weight) and requires that operators must implement a nutrient management plan.
The bill also includes additional nutrient management requirements for commercial fertilizer applicators servicing both agricultural and non-agricultural land encompassing three or more acres.
Applicators applying fertilizers to ten or more acres of agricultural land they own or manage will be required to complete a nutrient management education program once every three years.
This new authority provides our state with the ability to ensure implementation of the management measure for nutrient management.
Confined Animal Facilities
The Water Quality Improvement Act has been recognized as enhancing existing efforts to ensure the proper management of animal waste.
Farmers will be required to develop nutrient management plans that address proper utilization of animal waste as it is applied to the land.
In addition, the law establishes an Animal Waste Technology Fund to encourage the development and implementation of economically feasible technologies that help protect the public health and the environment by reducing the amount of nutrients from animal waste that are released to state waters.
Pesticide Management
The state further developed it's Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Program to implement the pesticide management measure.
Specifically, by conducting training efforts for both professional crop consultants as well as gardeners.
This program continues to be offered through the Maryland Cooperative Extension Service and publications are available to the public from their website.
Grazing Management
The state has developed a number of programs to ensure that grazing activities are managed to protect sensitive areas such as streambanks, wetlands, estuaries, ponds, lake shores, and riparian areas.
The implementation of these programs has been reliant on landowner incentives based programs.
Through application of the Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP), substantial progress has been made in the implementation of practices such as grass buffers, riparian forest buffers, wetland restoration, and the retirement of highly erodible land.
Finally, the state's Agricultural Sediment Control Law and regulations prohibit agricultural operations from introducing soil or sediment into waters of the state.
This authority can be used to address several erosion problems caused by improper grazing practices.
New and Operating Onsite Disposal Systems (OSDS)
Maryland met this condition by undertaking a number of activities to further develop management measures for new and operating onsite disposal systems, including the protection of nitrogen-limited surface waters and inspection and maintenance of existing OSDS.
Nitrogen Limited Surface Waters
Maryland is in the process of identifying nitrogen limited surface waters which may be adversely affected by excess nitrogen loadings from ground water associated with OSDS through a new program to delineate Areas of Special Concern (ASC).
Localities may petition the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) to have an area designated as an ASC.
Once areas are identified and receive formal designation, a management plan for septic systems is developed jointly by the state and the local authority.
The plan addresses design, inspection (including enforcement), operation and maintenance, and also provides for homeowner education.
Thus far, Worcester County has petitioned MDE to designate the Maryland Coastal Bays area as an ASC and the formal designation by MDE is in process.
The ASC plan will likely require new development of existing lots and all replacement systems that do not meet current standards for a conventional system to use alternative technologies, establish a public outreach program, and develop a tracking program for septic system maintenance and septage disposal.
Maintenance of existing OSDS
Maryland developed a white paper that lead to the drafting of new regulations that specify new standards and criteria for the installation of septic systems.
These regulations are still in development; they currently propose a number of provisions including a requirement that new permits for OSDS include a statement indicating that septic tanks should be pumped once every three years and the development of a system of tracking and enforcement for OSDS advanced treatment units to ensure that such units function properly.
Finally, Maryland conducts a biennial needs survey of local governments to identify areas with failing OSDS.
Where extensive areas of OSDS failure are identified, projects are funded to provide connections to central sewer systems.
Through the Water Quality Financing Administration Linked Deposit Program, financing is available for projects that repair or replace failing or failed OSDS.
Under this program, private property owners may borrow funds from private lending institutions located in their neighborhoods to finance projects to control NPS pollution.
These loans may be used for design and construction of a wide variety of water quality improvements to protect groundwater and surface water from NPS pollution, including leaking underground storage tanks and failing septic systems.
For a complete description of the Linked Deposit Program see Chapter 5 - Public Outreach and Assistance Programs.
Marinas Program
The Department of Natural Resources developed the Maryland Clean Marina Initiative in response to marina nonpoint source pollution issues identified through the Coastal NPS Pollution Control Program.
Through a unique partnership with the marine trades industry, DNR created a new program to recognize environmentally responsible marinas and to promote clean boating practices.
The initiative promotes and celebrates voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution from marinas and recreational boats by creating an incentives program.
Using a combination of practical common sense advice and public relations, the initiative is designed to:
1) increase use of pollution prevention practices by marinas and boaters; and 2) build market demand for environmentally responsible marinas.
Together, Clean Marina staff and members of a Maryland Clean Marina Committee developed the content of a Maryland Clean Marinas Guidebook and the structure of the Clean Marina Awards Program.
The Guidebook is a comprehensive review of best management practices, state and private resources, and laws and regulations that apply to marinas.
The awards program is based upon the Guidebook.
Marinas that adopt a significant portion of the recommendations contained in the Guidebook will be recognized as Maryland Clean Marinas.
Other Highlights
Under the Coastal NPS Pollution Control Program, Maryland has undertaken a number of activities to improve the management of polluted runoff: * Funded a project that produced a survey of livestock operations in the coastal zone management area.
This product helped the state target needs for management of livestock and will help in tracking agricultural BMPs.
* Funded a project to assist MDE in discussing and setting a protocol for declaring nitrogen sensitive areas as Areas of Special Concern (ASC) for septic systems.
Three counties have investigated this designation in 1998 and 1999.
The new regulations that MDE is proposing will most likely solidify components of ASC (requiring nitrogen monitoring in some septic systems).
* Held a roundtable discussion on septic systems and alternative technologies.
This effort aided in the formation of a statewide Septics Task Force which is currently reviewing new regulations proposed by MDE.
Future Directions
The Program's primary goal is to implement, as appropriate, all of the management measures in Maryland's coastal zone by 2012.
A fifteen year strategy has been developed that will guide the Program toward this goal.
On a five year cycle, action plans will be drafted that include detailed objectives and milestones.
The five year action plan for the period 1998 - 2002 is contained in Chapter IV - Maryland's NPS Programs and Initiatives.
To achieve full implementation of the management measures, the Program will continue to work with federal, state and local partners to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of our existing programs, provide technical and financial assistance and conduct outreach activities.
In the short term, the Coastal NPS Program will coordinate with the statewide NPS Program to focus technical and financial assistance in priority watersheds identified pursuant to the Maryland Clean Water Action Plan (see below).
The Program will track the implementation of management measures and will attempt to evaluate their effectiveness through water quality monitoring and other appropriate techniques.
Where management measures have shown to be ineffective over time, the Program will seek out and promote additional management measures (e.g., emerging technology).
Maryland's Clean Water Action Plan
Background
The Clean Water Action Plan was unveiled by President Clinton in February 1998.
This Action Plan proposed a new collaborative effort by state, federal, and local governments, the private sector and the public to restore those watersheds not meeting clean water and other natural resource goals and to sustain healthy conditions in watersheds that currently meet these goals.
The Clean Water Action Plan addresses all aspects of watershed condition: water quality, including public health issues; aquatic living resources; physical habitat and the landscape.
The key steps in this national effort include:
Unified Watershed Assessment - The Unified Watershed Assessment (UWA) used the best available information to assess the condition of each state's watersheds, identified watersheds in need of restoration, identified watersheds that need preventive action to sustain water quality and aquatic resources, and identified pristine or sensitive watersheds that need extra protection.
Watershed Restoration Priorities - Based on the UWA, states established watershed restoration priorities in October 1998.
This involved selecting those watersheds not meeting clean water and other natural resource goals that are most in need of restoration actions during the next two years.
Watershed Restoration Action Strategies - will identify the most important causes of water pollution and resource degradation, detail the actions needed to address these problems, and set milestones by which to measure progress.
Maryland's Unified Watershed Assessment Report
To meet deadlines established by EPA for the submission of draft and final Unified Watershed Assessment Reports and developing a public participation process, Maryland formed a Technical Workgroup with representatives from various state agencies, local government agencies, business and industry, universities, non-governmental organizations, Tributary Strategy Teams and citizens.
This group met every few weeks to oversee the development of the unified watershed assessment and provided the draft and final version of the report to the State's Bay Cabinet and State Conservationist.
A detailed description of Maryland's Unified Watershed process is located in Chapter 2.
Maryland's Watershed Restoration Priorities
After identifying all watersheds that do not meet clean water or other natural resource goals (Category 1 Watersheds), the Clean Water Action Plan called for the selection of a set of these watersheds that are most in need of restoration during the next two years.
These areas were defined as Category 1 Priority Watersheds.
The Clean Water Action Plan Technical Workgroup reviewed a number of methods for identifying Priority Watersheds.
As results generated for each method were examined, it was determined that the different methods produced similar results when selecting priority watersheds.
This produced confidence that the overall approach actually reflected the condition of the watersheds (and their need for restoration) and not just the particular method selected.
Category 1 Priority Watersheds were defined as watersheds that failed to meet at least half of their goals.
This method gave full consideration of all watersheds (since it does not "penalize" regions for which fewer statewide data are available, such as the Coastal Bays) and it is simple to calculate.
The principal drawback was that this method equally weighs all 17 indicators.
As a result, if there were more indicators that relate to a particular aspect of watershed health; e.g. biological integrity, these areas could carry more weight in the ranking process.
The Technical Workgroup recognized that other factors also should be examined to see if they warrant including additional watersheds in the Category 1 Priority list.
These included severity of impact (e.g. Pfiesteria outbreaks) and evaluation of new data.
For these reasons, additional watersheds were included in the Category 1 Priority list.
The Category I Priority watersheds are identified in Figure 1.2.
In addition to identifying priority watersheds that are most in need of restoration during the next two years, the state identified sensitive watersheds that need extra protection (Category 3).
For Category 3 watersheds, many data sets were examined that provided an accurate, unique and comprehensive assessment of desired high water quality, natural resource or landscape conditions.
Some of the selected Category 3 living resource indicators for pristine watersheds were the same as Category 1 indicators for watersheds needing restoration while others were not.
Thirteen indicators in all were selected to determine a Category 3 watershed.
Any watershed with two or more indicators meeting their benchmark criteria were placed in Category 3.
The select Category 3 watersheds are listed in Figure 1.3.
Funding of Priority Watersheds
The NPS Steering Committee which reviewed proposals for Federal FY1999 and FY2000 Section 319(h) Clean Water Action Plan funds considered projects located in watersheds sharing both Category 1 Priority and Selected Category 3 listings identified in Maryland's Clean Water Action Plan report as a high priority.
Projects located in only a Category 1 Priority watersheds were considered as a second priority for funding.
Additional criteria were used to review projects for funding.
Additional credit was given to projects if they were: maximizing water quality, habitat protection/restoration and other natural resource goals, addressing locally defined geographic priorities at scales smaller than the 138 watersheds evaluated in the Unified Watershed Assessment, using Section 6217 (Coastal Zone Management) measures that are a required part of the coastal nonpoint source pollution program, addressing issues of statewide concern (e.g., nutrient management, habitat goals for wetlands, siting/operation of septic systems, acid mine drainage, growth management), helping achieve water quality standards in areas listed on Maryland's 303(d) list, partnering (support/endorsement) with Tributary Teams, implementing recommendations contained in an existing watershed restoration strategy; and located within or supporting an EQIP priority area.
Future Clean Water Action Plan funds will be applied to activities within the 58 Category I Priority watersheds identified in the Unified Watershed Assessment.
The DNR will continue to work in partnership with local governments to refine and implement WRASs.
As WRASs are refined, CWAP funding will continue to be directed toward small scale watershed projects.
Maryland's Nonpoint Source Program was allocated Clean Water Action Plan funds for FFY99 in the amount of $1,331,200.
Fourteen projects were selected for FFY99 Section 319(h) Clean Water Action Plan funding and are broken out below into implementation projects and strategy development projects.
The funded project are:
Implementation Projects * Wye River Water Quality and Habitat Restoration Improvement Project * Western Maryland Cover Crop Demonstration Project * Town of University Park - Town Park Stram Restoration Project * Implementation of Clean Marina Practices * Progressive Best Management Practices for PDAs on the Lower Eastern Shore * Upper Pocomoke/Green Branch PDA Monitored Watershed Cover Crop Implementation and Soil Sampling * Tuckahoe Watershed Riparian Buffer Incentive Project, and * Northwest Branch of the Anacostia - Tributary Stream Habitat Restoration Project
Strategy Development Projects * Coastal Bays Forestry Initiative * Fecal Coliform Fingerprints from Nonpoint Source Pollution in the Pocomoke River Watershed * Little Patuxent Stream Survey Project * An Outreach Program for Low Interest Loans to the Agricultural Community (Linked Deposit) * Data Analysis and Hydrodynamic Model of the Pocomoke Estuary in Support of TMDL Development, and * Implementation of the Lower Eastern Shore Conservation and Restoration Action Strategy
Maryland's Nonpoint Source Program was also allocated Clean Water Action Plan funds for FFY2000 in the amount of $1,331,200.
Fourteen projects were selected for FFY2000 Section 319(h) Clean Water Action Plan funding and are broken out below into implementation projects and strategy development projects.
The funded project are:
Implementation Projects * Western Maryland Cover Crop Demonstration Project * Progressive Best Management Practices for PDAs on the Lower Eastern Shore * Roland Run Water Quality Retrofit and Stream Restoration Project * Redhouse Run Water Quality Retrofit and Stream Restoration Project * Restoration of Northwood Tributary of the Northwest Branch of the Anacostia * Lonaconing Island Restoration Project * Rock and Carroll Creeks Restoration Project * A Program to Reduce Nutrient Losses from Dairy Farms * Implementation of Clean Marina Practices, and * Little Seneca Creek Habitat Improvement Project
Strategy Development Projects * Implementation of a Stormwater Master Plan for Two Communities in the Severn River Watershed * Water Quality Model of the Pocomoke Estuary in Support of TMDL Development * Coastal Bays Forestry Initiative, and * Fecal Coliform Fingerprints for Nonpoint Source Pollution in the Lower Wicomico River and the Wicomico River Headwaters Watershed
Figure 1.4: Category 1 Priority (Restoration) Watersheds
a map of Maryland showing Category 1 Priority (Restoration) Watersheds
Figure 1.5: Selected Category 3 (Protection) Watersheds
a map of Maryland showing the selected Category 3 (Protection) Watersheds
Maryland's Watershed Restoration Action Strategies
The development of the Tributary Strategies, Targeted Watershed Program, Coastal Bays Management Plan, and the various river basin plans (see Chapter 3) has been an effort to more fully address water quality and other natural resource issues at a smaller geographic (i.e., watershed) scale.
During the next 15 years, Maryland will continue to implement the recommendations contained in each of our existing strategies and, pursuant to the Clean Water Action Plan, develop new Watershed Restoration Action Strategies (WRAS).
A WRAS provides information and guidance that will help the public, watershed organizations, and federal, state and local agencies focus their staff and monies in areas and on issues important to the public and that will result in measurable environmental improvement.
The State's long term objective is to have WRAS's that are comprehensive, and address all aspects of watershed condition and water quality, including public health; aquatic living resources; physical habitat and the landscape.
As a first step, Maryland's Nonpoint Source Program is currently developing watershed restoration action strategies for each of the 10 major tributary basins.
A strategy was previously developed for the Coastal Bays Watershed.
In the coming months, the Department of Natural Resources will select a sub-set of the 58 Priority Category 1 watersheds for the development of refined action strategies.
These strategies will provide the operational linkage between large scale basin planning efforts, typified by the work of Maryland's Tributary Teams, and water quality and habitat protection projects implemented on individual properties or targeted to specific pollution problems.
In addition, where appropriate, the strategies will take cognizance of and help the watersheds conform to Total Maximum Daily Loads being developed by the Maryland Department of Environment under the Clean Water Act.
Since local involvement is central to this initiative, final selection of watersheds will reflect the interest that citizens and local jurisdictions have for this process.
We will encourage local governments to take the lead in communicating and working with stakeholders and will promote the active involvement of the local Tributary Teams, the local Soil Conservation Districts and landowners.
This effort is expected to build upon existing assessment and targeting efforts (e.g., county comprehensive plans, stormwater and sewer plans, master plans, capital budgets, greenways and open space plans, watershed stewardship programs, site design standards/BMPS, soil conservation district watershed workplans, etc.).
The State will help identify funding for future watershed restoration activities, including recommendations on how local funds can best be leveraged toward watershed restoration activities.
Maryland will also continue to target future Section 319(h) Incremental funds on watershed restoration action strategy implementation projects in all 58 Priority Category 1 watersheds.
The watersheds selected will also form the basis of many of the Department's technical assistance activities.
The numbers and types of best management practices implemented will be tracked, as appropriate, by the Tributary Strategies Program, the Coastal Nonpoint Program and will be discussed in the Section 319 Annual Report.
WRASs will be complete when the goals and objectives identified in each strategy have been met.
Conclusions
The federal Clean Water Action Plan has stimulated a comprehensive statewide assessment of Maryland's watersheds including a diverse set of factors addressing all aspects of watershed condition.
This assessment has involved a broad spectrum of participants from local, state and federal agencies and representatives of many private organizations.
The potential benefits of this approach for Maryland's watersheds are significant.
The results of this process will ultimately provide a comprehensive framework which other programs can utilize to conduct coordinated activities on individual watershed issues.
These benefits will only increase with the further evolution of the Clean Water Action Plan's Watershed Approach.
Maryland's Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement
The purpose of an Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement is to provide for the development of a long-term, results-based management plan that will improve the effectiveness of Maryland's environmental programs and strengthen the relationship between the Maryland Department of the Environment, Maryland Department of Natural Resources (the Departments), and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (the Partners).
Specifically, the agreement is the beginning of a multi-year strategic planning/agreement process that sets forth Maryland's environmental goals, identifies the programs designed to achieve those goals, establishes and adopts indicators to measure progress, describes existing workload responsibilities, defines the State/EPA relationship, and reflects a comprehensive public participation process that will help guide future program direction.
The agreement will also enable DNR, MDE and EPA to evaluate how well program activities are improving the quality of Maryland's air, land, water, and natural resources as well as how well the partners are working together to achieve these improvements.
As part of the agreement, the partners have developed a process to negotiate the activities necessary in addressing the state's environmental condition.
The partners will continue to use categorical grants to fund many of these activities.
While a number of states have entered into such Performance Partnership Agreements with EPA, no standard agreement exists.
Indeed, one of the potential strengths of the partnership agreement is that they can be customized to meet the particular needs of the individual states.
Both Maryland and the federal government embarked upon new efforts to link their programs more directly with broad policy goals.
In Maryland, the Managing Maryland for Results system was created which is a results-based approach to management that includes strategic planning, continuous quality improvements, and performance planning and evaluation.
The federal government has adopted the Government Performance and Results Act that is based on the same premise.
The initial step in the Performance Partnership Agreement is the strategic planning/agreement process.
The five steps Maryland conducted in the strategic planning process include: * Characterizing Maryland's environmental conditions using "indicators" that reflect Maryland's environmental and public health protection goals;
* Assessing the State's performance and effectiveness in addressing Maryland's environmental problems;
* Establishing priorities for future targeting of the State's resources needed to remedy problems;
* Developing an annual workplan that spells out what actions the State and EPA are taking to achieve the desired environmental outcomes; and
* Implementing the workplan and evaluating its effectiveness.
Involving the public throughout Maryland's strategic planning process has been a guiding principle for the Partners.
At several points in the process, formal public meetings have been held at locations across the state.
In addition, a wide variety of stakeholder groups have been consulted regularly, and many of the key documents associated with the formation of Maryland's Performance Partnership Agreement have been posted on the Internet.
The public has played a vital role in shaping each of the elements of Maryland's Agreement and the Partners affirm the importance of the public and recognize the value that the public comments have added to Maryland's Agreement.
For a detailed look at the Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement's public participation process see Chapter 5.
The following section will provide a more detailed look at each step of the strategic planning process.
Characterizing Maryland's environmental conditions
In February 1997, MDE and DNR, with the cooperation of the Maryland Department of Agriculture and Office of Planning, produced "Maryland's Environmental Indicators - A Discussion Draft Report."
The report provided a concise characterization or snapshot in time, of Maryland's environmental and key public health protection parameters.
The report presented over 40 different public health and ecosystem protection indicators on goals related to air and water quality, waste disposal and recycling efforts, lead poisoning prevention, Chesapeake Bay protection and restoration activities, wildlife and their habitat, landscape modification and smart growth, among many others.
During the FY2000 EnPA process, the Partners updated the indicators report to include over 50 environmental and public health indicators.
An in-depth discussion of the environmental and public health indicators is located in Chapter 2 of this document.
Assessing the State's performance
The second step in the EnPA process involved each State agency to conduct an internal "self assessment."
The State agencies developed an extensive survey that asked staff from each program to analyze their progress toward meeting their program's environmental and public health protection goals.
The survey also addressed issues such as the adequacy of personnel, program funding, legal authority, and public acceptability.
The results of the assessment was used in the development of the EnPA FY98 annual workplan.
Updated assessments were used for the development of the FY99 and FY2000 annual workplans.
Establishing priorities
The next step of the EnPA process involved the environmental and public health protection goals and asking the public for its input into the relative importance of the goals.
In 1996, a wide range of MDE and DNR stakeholders analyzed and developed a ranking of State problems based on the relative residual risk that the environmental problems posed as part of the Maryland Environment 2000 Project (ME2000).
ME2000 identified the following three problems as having the highest residual risk, which is defined as the current level of risk given existing environmental controls:
1.
Ozone; 2.
Habitat modification and landscape change; and 3.
Nonpoint source pollution.
Listed below are the Partners priorities, based on Maryland's environmental and public health input:
MDE Priorities These priorities are part of MDE's Managing Maryland for Results workplan:Ensure the air is safe to breathe, * Ensure that Marylanders are not exposed to unnecessary levels of radiation, * Ensure safe drinking water, * Reduce the treat to public health from the presence of hazardous materials in the environment, * Ensure that water is clean and safe for harvesting fish and shellfish; * Improve and protect Maryland's water quality, * Ensure adequate protection and restoration of Maryland's wetland resources, * Protect and maintain Maryland's natural resource land base and encourage smart growth and community revitalization, * Promote public participation and stakeholder involvement in Departmental activities, * Improve regulatory customer service through regulatory reform, streamlining, and burden reduction, * Ensure MDE maximizes and values its human resources, * Achieve departmental diversity and MBE participation in MDE contracts, * Utilize information technology to optimize and enhance operations, and * Integrate pollution prevention activities throughout the Department's operations.
DNR Priorities DNR priorities, falling under 5 broad issue areas, were detailed in the FY1998 EnPA workplan and largely extend into FY2000 activities.
DNR has recently completed a process of revising its goals and objectives, which reflected in subsequent agreements and workplans.
* Supporting Tributary Strategy Teams to implement Bay Program objectives, * Developing watershed restoration and conservation action strategies, * Directing grant programs to implement watershed restoration action strategies, * Monitoring water quality and assessing living resources health, * Establishing forested buffer through Stream ReLeaf and related forestry programs, * Restoring oyster habitat and improving oyster fishery, * Restoring wetlands and submerged aquatic vegetation, * Supporting Smart Growth using Integrated Natural Resources Assessment framework, * Expanding the Urban Natural Resources Initiative, * Identifying core lands for protection of biological diversity, * Further developing and promoting green infrastructure, * Implementing the Rural Legacy program for expanded land conservation, * Carrying out ecosystem-based resource planning on public lands, * Enrolling additional private acreage, protected by conservation easements, in the green infrastructure initiative, * Revising and improving indicators of environmental health, and * Better aligning programs and budget initiatives with priority outcomes.
EPA Priorities * Chesapeake Bay, * Maryland Coastal Bays, * Anacostia River, * Pollution prevention, * Clean Water Action Plan, * Impacts of acidification * City/urban environments and community-based environmental protection, * Strengthen state relationships, * Ozone, * Climate change, * Protection of drinking water sources, * Sound science/indicator development, * A credible deterrent to pollution and grater compliance with the law, and effective management.
Developing an annual workplan
The forth step in Maryland's EnPA process was the development of an annual workplan that identifies what the Partners will do to address the State's environmental problems and achieve the desired outcomes.
During this step, the Partners began the process of identifying joint State/EPA goals and adjusting the State and EPA's efforts and funding to more closely align with those priorities established in step 3 of the EnPA process.
During this process, it was evident that the introduction of a new approach to the State/EPA relationship at this time might cause undue hardship at the individual program level.
Many individual workplans for EPA categorical grants were submitted or awarded as of the date of Maryland's EnPA Agreement.
Thus, the parties agreed to follow traditional administrative practices for FFY98 without disruption.
Consequently, for this first year, Maryland simply described its current environmental program activities.
Therefore, the FFY98 Agreement workplan addressed the following issues for each public and ecosystem health protection goal: * Key goal or issue area; * Environmental stressors and sources; * EPA and State management objectives and activities for that fiscal year; and * Program performance measures.
Maryland's FY99 Agreement served as a "bridge document" between the old way of doing business and the desired improvements the Partners seek to achieve.
The format of the workplan remained the same as the FY98 document.
During the fall of 1999, the Partners signed the updated FY2000 Agreement.
The Agreement will enable partners to evaluate how well program activities are improving the quality of Maryland's air, water, and natural resources, and evaluates how well the Partners are working together to achieve these improvements.
The FY2000 agreement reflects the progress the Partners intend to make in negotiating grant commitments from an environmental outcome basis rather than the past practices of activity-based negotiations.
It is anticipated that the Partners will continue to use categorical grants to fund many of their activities.
The FY2000 Agreement serves as an umbrella that incorporates by reference the EPA categorical grants.
The categorical grant commitments, just like other State/EPA commitments, are not changed by the FY2000 Agreement.
What is changed is how the partners interact with one another, and how they will collaborate in the future to protect and improve the environment using the best available environmental information.
Implementing the workplan
For the purpose of Maryland's agreement, the Partners will use the environmental indicators found in Maryland's Environmental Indicators Report and other program performance measures to evaluate and report progress.
For those areas in which progress is being made, it is anticipated that EPA and the State can begin to examine ways to better target monitoring and streamline reporting.
For those areas in which sufficient progress is not being made, the State and EPA will identify what, if any, changes need to be made.
The Partners also will develop a process to move forward with re-aligning funding to support their strategic priorities.
The State of Maryland and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency continue to move forward in their efforts to better define the federal-state relationship and advance a results-based approach to environmental protection issues.
Federal Consistency with State Nonpoint Source Management Plan
Section 313 of the Clean Water Act requires federal agencies to comply with all federal, state, interstate and local requirements to the same extent as any non-governmental entity.
Federal consistency requirements are further spelled out under Executive Order 12372 ("The President Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs").
Under this order states, in consultation with their local governments, design review processes and select those federal financial assistance and direct development activities they wish to review.
Though the process differs from state to state, most states have established a clearinghouse through which state, local or regional government entities can communicate concerns about proposed activities to the appropriate federal agency before final decisions are made.
Once a process is approved, the state selects which financial assistance programs and development projects it wants to review from the list of activities eligible for executive order review, and notifies the federal agencies of its choices.
In Maryland, the Single Point of Contact designated to coordinate Executive Order review is the Maryland State Clearinghouse housed in the Maryland Office of Planning (MOP).
The Clearinghouse is responsible for sending proposed federal assistance programs and development projects to each state agency and local government that has requested to receive the specified proposal.
After a certain time frame, Clearinghouse collects any comments, concerns, and recommendations and forwards them to the responsible federal agency.
That federal agency must either (1) accept the recommendations; (2) negotiate acceptable solutions; or (3) explain in writing why the State's concerns cannot be accomplished.
Federal Consistency is also mandated by Section 307 of the Federal Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, as amended (CZMA), and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) regulations (15 CFR part 930).
The CZMA requires that federal actions which are reasonably likely to affect any land or water use, or natural resource of a state's coastal zone be conducted in a manner that is consistent with a state's federally approved Coastal Zone Management Program (CZMP).
Under the CZMA, the Federal Consistency requirement applies to three types of actions: direct federal activities including federal development projects, federal license or permit activities, and federal financial assistance to state and local governments.
The Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (CZARA) amended the CZMA to clarify that Federal Consistency applies when any federal activity, regardless of location, affects any land or water use or natural resource of the coastal zone.
The CZARA also clarified that coastal effects include cumulative and secondary effects.
The State of Maryland has a coordinated review procedure to insure that CZMP consistency standards are met.
The Department of Natural Resources (DNR) is the lead agency for the State's CZMP.
Within DNR, the Coastal Zone Management Division of the Chesapeake and Coastal Watershed Service is the lead agency for the CZMP.
The Federal Consistency requirements are carried out by the Coastal Zone Consistency Division in the Wetlands and Waterways Program of the Water Management Administration (WMA) in the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE).
Coastal Zone Consistency evaluates proposed federal activities affecting the State's coastal zone to ensure consistency with the enforceable policies of the State's CZMP.
Although WMA is responsible for the official Federal Consistency decision, the decision is often based partially or entirely upon the findings of a variety of agencies within the CZMP network, depending upon the nature of the proposed activity.
Upon receipt of any state agency and public comments on the proposed activity, WMA transmits the State's response to the federal agency, including action on the federal agency's consistency determination.
The Nonpoint Source Management program plans to use existing consistency review procedures to insure that federal programs and activities consistency requirements are met.
Since the Maryland CZMP reviews federal programs and activities for their consistency with all state and local requirements, the CZMP needs to consider the goals and activities of the Nonpoint Source Management program during consistency review.
The WMA in coordination with the DNR Coastal Zone Management Division, and the DNR's Environmental Review Unit will include Nonpoint Source Management Program goals during consistency evaluations.
The DNR's Environmental Review Unit reviews internal and external projects for environmental impacts.
The state will contact the Nonpoint Source Management Program when any conflicts are identified and give the program an opportunity to review and comment on any relevant federal activity or program.
The Nonpoint Source Management program will review the state's Intergovernmental Review to identify those few potentially relevant federal programs and activities not reviewed by the CZMP for consistency.
Section 319 (b)(2)(f) of the Clean Water Act requires states to identify federal financial assistance programs and federal development projects that they will review for their effect on water quality consistent with the state NonPoint Source Management Program.
The Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance is an annual publication of federal programs, projects, services, and activities that provide technical or financial assistance benefits to the public.
It currently contains well over 1000 programs administered by 50 federal agencies.
Such assistance includes, but is not limited to grants, loans, loan guarantees, scholarships, insurance, counseling and other expertise, cooperative agreements, and property.
The following is a list of financial assistance programs from the catalog that will be reviewed for federal consistency with the Nonpoint Source Management Plan.
Also attached is a list of federal development projects that will be reviewed for federal consistency.
Federal Financial Assistance Projects
Department of Agriculture 10.418 Water 
Department of Commerce 11.300 Economic Development - Grants and Loans for Public Works and Development Facilities 11.419 Coastal Zone Management Program Administration Grants 11.420 Coastal Zone Management Estuarine Research Reserves
Department of the Interior 15.252 Abandoned Mine Reclamation Program 15.605 Fish Restoration
Department of Transportation 20.106 Airport Improvement Program
Environmental Protection Agency 66.001 Air Pollution Control Program Grants 66.418 Construction Grants for Wastewater Treatment Works 66.435 Clean Lakes Cooperative Agreements 66.456 Comprehensive Estuarine Management 66.700 Pesticides Enforcement Program 66.801 Hazardous Waste Management State Program 66.802 Hazardous Substance Response Trust Fund (Superfund) 66.804 State Underground Storage Tanks Program
Federal Development Projects
Forest Service Chemical/Pesticides Area Analysis/Cumulative Impacts Analysis Recreational Development Watershed Management Watershed Rehabilitation projects Hydrologic Modification Wetlands Protection
Bureau of Land Management Chemicals/Pesticides Area Analysis/Cumulative Impacts Public Watershed Management Wetlands Protection Hydrologic Modification RCWP BMP 16 - Pesticide Management
Department of Defense
Defense Installations Land Management Plans Location, design and acquisition of new or expanded defense installations Establishment of impact, compatibility or restricted use zones
Corps of Engineers Proposed authorizations for: dredging channel improvement Other navigational works beach replenishment dams or flood control works Selection of open water disposal sites
Federal Highways Administration (DOT) Highway Construction/Reconstruction
Federal Aviation Administration (DOT) Location and design, construction, maintenance and demolition of Federal aids to air navigation.
Coast Guard Location and design, construction or enlargement of Coast Guard Stations, bases and lighthouses.
Expansion, abandonment, designation of anchorages, lightering areas or shipping lanes and ice management practices and activities.
Office of Surface Mining/SMRCA Abandoned Mine Lands Program
Fish 
General Service Administration Acquisition, location and design of proposed Federal government property or buildings, whether leased or owned by the Federal government Disposition of Federal surplus lands and structures _________________________________________________________________
Return to Table of Contents Return to Nonpoint Source Program Homepage
If you have any questions about the Nonpoint Source Program contact Katharine Dowell at Kdowell@dnr.state.md.us
