Mary Ellen Burns 7 Cogswell Lane Stamford, CT 06902 203-327-4998 E-mail address: BurnsM@home.com I. Profession Attorney
File Last Updated: 2/18/00
Accrediting Agency or Jurisdiction York State Supreme Court
Date of Admission March 1979
II.
Professional Organization
Date of Admission
Active/Inactive
New York State Bar Connecticut State Bar U.S. District Court - Eastern and Southern Districts Connecticut State Bar Association 1988-1996 Reinsurance Association of America, Law Committee, 1989 - 1996.
1995-96 Law Committee Chair ARIAS-US (AIDA Reinsurance 
Board of Arbitrators.
Certified arbitrator American Reinsurance and Insurance Arbitration Society -ARIAS US.
Included on list of eligible arbitrators by the NYSE 1997 1997 January 2000
Inactive
Active
Active Active Active
New York State Bar Association American Bar Association Connecticut State Bar Association member and law day lecturer Member, Advisory Committee to Board of Directors of US Trust.
III.
General professional experience:
1979-1986 1980-1987 1988-1996.
1999 Active
ARBITRATOR, MEDIATOR, AND ATTORNEY, Stamford, CT. 1997 to present Serve as an arbitrator, umpire and expert witness in a variety of insurance, reinsurance and
securities disputes.
Qualified as a mediator; perform limited transactional work; and advise on employment issues.
.
NATIONAL RE CORPORATION, Stamford, CT General Counsel, Senior Vice President General Counsel, Vice President Assistant General Counsel 1993- 1996 1990 - 1993 1987 - 1990
Directed legal activities supporting business operations with two professionals and three support staff.
Provided legal advice to senior management regarding transactions, securities law, and employee relations.
Participated in formulation of long and short-term strategic initiatives.
Elected to Board of Directors of operating company.
KROLL 
Concentrated in insurance and reinsurance areas with emphasis on regulatory issues, corporate law and litigation.
Managed legal aspects of corporate transactions including acquisitions, divestitures, company formations, and liquidations.
Served as an incorporating or interim director for several insurance companies.
BRADY 
Responsible for maintaining multi-state eligibility for alien insurers, liaised with regulators, examined and interpreted various tax treaties and contracts, and represented clients in various aspects of insurance litigation, including negligence, and malpractice AHEARN, DIMANTI 
Dealt with U.C.C.
Workers compensation, ERISA, banking, and commercial law and federal guideline compliance.
1978 - 1980 1980 - 1981
IV.
General pertinent experience :
V. Mediation training: Mediator Skills Training, November 3-5, 1997 presented by National Association of Securities Dealers Regulation, Inc., Office of Dispute Resolution and the U.S. Bankruptcy Court, Southern District of New York I have had experience in many informal meditations, as a general counsel.
As general Counsel, my role was to communicate with various people and departments within the organization, bring them together and facilitate their own resolution.
I found I was very effective at a getting people to reach a consensus.
As a former litigator I also have had experience with the procedural aspects of mediation process I as I negotiated settlements.
Also I believe strongly that if people are given the opportunity to sit down and communicate, they can resolve their disagreements.
Finally, in the three years that I have been doing arbitrations, I frequently find myself in the role of mediator in getting the other panelists to reach a consensus.
VI. Pertinent bankruptcy training: When I was National Re corporation we had occasion to file and pursue claims as creditors of bankrupts.
I have also filed several personal bankruptcy petitions.
I have also, from time to time been called upon to research various bankruptcy issues as they pertained to my clients, particularly in the area of insurance and reinsurance.
Finally, I have been involved in a great many liquidations of insurance companies and while not governed by the dame laws, many of the issues and principles the same.
Moreover, we frequently looked to the bankruptcy court and rules for guidance.
VII.
General pertinent business or legal experience : Litigation and Arbitration: Managed litigation, arbitrations and mediation.
Negotiated procedures disputes, commutations and discovery requests.
Attended pretrial conferences; argued motions and appeals; appeared at administrative and judicial hearings; drafted pleadings, motions and briefs; and evaluated claims.
Supervised other associates and law firms.
Tried or participated in several trials.
Serve as an arbitrator.
Real Estate : Supervised lease and sublease negotiations for company offices.
Foreclosed and closed residential and commercial real estate transactions.
Regulatory Affairs: Analyze legislation.
Serve on the law committees of the RAA and the NAII.
Lobby state and federal regulators.
Monitor regulatory, legislative and judicial developments; obtained state licenses; wrote and filed programs for approval.
Established branches in the U.S., Canada and United Kingdom.
Tax: Reviewed, research and analyzed various corporate and employee tax issues, including ERISA.
Completed closings under tax treaties.
Securities Law: Responsible for all filings including 10Q, S-8, 13D, proxies and 16b filings.
Advised Board of Directors and management.
Wrote internal trading and compliance programs and procedures.
Transactions: Oversaw and coordinated National Re's management led leveraged buyout,
IPO, debt offering, and several refinancings.
Managed legal aspects of company merger as well as numerous stock purchases and investments.
Negotiated terms and drafted agreements.
Managed domestications and liquidations.
Employment and Labor Law: Negotiated and drafted employment contracts, severance and confidentiality agreements.
Oversaw and mediated employee disputes.
Drafted/reviewed employee benefits arrangements, including pensions plans, and stock plans.
Drafted policies to comply with The Family and Medical Leave Act, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and Title Seven.
Insurance and Reinsurance : Interpreted policy provisions.
Reviewed and drafted treaties, agency contracts and trusts.
Revised facultative certificates.
Worked on alternative risk products, self insurance and workers' compensation programs.
Advised on laws in various states.
Information Services: Reviewed and negotiated equipment leases and software licenses.
Automated law library.
Surety: Drafted, negotiated, interpreted and litigated surety bonds for financial guarantee, workers' compensation, and construction.
