Chapter 2 - Resource Assessment and Monitoring Programs This chapter of the Nonpoint Source Management Program document explores Maryland's geography, water quality, pollution history and types of nonpoint source pollutants, as well as the different monitoring and assessment programs Maryland administers throughout the State.
The continued implementation of monitoring and assessment programs such as the one's described in this chapter are the key to improving water quality and will be used to assess the state's success in achieving its goals.
Maryland Overview - Geography, land-use, pollution history, pollutant types and pollution sources
The Landscape at a Glance
Maryland has a diversity of landforms and natural features.
From the state's western border to the Eastern Shore, the physical landscape changes dramatically.
The western mountains give way to rolling hills which change to the Coastal Plain in the east.
All of these physiographic provinces were created as weathering, crustal uplift, erosion, and deposition molded the landscape over vast periods of time.
Maryland has five physiographic provinces (Figure 2.1).
The Appalachian Plateaus Province has the highest elevations; the lowest are in the Coastal Plain.
In between is the variable landscape of the Ridge and Valley, the narrow mountainous strip of the Blue Ridge, and the broad Piedmont Plateau that slopes to the Coastal Plain.
These physiographic regions have a significant influence on the types of streams that evolve and their hydrological features.
For example, streams in the Appalachian Province flow rapidly over steep mountainous terrain.
These streams are generally narrower, usually occurring on soils with low permeability.
In contrast, streams in Maryland's Coastal Plain are flatter and wider with few rapids.
A strong relationship also exists between the physiographic provinces and the endemic vegetation.
Appalachian Plateaus Province
The Appalachian Plateaus Province occurs in westernmost Maryland and occupies approximately six percent of the state.
Its boundaries extend from Dans Mountain in the east to well past the Maryland State line in the west.
Streams in this province drain southward and eastward to the Potomac River which flows to the Chesapeake Bay and the Atlantic Ocean or northward to the Ohio River, eventually reaching the Gulf of Mexico via the Mississippi River.
The bedrock of the Appalachian Plateaus consists primarily of gently folded shale, silt, and sandstone.
Several sandstone ridges reach elevations of more than 3,000 feet.
The valleys between the ridges consist of easily eroded shale with limestone at the outer edges.
Because of the rugged terrain, local streams have steep slopes dotted with waterfalls and rapids.
These fast-moving waterways have many large rocks and exposed bedrock.
Figure 2.1: Map of the five Physiographic Provinces of Maryland Ridge and Valley Province
Map of the Physiographic Provinces of Maryland
The Ridge and Valley Province extends from the western edge of the Blue Ridge Mountains to Dans Mountain and occupies approximately 12 percent of Maryland.
It has two distinct features - the Western Ridges and the Great Valley.
The Western Ridges consist of numerous sandstone and quartzite ridges.
The valleys between the ridges are composed of shale and limestone eroded from the surrounding ridges.
Steeply-sloped streams flow from the ridges into the more moderately sloped channels of the valley.
When mountain-building forces compress flat-lying sedimentary rocks, the rocks become acutely folded and resemble a pleated skirt.
These folded layers of rock have differing resistance to erosion in more or less parallel bands close to the surface.
Streams flowing over these tightly folded rocks tend to follow the layers of weaker rocks, such as shale.
In time, shale-bottomed valleys develop parallel to the folds, leaving more resistant rock - usually sandstone - to form long ridges.
Much of the Western Ridges landscape in eastern Allegany County and western Washington County developed in this fashion.
The northerly alignment of the ridges and streams in this area is visible on topographic maps and aerial photographs.
Even with acute bedrock folding, however, ridge and valley topography does not always develop.
If the bedrock is primarily limestone or shale without a thick layer of uniformly resistant rock, the landscape can evolve into a shale or limestone valley.
The Great Valley is distinguished by a gently rolling lowland between the more mountainous landscapes to the east and west.
The two landscapes that developed due to the inclusion of this thick layer of uniformly resistant rock are the Hagerstown Valley and the Frederick Valley.
The streams of the Great Valley generally have low gradients, few large rock outcrops, and meander widely through the landscape.
The channel sediments are mainly sandstone and quartzite from the hard rocks of South Mountain and silt from the valley's limestone formations.
Blue Ridge Province
The Blue Ridge Province, which includes Catoctin Mountain at the eastern boundary and South Mountain at the western boundary, comprises roughly five percent of Maryland.
Like the Appalachian Plateau Province, the Blue Ridge is underlain by folded and faulted sedimentary rock.
The rocks of the Blue Ridge Province are exposed in two large anticlinal ridges - rock layers that has been warped upward in the shape of an arch with one in central Frederick County and the other in the western part of the county.
These ridges occupy most of the land in the province and are composed of resistant sandstone and quartzite.
A broad valley that is floored by gneiss (a metamorphic rock created by the transformation of other rock types through extremely high pressure and temperature) and volcanic rock lies in the trough between the two ridges.
In this area, stream channels are typified both by the steep slopes of the Catoctin and South Mountains and the moderate grades of the interspersed valley.
Valley stream sediments are derived from gneiss and volcanic rock and include gravel, cobble, and boulder-size materials.
Piedmont Plateau Province
The Piedmont Plateau Province covers roughly 29 percent of Maryland.
This province extends from Catoctin Mountain eastward to the edge of the Coastal Plain.
The province is typified by rolling terrain and low ridges.
Most Piedmont streams have moderate slopes controlled by bedrock outcrops at the surface, however, steeply-sloped areas and small waterfalls exist.
Most stream bottoms have a mixture of gravel and sand.
Streams underlain with schist (another metamorphic rock) have bottoms of flat stones while streams underlain by limestone bedrock are dominated by silty sediment.
The bedrock in the eastern part of the Piedmont consists of gneiss and schist, gabbro (an igneous rock formed deep below the surface), and other heated and squeezed sedimentary and igneous rocks.
The rocks of the western part of the Piedmont are diverse and include phyllite, slate, marble, and moderately to slightly metamorphosed volcanic rocks.
Differential erosion of the contrasting rock types in Baltimore County and parts of the adjacent counties has produced a distinctive topography in this section of the Piedmont.
Coastal Plains Province
The Coastal Plain Province is the easternmost and largest province in Maryland with an area covering almost 50 percent of the state.
As streams cross from the Piedmont into the Coastal Plain, they change from hard-rock bottoms to softer, more easily-eroded substrate.
At the western boundary of the Coastal Plain, as streams flow across this transition (the "fall line"), they slow and begin cutting more deeply into the landscape.
The most well-known section of the fall line is Great Falls on the Potomac River.
The thick layers above the bedrock of the Coastal Plain consist of unconsolidated sediments - primarily gravel and sand.
Some of these sediments are of oceanic origin although many are derived from the Piedmont Plateau and were deposited in lakes, swamps, and the rivers floodplains.
The Coastal Plain is subdivided into the Western Shore Uplands, the Estuaries Region, the Chesapeake Estuary Region, and the Delmarva Peninsula Region.
The topography of the Western Shore Uplands and the Estuaries Region is rolling.
Some areas, such as the landscape surrounding Prince Frederick in Calvert County, appear very bumpy or "knobby."
In this region, streams have moderate to low slopes with steep valley walls while stream bottoms consist of sand and gravel.
Generally, the Chesapeake Estuary Region is flat.
Streams in this area are gently sloped and frequently have sandy or small gravel channel bottoms.
Lastly, the Delmarva Peninsula Region has very flat topography drained by slow- moving streams.
The sediment dominating the stream bottoms is slightly smaller in size than the coarser gravels that occur closer to the western boundary and the fall line.
Rivers, Bays, and Streams
The State of Maryland has designated 19 river basins and 138 subwatersheds within its borders (Figure 2.2).
A majority of Maryland's rivers and streams drain into the Chesapeake Bay.
The remainder drain into either the Coastal Bays region on the southeastern tip of Maryland, the Youghiogheny River basin in far western Maryland (which drains into the Ohio River), or the Christina River which drains into the Delaware River basin.
Maryland is unique in that more than 90 percent of its rivers and streams drain into a single body of water - the Chesapeake Bay.
The Chesapeake is the nation's most productive estuary with a watershed encompassing 64,000 square miles of Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, and Delaware.
Two hundred miles long and covering 4,400 square miles, the main bay is a unique ecosystem which is home to over 2,700 migratory and resident animal species.
The Maryland portion of Chesapeake Bay extends nearly 125 miles in length between the Susquehanna and Potomac rivers, encompassing 1,310 square miles.
Figure 2.2: Map of Maryland's 138 8-digit HUC watershed basins
map of Maryland's Watershed Planning Units
The Chesapeake Bay receives about half its water volume from the Atlantic Ocean.
The rest drains into the bay from its many rivers.
The Potomac and Susquehanna river basins contribute about 80 percent of the fresh water that enters the bay.
The Maryland Coastal Bays (Figure 2.3) are shallow lagoons situated behind Ocean City and Assateague Island.
They include Assawomen, Isle of Wight, Sinepuxent, Newport, and Chincoteague bays.
The coastal lagoons are characterized by their shallow depths, well-mixed waters, and slow exchange of water with the ocean.
The Coastal Bays watershed encompasses 175 square miles and is almost two times larger then the bays themselves.
The relatively small size of the Coastal Bays watershed in addition to its low elevation, high water table, poor natural surface drainage, generally sandy soils, and abundance of wetlands results in low stream flow and limited freshwater runoff.
Groundwater, which flows very slowly, serves as the major source of fresh water to the creeks, tributaries, and bays.
Figure 2.3: Coastal Bays Region
Map of the Coastal Bays Region Land Use and Geography
Most of the state's developed land occurs in and around the cities of Washington, Baltimore, and Annapolis.
Areas that once had farms and forest now sport shopping malls and residential homes.
The movement of people from urban centers to rural land has significantly modified the landscape.
For example, Howard County, once rural, now serves as a corridor between Washington and Baltimore.
As the suburbs of these cities have expanded over the last several decades, Howard County has seen a boom in development.
Developed land occupies approximately 11 percent of Maryland's land area.
Agricultural lands are ubiquitous across the Maryland landscape.
The largest concentration of farms is on the Delmarva Peninsula.
Since soils, topography, and climate largely dictate the type of agriculture in a region, alternate parts of the state produce different agricultural products.
For example, the Piedmont and Blue Ridge provinces have good conditions for cattle while the coastal region, especially the Delmarva Peninsula, has good conditions for row crops such as corn, soybeans, and a variety of fruits.
Maryland agriculture is as diverse as its people.
In 1996, approximately 38 percent of Maryland's land was used for agricultural purposes.
As the state has grown in population, traditional dairy, grain, and livestock production has given way to products more directly related to consumers.
Poultry, nursery and turf production, fresh fruits and vegetables, and racing and pleasure horse industries now dominate Maryland agriculture.
The agriculture industry contributes more than $11 billion in revenue annually, making it the state's largest commercial industry.
The largest percentage of Maryland's land is in forest.
At one time in history, the state was almost completely forested.
Today, 44 percent (4,333 square miles) of the state is forested.
As suburban sprawl continues, contiguous forests will become fragmented.
Overview of Water Quality in Maryland
More than 300 years ago, before the early settlers arrived on Maryland's shores, the geographical area now comprising the state looked very different than today.
Anthropogenic factors such as a growing population, social, economic, and cultural changes have induced a variety of landscape and environmental changes such as deforestation, development, intensive agriculture, and air and water pollution.
These changes have contributed to the degradation of many of the state's waterways.
As industry grew in the early 1900s, the most obvious water pollution problem was industrial and municipal waste.
For example, raw sewage from Washington D.C. was once dumped directly into surface waters.
In 1938, the Blue Plains Wastewater Treatment Plant, today one of the largest in the nation, was built to serve residents of the Washington area - many of whom resided in Maryland.
During the 1930s to1950s, several wastewater treatment plants were built in the state.
These plants, however, were generally inadequate to deal with many of the problems facing state waters.
Wastewater treatment was crude and did not remove many of the pollutants.
As a result, dramatic water pollution problems occurred in the 1950s and 1960s.
The 1972 Federal Clean Water Act helped promote significant increases in municipal wastewater treatment.
Since passage of the Act, the emphasis of water pollution control had been point sources.
Recently, efforts to control nonpoint sources of pollution have gained increased attention.
Today, nonpoint sources account for a majority of the pollutants that enter the state's waters.
Surface Water Quality
Today, the overall surface water quality in Maryland is good.
Serious impacts still occur in some areas due to excess nutrients, suspended solids, bacteria, toxic materials, or stream acidity.
In severe instances, recreational bathing, consumption of certain fish species, and shellfish harvesting are severely restricted or prohibited.
The extent of these severe impacts is limited.
Except for estuarine waters, much of Maryland's surface waters meet defined state uses and meet federal Clean Water Act goals of fishable and swimable waters.
The most pervasive water quality problem is the continued accumulation of nutrients in estuaries and lakes.
Excess nutrients from agricultural, urban, and natural nonpoint source runoff, point sources, and atmospheric deposition contribute to accelerated eutrophication of lakes, estuaries, and reservoirs.
As a result, extensive algal blooms and low dissolved oxygen levels occur in many lakes and tidal embayments of the state, affecting water supplies and limiting the habitat available for aquatic plants and animals.
Regional point source nutrient control programs and nonpoint source nutrient control programs employ the use of best management practices (BMPs) statewide in an effort to reduce these nutrients.
The Chesapeake Bay Program concluded in their 1997 Reevaluation that the Baywide 40% reduction goal for phosphorus reduction will be met by the year 2000.
The 1997 Reevaluation also concluded that unless current efforts are accelerated--and some "gap closers" put in place--the Baywide nitrogen reduction goal will not be met by the year 2000.
In turn, the decrease in nutrient loading to the bay should result in fewer algal blooms and a lessening of the area impacted by low oxygen levels.
These changes would increase available aquatic habitat in the bay.
High suspended sediment levels can affect recreational activities and aquatic habitat in all of the state's surface waters.
Sources of sediment include agricultural and urban runoff, construction activities, natural erosion, dredging, forestry, and mining operations.
Efforts to control sediments are centered on implementing BMPs for sediment and erosion control and stormwater management.
High bacterial levels can occur in all water types in the state.
Elevated levels are attributed to agricultural, urban and natural runoff, and failed septic systems.
In severe instances, recreational bathing or shellfish harvesting areas are closed or restricted.
Although several swimming areas were closed in 1993 to1995 because of high bacteria levels, most of the state's waters have no swimming restrictions.
About 104 square miles of Maryland's estuarine waters were closed to shellfish harvesting in 1993 to1995 because of these elevated bacteria levels; another 72.3 square miles were temporarily closed after major rainstorms because of elevated levels in runoff from nearby land and marshes.
Acidic waters from abandoned coal mine drainage in western Maryland or from atmospheric deposition in headwater streams have detrimental effects on aquatic life by smothering aquatic habitats with precipitates or through the toxic effects of low ph and high metal concentrations.
Costly reclamation efforts are slowly addressing mine drainage problems; stream naturalization facilities have been installed in some severely impacted waters in western Maryland and have been used experimentally in Coastal Plain streams to neutralize the effects of acid deposition.
In some waters, elevated levels of toxic metal and organic compounds from agricultural and urban runoff and industrial and municipal discharges accumulate to measurable levels in sediments and in the tissues of aquatic organisms.
At high concentrations, these compounds can adversely affect aquatic life and can pose a human health risk if these affected fish are caught and eaten.
In some urban areas, certain fish species have been found with elevated levels of chlordane, an organic pesticide, in their tissues.
As a result of these elevated pesticide levels, the state has issued an advisory suggesting that people limit their consumption of fish species caught in the affected areas.
Point source discharges of toxic metals and organic materials have been regulated through Maryland's pretreatment programs, bio-toxicity programs and National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits programs.
A statewide toxic materials reduction strategy addressed additional water quality standards for toxic substances and nonpoint source discharges of toxic materials.
Groundwater Quality
Groundwater in Maryland is of generally good quality.
Localized groundwater quality problems do occur statewide as a result of excess nutrients (nitrates), bacteria, saline water, toxic compounds, and petroleum products.
In severe instances of contamination, some private water supply wells have been closed as sources of potable water.
From a public health standpoint, one of the most serious groundwater quality problems is bacterial contamination from stormwater runoff or failing septic systems.
This problem may occur in all areas of the state; control efforts have centered on enforcing septic system regulations, implementing approved-well construction methods, and identifying streams in karst or in fractured rock areas that directly feed groundwater.
Nitrogen applications to the soil can cause elevated nitrate levels in the groundwater below.
Drinking water with high nitrate levels can cause health problems.
Control efforts are limited to the enforcement of septic tank regulations, strict well construction requirements, and agricultural BMPs.
Saltwater intrusion into aquifers is a serious problem in some coastal and estuarine areas due to both natural salt water and de-icing salts used on highways and on airport runways.
Natural intrusion or runoff may be accelerated by heavy groundwater demand contributing to this problem.
Control efforts focus on limiting groundwater withdrawals and well placement.
Petroleum contamination of groundwater supplies occurs from leaking underground storage tanks or surface spills; occurrences have been reported statewide.
Toxic metals and organic compounds from septic tanks, landfills, and surface spills have locally contaminated some groundwater supplies.
Control measures center on enforcing underground storage tank and waste disposal regulations.
Drainage from abandoned coal mines in western Maryland contaminates local groundwater supplies with acidic waters and elevated levels of metals.
Some mine reclamation efforts address groundwater quality, however, identifying the source of contamination is often difficult.
Nonpoint Source Pollution: Major Source Categories and Pollutants
The source of water pollution provides the key to its control.
Point sources of pollution are direct discharges to a receiving water body through a discrete pipe or ditch.
Examples of point sources include discharges from industries (including large animal feedlots), wastewater treatment plants, and combined sewer overflow points.
Nonpoint sources of pollution include all other diffuse discharges such urban and agricultural runoff, leachates from landfills and septic tanks, stream channel construction, and runoff due to deforestation and forestry practices.
Traditional efforts to control nonpoint source pollution have focused on the implementation of BMPs to limit runoff from sources.
For example, stormwater management facilities are built to slow urban runoff and in some cases to filter sediments and other pollutants.
A variety of BMPs, such no-till and contour farming, help control runoff from farms.
The forest industry utilizes several BMPs to control soil compaction and sedimentation while harvesting forest products.
In many landscape situations, BMPs can remove a variety of pollutants.
Many BMPs used in Maryland are reasonably effective in reducing erosion and sedimentation, however, they generally are not as effective in removing heavy metal and other chemicals.
The major nonpoint source pollutants causing impairment in Maryland waters are nutrients (primarily nitrogen and phosphorus), toxic substances such as heavy metals and chemical compounds, sediments, and pathogens (fecal coliform).
There are many categories of nonpoint source pollution.
This document focuses on seven categories of nonpoint source pollution: agriculture, urban development, forestry, marinas and recreational boating, hydromodification, atmospheric deposition, and mining.
The state has also focused on management measures for wetlands, riparian areas, and vegetated treatment systems that apply generally to various categories or sources of pollution.
Agriculture
Agricultural activities that cause NPS pollution can include confined animal facilities, grazing, plowing, pesticide spraying, irrigation, fertilizing, planting, and harvesting.
The major agricultural NPS pollutants that result from these activities are sediment, nutrients, pathogens, pesticides, and salts.
Agricultural activities also can damage habitat and stream channels.
Agricultural impacts on surface water and ground water can be minimized by properly managing activities that can cause NPS pollution.
Forestry
Sources of NPS pollution associated with forestry activities include removal of streamside vegetation, road construction and use, timber harvesting, and mechanical preparation for the planting of trees.
Road construction and road use are the primary sources of NPS pollution on forested lands.
Harvesting trees in the area beside a stream can affect water quality by reducing the streambank shading that regulates water temperature and by removing vegetation that stabilizes the streambanks.
These changes can harm aquatic life by limiting sources of food, shade, and shelter.
Urban Development
Urbanization increases the variety and amount of pollutants transported to receiving waters.
Sediment from development and new construction; oil, grease, and toxic chemicals from automobiles; nutrients and pesticides from turf management and gardening; viruses and bacteria from failing septic systems; road salts; and heavy metals are examples of pollutants generated in urban areas.
Sediments and solids constitute the largest volume of pollutant loads to receiving waters in urban areas.
Marina and Recreational Boating
Individual boats and marinas usually release only small amounts of pollutants.
Yet, when multiplied by thousands of boaters and marinas, they can cause distinct water quality problems in lakes, rivers, and coastal waters.
Potential environmental impacts from boating and marinas are: high toxicity in the water; increased pollutant concentrations in aquatic organisms and sediments; increased erosion rates; increased nutrients, leading to an increase in algae and a decrease in oxygen (eutrophication); and high levels of pathogens.
In addition, construction at marinas can lead to the physical destruction of sensitive ecosystems and bottom-dwelling aquatic communities.
Water pollution from boating and marinas is linked to several sources.
They include poorly flushed waterways, boat maintenance, discharge of sewage from boats, storm water runoff from marina parking lots, and the physical alteration of shoreline, wetlands, and aquatic habitat during the construction and operation of marinas.
Hydromodification
One form of hydromodification is channelization or channel modification.
These terms describe river and stream channel engineering undertaken for the purpose of flood control, navigation, drainage improvement, and reduction of channel migration potential.
Activities such as straightening, widening, deepening, or relocating existing stream channels and clearing or snagging operations fall into this category.
These forms of hydromodification typically result in more uniform channel cross sections, steeper stream gradients, and reduced average pool depths.
Channel modification activities have deprived wetlands and estuarine shorelines of enriching sediments, changed the ability of natural systems to both absorb hydraulic energy and filter pollutants from surface waters, and caused interruptions in the different life stages of aquatic organisms.
Channel modification activities can also alter instream water temperature and sediment characteristics, as well as the rates and paths of sediment erosion, transport, and deposition.
A frequent result of channelization and channel modification activities is a diminished suitability of instream and riparian habitat for fish and wildlife.
Hardening of banks along waterways has eliminated instream and riparian habitat, decreased the quantity of organic matter entering aquatic systems, and increased the movement of NPS pollutants from the upper reaches of watersheds into coastal waters.
Wetlands
Properly managed wetlands can intercept runoff and transform and store NPS pollutants like sediment, nutrients, and certain heavy metals without being degraded.
In addition, wetlands vegetation can keep stream channels intact by slowing runoff and by evenly distributing the energy in runoff.
Wetlands vegetation also regulates stream temperature by providing streamside shading.
Some cities have started to experiment with wetlands as an effective tool to control runoff and protect urban streams.
Improper development or excessive pollutant loads can damage wetlands.
The degraded wetlands can no longer provide water quality benefits and become significant sources of NPS pollution.
Excessive amounts of decaying wetlands vegetation, for example, can increase biochemical oxygen demand, making habitat unsuitable for fish and other aquatic life.
Degraded wetlands also release stored nutrients and other chemicals into surface water and ground water.
Mining
Within the State of Maryland, there are approximately 9,500 acres of land and 450 miles of streams that were impacted by surface and underground coal mining prior to state and federal mining and reclamation regulatory programs.
Acid Mine Drainage is Maryland's most serious problem attributable to abandoned coal mines, and Western Maryland's most severe water pollution problem.
When water comes into contact with pyrite in coal and the rock surrounding it, chemical reactions take place which cause the water to gain acidity and to pick up in solution iron, manganese and aluminum.
Water that comes into contact with coal has a characteristic orange-red, yellow color.
The metals stay in solution beneath the earth due to the lack of oxygen.
When water emerges from the mine or borehole it reacts with the oxygen in the air or dissolved in the stream and deposits iron, manganese and aluminum on rocks and the stream bed.
Each of the chemical characteristics of acid mine drainage (AMD) is toxic to fish and aquatic insects in moderate concentrations.
At high concentrations all plant life is killed.
Atmospheric Deposition
Air pollution comes from everything that burns or emits nitrogen oxides (NOx), or other air pollutants.
This means that industries and electric utilities as well as boats, trains, planes and cars contribute to the air pollution that affects the Bay and its rivers.
Air pollution either gets washed out of the air as rain, snow or fog or as gases and tiny particles.
Even if the pollution does not fall directly on the Bay, it can be transported to the Bay and rivers by storm water runoff or through groundwater flow.
Some pollution is carried by wind for hundreds of miles before it is deposited.
Reductions in acid deposition have the potential to improve the condition of Maryland surface waters, particularly in small streams most susceptible to acidification.
Atmospheric pollution reaches Maryland from a wide geographic area through the movement of air masses into the state.
The EPA's Regional Acid Deposition Model (RADM) estimates that much of the nitrogen deposition affecting the Chesapeake and Coastal Bays watershed originates from far outside the immediate drainage area.
Because Maryland's nonpoint source pollution problems are as diverse as its landscape.
The state has developed a variety of nonpoint source pollution programs that are aimed in combating these varied pollution sources.
Chapter four provides a discussion of Maryland's nonpoint source programs and the strategies used to prevent nonpoint source pollution.
The chapter explains in detail the problems associated with these areas; the different types of programs used to help decrease nonpoint source pollution; and the future goals of each one of these nonpoint source related programs.
Water Quality Monitoring Programs - State and Volunteer
The State of Maryland has a variety of water quality monitoring programs to address specific questions on water and habitat quality.
Sampling ranges from water chemistry and biological profiles and processes to analyses of sediment and tissue samples.
Some programs use a network of fixed location monitoring stations with a regular sampling frequency while sample site selection and sample frequency in other monitoring programs may be random and variable.
To improve its ability to determine the nation's progress in meeting the goals of the Clean Water Act, EPA set a goal for states to make a comprehensive assessment of all their waters.
Economic constraints (personnel, equipment, transportation, laboratory, and data management costs) on water quality monitoring have presented a considerable challenge to the state in reaching this goal.
Maryland has responded to this challenge by focusing its limited resources on the most significant of known water quality problems.
When point source pollution was considered to be the principal water quality problem, monitoring sites were focused in areas where point source dischargers were located.
As point source discharges came under control and complied with permitted discharge levels, water quality problems resulting from nonpoint source pollution became more evident.
These sources are diffuse, more ubiquitous, and deal with many water quality constituents with no established criteria.
Monitoring nonpoint source pollution requires sampling near the sources of pollution and during periods when the pollutant is expected.
Often this requires automated sampling around known stream flow levels.
Because of the amount of work involved in sampling nonpoint source pollution, these studies are usually conducted only in small watersheds.
In order to ensure efficient and effective monitoring programs, Maryland continually reviews specific information on each monitoring effort, including the program objective, sampling and analytical protocols, sampling and laboratory equipment, quality assurance and control measures, data management, assessment, and reporting products.
In 1996, the Maryland Water Monitoring Council (MWMC) was established to promote effective collection, interpretation, and dissemination of aquatic resource monitoring data used in addressing issues, policies, and management of the state's waters.
Through the MWMC, Maryland expects to advance the goal of comprehensive watershed management and integrate its diverse monitoring programs to the greatest extent possible.
The MWMC operates through a Board of Directors and five standing committees that coordinate monitoring activities carried out by a diverse group through cooperation and consensus.
The MWMC hold an annual conference to promote cooperative water monitoring and data sharing.
The MWMC has also held workshops on a variety of topics including: Maryland Gaging Stations, Development and Application of Reference Conditions to Assess Surface Water Quality in Maryland and a Sampling Design Workshop.
Maryland water quality monitoring programs are briefly described below.
For convenience, each program is placed in one of four categories:
· Long-term ambient monitoring programs - These programs originated in the 1970s and include several water quality, benthic macroinvertebrate, fish tissue, phytoplankton, and shellfish monitoring programs.
· Short-term intensive monitoring - These short-term programs are special studies in which several samples may be collected in a small section of a water body or with a high sampling frequency to determine the cause of a water quality problem or for modeling studies.
· Estuarine monitoring - This suite of monitoring programs (water and sediment chemistry, plankton and benthic macroinvertebrate sampling, and sediment-nutrient flux sampling) was initiated as part of the state's Chesapeake Bay Program in 1984.
· Indirect water quality monitoring - This includes monitoring programs that measure water quality as part of habitat assessments or unusual events (e.g. fish kills) as well as projects intended to address specific problems rather than long-term programs to detect water quality trends.
Long-Term Ambient Monitoring
CORE/Trend Program Water quality data are collected by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) monthly from each of 59 CORE/Trend stations located throughout Maryland as part of the US Environmental Protection Agency's national monitoring network.
Samples are collected at each station and analyzed for a variety of physical, chemical, and bacteriological parameters.
Maryland Biological Stream Survey DNR initiated the Maryland Biological Stream Survey (MBSS) in 1994 to assess the ecological health of the state's non-tidal streams.
This survey has assessed water quality, habitat conditions, and baseline aquatic populations at more than 1,600 sites across the state.
Water quality data and samples of fish, benthos, amphibians, and reptiles are collected and taxa lists, community indices, and maps are produced.
The probabilistic nature of the sampling design allows DNR to draw watershed-wide conclusions about biological and habitat conditions and water chemistry with a known level of precision.
Fish Tissue Program To monitor for the presence of organic compounds and heavy metals in the higher trophic levels and to establish long-term trends, the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE) collects and analyzes fish tissue samples from approximately 45 stations throughout the state.
These stations include sites in non-tidal rivers, impoundments, and estuaries and are distributed in three geographic areas (Western Maryland, Chesapeake Bay, and the Baltimore/Washington metropolitan area) with each sampled every third year.
Contaminants analyzed include PCBs as well as selected metals (arsenic, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, manganese, silver, and zinc).
Phytoplankton Program The Department of Natural Resources collects surface grab samples during the Chesapeake Bay mainstem cruises and on tributary cruises in the Choptank, Chester, Patapsco, Potomac, and Patuxent river estuaries.
Samples from 20 stations are collected between February and November and phytoplankton are enumerated and identified to the lowest taxonomic level possible.
This program tracks seasonal phytoplankton abundance, identifies bloom organisms and tracks blue-green algae (Microcystis) in the Potomac River and other tidal tributaries.
Shellfish Sanitation Program The Maryland Department of the Environment monitors estuarine water quality in Use II (shellfish harvesting) waters throughout the state's portion of the Chesapeake Bay watershed, in its Coastal Bays, and in the Atlantic Ocean.
The program has three objectives: identification and elimination of pollution sources, bacteriological survey of water quality, and examination of shellfish tissue for bacterial and toxic contamination.
The department also conducts water quality monitoring and shoreline surveys of properties near shellfish-growing areas to identify factors influencing the sanitary quality of each area.
When pollution sources are identified, efforts are made to eliminate the source.
MDE also determines the bacterial quality of shellfish tissues (shell stock) and assessment of metal and pesticide contamination.
FIGURE 2.4: MBSS Sampling Sites 1994 - 1997
map of MBSS sampling sites 1994-1997
Municipal Compliance Program MDE's Municipal Compliance Monitoring Program provides information on the performance of all wastewater treatment plants in the state.
In addition to data provided by plant operators, MDE collects routine grab samples of effluent from each discharge throughout the year and analyzes them for a variety of physical and chemical constituents.
Composite samples (24-hour) from "major" municipal and federal facilities (discharge capacity greater than one million gallons per day) also are collected and analyzed annually.
Intensive Monitoring
Intensive surveys collect data to determine waste load allocations (discharge modeling) used in issuing National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits, to meet Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDL) modeling needs, determine causes of water quality problems in specific areas, or assess the effectiveness of water pollution control programs.
Physical and chemical data are often collected during low-flow, summer conditions to permit an assessment of worst-case situations.
Targeted Watershed Project This interagency effort is designed to demonstrate and evaluate how a coordinated approach in implementing various bay cleanup activities can improve water quality and living resources.
It is a coordinated effort by DNR, MDE and Department of Agriculture (MDA).
The project's goal is to test the assumption that management actions in selected watersheds will improve water quality, stream habitats, and the biota.
Four "target watersheds" have been selected: Sawmill Creek in Anne Arundel County, Bird River in Baltimore County, Piney Creek/Alloway Creek in Carroll County, and German Branch of the Tuckahoe River in Queen Anne's County.
An interagency task force comprised of members from state agencies, local governments, and interest groups coordinates each project.
DNR, MDE, MDA, and the US Geological Survey along with volunteer citizen monitors conduct biological and chemical water quality monitoring.
(See chapter three for a more detailed description of the Targeted Watershed Project.)
Estuarine Monitoring - Chesapeake Bay Program
This program monitors the physical, chemical, and biological components that are indicators of water quality status and trends in the Chesapeake Bay.
The program is multidisciplinary and includes direct measurements of the physical/chemical environment (including nutrient levels and toxic substances), measurements of point and nonpoint source pollutant loadings, determinations of biological indicators of water quality (zooplankton, phytoplankton, and benthos), and measured rates of important ecosystem processes such as photosynthesis, metabolism, sediment flux, and nutrient limitation.
Mainstem water chemistry samples are collected from 22 Chesapeake Bay stations once per month in January through March, June, and September through December and twice a month in April, May, July, and August.
Water quality samples are collected from an additional 55 stations located in the bay's principal tributaries and embayments.
In the sediment contaminant study, surface sediment samples were collected at each of the 22 Chesapeake Bay mainstem stations in 1984 and 1985 and, beginning in 1986, from many of the bay tributary stations.
In addition, nine samples are collected annually in Baltimore Harbor and from one site in Back River.
Particle size distribution, percentage moisture, total organic carbon, and selected heavy metals and organic compounds are determined from these samples.
The benthic monitoring program consists of two elements - a fixed site sampling effort to identify trends in benthic condition and a probability-based sampling program designed to estimate the area of the bay where benthic communities meet the Chesapeake Bay Program's Benthic Community Restoration Goals.
The plankton monitoring program measures phytoplankton productivity, biomass and zooplankton communities.
Samples are taken at five mainstem stations and at nine tributary stations.
These measures help determine the amount of plant material found in the bay and the Food Availability Index, which is a measure of the critical zooplankton densities required for juvenile fish survival.
Nutrient limitation experiments measure phytoplankton growth rates under ambient nutrient conditions and under various combinations of nitrogen and phosphorus additions.
This information is then used to determine the limiting factor for phytoplankton growth - either nitrogen, phosphorus or light in individual tributaries and during different seasons of the year.
Sediment and Oxygen Nutrient Flux - This program measures the rate of sedimentation to the bay bottom and tests for differences in oxygen consumption and nutrient exchange between the sediments and overlying waters.
Monthly samples are collected between June and September from 4 long term stations and 6 additional stations added in 1996 using a abbreviated technique in the Patuxent estuary.
River Input - This program quantifies the quantity of nutrients and sediment entering the Chesapeake Bay from five tributaries representing the range of different sources of runoff contributions to the bay (Susquehanna, Potomac, Patuxent, and Choptank rivers and Chesterville Branch).
In cooperation with the US Geological Survey and, the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (MWCOG), each river site is monitored for flow and sediment and nutrient concentrations during both base flow and storms.
There are two regional estuarine water quality monitoring programs that are usually considered part of the CORE or Chesapeake Bay monitoring efforts but which have unique objectives.
Both the tidal Potomac and Patuxent River Water Quality Monitoring programs use data collected by the other programs to meet their own goals and objectives.
Potomac River water quality is regionally assessed through the Interstate Commission on the Potomac River Basin (ICPRB) and the MWCOG .
The Patuxent River estuary project was initiated in 1983 in an effort to characterize the estuary's health and document its response to the state's nutrient control strategy in the basin.
Like the Chesapeake Bay Program, samples for analysis of physical and chemical parameters (including solar radiation) and phytoplankton data, are taken at 13 stations throughout the year.
Monitoring Program for Pfiesteria and Pfiesteria-like organisms In 1997, Pfiesteria monitoring efforts consisted of several layers of monitoring: review of past studies and data, longitudinal sampling to determine water quality conditions in critical "bloom" areas, contaminants sampling in fish and sediments, and review of discharge information.
These efforts created a system with a variable response capacity to fish kill incidents.
DNR, MDE, MDA, Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH), and the Pfiesteria Technical Advisory Committee developed a monitoring strategy that protects public health and helps identify how activities on land may be contributing to toxic outbreaks of Pfiesteria in our waterways:
· LEVEL I: Rapid Response - Due to documented impacts of Pfiesteria outbreaks on human health, the highest priority is to rapidly identify toxic outbreaks and protect the public from exposure.
A rapid response monitoring effort was designed to: quickly gather information, evaluate suspected outbreaks, and recommend river closures if warranted.
Reports of fish lesions or kills received through the Fish Health Hotline (1-888-584-3110) or through other channels are reviewed by biologists daily and reports that warrant further investigation are identified.
Rapid response teams of biologists and water quality technicians are dispatched to suspected outbreaks.
The state then works with county health officers to determine closure boundaries, notify local officials, and close the affected water body.
The closed water body will be monitored daily until the closure criteria have not been met for 14 days, at which time the water body will be reopened.
· LEVEL II: Comprehensive Assessment of Affected Rivers - Much of the water quality information collected by DNR, MDE, and DHMH in 1998 and 1999 focused on the three affected lower Eastern Shore rivers (Pocomoke River and Sound, Kings Creek, and Chicamacomico River) and their watersheds.
These data have proven invaluable in identifying the relationships between human activities on the land and the risk of toxic Pfiesteria outbreaks.
Additional intensive monitoring will focus on watershed activities, water and sediment quality, monitoring Pfiesteria, and the status of fish health.
· LEVEL III: Comprehensive Assessment of Selected Rivers - Pfiesteria probably exists in a non-toxic form throughout much of Chesapeake Bay and the Coastal Bays.
It is valuable to monitor fish health, water quality conditions, and Pfiesteria before toxic outbreaks occur, both to protect public health and to further the understanding of the environmental dynamics contributing to toxic Pfiesteria outbreaks.
Since every water body in the state cannot be intensively monitored, waterways were chosen based on their similarity to waterways in which 1997 Pfisteria outbreaks occurred.
Several Eastern Shore tidal tributaries were selected for a comprehensive assessment in 1998 and 1999.
In terms of water quality and physical dynamics, these tributaries - the Nanticoke, Big Annemessex and Wicomico rivers - are somewhat similar to the Pocomoke River.
Also, two coastal bay tributaries are being assessed: St. Martins River and Newport Bay.
In each watershed, water quality parameters are measured each month between April and October at about 12 sites; the health of the fish communities are monitored every two weeks between April and November.
· LEVEL IV: Regional Assessments - DNR currently conducts several fish stock assessment and water quality monitoring programs across the state (e.g., striped bass juvenile survey, Coastal Bays finfish monitoring program, and other fishery-dependent stock assessment programs).
These existing programs, while not as intensive as the Level II and III monitoring efforts described above, monitor fish health statewide and provide an early alert to problems that might occur.
If fish health problems are identified through these programs, more intensive Level I monitoring will be initiated in the affected areas.
Indirect Water Quality Monitoring Efforts
Resource Monitoring DNR's Resource Assessment and Fisheries Services routinely monitor certain water quality aspects as part of their assessment and fisheries management programs, respectively.
Water quality at select lakes and streams is monitored each year as part of a survey of suitability of fish habitat in some waters of the state.
Programs that monitor population levels of estuarine resources (e.g., striped bass young-of-the-year index program, adult American shad survey, yellow perch population survey, and oyster spat and condition index program) also monitor basic water quality parameters.
An estuarine IBI (Index of Biotic Integrity) research program monitors fish community structure and habitat in tidal waters to gain a better understanding of the relationship among water quality, fish communities, and habitat.
DNR also conducts and assists in numerous other resource monitoring and research programs, including monitoring submerged aquatic vegetation (SAV).
These programs include a ground survey program, SAV water quality survey, and re-vegetation programs.
Impact/Alert Monitoring In addition to the state's alert monitoring effort for Pfiesteria, Maryland has several special monitoring efforts to collect samples during unusual events or to survey for exotic species.
For example, MDE collects basic water quality data during investigations of fish kills, algal blooms, and other water quality problems.
If a pollutant is suspected of causing a water quality problem, additional samples are collected and analyzed.
The state also has initiated a zebra mussel monitoring program to detect the presence of the exotic zebra mussel in the state's waters.
Other Monitoring Programs A variety of other water quality monitoring programs are conducted throughout Maryland by the State and federal government, local governments and by universities.
Many of these programs are short-term projects intended to address specific problems rather than long-term programs to detect water quality trends:
· MDE's Bureau of Mines monitors water quality above and below active coal mines in western Maryland to determine water quality impacts.
The bureau also has conducted several stream monitoring programs to establish a baseline, helping to evaluate the effectiveness of planned abandoned mine drainage abatement and treatment projects.
· EPA has long supported several state and local water quality monitoring efforts by providing financial and technical support.
In some cases, the agency has served as a coordinator for different monitoring/interest groups.
As an example, EPA provided support for the regional Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program in the Ridge and Valley region of the state and in the Coastal Bays.
· US Geological Survey (USGS) conducts several long and short-term surface and ground water quality monitoring projects in the state under cooperative agreements with DNR, MDE, Department of Transportation, regional agencies, and local governments.
USGS's Federal-State Cooperative Program, a partnership between USGS and local and state agencies, provides joint planning and funding for systematic studies on water quantity, water quality, and water use.
· Some local governments in Maryland conduct water quality surveys in reservoirs and free flowing and tidal waters as part of the NPDES stormwater program.
Local governments that have water quality monitoring programs include Anne Arundel, Baltimore, Carroll, Harford, Howard, Montgomery, Prince George's, and Somerset counties, and Baltimore City.
Some of these efforts involve citizen involvement in monitoring and restoration activities.
· The Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Maryland conducts specific water quality monitoring.
Recent monitoring projects have occurred in Monie Bay, Jug Bay and Otter Point Creek.
Volunteers trained by the Department of Natural Resources and the Alliance for the Chesapeake Bay conduct water quality monitoring at four sampling stations at Otter Point Creek Estuary and the lower Winters Run watershed.
During the summer of 1999, monitors have started collecting data for the Index of Biotic Integrity project sponsored by DNR.
· Local health departments monitor bacterial levels and other water quality parameters at permitted bathing beaches and sometimes at unregulated bathing areas.
High bacterial levels in water samples collected at these locations may result in a beach or swimming area being closed.
Water quality standards for swimming areas require that several bacteriological samples be collected each month and that periodic sanitary surveys be conducted to identify potential human sources of bacteria.
In some areas, local health departments may not have sufficient information to restrict a bathing area (e.g., infrequent bacterial sampling).
In these instances, the local health department may advise local communities against bathing and suggest posting notices to the public.
Maryland's Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) Program
Background In the federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Congress intended that water pollution, resulting principally from point source discharges, would be eliminated through strict effluent limitations.
Technological advances would develop processes that would remove nearly all pollutants from these sources and help meet the Act's goal of eliminating the discharge of pollutants by 1985.
All municipal facilities would achieve secondary treatment levels by July 1, 1977 and industrial facilities would achieve best practicable control technology currently available.
To ensure that these programs would improve water quality conditions to meet fishable and swimmable goals, Congress provided a corrective process that would address any shortcomings.
Section 303(d) of the Act and its amendments require states to identify and prioritize waters for which effluent limits based on municipal secondary treatment and "best practicable control technology currently available" are not stringent enough to meet water quality standards.
For each of these water quality-limited segments, the State must determine the maximum level of any impairing pollutant that can be borne in the water without causing violations of established water quality standards.
This upper limit of a pollutant is called the "Total Maximum Daily Load" or TMDL for these waters.
By calculating this maximum pollutant load, then allocating the load among various sources (both point and nonpoint), water quality standards should be met.
Although states have the primary responsibility to identify their water quality-limited waters and complete TMDLs, the Clean Water Act states that EPA is required to complete these tasks if a State does not do so.
During the past several years, various environmental protection advocacy groups have filed law suits against the EPA in federal court alleging EPA's failure to adequately oversee several states implementation of the TMDL section of the Clean Water Act including Maryland.
As a result, the national TMDL program, including the state priority listing and implementation process and schedules, has been substantially modified.
Maryland's TMDL Program
The Department of the Environment (MDE) is the lead agency for the State's TMDL Program and most regulatory water quality programs.
MDE updates Maryland's list of water quality-limited segments (the "303(d) list") every two years, using data from the 305(b) report with other readily available information from monitoring efforts conducted by federal and local governmental agencies, as well as by academic and research organizations.
The protocols and decision criteria associated with the development of the 303(d) list are reviewed by the Interagency TMDL Workgroup made up of staff from MDE, DNR, the Departments of Agriculture, Transportation, the Office of Planning, and University of Maryland.
Once the waters to be included on the 303(d) list have been identified, priority categories (High, Medium and Low) are assigned to each water quality limited segment.
These priority rankings, which take into account the severity of the pollution and uses to be made of the waters, are used for purposes of resource allocation and scheduling.
However, due to variable data needs and analytical complexity, priority may not translate directly to order of TMDL completion.
Maryland's Section 303(d) list is provided on MDE's Internet site at http://www.mde.state.md.us.
The following is a list of steps in the development of a TMDL:
· List development - (monitoring, collection and assessment of other "readily-available" information to support listing, prioritize listing, review public comments, submission of 303(d) list to EPA),
· Characterization of the water quality-limited segments (WQLSs) - (review "readily available" information and other supporting documentation, interview field staff familiar with the segment and make determination on the need for additional field sampling),
· Source characterization - (collect readily available information, develop field support materials, conduct field surveys to validate/enhance other information, characterize sources of impairment),
· Data collection and processing for TMDL computation - (assemble and process information from characterization step, collect and process information for load estimation and water quality modeling),
· TMDL computation and load allocation - (determine assimilative capacity of WQLS, estimate current delivered loads by point and nonpoint source types, allocate allowable loads between point and nonpoint sources accounting for a margin of safety and future allocations where appropriate),
· Document the TMDL - (write and refine the report based on internal reviews),
· TMDL review - (Interagency TMDL Workgroup members, and a period for public review and comment as announced through newspaper publication and posting on MDE's Internet site at http://www.mde.state.md.us), and
· Submit TMDL to EPA and respond to their comments.
At present, the TMDL process includes biennial reporting of Section 303(d) listing of water quality-limited waters.
A waterbody may be listed more than once for each pollutant causing an impairment.
The TMDL document must include the loading calculation (point source + nonpoint source + margin of safety), and describe the programs that will manage the pollution sources contributing to the impairment.
The existing Tributary Strategy tracking framework will provide a solid foundation for tracking nutrient TMDL implementation.
In addition, MDE is evaluating the role local governments can play in tracking TMDL implementation.
Local government activities (e.g., comprehensive planning, landuse zoning, etc.) may eventually play a role in the long-term maintenance of TMDL limits.
TMDL limits and implementation planning will be reflected in the Watershed Restoration Action Strategies.
Unified Watershed Assessment
The Clean Water Action Plan was unveiled by President Clinton in February 1998.
The Plan proposed a new collaborative effort by state, federal, and local governments, the private sector, and the public to restore those watersheds not meeting clean water and other natural resources goals and to sustain the healthy conditions in watersheds that currently meets these goals.
The Clean Water Action Plan address all aspects of watershed conditions.
The key step in this national effort are the development of: 1) a Unified Watershed Assessment, 2) Watershed Restoration Priorities and 3) Watershed Restoration Action Strategies.
A detailed description of all of these processes is contained in Chapter 1.
This chapter will describe how Maryland developed its Unified Watershed Assessment.
The purpose of the Unified Watershed Assessment is to assess the condition of Maryland's watersheds and, based on watershed condition, classify the watersheds into four categories: Category I watersheds are not meeting clean water and other natural resource goals and are in need of restoration; Category 2 watersheds are currently meeting clean water and natural resource goals, but need preventive actions to sustain water quality and aquatic resources; Category 3 contains pristine or sensitive watersheds that need an extra level of protection; and Category 4 watershed has insufficient data to determine their status.
The Unified Watershed Assessment (UWA) provided the foundation for setting watershed restoration, protection, and preservation priorities.
Accordingly, the UWA considered all components of the watershed related to aquatic systems including biological, physical, and chemical characteristics and related landscape factors.
Watershed Scale
States were able to make assessments for watersheds at multiple scales under the Clean WaterAction Plan, but the hydrologic unit "basins" established by the U.S. Geological Survey served as the common scale for unified watershed assessments at the national level.
There are portions of 20 of these federal basins in Maryland (Figure 2.4), with an average area in Maryland of about 500 square miles (for comparison, the average area of a Maryland county is about 400 square miles).
The condition of the Maryland portion of these federal basins were determined either directly or as a result of aggregation of assessments of smaller watersheds.
Maryland chose the latter approach because information at smaller watershed scales is invaluable when preparing Watershed Restoration Action Strategies.
Figure 2.4 Map of the 20 Federal 8-digit HUC watershed basins that are either located or partially located in the State of Maryland
Maryland map showing 20 Federal 8-digit HUC Watershed Basins
Maryland has identified smaller watersheds at scales that, for the most part, fall inside or "nest" within the larger federal basins.
For Maryland's Unified Watershed Assessment report, the State focused on smaller watersheds.
There are 138 of these State-defined "8-digit" watersheds in Maryland, each with an average area of about 75 square miles.
A map of Maryland's 138 8-digit watershed is located on page 52.
Overall Goals Two overarching goals were considered in the assessment of Maryland watersheds: clean water goals and other natural resource goals.
Clean water goals maintain that Maryland watersheds should meet water quality standards, including numerical criteria as well as narrative standards and designated uses while other natural resource goals maintain that watersheds should achieve healthy conditions as indicated by natural resource indicators related to the condition of the water itself (e.g. water chemistry), aquatic living resources and physical habitat, as well as landscape factors (e.g. buffered streams and wetland restoration).
Clean Water Goals
To evaluate clean water goals, the assessment generally examined single factors that result in, or cause, a violation of the numeric/narrative water quality standards described in the Code of Maryland Regulations (§§26.08.02).
The State's biennial water quality report, required by Section 305(b) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments, is a primary source of information about water quality impairments in the State.
Maryland's UWA provided a summary of violations of State water quality standards as well as information about defined use impairments such as shellfish harvesting closures, swimming and water contact bans, and fish consumption advisories.
Much of the summary data about impaired waters and violations of State water quality standards in the 305(b) report were used to develop the list of impaired waters required under Section 303(d) of the Act.
The final, EPA-approved listing of impaired waters on the State's 303(d) list through 1998 was incorporated in Maryland's Unified Watershed Assessment report.
Other Natural Resource Goals
To evaluate other natural resource goals, multiple and cumulative impacts that prevent watersheds from achieving healthy watershed conditions were assessed using selected natural resource indicators.
These indicators relate to the condition of water chemistry, aquatic living resources, physical habitat and landscape.
The assessment used existing data from state monitoring and assessment programs.
These constitute the core data for the Unified Watershed Assessment.
In addition, supplemental information was solicited from several hundred individuals and organizations, such as local governments and community watershed associations, encouraging them to submit available water quality and aquatic resource information.
Watershed Assessment Methods
Assessing the condition of the State's water quality and natural resources was a difficult undertaking.
Not only are these natural conditions complex, but various human activities and impacts add to the level of complexity.
Maryland presented the condition of the state's watersheds by developing understandable measures or indicators that provided information about these resources.
Maryland used this information to determine the status of the resources, determine information about the pressures that degrade environmental quality and evaluate programs or changes in behavior designed to improve the environment.
Over time, indicators will help the state measure progress towards meeting our goals.
Watershed profiles which included a listing of these natural resource indicators with their respective rankings were developed for every sub-watershed in Maryland.
Determination of Watershed Categories
Category I Watersheds
Both the violation of water quality standards, as reflected by inclusion on the 303(d) List, as well as poor values for other natural resource indicators, were used as criteria for determining whether a watershed was classified as a Category 1 watershed "in need of restoration".
Many data sets that could be used as natural resource indicators were examined.
A minimal number of indicators were selected that would provide the most accurate, non-duplicative, and comprehensive assessment of watershed condition.
These indicators were grouped into several major "clusters" that focused on the key areas of watershed condition:
Water Chemistry Monitored data for nutrients (total nitrogen, total phosphorus), suspended sediments, and indicators of over-enrichment (chlorophyll a, summer bottom dissolved oxygen and Secchidepth) Modeled nutrient loadings (total nitrogen and total phosphorus)
Aquatic Living Resources Submerged aquatic vegetation coverage and habitat requirements Indices of the health of tidal and non-tidal fish and benthic communities
Instream physical habitat
Landscape Impervious surface Population density Historic wetland loss Unbuffered streams Soil erodibility
Detailed information about these indicators were made available as "metadata" on the State's Clean Water Action Plan Internet site (www.dnr.state.md.us/cwap/metadata.pdf).
A set of "watershed profiles" for each of the State watersheds that summarizes these indicators was included in a separate report titled Maryland Watershed Profiles, MD Dept.
Natural Resources, 1998.
Category II Watersheds
To identify watersheds needing preventative actions to sustain water quality and aquatic life, the application of Category 1 indicators was modified to identify these watersheds.
As such, any watershed that is not on the 303(d) List and meets all or all but one of the available Category 1 benchmarks for the indicators listed below were placed in Category II.
Water quality Monitored Nutrient Concentrations: eutrophication Monitored Nutrient Concentrations: habitat Modeled Nitrogen and Phosphorus Loading Rate
Aquatic Living Resources SAV Abundance SAV Habitat Index Tidal Benthic Index of Biotic Integrity Tidal Fish Index of Biotic Integrity Anadromous Fish Index Non-Tidal Benthic Index of Biotic Integrity Non-Tidal Fish Index of Biotic Integrity Non-Tidal Instream Habitat Index
Landscape Parameters Percent Impervious Surface Population Density Historic Wetland Loss Density Percent Unbuffered Streams Soil Erodibility
Clean Water Requirements 303d List
Category III Watersheds
Indicators selected to identify watersheds needing restoration (Category 1) are not necessarily the same indicators that might be used to identify pristine or high quality (Category 3) watersheds that might need additional levels of protection.
Many data sets were examined that would provide an accurate, unique and comprehensive assessment of desired, high quality water quality, natural resource or landscape conditions.
Some of the selected Category 3 living resources indicators for pristine watersheds were the same as Category 1 indicators for watersheds needing restoration while others were not.
Other indicators appeared useful only in assessing Category 3 watersheds.
These indicators were clustered under key living resource and landscape issues and others address special water use needs (i.e., drinking water and fish hatchery water supply).
Any watershed with two or more indicators meeting their criteria (benchmark) was placed in Category 3.
Aquatic Living Resources Tidal Benthic Index of Biotic Integrity Non-Tidal Instream Habitat Index Non-Tidal Fish Index of Biotic Integrity Imperiled Aquatic Species Indicator Migratory Fish Spawning Area Anadromous Fish Index Wetland-Dependent Species Trout Spawning Area
Landscape Parameters %Headwater Streams in Interior Forest %Watershed Forested Wildland Acres
Special Water Quality Fish Hatchery Water Supply Number of Drinking Water Intakes Category IV Watersheds
The federal Clean Water Action Plan created another classification for watershed that do not have enough data to classify the watershed into Categories 1, 2 or 3; these are Category 4 - Insufficient Data.
Although the data available for different watersheds varies, the state determined that there was sufficient data to classify all state watersheds as Category 1, 2 or 3.
Assessment
The federal Clean Water Action Plan has stimulated a comprehensive statewide assessment of Maryland's watersheds including a diverse set of factors addressing all aspects of watershed conditions.
This assessment has involved a broad spectrum of participants from local, state and federal agencies and representatives of many private organizations.
The potential benefits of this approach for Maryland's watersheds are significant.
The results of this UWA process will ultimately provide a comprehensive framework which other programs can utilize to conduct coordinated activities on individual watershed issues.
These benefits will only increase with the further evolution of the Clean Water Action Plan's Watershed Approach.
Maryland's Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement Indicators
Environmental or public health indicators describe, analyze, and present scientifically-based information on environmental and public health trends, conditions, and their significance.
Indicators can simplify complex phenomenon so that a reader may more easily understand what is happening in the environment.
The use of environmental indicators to identify trends and conditions and assess their significance requires a strong commitment to long-term monitoring by local, state, and federal agencies such as the programs discussed above in this chapter.
Such monitoring includes water quality and water quantity monitoring, aquatic and terrestrial biological species and communities, and atmospheric parameters.
Not only is monitoring vital to describing trends and conditions, but also in describing and ranking existing and emerging problems, and in evaluating program effectiveness.
Much of the monitoring data described in this chapter was used in the development of Maryland's Environmental Performance Partnership Agreement's environmental and public health indicators.
The purpose of Performance Partnership Agreement is to provide for the development of a long-term, results-based management plan that will improve the effectiveness of Maryland's environmental programs and strengthen the relationship between the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR), and the U.S.Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
A detailed discussion of the Agreement process is located in Chapter 1.
This section will describe in detail Maryland's Environmental performance Partnership Agreement (EnPA) environmental indicators.
For Maryland, the broad programmatic goals for the protection of public health and the natural environment are defined by: * Federal statutes, such as the Clean Water Act, Clean Air Act, Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Superfund, Endangered Species Act, Coastal Zone Management Act, and Food Security Act;
* State statutes, such as the Critical Area Act; Non-tidal Wetlands Protection Act; Lead Poisoning Prevention Act; Maryland Economic Growth, Resource Protection, and Planning Act; or the many sections of both the Environment and Natural Resources Article; and * Executive orders, executive policies, such as those ensuring Smart Growth, or directives from the Chesapeake Bay Executive Council.
The state is committed to achieving these goals through environmental protection, resource management, and public health protection programs.
Using its strategic planning process, the state evaluated its progress in meeting the goals established under this set of mandates.
The first step in this strategic planning process was the characterization of Maryland's environmental conditions using public and ecosystem health indicators related to the established goals.
In February 1997, MDE and DNR, with the cooperation of the Maryland Department of Agriculture and Office of Planning, produced "Maryland's Environmental Indicators - A Discussion Draft Report."
The report provided a concise characterization or snapshot in time, of Maryland's environmental and key public health protection parameters.
The report presented over 40 different public health and ecosystem protection indicators on goals related to air and water quality, waste disposal and recycling efforts, lead poisoning prevention, Chesapeake Bay protection and restoration activities, wildlife and their habitat, landscape modification and smart growth, among many others.
For the FY2000 EnPA Agreement, the indicators report was reviewed and revised to include over 50 new indicators of environmental and public health.
Traditionally, government programmatic measures have focused on measuring and reporting activities such as issuing permits, inspecting industrial facilities, or counting enf tracking personnel activity, their usefulness as measures of true environmental performance is limited.
Environmental performance indicators more accurately portray the environmental and public health conditions in Maryland.
Environmental indicators describe and analyze scientifically-based information on environmental trends, conditions, and their significance.
Indicators can simplify complex phenomena to allow a better understanding of changes in the environment.
Use of environmental indicators to identify trends and conditions and assess their significance requires a strong commitment to long-term monitoring by local, state, and federal agencies.
Such monitoring includes water quality and water quantity, aquatic and terrestrial population counts and community evaluation, and atmospheric parameters.
Monitoring is vital not only in describing trends and conditions, but also in describing and ranking existing and emerging problems, and in evaluating program effectiveness.
Along with monitoring, the state must maintain accurate data bases and routinely evaluate the data to guide environmental management efforts and establish status and trends.
Maryland has developed over 50 indicators that fall into three broad categories: public health, ecosystem health, and interface with the public.
These indicators provide a snapshot of the status of critical environmental and public health issues that Maryland faces today, however it is not possible to include indicators for every environmental or health issue.
The essence of some important environmental or public health issues cannot be easily captured by an indicator.
Information may simply be unavailable in some cases.
The indicators do relay important information about the environmental and public health protection issues facing the people of Maryland.
These indicators also provide information of interest to both the government and the public.
They will continue to be revised and updated in response to public input and stakeholder comments and with improved scientific analysis and further environmental monitoring.
Public Health Indicators
The following section list Maryland's public health indicators.
Most of these indicators first were presented in the 1997 report.
In the public health area, researchers are challenged to demonstrate casual relationships between exposure to adverse environmental conditions and human health effects.
While it is difficult to measure directly what changes in public health conditions result from environmental improvements or causes, it is reasonable to use reductions in emissions or ambient concentrations of pollutants to adversely affect human health as indicators of improvements in conditions affecting public health.
The following list of indicators address public health protection issues related to ensuring that the air is safe to breathe, minimizing exposure to a variety of hazardous material, protecting public drinking water, and assuring that fish and shellfish are safe to eat:
Air Quality Population Living in Areas Meeting Air Quality Standards Common Air Pollutant Ozone Levels above 1-hour Outdoor Air Quality Standard Ozone Levels Exceeding 8-hour Outdoor Air Quality Standard Change in Emissions by Source Category Vehicle Miles Traveled/population and Nox Public Transportation Use
Hazardous Materials Exposure Hazardous Waste Generated per Year Reported Exceedences of Lead Poisoning Standard Toxic Releases
Drinking Water Safety Public Water Systems in Compliance Surface Water Supply Systems with Source Protection Programs Groundwater Systems with Wellhead Protection Programs Municipal Waste Landfills in Compliance with Groundwater Standards Oil-contaminated Sites
Water Quality (Fish and Shellfish Harvesting) Shellfish Harvesting Waters Maryland Waters Safe for Harvesting Finfish
Ecosystem Health Indicators
Maryland has substantial experience in evaluating the conditions of the State's biological resources.
Through initiatives such as the multi-agency Chesapeake Bay Program and Maryland's Power Plant Research Program, state and federal agencies have accumulated a wealth of data for monitoring trends in resource conditions and for developing management recommendations based on this abundance of scientifically credible data.
The ecosystem health indicators listed below were compiled and assembled according to conventional science and the best available data at the time of the indicator development.
The data are legitimate and meaningful.
However, our understanding of ecosystem health is improving and as it does, the state needs to be prepared to develop the new information bases and tools that will enable us to accurately assess conditions.
EnPA establishes a framework for refinement of existing and the further development of new indicators.
In the long term, these new indicators are at least as important, if not more so, than the indicators for which we have collected data in the past.
It is imperative for ecosystem recovery and sustainability that we pursue their development.
The environmental indicators include:
Water Quality - Ecosystem Health Designated Use of Surface Waters Dissolved Oxygen and Water Quality Impairments Nutrient Inputs to Mainstem and Tributary Waters Cropland Areas under Nutrient Management Plans Phosphorus Concentrations in Maryland's Chesapeake Bay Nitrogen Concentrations in Maryland's Chesapeake Bay Atmospheric Nitrogen Loadings Cropland Areas under Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
Tidal Aquatic Systems Submerged Aquatic Vegetation Habitat Quality Acres of Submerged Aquatic Vegetation Benthic Index of Biotic Integrity - Chesapeake Bay Fish Index of Biotic Integrity - Estuarine Striped Bass Juvenile Index American Shad Population Blue Crab Population Seed Oyster Production
Non-Tidal Aquatic Systems Miles of Stream Degraded by Abandon Mine Drainage Stream Miles Open to Migratory Fish Physical Habitat Index (Non-tidal) Benthic Macroinvertebrate Index of Biotic Integrity (Non-tidal) Fish Index of Biotic Integrity (Non-tidal) Riparian Forest Buffers
Terrestrial System Degradation, Fragmentation, Isolation Maryland Wetland Trends Wetlands Restoration Initiative Acres of Agricultural and Forest Land Protected Lands Septic System Permits/Low Density Residential Development Acres of Abandoned Mine Lands Brownfields/Federal Facilities Approved for Redevelopment Recycling Municipal Solid Waste
Conservation of Biological Diversity Forest Interior Breeding Bird Population Bald Eagle Population Colonial Waterbird Population Trends
Public Interface
The people of Maryland are at the heart of the State's environmental management.
Over the past decade or so, the people have spoken clearly and repeatedly of their desire for protection of natural resources, clean-up of pollution, and a healthy Chesapeake Bay.
These desires find expression in a variety of State laws and regulations covering the range of goals and issues reflected in the public health and ecosystem health indicators.
One core concept in which the state is moving towards in ecosystem-based management is that people are part of the ecosystem - their health and quality of life are affected by environmental conditions and many of their actions affect other ecosystem components.
Part of the job facing environmental mangers at all levels of government is to bring together the social context with the science with which most of them have greater experience and comfort.
A two-way communication system is called for-making environmental information available to the people, and hearing from the people their concerns and issues.
If indicators of public health and ecosystem health are constrained by the level of knowledge and the data available to measure what is happening "out there".
Indicators of social interaction with the environment are even less well developed.
The indicators which follow provide a first cut at measuring the states ability to convey information in a meaningful way, to children as well as adults, and how even-handed the state is being the provider of environmental programs to the people of Maryland.
Public Understanding and Community Support Envirothon Participants Green Schools Teaching Environmental Awareness in Maryland - TEAM DNR
Environmental Justice What is Environmental Justice What is Maryland doing
These indicators provide a snapshot of the status of critical environmental and public health issues that Maryland faces today, however because it is not possible to include indicators for every environmental or health issue, these indicators will continue to be revised and updated in response to public input and stakeholder comments and with improved scientific analysis and further environmental monitoring.
_______________________________________________________________
Return to Table of Contents Return to Nonpoint Source Program Homepage
