The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Hearing on Presidents Fiscal Year 2004 Budgets For The U.S. Coast Guard And The Federal Maritime Commission
__________________________________________________________________
TABLE OF CONTENTS(Click on Section)
PURPOSE
BACKGROUND
WITNESSES __________________________________________________________________
PURPOSE
The purpose of this hearing is to consider the Administrations fiscal year 2004 budget requests for the U.S. Coast Guard and the Federal Maritime Commission.
BACKGROUND
Fiscal Year 2004 Coast Guard Budget Request
The Administration requests $6.7 billion for fiscal year 2004, for Coast Guard activities that are subject to appropriation.
This request is $581 million, or approximately 10 percent, more than the amount appropriated for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 2003.
This request reflects three primary objectives for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 2004: (1) recapitalize Coast Guard legacy assets and infrastructure; (2) build-out homeland security capabilities; and (3) sustain non-homeland security missions near pre-September 11, 2001, levels.
Approximately $538 million is requested for mandatory military personnel entitlement programs, including retirement pay, and enhanced Coast Guard operations.
An additional $60 million is requested for increased costs for capital acquisitions and for training of Coast Guard Reserve forces.
The following table compares the fiscal year 2002 and 2003 Coast Guard appropriations with the fiscal year 2004 Coast Guard budget request (in millions of dollars):
Coast Guard
Account
Fiscal Year
2002
Enacted ,
(A)
Fiscal Year
2003
Enacted ,
(B)
Fiscal Year 2004
Presidents Budget Request
(C)
Fiscal Year
2004
Increase
(C) (B)
Operating
Expenses
$3,778.5
$4,322.1
$4,729.0
$406.9 (9.4%)
Reserve
Training
83.2
86.5
114.0
27.5 (31.8%)
Environmental
Compliance and
Restoration
16.9
17.0
17.0
0 (0%)
Acquisition, Construction, 
702.1
742.1
775.0
32.9 (4.4%)
Research, Development, Testing, and Evaluation
20.2
22.0
22.0
0 (0%)
Alteration of
Bridges
15.5
17.2
0.0
-17.2 (-100%)
Retired Pay
876.3
889.0
1,020.0
131.0 (14.7%)
TOTAL
$
$
$6,677.0
$581.1 (9.5%)
The President has modified the accounting structure and presentation of the fiscal year 2004 Coast Guard budget request.
The Presidents request consolidates six Coast Guard accounts, which previously were requested individually, into two accounts.
The Operating Expenses, Environmental Compliance and Restoration, and Reserve Training accounts are now subsumed under one single Operating Expenses account.
The new Capital Acquisitions account includes funding previously requested in the Acquisition, Construction, and Improvements; Research, Development, Testing, and Evaluation; and Alteration of Bridges accounts.
OPERATING EXPENSES (OE)
The Operating Expenses account provides for the safety of the public and the Coast Guards workforce, with an enhanced emphasis on its maritime homeland security mission.
The budget request for Coast Guard operating expenses in fiscal year 2004 is $4.7 billion, an increase of $407 million, or 9.4 percent, over the fiscal year 2003 appropriated level.
Operating expenses account for over two-thirds of the Coast Guards budget and support the operations of the Coast Guard as it carries out its unique duties as a peacetime operating agency and an armed service.
These funds support Coast Guard search and rescue, port security, aids to navigation, marine safety, marine environmental protection, and law enforcement missions.
This includes funding for 40,275 military and 7,305 civilian personnel.
The Coast Guards operating expense request includes an additional $168 million to improve the Coast Guards search and rescue staffing and training programs, enhance Coast Guard maritime homeland security systems, and increase maritime intelligence capabilities.
The budget request also includes $45 million to continue the operation of other assets acquired in 2003.
The Presidents announced pay raises in fiscal year 2004, a targeted 3.7 percent for Coast Guard military personnel and 2 percent for civilians, would cost the Coast Guard a total of $64.5 million.
In addition, this request increases Coast Guard military personnel by 1,788 and civilians by 188.
RESERVE TRAINING
The Coast Guard provides qualified individuals and a limited number of trained Port Security Units for mobilization in the event of national emergency or disaster.
The reservists maintain readiness through mobilization exercises and duty alongside regular Coast Guard members during routine and emergency operations.
In addition, the Coast Guard Reserve fills critical national security and national defense roles in both Homeland Security and in direct support of the Department of Defense.
The Coast Guard Reserve continues to play a pivotal role in both Operation enduring Freedom and Operation Noble Eagle.
In the immediate wake of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, over 2,500 Coast Guard Reserve personnel were recalled to active duty, and many more have been activated since that time.
Today, approximately 3,500 Coast Guard Reservists are serving on active duty.
The fiscal year 2004 budget request proposes funding of $114 million, an increase of $27.5 million, or 32 percent, for Coast Guard Reserve training to support a growth to 10,000 Coast Guard Reservists, an increase of 1,000.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND RESTORATION
For environmental compliance and restoration, funding of $17 million, the same amount appropriated for fiscal year 2003, has been requested to mitigate environmental problems resulting from the operation of former and current Coast Guard facilities, and to ensure that Coast Guard facilities are in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
A significant portion of program funds will support continued clean up of hazardous waste sites in Kodiak, Alaska; Elizabeth City, North Carolina; and Baltimore, Maryland.
ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION, AND IMPROVEMENTS
The Administration requests $775 million in acquisitions funding for fiscal year 2004, a $33 million, or 4.4 percent, increase over the amount appropriated in fiscal year 2003.
This funding provides for the acquisition, construction, renovation, and improvement of vessels, aircraft, information management resources, shore facilities, and aids to navigation.
This request supports the Coast Guards multi-mission capabilities, providing funding for the Coast Guards Integrated Deepwater System recapitalization project, Rescue 21 project ("maritime 911"), new coastal patrol boats and response boats, and the Coast Guard personnel responsible for the acquisitions program.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TESTING, AND EVALUATION
For research, development, testing and evaluation (RDT
This account funds the development of techniques, methods, research, hardware, systems, and planning to improve the productivity of existing Coast Guard missions.
The RDT
The Coast Guard is also continuing research in the fields of marine environmental protection and response, risk assessment and competence; and human error reduction and fatigue analysis.
ALTERATION OF BRIDGES
The Bridge Alternation program provides the Federal governments share of the costs for altering or removing bridges determined to be obstructions to navigation.
Under the Truman-Hobbs Act of 1940, (33 U.S.C. 511et seq.), the Coast Guard shares, with the bridge owner, the cost of altering railroad and publicly-owned highway bridges which obstruct the free movement of vessel traffic.
The Administration requests no funding for the alteration or removal of obstructive railroad bridges.
RETIRED PAY
The Coast Guards mandatory fiscal year 2004 retired pay liability is approximately $1 billion.
BOATING SAFETY
In 1984, the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 created the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund.
The Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund consists of two accounts, the Sport Fish Restoration Account and the Boat Safety Account.
Annually, up to $70 million of the motorboat fuel taxes paid by recreational boaters are deposited in the Boat Safety Account to fund state boating safety grant programs coordinated by the Coast Guard.
Subtitle D of title VII of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century, P.L. 105-178, is the Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act of 1998.
This legislation amends the Recreational Boating Safety Program, administered by the Coast Guard.
Under these amendments, states receive $59 million without appropriation for boating safety programs.
An additional $13 million may be appropriated from the Coast Guards budget for boating safety programs.
This legislation also provides the Coast Guard with $5 million annually to coordinate and carry out the national recreational boating safety program.
The Administration does not request additional funding above the $64 million permanently appropriated for the boating safety program and Coast Guard administrative expenses.
OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND
Established by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund provides a source of funds, not subject to appropriation, to pay oil spill removal costs and damages, including assessment of natural resources damages, and Federal expenses necessary to administer the Fund.
Each year, the Fund may provide up to $50 million for emergency response costs and pay all valid claims for oil spill damages resulting from oil spills.
The Administrations fiscal year 2004 request from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund is $61.2 million, including $50 million for emergency response costs, $10 million for payment of claims, and $1.2 million for support of the Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery Institute in Cordova, Alaska.
KEY ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH THE COAST GUARDS BUDGET REQUEST
Coast Guards Transition to Department of Homeland Security
On November 25, 2002, the President signed into law the Homeland Security Act of 2002, Public Law 107-296, which creates the new Department of Homeland Security.
Under this legislation, the Coast Guard was transferred to the new Department on March 1, 2003.
Public Law 107-296 requires that the Coast Guard be kept as a distinct agency and that the Commandant of the Coast Guard report directly to the Secretary of Homeland Security.
Functions not related directly to securing the homeland will continue to be allocated to those agencies in which the functions currently reside.
Maritime Homeland Security
The Coast Guard is the lead Federal agency for Maritime Homeland Security.
The Coast Guards mission is to protect the U.S. Maritime Domain and the U.S. Maritime Transportation System and deny their use and exploitation by terrorists as a means for attacks on U.S. territory, population, and critical infrastructure.
The Presidents fiscal year 2004 budget request provides $2.1 billion for the Coast Guards Maritime Homeland Security missions.
The President includes $34 million in operating funds to continue building what the Coast Guard calls maritime domain awareness.
The goal of maritime domain awareness is the timely possession of information and intelligence, and the ability to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance of all vessels, cargo, and people that operate in the maritime domain well before a potential threat enters U.S. maritime borders.
This funding will increase the capabilities of the Coast Guards intelligence program and fully leverage the Coast Guards recent inclusion in the Intelligence Community.
These resources will significantly enhance the Coast Guards ability to receive, fuse, disseminate, and transmit secure and non-secure information both internally and among other agencies.
In an effort to streamline the performance of port vulnerability assessments, the President has redirected $11 million in operating funds and moved this requirement from the Coast Guard to the Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection (IAIP) Directorate within the Department of Homeland Security.
The President has requested $172 million to provide increased capabilities and capacity for the Coast Guard to perform layered maritime security operations.
Included in this funding is $52 million in capital acquisitions funds to buy nine new 87 foot Coastal Patrol Boats to escort vessels, control movement of High Interest Vessels, intercept and board vessels, and perform coastal surveillance.
An additional $12 million in capital acquisitions funds is requested to provide the Coast Guard with new Medium Port Security Response Boats (Response Boat-Medium) which will increase the duration and scope of maritime patrols.
Finally, the Administration has requested $108 million in operating funds to improve the Coast Guards maritime homeland security systems and operations.
The Presidents budget proposal enhances the Coast Guards presence and response capabilities by providing funds to support six deployable Maritime Safety and Security Teams, each consisting of 73 active duty personnel, and 33 Coast Guard reservists with the capability for harbor patrols, establishment of security zones, vessel interdiction, and waterborne incident response within most critical U.S. ports.
This budget request also funds 53 Sea Marshals to conduct armed vessel escorts to preclude commercial vessels from being used by terrorists as weapons; 43 Small Port Security Response Boats (Response Boat-Small) to increase the Coast Guards presence in our ports; the stand-up of Stations in Washington, DC and Boston; and two Port Security Units to support domestic and overseas operations.
Search and Rescue
The Presidents budget places specific emphasis on the Coast Guards search and rescue mission by providing an additional $160 million to enhance the Coast Guards ability to plan and respond to maritime incidents.
Annually, the Coast Guard responds to approximately 40,000 calls for assistance.
This amount includes $20 million to provide an additional 390 search and rescue personnel during fiscal year 2004 to fill critical personnel shortages at Coast Guard field search and rescue units and command centers.
In addition, the President requests $6 million to fund 59 new instructors and other enhancements at the National Motor Lifeboat School and the Boatswainmate A" school.
Also included in the request is $134 million to overhaul the critical National Distress and Response System (discussed below).
Integrated Deepwater System
The Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project is intended to replace or modernize all assets used in the Coast Guards Deepwater missions, which generally occur more than 50 miles offshore.
Coast Guard activities in this zone typically require either extended on-scene presence, long transit distance to reach the operating area, forward deployment of forces, or a combination of these approaches.
The Coast Guard has identified fourteen missions in this zone, including alien migration interdiction operations, drug interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement.
It is critical that the Coast Guard be able to identify and intercept targets of interest as far from U.S. shores as possible.
The Coast Guard began planning for replacing assets in 1996 because Deepwater-capable assets are nearing the end of their service lives, are technologically limited for performing deepwater missions effectively, and are expensive to operate because of relatively high crew requirements.
Instead of proposing a traditional one-for-one asset-replacement program, the Coast Guard hired three industry teams to develop competing proposals for a single, integrated package of ships, aircraft, and associated systems that will optimize performance of deepwater missions while minimizing life-cycle costs.
On June 25, 2002, the Department of Transportation announced the award of a contract valued at $11 billion for a fleet of new ships and aircraft, plus improved command and control systems, to elevate the Coast Guards capability to perform their varied core safety missions and homeland security missions.
In addition, the contract includes another $6 billion for operating and maintaining this new system of assets.
The contract was awarded to Integrated Coast Guard Systems (ICGS), a joint venture established by Lockheed Martin and Northrup Grumman.
Although the Deepwater build-out plan is scheduled to take 20 years, the ICGS contract may extend up to 30 years.
The Administration has requested $500 million in fiscal year 2004 to fund the second year of implementation of the ICGS contract, although this request does not reflect an additional $78 million of inflation since 1998, the base year of the Coast Guards notional funding stream.
The Coast Guards Deepwater build-out plan was based on a 20 year notional funding stream of $500 million (in 1998 dollars) per year going to the prime contractor beginning in fiscal year 2003.
In addition to the annual $500 million acquisition cost there is approximately $25 million (in 1998 dollars) in government program fees required to administer a project of this magnitude on an annual recurring basis.
The Presidents Budget Requests have not adjusted to this indexed funding stream resulting in the project operating below notional funding levels since fiscal year 2003, the first full year of funding.
The Presidents fiscal year 2003 Budget requested $500 million for Deepwater while $478 million was appropriated in the fiscal year 2003 Omnibus Appropriations Act.
The expectation of a reduced funding level prompted the Coast Guard to restructure its fiscal year 2003 Deepwater spending plan, potentially delaying acquisition of two Maritime Patrol Aircraft.
Rescue 21 (National Distress and Response System Modernization Project)
This project will fully modernize the existing VHF-FM National Distress and Response System and provide improved distress alerting and response coordination capability, along with improved command and control for all Coast Guard missions.
The new system will include direction finding, asset tracking, digital selective calling, and multi-channel transmitting and receiving capability.
On September 24, 2002, the Coast Guard awarded a $611 million multi-year contract to General Dynamics Decision Systems to modernize the National Distress and Response System.
The Department of Transportation fiscal year 2002 appropriation requires this project to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2006, and the Coast Guard expects that it will meet this deadline.
The existing National Distress and Response System provides two-way voice communications coverage for the majority of Coast Guard missions in coastal areas and navigable waterways where commercial and recreational traffic exists.
The Coast Guards system monitors the international VHF maritime distress frequency (Channel 16) and acts as the primary command and control network to coordinate Coast Guard search and rescue response activities.
The secondary function of the system is to provide command, control, and communications for Coast Guard missions involving national security, maritime safety, law enforcement, and marine environmental protection.
The national distress and communication capability of the existing communications system, built in the 1970s, is inadequate.
The current system is unable to accommodate the significant growth in maritime commerce and recreational boating.
The Presidents request provides $134 million in acquisitions funds to deploy initial operating capability in Atlantic City and the Eastern Shore.
This request will also support a deployment of low-rate initial production of the system in four regions: Seattle, Port Angeles, St. Petersburg, and Mobile.
Finally, the Coast Guard will use these funds to conduct site surveys of potential tower locations in preparation for the fiscal year 2004 regional deployments.
After successful testing of the initial operating capability regions and achievement of other project milestones, additional regional systems will be deployed from these regions.
By deploying the system from one region to the next adjacent region, the overall number of remote transceiver sites required will be reduced, keeping costs as low as possible.
The Coast Guards priority is to first complete the Continental U.S., then proceed to the Great Lakes, then regions outside of the Continental U.S., and finally the Western Rivers.
FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION BACKGROUND
Fiscal Year 2004 Federal Maritime Commission Budget Request
The Administration requests $18.47 million for the operation of the Federal Maritime Commission for fiscal year 2004.
Approximately $16.70 million was appropriated for FMC operations in fiscal year 2003.
The Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) is an independent agency formed in 1961 following the abolition of the Federal Maritime Board.
The Commission is responsible for enforcing international shipping rules and regulations involving carriers (container ship operators), shippers (companies owning goods to be transported), and transportation facilitators such as freight forwarders, nonvessel operating common carriers, and customs brokers.
The FMC is composed of five commissioners, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The current Chairman of the FMC is the Honorable Steven R. Blust.
The FMC is primarily engaged in administering the Shipping Act of 1984.
However, the FMC also enforces the Foreign Shipping Practices Act and Section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920.
Under these authorities, the FMC protects shippers and carriers from restrictive or unfair practices of foreign governments and foreign-flag carriers.
Under these laws, the FMC has the authority to take action against the offending
carriers, including the imposition of per voyage fees and the prevention of trade with the United States.
The FMC also enforces the laws related to cruise vessel financial responsibility to ensure that cruise vessel operators have sufficient resources to pay judgments to passengers for personal injury or death or for nonperformance of a voyage.
Shipping Act of 1984
The major responsibility of the Federal Maritime Commission is to enforce the provisions of the Shipping Act of 1984, the Act that establishes the system of economic regulation of the international waterborne commerce of the United States.
Most goods move in international commerce either as bulk commodities or as dry cargo.
Bulk cargoes, such as oil, coal, or bulk grains are normally shipped as full shiploads chartered expressly for the purpose of carrying the cargo to a given location at a given time.
Most other goods, including all manufactured goods and finished products, are shipped by "liner" service.
Liner shipping operates on a given route and schedule, by taking partial shiploads from many different cargo owners.
Ships in liner service hold out their services as "common carriers," requiring them to charge a given rate for carrying the same cargo to the same destination.
Traditionally, these international liner shipping companies (carriers), have organized into small groups in a given trade route (conferences) to set rates, and make other agreements related to ocean transportation in a given trade.
Before the Shipping Act of 1984 was enacted, international ocean shipping was regulated under the Shipping Act of 1916.
The 1916 Act required "open" conferences and limited the antitrust immunity available to conferences for collective actions such as rate-setting.
The 1916 Act required conferences to file agreements with the FMC, which were reviewed and approved for antitrust purposes under a "public interest" test.
The Act also contained prohibited practices, such as deferred rebates and retaliatory or discriminatory rates or services.
Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998
Public Law 105-258, the Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998 (the Reform Act), amends the Shipping Act of 1984 and other related U.S. shipping laws to encourage competition in international ocean shipping and growth in Unites States exports.
The most important provisions of the Reform Act provide American businesses with the freedom to keep their ocean transportation contract prices confidential.
The Reform Act is a major step forward in the process of deregulating international ocean shipping.
The Reform Act maintains antitrust immunity for ocean carrier conferences, requires private tariff publication and enforcement of tariffs by the Federal Maritime Commission, and authorizes confidential transportation rates.
The Reform Act eliminates the requirement for ocean common carriers to file tariffs with the FMC.
Instead, carriers must make their tariffs publicly available by means of an electronic filing system.
The Reform Act reduces the number of days before which a member of an ocean shipping conference is required to give notice to conference members of an independent action on a rate or service item from ten to five days.
The Reform Act also forbids ocean conferences from prohibiting or restricting conference members from negotiating service contracts, requiring conference members to disclose negotiations on service contracts, and adopting mandatory rules or requirements affecting the rights of conference members to negotiate and enter into service contracts.
Finally, the Reform Act clarifies section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act of 1920, to prohibit unfair pricing of liner services by foreign carriers and further tightens the oversight of controlled carrier tariffs.
WITNESSES PANEL I Admiral Thomas H. Collins Commandant United States Coast Guard Master Chief Franklin A. Welch Master Chief Petty Officer United States Coast Guard PANEL II The Honorable Steven R. Blust Chairman Federal Maritime Commission Accompanied by: Amy W. Larson, Acting General Counsel and Bruce A. Dombrowski, Executive Director
