International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2002* October Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
China Busts Biggest Human-Smuggling Racket in Half-a-Century Agence France Presse, Dateline Beijing, October 31, 2002 and China To Try Gang Accused of Smuggling 730 People to Japan Deutsche Presse-Agentur, Dateline Beijing, October 31, 2002 Chinese authorities have charged 42 people of smuggling some 730 Chinese into Japan.
From 1998 to 2002, this human-smuggling gang shipped the illegal immigrants -- most of whom were from southern Fujian province -- through sea ports in Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Liaoning and the municipalities of Shanghai and Tianjin.
Among those arrested are shipping company personnel who cooperated with the "snakeheads" by providing ships under the guise the human smugglers were legitimate leasing and business partners.
The alleged ringleader Chen Wenshu, 38, was also arrested.
The case is considered to be the biggest for Chinese law enforcement in the last 50 years.
Japanese authorities first discovered the smuggling ring in November 2000, when 17 Chinese stowaways were found aboard a Chinese ship at a Japanese port.
U.N. Number of World's Migrants Reaches 175 Million; Migration Population Has Doubled in Twenty-Five Years M2 Presswire, October 29, 2002 In its latest study, the United Nations Population Division estimates that some 175 million people currently reside in a country other than where they were born -- double the number since 1975.
Sixty percent of the world's migrants live in developed regions.
Most live in Europe (56 million) followed by Asia (50 million) and North America (41 million).
See the United Nations Population Division web site for more information.
Barbarians from the North By Joe Cochrane and Adam Piore, with Peter Janssen in Jakarta, Marites Vitug in Manila and Brian Calvert and Khieu Kola in Phnom Penh, Newsweek, October 28, 2002 Culture clash is creating tensions between newly arrived Chinese and established Chinese living in Asia-Pacific nations, according to this report.
A number of the newcomers are illegal immigrants who buy package tours to places like the Philippines, Cambodia, Burma, Vietnam and Thailand and never return to China.
Others have fueled a lucrative business in human smuggling.
Those smuggled often turn to prostitution or other illegal labor to pay back their smugglers while supporting themselves.
"It's fed a boom in Southeast Asian organized crime," this article says.
In the Philippines, 70 percent of some 300 illegal immigrants arrested in the past three years for narcotics dealing have been Chinese nationals.
Established Chinese fear the newcomers will create hostilities in their adopted countries that will eventually endanger them.
Teresita Ang See, a leader in the Philippines' Chinese community, is quoted as saying: "They (the newcomer and illegal immigrant Chinese) resent us for separating ourselves from them.
We resent them, too, because of their illegal activities.
Our sense of belonging is already to the Philippines compared to these newcomers, whose loyalties are still to China."
Death Eligible Crimes The Associated Press, October 27, 2002 Using Bureau of Justice Statistics, this article lists 27 crimes eligible for the U.S. federal death penalty.
Among them are murder related to the smuggling of illegal immigrants; murder with the intent of preventing testimony by a witness, victim, or informant; murder involved in a racketeering offense; and murder committed during an offense against maritime navigation.
Disputes Over Pay Costing Illegal Workers By Dawn House, The Salt Lake Tribune, October 27, 2002 Some U.S. employers are taking advantage of greater post-9/11 security measures by threatening to report their undocumented immigrant employees to the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) if they complain of pay disparities.
The Mexican consulate in Salt Lake City, Utah, receives about eight calls a day from undocumented workers who complain of getting pay cuts or no pay at all when they complete jobs.
Mexican Consul Martin Torres is quoted as saying: "It's disheartening that vulnerable people are being exploited.
We have a close relationship with the INS so I can say that the agency will not respond to those types of calls.
We are also working with the U.S. Labor Department to report this type of illegal activity."
See information regarding the U.S. Department of Justice Worker Exploitation Task Force.
Human Smugglers Are Seen as Needed Service By Mark Siebert and Brianna Blake, Des Moines Register, October 26, 2002 Although human smugglers are criminals, their clients regard them as "a necessary evil," this article says.
Human smugglers can be divided into two basic groups: friends or relatives and organized smuggling rings.
Speaking of the organized smuggling rings, Ed Leahy, of the Immigrant Rights Network of Iowa and Nebraska, is quoted as saying: "It's not a tour-guide type of relationship where one person takes you to your final destination.
It's often a system of smugglers, and that's where the intense competition and abuse comes into play."
Fernando Melendez, chief Border Patrol agent in El Paso, Texas, says smugglers lead their clients into all sorts of dangerous situations.
Melendez is quoted as saying: "It's not uncommon to be standing in the middle of the street in El Paso and see a manhole pop open and 12 or 13 people, including women and children, come out."
Presidents Bush, Fox Discuss Migration, North Korea, Iraq White House transcript, Los Cabos, Mexico, October 26, 2002 President Bush says he and Mexican President Vicente Fox seek to deal with the issue of Mexicans who migrate to the United States in search of work "in a way that recognizes reality, and in a way that treats the Mexican citizens who are in the United States with respect."
In a joint photo opportunity with Fox in Los Cabos, Mexico October 26, Bush said the long-term solution for the migration issue is to find a way to encourage commerce "on both sides of the border, so people can find jobs here in Mexico, for starters."
At the same time, he said, "we've got to recognize that wage differentials are going to cause people to want to come to the United States."
107 Indicted in Upstate Paid Marriage Ring Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Columbia, South Carolina, October 23, 2002 A federal grand jury has indicted 107 men and women who were part of a scam marriage scheme.
Forty-five women have pleaded guilty to accepting between $1,000 to $6,000 to marry illegal immigrants they had never before met so that the illegals could get green cards and stay in the United States.
The couples would meet at the courthouse, get married in front of a probate judge, then leave, never to see each other again.
Police Investigate Killings of Illegal Immigrants in Arizona Desert By Nick Madigan, The New York Times, Dateline Red Rock, Arizona, October 23, 2002 Law enforcement officials in Pinal County are trying to learn if the shooting deaths of two illegal immigrants and the disappearance of nine others was the work of armed vigilantes or rival human smugglers.
An illegal immigrant who managed to escape the attack told authorities the group of illegal immigrants was waiting to be picked up by smugglers when two men wearing camouflage fatigues appeared and fired at them with an automatic rifle and pistol.
Migrants-rights advocates say the killings are part of a vigilante terror campaign to stop the flow of illegal aliens coming across the U.S.-Mexico border; members of the self-professed "border guardian" groups deny any involvement with this incident.
Farther north in Maricopa County, law enforcement authorities are investigating the deaths of eight illegal immigrants whose bodies were found from June to September in the desert west of Phoenix.
Madigan writes: "The men were gagged and handcuffed or bound with duct tape and elastic bands.
Seven had been shot in the back of the head; the eighth was stabbed.
"Investigators were looking into the possibility that smugglers had killed them for their money, or that they were involved in drug trafficking.
Lt. J.J. Tuttle, a sheriff's department spokesman, said hate groups or vigilantes might also be to blame."
Police Detain 47 Refugees from Asia and Polish Guides CTK (Ceska Tiskova Kancelar) Business News, Dateline Ostrava, North Moravia, October 21, 2002 North Moravian police apprehended 47 illegal immigrants from Vietnam and China and their four Polish smugglers who crossed the Czech-Polish border in an attempt to reach Germany.
The smugglers could face up to eight years in prison under Czech law; the illegal immigrants were expelled and returned to Poland.
The number of illegal immigrants crossing the Czech border is increasing rapidly.
In 2001, north Moravian police caught 1,900 illegal border crossers, 700 more than the year before.
This year 1,300 illegal border crossers have been caught so far; most are guided by well-organized people-smuggling groups, according to this report.
Lawyer Sentenced for Fraud Scheme Associated Press, Dateline Alexandria, Virginia, October 21, 2002 Ronald Bogardus, an Arlington lawyer, was sentenced to eight years in prison for a fraud scheme that involved thousands of illegal immigrants.
Bogardus and his partner Samuel Kooritzky, charged illegal immigrants between $8,000 and $30,000 for fraudulent applications that would allow them to get jobs in the United States.
See Virginia Men Charged in Visa Scheme: 2,700 Fake Papers Filed, U.S.
Says
Two Border Crossers Shot Dead in Rural Arizona Cattle Pond; Nine Others Missing Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, October 18, 2002 Gunmen suspected of being human smugglers opened fire on a dozen illegal immigrants; two were killed, one escaped, and the others appeared to have been kidnapped by their assailants.
The dead were found at a remote cattle pond about 35 miles northwest of Tucson that is often used as a congregation point for illegal immigrants entering the United States.
This report also notes: "Earlier this week, workers opening a train car in Iowa found the decomposed bodies of 11 people believed to have been illegal immigrants smuggled into the country in June.
The state medical examiner said the victims died of extreme heat and dehydration.
"On Thursday (Oct. 17), Texas troopers discovered 25 other illegal immigrants, including children, in a locked tractor-trailer that was stopped for speeding.
They lacked food and water but appeared to be in good health."
Outgoing Commissioner Assesses INS Work By Suzanne Gamboa, Associated Press, Dateline Washington, D.C., October 17, 2002 James Ziglar, the outgoing commissioner of the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS), says the agency has made progress with post-9/11 security measures.
The INS, he said, has a rapidly expanding mission which is outstripping its available technological and personnel resources.
INS currently employs 2,000 investigators, 5,000 inspectors, some 10,000 Border Patrol agents, and 3,000 adjudicators who inspect 550 million people every year and arrested 1.2 million undocumented immigrants last year.
Ziglar supports INS becoming a part of the proposed Homeland Security Department, saying it may be the best way for the agency to meet its goals.
Ziglar made his remarks in a speech delivered September 17 to the Cato Institute, a libertarian Washington think tank.
The Trail That Leads to Misery and Death Liverpool Echo, October 16, 2002 The United Kingdom is seeing an upswing in Chinese illegal immigrants.
The Chinese, mostly from Fujian province, cross through Russia, Hungary and the Czech Republic before entering Western Europe.
"There have been numerous reports of people being beaten, and even murdered, en route," this report says.
The illegal immigrants meet at prearranged check-points in France, where they can be held for weeks by gangsters in abysmal conditions.
They reach the UK via ferry, hidden in lorries containing anything from fruit to industrial equipment.
In the most serious incident, 58 illegal immigrants died of heat and lack of air in a lorry in Dover.
American Charged With Smuggling Chinese Nationals Associated Press, Dateline Syracuse, New York, October 14, 2002 An American man was charged with attempting to smuggle 15 Chinese illegal immigrants across the St. Lawrence River from Canada to the United States via a rented boathouse.
The illegal immigrants, all from Fujian province, included seven children.
Except for three women who must return to court to face deportation hearings, all are being held in federal detention facilities.
Police Dismantle Immigrant Smuggling Ring Allegedly Led by Chinese in Colombia Associated Press, Dateline Bogota, Colombia, October 13, 2002 Colombian police have arrested five Chinese citizens and one Colombian man on charges that they operated a crime ring that smuggled illegal immigrants into the United States.
Seven Chinese illegal immigrants were also detained.
The ring leaders allegedly charged the immigrants between $4,200 and $17,500, which paid for transportation, lodging, food and false documents.
The illegal immigrants were routed through cities such as Moscow, Madrid, and Bogota before reaching the United States.
ASEAN, China To Enhance Cooperation on Transnational Issues Kyodo News, October 12, 2002 The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and China agreed to intensify cooperation to fight transnational security threats such as terrorism, people smuggling, illegal drugs, sea piracy, arms smuggling, money laundering, international economic crime and cybercrime.
In a joint declaration issued October 12, both sides said they would strengthen information and personnel exchanges and training.
Illegals Using Children To Fight for Abode in France By Mark O'Neill, Dateline Beijing, South China Morning Post, October 11, 2002 An increasing number of Chinese living illegally in France are attempting to use their children to obtain legal status, this report says.
The children are coached by their parents to present themselves at a police station and demand political asylum.
If the child is granted asylum, the rest of the family will then apply for legal status.
There are an estimated 90,000 Chinese living illegally in France; 80,000 of them from Zhejiang province, most from the cities of Wenzhou and Qingtian.
Most reach France via the former Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, Italy and other European Union countries.
15 Arrested After Raids on People-Smuggling Ring -- Operation Got South Asian Immigrants to Canada, Then U.S.
By John Deverell, The Toronto Star, October 8, 2002 The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) in Toronto, Hamilton and Windsor have apprehended 15 suspected members of a large-scale people-smuggling ring that charged South Asians up to $40,000 to bring them into Canada and the United States.
Deverell writes: The RCMP says the illegal migrants came to Canada through airports in Vancouver, Toronto and Montreal using forged passports, often travelling under the cover of large tour groups.
"They were staged in safe houses, motels or hotels in the Toronto area, and then about 80 percent went on to the U.S. hidden in the trunks of cars, the back of trucks or trailers.
Some crossed the border at Niagara Falls or Windsor in vehicles, others in boats over the Niagara or St. Clair rivers."
Corrections Says Imprisoned Illegal Immigrants Cost Millions Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Salt Lake City, October 8, 2002 Corrections officials in Utah say increasing amounts of state funds are going to detain illegal immigrants.
According to this report, the Utah State Prison spent $5.7 million in 2001 to house 237 people who entered the United States illegally and then committed felonies.
So far for 2002, 164 criminal illegal immigrants have been prosecuted in Utah for entering the United States illegally for a second time and committing new felony offenses.
At Journey's End, a Dark River, Perhaps a New Life By Sonia Nazario, Los Angeles Times, October 7, 2002 When children of illegal immigrants finally rejoin their parents in the United States, the end of a long separation is not always a happy one, according to this report.
"The children show resentment because they were left behind," Nazario writes.
"They complain that their mothers work too hard to give them the attention they have been missing....
"Some are surprised to discover entire new families in the United States -- a stepfather, stepbrothers and stepsister...."
Their hard-working mothers, on the other hand, think their children are ungrateful.
Nazario writes: "In time, mothers and children discover they hardly know each other."
NOTE:This story is part of a series that tracks the journeys of illegal immigrants from Central America.
See Enrique's Journey on The Los Angeles Times website Chinese illegal immigrant families share the same problems.
See Back in the United States, Meeting the Parents: Immigrants' Children Are American Born, Chinese Raised, and Confused, by Yilu Zhao, The New York Times, March 19, 2002
In the Shadows of the American Dream By Lornet Turnbull, The Columbus Dispatch (Ohio), October 6, 2002 Most illegal immigrants in the United States try to remain inconspicuous, but their precarious circumstances leave them vulnerable to extreme exploitation, this report says.
Oscar Budde, a lawyer and Argentine native who works with immigrants in Columbus, Ohio, is quoted as saying: "What's very difficult to stomach is that sometimes some of that exploitation can come from within the community itself."
Turnbull writes: "The American dream, Mario explained, is realized in three stages: crossing the border safely, considering the number who die trying to get here; helping relatives back home; and settling into a rewarding life in the United States.
"'That's truly the first glimpse of the American dream,' Mario said.
'And then someone comes up to you and asks, Where are your papers?'" "'That's the moment you reflect on whether the American dream is really within your grasp.'"
S.W. Pacific Forum Puts Indonesia in the Regional Spotlight By Michael Casey, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Yogyakarta, Indonesia, October 4, 2002 People smuggling was among the topics discussed at the recently concluded Southwest Pacific Dialogue.
The two-day informal talks included foreign ministers from Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines, East Timor and Papua New Guinea.
Dewi Fortuna Anwar, a foreign affairs adviser to former President B.J. Habibie, is quoted as saying: "Indonesia cannot afford to be a passive follower.
If Indonesia does not fully participate in various regional issues, there is a tendency for neighbors to blame it for failing to act to prevent criminal activities like people smuggling and terrorism.
If they get involved, they can set the agenda and be part of the resolution."
NOTE:In February, Indonesia co-hosted a conference on people smuggling with Australia.
For more information on the Regional Ministerial Conference on People Smuggling, Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime held in Bali, Indonesia, February 27-28, 2002, see: Department of Foreign Affairs, Republic of Indonesia or Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Full text of co-chairs' statement.
Seattle INS Breaks Ring of Smugglers; Crackdown Has Reportedly Halted Human Trafficking By Chris McGann, The Seattle Post-Intelligencer, October 3, 2002 Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) agents have broken a crime syndicate that smuggled about 100 Chinese in cargo containers through West Coast ports in 1999 and 2000.
The alleged ring leaders -- Chan Sin Chung and Chen Sin Chow -- face up to 11 years in prison.
The illegal immigrants each paid between $50,000 and $60,000 for a 15- to 25-day sea trip in a cargo container packed with 12 to 25 people.
Along the Tracks: How Carlos Lost His Leg to the Wheels of a Train By Sonia Nazario, Los Angeles Times, October 2, 2002 The Red Cross estimates that Central American illegal immigrants lose arms, legs, hands or feet at a rate of nearly one every other day when they try to ride freight trains traveling towards the United States.
That estimate is for the Mexican state of Chiapas alone; it doesn't include those who die instantly when they are cut in half or decapitated.
The illegal immigrants who jump on the trains in an attempt to sneak into the United States get hurt for a number of reasons: some fall asleep and roll off the train cars; others are thrown by the gangs who control the train tops.
Nazario writes: "Because the migrants try to fool authorities and pass themselves off as Mexican, they carry no identification.
If they die, their bodies are lowered, nameless, into common graves."
Reyder Cruz Toledo, the police chief at Arriaga, in northern Chiapas, keeps a book of snapshots of the dead in the hope that someone will identify the bodies he recovers.
But he told Nazario that no one has come to look.
This report gives an account of how Carlos Roberto Diaz Osorto, a 17-year-old Honduran, lost his leg riding a train bound northward through the town of Arriaga.
The young man ran fast alongside a moving train and caught the ladder on a fuel tanker, but strong currents of rushing air sucked his legs beneath the car and the wheels cut one leg off above the knee.
Along the Tracks: Rapists Watched and Waited for Wendy and Karen By Sonia Nazario, Los Angeles Times, October 2, 2002 Large numbers of illegal immigrant girls are raped when they try to travel to the United States through Mexico, according to this report.
Nazario writes: "A 1997 University of Houston study of U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service detainees in Texas shows that nearly one in six says she was sexually assaulted.
"The rapes are part of the general denigration and humiliation of Central Americans in Mexico, where the migrants are seen as inferior because they come from less developed countries, says Olivia Ruiz, a cultural anthropologist at El Colegio de la Frontera Norte in Tijuana.
"The targets," she says, "can be men or women."
This report details the assaults suffered by two Central American girls caught by bandits in Mexico's Chiapas state, which is known among illegal immigrants as "the beast" because of the number of brutal gangs and corrupt police which prey on outsiders.
Police Close Down People-Smuggling Network Associated Press Newswires, Dateline London, October 1, 2002 London police have arrested five men who operated a sophisticated network used to smuggle hundreds of illegal immigrants into Britain from South Asia.
Charging some 8,000 pounds (12,527 U.S. dollars) per person, the gang used fraudulently obtained passports and visas indicating the illegal immigrants were in Britain on the return leg of a vacation in South Asia.
Detective Inspector Frank Frances, head of the police team that made the arrests, is quoted as saying: "People smuggling and human trafficking generates millions of pounds for the organised crime groups involved in much the same way that other crime groups traffic drugs."
"The main difference is, of course, that in this case the commodity is vulnerable people being exploited purely for profit."
Two Former INS Employees Sentenced for Helping Issue ID Cards Associated Press Newswires, Dateline San Diego, California, October 1, 2002 Two former Immigration and Naturalization Service employees were sentenced to prison for selling employment cards to illegal immigrants.
The two sold more than 100 employment authorization cards to illegal immigrants who paid $3,000 to $4,000 for cards which, when obtained legally, cost $100 each.
Man Pleads Guilty to Duping Illegal Immigrants Out of Money Associated Press Newswires, Dateline San Diego, California, October 1, 2002 Tony DeLorenzo faces up to a year in jail if he does not pay some $28,000 to three of his illegal immigrant victims.
DeLorenzo, who pleaded guilty to one count of grand theft, posed as an immigration lawyer and falsely promised to legalize the status of his clients.
He took his clients' money, but never filed any paperwork with the Immigration and Naturalization Service on their behalf.
__________________________________________________________________
* Back to IN THE NEWS FOR 2002 index Most recent IN THE NEWS FOR 2003 articles IN THE NEWS FOR 2001 Journal Articles and Book Excerpts __________________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
