NIAID and Clinical Center Research Program Laboratory Test Information _________________________________________________________________ Introduction One of the many functions of the body is to protect itself from the invasion of foreign substances.
This protective role is acted out by the immune system that is a complex network of specialized cells and organs.
The success of this system in defending the body relies on an incredibly elaborate interplay of T-cells, B-cells, natural killer cells and accessory cells.
It is one of the most difficult systems to understand because of its complexity.
By combining a series of tests utilizing both in vivo (in the body) and in vitro (in the lab) measurements of immune function, along with determination of cell numbers, one is better able to understand the function of the immune system of a given individual.
Here, in the NIAID/CCMD clinic (OP8), baseline assessment of the immune function is done before initial therapy is started.
These various tests will then be repeated intermittently during the course of the therapy to determine if changes are occurring.
These tests, referred to as research bloods, include CD4+ cell counts, and viral burden along with several other tests.
The easiest way to evaluate the function of various cells of the immune system is by drawing blood from the arm.
Along with looking at the immune function, other tests are done to observe possible complications related to the virus and most importantly to observe possible toxicities (adverse affects) of medications being studied.
These tests, referred to as safety bloods (labs), include a CBC/differential, full chemistries and a urinalysis.
The CBC consists of the white blood cell count, differential, hemoglobin, hematocrit and platelet count.
The differential is the percent of the various types of white cells; lymphocytes, granulocytes, and several others.
The full chemistries look at the functioning of the liver, kidneys, heart and many other important workings of the body.
The urinalysis also helps determine the function of the kidneys.
There is some overlap of safety bloods and immune function studies as may be noted.
Below is a brief explanation of the various tests done for both the immune function and for safety bloods.
The normal levels (values) are what are used at the NIH.
They may vary slightly when compared to those done at another laboratory.
Immune Function Studies * White Blood Cells: WBC, Leukocytes White blood cells (WBC) are produced in the bone marrow and stored in various lymphoid tissues such as the thymus, lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils, etc.
White blood cells play a major role in defending the body against infections and foreign invaders such as bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites.
There are five types of white blood cells: grans (also known as neutrophils), lymphs, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils.
A person infected with HIV often has a lowered WBC count since the infection may suppress production of white cells from the bone marrow
.
Normal Value: 3300-9600/cu.mm.
* Polymorphonuclear Granulocytes: Polys, Segs, Neutrophils, Grans Polys are mature white blood cells with Bands being the less mature polys.
Neutrophils (polys and bands) are considered scavenger cells and are the first to arrive at a site of infection or injury.
The main function of neutrophils is phagocytosis, meaning that they ingest, and then kill bacteria and foreign matter.
When the total neutrophil count (polys + bands) drops to less than 1000/cu mm., there is an increased risk for bacterial and certain fungal infections and severe risk when less than 500/cu mm.
Neutropenia is the term used for a low neutrophil count.
A person with HIV infection usually has a normal neutrophil count but some medications given to fight the HIV infection or opportunistic infections such a cytomegalovirus (CMV), may cause a drop in the neutrophil count.
If the neutrophil count drops too low, dosage of the medication may be reduced or stopped until the count returns to normal.
The medication, neupogen, may be prescribed in certain conditions to boost the neutrophil count.
Normal Value: 40-78% of WBC or 1200-7800/cu mm.
* Lymphocytes: Lymphs Lymphocytes are small white blood cells that bear the major responsibility for carrying out the activities of the immune system.
They are able to specifically identify foreign substances as being "non-self" or mutant (defective) cells and cause their destruction and elimination.
There are two major classes of lymphocytes, B-lymphocytes and T-lymphocytes.
There is also the natural killer cell that falls under the classification of lymphocytes.
Normal Value: 14-49% of WBC or 420-4900/cu mm.
* B Lymphocytes B cells are programmed to produce substances called immunoglobulins also known as antibodies.
Each B cell produces a specific antibody for a specific antigen (foreign substance) much like a specific key is made for a specific lock.
When an antibody locks with an antigen it usually renders the antigen harmless and marks it for destruction.
There are five classes of immunoglobulins: IgG, IgM, IgA, IgD, and IgE.
Each has a different role in the immune defense scheme.
IgG is the most abundant immunoglobulin in blood.
It coats microorganisms making them more desirable for ingestion and destruction by other white blood cells.
IgM is the largest of the immunoglobulins and is also found in the bloodstream.
It is very effective in killing bacteria.
IgA is found mainly in body fluids such as tears, saliva, respiratory, and gastrointestinal secretions.
Its function is seen as guarding the entrances into the body.
These are the three immunoglobulins that are measurable in the peripheral blood.
Because IgE and IgD are found in such small amounts in the blood stream they are not as easily measurable.
Abnormalities associated with HIV infection are not only seen in T cells but also in B cells.
B cells depend upon the T4 cells to tell them what to do (T4 cell induction); because of this, many B cell abnormalities, such as elevated immunoglobulins and poor antibody response to new antigens, are probably due to faulty regulation by the infected T4 cell.^7^,^9 Normal Values of Immunoglobulins: IgG: 650-1600 mg/dl IgM: 50-320 mg/dl IgA: 65-415 mg/dl * T Lymphocytes T cells do not produce antibodies but have a very major role in the immune response.
They have two functions; (1) acting as regulators of the immune system and (2) directly attacking cells that are malignant or defective.
There are two main types of T cells that vary in respect to their function.
There are the T4 cells or CD4+ cells, also called the "helper/ inducer cells."
These cells are essential for the activation of B cells, other T cells, natural killer cells and monocytes/macrophages when they detect that the body has been invaded by viruses, parasites and fungi.
It is known that the HIV virus invades the CD4+ cell and makes the cell ineffective in doing its normal functions.
After infection with HIV, there is an initial decline in CD4+ cells followed by a return to near normal levels, with a gradual decline over an extended period.
As the disease progresses, the rate of loss of CD4+ cells increases.
A person with less than 200 CD4+ cells/mm^3 or less than 14% CD4+ cells is much more likely to develop opportunistic infections than someone with greater than 200 CD4+ cells/mm3.
Although the course somewhat varies, it may take years for the CD4+cell number of an HIV infected person to drop below 200/mm3.
T8 cells or CD8+ are the other subset of T lymphocytes and are known as the "suppressor/cytotoxic" T cells.
Their main function is to down regulate (turn-off) antibody production by the B cell and to suppress or turn off the cells once the infection is under control.
The cytotoxic T cells kill cells that are infected by virus and also kill tumor cells.
CD8+ cells specific to HIV have been seen in the early course of the disease in HIV-infected individuals and over time, along with the loss of CD4+ cells, there is a loss of these HIV-specific CD8+ cells.^7 Levels of CD8+ cells vary during the course of HIV disease and could be normal, elevated or decrease.^7 Normal Values: T4 Cells: 600-1200/cu.mm, 40-60% T8 Cells: 150-600/cu.mm, 15-20% * Natural Killer Cells: NK Cells Natural killer cells are a type of lymphocyte that do not carry the markers to be B cells or T cells.
Like cytotoxic T cells they attack and kill tumor cells and protect against a wide variety of infectious microbes.
They are "natural" killers because they do not need additional stimulation or need to recognize a specific antigen in order to attack and kill.
Natural killer cells in vitro have shown the capability of killing HIV-infected cells.^7 Coated with antibody, the NK cell has the ability to kill cells expressing HIV on their surface.^7
Viral Burden * Branched Chain DNA: bDNA Branched chain DNA (bDNA) is a sensitive, rapid, quantitative and reproducible means of measuring viral particles of the HIV genetic material (RNA) that are circulating in the blood plasma.
This assay is done by spinning down and removing the viral particles that are present in the plasma.
The genetic material is extracted and undergoes a number of steps which involve attaching probes to the RNA, binding an amplifier (bDNA) to the probes and labeling the amplifier so that a chemiluminescence agent can bind allowing the amplified probes to be measured.
The chemiluminescent agent gives off light that is then measured.
The measurement of the light intensity is directly proportional to the viral particles present in the plasma indicating the amount of viral burden.
This test rapidly detects changes in virus levels, and along with other immune-based tests permits researchers and clinicians to respond with changes in therapy.^6 Measurements: 50 HIV-1 equivalents/ml on the 3^rd generation bDNA assay is below the sensitivity level of the test, viral activity may be present but not measurable (in use as of 8/98) 500 HIV-1 equivalents/ml on the ultra-sensitive bDNA assay (Version 2).
* RT PCR RT PCR also measures the quantity of the genetic material, RNA of the HIV virus, in the blood plasma.
This test is different from bDNA in that the genetic material is being measured and not the amplifier probe.
The technique involves spinning out all particles from the plasma and removing all DNA.
DNA copies are then made from the HIV RNA.
The DNA copies that are made from the HIV RNA are proportional to the amount of genomic RNA present in the original plasma sample.^5 The DNA copies then undergo an amplification process.
This process is repeated 20-30 times, eventually amplifying even tiny amounts of material into detectable quantities in order to determine the amount of HIV RNA present in the plasma sample.
Sensitivity for detecting viral RNA in the plasma is close to 100%, and reliability makes the technique excellent for quantification of viral burden over time.^1 Limitations of RT PCR are contamination of the sample and false positive results.
For this reason, controls are always run with samples.
Measurement: 50 HIV RNA copies/ml is the smallest number of viral particles that can be measured with this test.
If the test is 50 copies, viral activity may be present but not measurable.
Safety Labs CBC/Differential * White Blood Cells Counts Refer back to section II * Platelets Platelets are active agents of inflammation when damage to a blood vessel occurs.
They are not actually cells but fragments released by the megakaryocyte cell.
A megakaryocyte is large cell in the bone marrow whose function is to produce platelets.
When vascular damage occurs, the platelets stick to the vascular walls and form clots to prevent the loss of blood.
Thus, it is important to have adequate numbers of normal functioning platelets to maintain hemostasis and effective coagulation of the blood.
There are drugs that can potentially alter the platelet count making it necessary to monitor.
Also, some people with HIV infection develop thrombocytopenia (a low platelet count, less than 100,000/cu.mm.)
Normal Value: M: 154,000-354,000/cu.mm.
F: 162,000-380,000/cu.mm.
* Hemoglobin: Hgb Hemoglobin is the main component of red blood cells and is the essential protein that combines with and transports oxygen to the body cells for nourishment.
It also collects carbon dioxide that is later released by the lungs.
Any condition that results in anemia, a decrease in concentration of hemoglobin in the peripheral blood, lowers the ability of the red cells to pick up the oxygen.
Those who have greatly reduced hemoglobin (less than 7.0 g/dl) may require blood transfusions to help boost their red blood cell count and hemoglobin levels.
The medication, Epogen, may be prescribed in certain conditions to also help maintain normal hemoglobin levels.
Normal value: M: 12.7-16.7 g/dl F: 11.1-15.0 g/dl * Hematocrit: Hct Hematocrit measures the percentage of a given volume of whole blood that is occupied by red blood cells.
Thus a hematocrit value of 40% indicates that 40 ml of each 100 ml of peripheral blood is composed of packed blood cells.
Measuring of the hematocrit and hemoglobin go hand in hand and when both are very low, treatment is usually required as mentioned above.
Normal value: M: 36.7-48.3% F: 31.8-43.2%
Liver Function Tests The liver is a very complex organ with numerous functions.
One of the many functions is filtering and cleaning the blood.
It also breaks down old and worn out red blood cells and certain medications.
Monitoring the SGOT, SGPT, total bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase is a way of determining how well the liver is functioning.
Elevated levels indicate that there is impairment of the liver.
There are many factors that could cause impaired liver function: Hepatitis, Epstein-Barr Virus, Cytomegalovirus, bacteria, chemicals, drugs and alcohol.
Elevations in values relate to the amount of damage that is occurring to the liver.
* SGOT: Serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, AST SGOT is an enzyme released by the liver, heart muscle, skeletal muscle, pancreas and kidneys into the blood stream when disease or injury occurs.
A clinical diagnosis cannot be based on this lab value alone since several organs contain this enzyme.
Normal Values: 9-34 u/l * SGPT: Serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, ALT SGPT is an enzyme found in high concentrations in the liver and at lower concentrations in the heart, kidney and skeletal muscle.
Both SGOT and SGPT are found in relatively low numbers in the peripheral blood.
When elevations do occur in these enzymes, it usually indicates that some tissue destruction is occurring.
Normal Values: 6-41 u/l * Total Bilirubin: T Bili Bilirubin is a waste product of the breakdown of old or damaged red blood cells.
Bilirubin normally enters the bloodstream and circulates until it reaches the liver and bowel where it is further broken down and excreted.
Normal Values: 0.1-1.5 mg/dl * Alkaline Phosphate: Alk Phos This is an enzyme found in bone, liver, kidney, intestine, and placenta.
During bone formation or with liver and biliary tract disorders, serum levels will rise in proportion to the severity of the condition.
Normal Values: 37-116 u/l
Kidney Function Tests * Creatinine Serum creatinine value is used as a screening test of kidney (renal) function.
Creatinine is the end product of energy released from the skeletal muscle energy-storing compound, phosphocreatine.
Creatinine is removed from the blood stream by the kidneys and excreted in the urine.
The balance between the amount of creatinine produced and the amount excreted is indicated by the serum level and reflects kidney function.
Elevations in serum creatinine are indicative of the degree of the kidneys' diminished function.
Normal Values: M: 0.9-1.6 mg/dl F: 0.7-1.3 mg/dl * Blood Urea Nitrogen: BUN Blood urea nitrogen is most commonly used as a screening test of renal function.
Urea is the chief end product of protein breakdown.
It is formed in the liver and transferred by the blood to the kidneys for removal in the urine.
Elevated BUN concentrations may result from inadequate kidney function causing the urea to stay in the blood stream rather than be removed through the urine.
Normal Values: 8-22 mg/dl
Pancreatic Function Tests * Amylase: Serum amylase value is one test used to monitor for pancreatitis, an inflammation of the pancreas.
Amylase is a digestive enzyme that is produced by the pancreas and salivary glands.
It aids in the breakdown of carbohydrates into simple sugars.
One serious side effect of didanosine (ddI, Videx) is pancreatitis, usually at the higher doses or in combination with alcohol or pentamidine.
Because elevations of amylase could be caused by other diseases or complications it is usually monitored with lipase.
Normal Values: 18-93 U/L * Lipase Lipase is also a digestive enzyme that splits dietary fats and triglycerides into fatty acids and glycerol.
Like amylase, lipase appears in the bloodstream following damage to the pancreatic cells.
Elevations of lipase levels are usually seen with acute pancreatitis and other pancreatic disorders.
As mentioned above, pancreatitis is a potential adverse effect of didanosine and amylase and lipase levels should be monitored regularly.
Normal Values: 21-132 U/L
Thyroid Function Tests The thyroid secretes the hormones, thyroxine (T4), triodothyronine (T3) and calcitonin.
Calcitonin inhibits the mobilization of calcium from the bone in order to reduce plasma calcium levels.
T3 and T4 have multiple funtions.
They influence general metabolic rate; are necessary for normal development of the central nervous system; stimulate growth and normal metabolism in all cells; and help to regulate protein, carbohydrate and fat (cholesterol) metabolism.
* TSH: Thyroid-stimulating horomone TSH is released from the pituitary gland and controls the production of T4 and T3.
The TSH levels become greatly elevated in primary hypothyroidism in an attempt to stimulate a failing thyroid.
Interleukin-2 can induce hypothyroidism in some patients and replacement therapy with synthroid may be indicated.
Normal Value: 0.43-4.60 IU/ML
Lipid Metabolism Tests: * Cholesterol Cholesterol is a fat-like substance found in the blood, bile and brain.
It is formed by the liver and by the breakdown of saturated fats in the diet.
The majority of cholesterol is formed in the liver and flows with the bile to the small intestine where it combines with dietary cholesterol.
The majority of the cholesterol is combined with fatty acids to form cholesterol esters.
Both free cholesterol and cholesterol esters are essential for the manufacturing of many of the steroid hormones and for the composition of cell membranes.
Serum cholesterol concentrations are reliable indicators of a tendency toward atherosclerosis, since elevated levels have been identified as one factor contributing to circulatory disorders.
Levels will vary greatly depending on age, diet, geographic location and genetic influences.
Persons with cholesterol levels above 200 mg/dl are considered to be at moderate to high risk for cardiovascular disease.
Normal Value: 100-200 mg/DL * Triglycerides: Triglycerides or "true" fats are lipids that are normally present in the blood stream.
They are the most abundant groups of lipids and are either absorbed from animal and vegetable fat intake or synthesized by the liver.
The dietary fats are partially broken down in the small intestines by the bile and then absorbed into the bloodstream as tiny fat droplets.
It is these fat droplets that give blood a milky appearance following a high-fat meal.
Triglycerides store energy for the body in the form of adipose tissue.
Carbohydrates, glucose, and protein all can be converted to triglycerides to be stored as adipose tissue and can be called upon later when energy is needed for other tissues.
Like cholesterol, measurements of triglycerides serve as indictor of risk for plaque deposits and atherosclerosis.
Elevated levels may also occur as a result of faulty glucose metabolism.
In order to get the most accurate triglyceride level, one should have fasted for the last 12-14 hours and consumed no alcohol in the last 24hrs as this may cause elevated levels.
Normal Value: 10-160 mg/DL * High-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (HDL) HDL cholesterol makes up about 20% of the serum cholesterol and is referred to as the "good" cholesterol.
Data have shown that lower levels, less then 45mg/dl, indicate a higher risk for the development of coronary disease.
Those with levels greater then 45mg/dl may be less likely to develop artherosclerosis.
Normal Value: 45 mg/DL * Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol (LDL) HDL cholesterol makes up about 20% of the serum cholesterol and is LDL's carry the cholesterol in the plasma.
The LDL-cholesterol has been identified as the "bad" cholesterol since it has been associated with coronary arterial atherosclerosis.
Normal Value: 65-129 mg/DL
Creatine Phosphokinase: CPK, CK Creatine Phosphokinase (CPK) is an enzyme that is found in skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and brain tissue.
CPK helps to control the amount of energy available for use by the body.
CPK levels will rise when tissue or muscle damage occurs during muscle disease, injury, strenuous exercise or myocardial infarction.
Normal Values: 52-386 units/L Urinalysis Urinalysis is a way to monitor infections of the bladder and/or kidneys, dehydration in ill persons whose fluid intake may be poor, and basic kidney function.
A urinalysis looks at the concentration of the urine, detects glucose (sugar), proteins, red cells, white cells, and bacteria in the urine.
* Proteinuria Protein in the urine, proteinuria, is a very sensitive indicator of kidney disorders since in normal conditions it is not found.
Measuring the amount of protein in the urine aids in diagnosis and directing therapy since the degree of proteinuria varies according to the type and severity of the disease.
Transitory proteinuria unrelated to organic disease can occur following strenuous exercise or severe emotional stress.
A 24-hour urine for protein measurement is the more accurate indicator of the severity of the condition and is only done when protein has been detected in a clean catch urine more than once.
* White Cells Normally few white cells are found in the urine.
If 11-20 white cells are found in the urine, often a repeat urinalysis and urine culture will be done to rule out a urinary tract infection.
* Red Blood Cells Normally only up to two red cells per high power field on a microscope are found in a urinalysis.
A repeat urinalysis is done when more than 10 red cells are found in the urine to rule out urinary tract infections and kidney stones.
Summary This is a brief explanation of the tests commonly performed either on a routine basis or at various time points in the study.
This was written with the intention that you as a study participant could gain a better understanding of how one is clinically monitored on a research study, here in the NIAID clinic.
You are encouraged to refer to this guide, after you have reviewed your results with your nurse, in order to help you better understand the information.
Remember: the normal values that are in this packet are for our labs here at NIH.
These normal values may vary when compared to other laboratories.
If you have any feedback or suggestions on this guide, please give it to your case manager or study coordinator.
It would be greatly appreciated.
Glossary Alloantigen: an antigen that occurs in some, but not in other members of the same species.
Anemia: a lower than normal number of red cells, in the quantity of hemoglobin, or in the volume of packed red cells per 100 ml of blood which occurs when the balance between blood loss and blood production is disturbed.
Antibody: a soluble protein molecule produced and secreted by B cells in response to an antigen, which is capable of binding to that specific antigen.
Antigen: any substance that, when introduced into the body, is recognized by the immune system.
Atherosclerosis: an extremely common form of arteriosclerosis in which deposits of yellowish plaques containing cholesterol, lipid deposits are formed within the inner most large and medium-sized ateries.
Basophils: a white blood cell that contributes to inflammatory reaction.
Along with mast cells, usually increased in toxic conditions (ie: lead poisoning).
B Cells: small white cells crucial to immune defenses, are the source of antibodies.
CBC: complete blood count.
Chemiluminescence: luminescence produced by the direct transformation of chemical energy into light energy.
Coagulation: the process of clot formation.
CPM: Counts per minute.
Cytokine: a generic term for nonantibody proteins release by one cell populations on contact with a specific antigen, which act as intercellular mediators, as in the generation of an immune response.
DNA: Deoxyribonucleic Acid.
The molecular chain found in genes within the nucleous of each cell, which carries the genetic inforation that enables cells to reproduce.
Eosinophils: a white blood cell that contains granules filled with chemicals damaging to parasites, and enzymes that turn down inflammatory reactions.
Gene: a unit of DNA that carries information for the biosynthesis of a specific product (in the cell).
Genome: the complete set of genes in the chromosomes of each cell of a particular organism.
Hemoglobin: the oxygen-carrying pigment of the red cells.
Hemostasis: the arrest of bleeding, either by physiologic properties of vasoconstriction or coagulation.
Host: a cell that harboring a virus (CD4 cell harboring the HIV virus).
A plant or animal harboring and/or nourishing another organism.
Hypergammaglobonemia: higher than normal levels of immunoglobulins.
Immunity: a natural or acquired resistance to a specific disease.
May be partial or complete, long-lasting or temporary.
Immunoglobulin: a family of large proteins molecules, also know as antibodies.
In Vitro: a process or reaction occurring in an artificial environment such as a test tube, out side the body.
In Vivo: a process or reaction occurring in the body.v Lymphocytes: small white cells produced in the lymphoid organs and paramount in the immune defenses.
Macrophage: a large and versatile immune cell, not in the blood, that acts as a microbe-devouring phagocyte, an antigen-presenting cell, and an important source of immune secretions.
Megakaryocyte: a large cell found in the bone marrow that give rise to blood platelets.
Metabolism: the sum of the processes by which a particular substance is handled (as by assimilation and incorporation, or by detoxification and excretion) in the living body.
Microbes: minute living organisms, including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and protozoa.
Microorganisms: microscopic plants or animals.
Mitogen: a substance that causes DNA synthesis, blast transformation, monoclonal antibody division and proliferation of lymphocytes independent of a specific antigen.
ML: Milli-leter Molecule: the smallest amount of a specific chemical substance that can exist alone.
(To break a molecule down into it constituent atoms is to change its character.
A molecule of water, for instance, reverts to oxygen and hydrogen.)
Monoclonal antibody: antibodies produced by a single cell or its identical progeny, specific for a given antigen.
As a tool for binding to specific protein molecules, monoclonal antibodies are invaluable in research, medicine, and industry.
Monocyte: a large, circulating phagocytic white blood cell which, when it enters tissue, develops into a macrophage.
Natural Killer Cell: a lymphocyte that naturally attacks and kills tumor cells and protects against a wide variety of infectious organisms.
They require no stimulation or need to recognize a specific antigen to function.
Neutropenia: the presence of abnormally small amounts of neutrophils in the circulating blood.
Neutrophil: a white cell that is an abundant and important phagocyte.
Opportunistic Infection: an illness caused by an organism that usually does not cause disease in a person with a normal immune system.
Tends to occur in individuals with advance HIV disease such as Pneumocystis Carini Pneumonia, Tuberculosis.
p24: one of the main structural proteins of HIV. Phagocytosis: a process during which an alien molecule is engulfed by a white cell.
The cell can render it harmless, kill it, or process it for destruction by another white cell.
Plasma: the fluid (non-cellular) portion of the blood.
Platelets: cellular fragments critical for blood clotting and sealing off wounds.
Proliferation: the reproduction or multiplication of similar forms, especially cells.
Proviral DNA: the DNA copy of the HIV RNA found integrated into the DNA of the host cell.
The proviral DNA is copied back to RNA to generate new virus particles.
Response Modifier: a substance or cytokine, such as interleukin-2, illicits a response from particular cell, such as CD4+ cell.
Retrovirus: HIV and other virues that carry their genetic material in the form of RNA and that have the enzyme reverse transcriptase.
Reverse Transcriptase: the viral enzyme that converts the RNA into DNA within the T cell to allow the viral RNA to incorporate into the gene material of the cell.
RNA: a nucleic acid, found mostly I the cytoplsm of cells, that is important in the synthesis of the proteins.
Seropositive: showing a high level of antibodies to a particular antigen.
Serum: the fluid portion of the blood obtained after the removal of cells and the fibrin clot.
T Cells: small white blood cells that orchestrate and/or directly participate in the immune defenses.
Thrombocytopenia: a condition of abnormally small number of platelets in circulation.
Toxicity: the extent, quality or degree of being poisonous or harmful to the body.
Vascular: pertaining to blood vessels or indicative of an abundant blood supply.
Viral Burden: the amount of detectable virus measured in the peripheral blood .
References 1.
Barrick B, and Vogel S. Applications of Laboratory Diagnostics in HIV Nursing.
In Grady C, Boenning-Betchel C, Boland M (eds): Nursing Clinics of North America, Philadelphia; W.B. Saunders, 1996, p 41.
2.
Baseler, W., Stevens, R.A., and Metcalf, J.A. "Immunologic Monitoring of Patient with Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection."
In Rose, N.R., De Macario, E.C., Friedman, H., Penn, G.M. (eds): Manual of Clinical Laboratory Immunology.
Washington, D.C.; American Society from Microbiology, 1992, p 381.
3.
Byrne, C.J., Saxton, D.F., Pelikan, P.K., and Nuget, P.M. Laboratory Tests: Implication for Nurses and Allied Health Professionals.
Menlo Park: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1981, p 41-49, 70, 112, 123-127, 159-16.
4.
Chatterton, J.M.W. and Ho Yen Do.
Laboratory investigation of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia.
Genitourinary Medicine.
68: 336, 1992.
5.
Davey, R.T. Jr. and Lane, H.C. Laboratory methods in the diagnosis and prognostic staging of infection with human immunodeficiency virus type 1.
Reviews of Infectious Diseases.
12: 912, 1990.
6.
Davey, R.T. Jr., Vasudevachari, M.B., and Lane, H.C. "Serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus infection."
In Devita, V.T., Hellan, S., and Rosenberg, S. (eds): AIDS: Etiology, Diagnosis, Treatment, and Prevention.
Philadelphia; JB Lippincott, 1992, p 141.
7.
Dewar, R.L., Highbarger, H.C., Sarmiento, M.D., et al: Application of branched DNA signal amplification to monitor human immunodeficiency virus type 1 burden in human plasma.
Journal of Infectious Diseases.
170: 1172, 1994.
8.
Fauci, A.S. and Lane, H.C. "Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Disease: AIDS and Related Disorders."
In Isselbacher, K.J. and et al (eds): Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine.
McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1994, p 1566.
9.
Pagana, K.D. and Pagana, T.J. Mosby's Diagnostic and Laboratory Test Reference.
St Louis: Mosby's Year Book, 1992, p 43-44, 462-463, 595, 615,759, 792.
10.
Rosenberg, Z.F. and Fauci, A.S. "Immunology of HIV infection."
In Paul, W.E. (ed): Fundamental Immunology.
New York: Raven Press, 1993, p 1375.
11.
Saag MS: "AIDS testing: Now and in the future."
In Sand, M.A. and Volberding, P.A.(eds): The Medical Management of AIDS, ed. 3.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1995, p 6.5.
12.
Stites, D.P. "Clinical Laboratory Methods for detection of Cellular Immune Function."
In Sites, D.P., Stobo, J.D., Wells, J.V. (eds): Basic and Clinical Immunology.
Norwalk: Appleton and Lange, 1987, p 295.
13.
Tsoukas, C.M. and Bernard, N.F. Markers predicting progression of human immunodeficiency virus-related disease.
Clinical Microbiology Review.
7: 14, 1994.
14.
Urdea, M.S., Wilber, J.C., Yeghiazarian, T., et al.
Direct and quantitative detection of HIV-1 RNA in human plasma with a branched DNA signal amplification assay.
AIDS.
7(suppl2): S11, 1993.
_________________________________________________________________
NIAID Clinical Center and HIV Program DIR Home | NIAID Home | Search NIAID Last Updated 10.09.03 (alt)
111
