The Subcommittee on Highways, Transit 
The three-part hearing is structured with the following topics and witnesses:
Thursday, May 15, 2:00 p.m. - Overview of Administrations Reauthorization proposal.
The Honorable Norman Mineta, Secretary of Transportation.
Tuesday, May 20, 10:00 a.m. - Federal Highway Administration programs, The Honorable Mary Peters, Administrator, and Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration programs, The Honorable Annette Sandberg, Acting Administrator.
Wednesday, May 21, 2:00 p.m. - Federal Transit Administration programs, The Honorable Jennifer Dorn, Administrator, and National Highway Traffic Safety Administration programs, The Honorable Jeffrey Runge, M.D., Administrator *.
BACKGROUND
The Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA 21), as amended, expires September 30, 2003.
TEA 21 is landmark surface transportation legislation, primarily because it ensures that highway user fees are spent only for the purpose of highway, transit, and safety programs.
Additionally, the funding levels provided for these programs are tied to receipts coming in to the Highway Trust Fund, and those funding levels are guaranteed by a budgetary firewall mechanism.
TEA 21 provides a total of $218 billion for highway, transit, and highway safety programs, of which $198 billion is guaranteed by the budgetary firewall.
This funding level represents a 40% increase in real funding over the previous six-year authorization period under the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act.
However, as successful as TEA 21 has been, the funding levels provided in this bill have not been enough to even maintain the current infrastructure system, much less improve it.
The Department of Transportations Conditions and Performance report estimates over a 20-year period the level of investment needed to maintain or improve highway and transit infrastructure.
Using conservative assumptions, the data in the 2002 Conditions and Performance report indicate that a federal highway and transit program size of at least $75 billion needs to be reached by fiscal year 2009, the final year of the proposed authorization cycle, in order to begin to meet the federal cost to improve the current system of highways, bridges, and transit properties.
Based on these findings, the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee has formally adopted a recommendation for a 6-year authorization funding level of $375 billion for highway, transit, and highway safety programs to begin to meet the federal cost to improve these vitally important infrastructure systems.
Highlights of SAFETEAs Transit Proposal
Funding level.
SAFETEAs total authorized funding level for transit is approximately $45.7 billion, an 11.5% increase over the total funding levels authorized in TEA 21.
The trust-funded, firewalled portion of SAFETEAs transit program totals $37.6 billion, a $1.6 billion increase over TEA 21 guaranteed transit funding (a 4.4% increase).
Budgetary firewall.
There is a budgetary firewall established for the trust fund portion of the transit program only.
This firewall, as well as the highway programs firewall, will be effective only if Congress enacts new budgetary control measures, such as reauthorizing the 1985 Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act.
The guaranteed portion of the transit program totals $37.6 billion (the mass transit account-funded portion of the program).
Another $8 billion in general funds are authorized for the transit program, but these funds are outside the firewall.
Under TEA 21, both the trust fund and general fund portions of the transit program are protected by the budgetary firewall.
Revenue Aligned Budget Authority (RABA).
The SAFETEA proposal would allow the Mass Transit Account and the transit program to adjust to motor fuel tax revenue receipts beginning in fiscal year 2006.
Transit Program Restructuring.
The Administrations bill proposes a major restructuring of the transit accounts, moving the fixed guideway modernization, research, and planning programs into a consolidated Formula Grants and Research program.
The Capital Grants program would consist solely of new starts.
The Administration proposes to eliminate the Bus and Bus Facilities discretionary grant program.
The primary reason for this restructuring is budgetary.
Currently, every transit program is split funded, 80% from the Mass Transit Account of the Highway Trust Fund, and 20% from the General Fund.
At the beginning of each fiscal year, OMB financial practice dictates that split funded agencies must transfer all trust funds into the General Fund for ease of accounting.
This has the effect of making it appear that all the transit trust funds have immediately obligated, or spent out (even though, in reality, transit infrastructure programs are very slow to spend out).
As a result, the balances of the Mass Transit Account are dwindling rapidly, and the trust-funded portion of the program will actually go broke by 2007 unless something is done to change the current accounting system.
The Administrations bill restructures the programs so that only one account is split funded - new starts, at 20% trust fund, 80% general fund, which means that the impact of washing the trust funds through the general fund will be greatly minimized.
FTAs administrative expenses are also 100% general funds.
The potential disadvantage to this restructuring is that, without a budgetary firewall, the appropriators may choose not to fund or to underfund the new starts and administrative expenses programs.
New Starts and Small Starts.
The Administrations proposal establishes a new category of new starts projects with under $75 million in federal funding as small starts.
These projects would have a streamlined evaluation process.
This new category is meant to foster the development of less capital-intensive transit systems, such as Bus Rapid Transit.
The Administrations bill also proposes to increase the local share requirement for new starts to 50%.
Currently, transit programs have the same federal share requirements as highways - 80% federal, 20% state or local.
Highlights of SAFETEAs NHTSA Proposal
Funding level.
The total authorized 6 year funding level from the Highway Trust Fund for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) is approximately $3.4 billion.
This is a 26 percent increase over the $2.7 billion that was authorized for these activities in TEA 21.
Consolidated Highway Safety Grants.
SAFETEA combines several of the safety programs administered by NHTSA under TEA 21 into a consolidated grant program.
State and Community Formula Grants, Occupant Protection Incentive Grants, Alcohol-Impaired Driving Countermeasures Incentive Grants, Child Passenger Protection Education Grants, Safety Incentive Grants for the Use of Seat Belts, and Safety Incentives to Prevent Operation of Motor Vehicles by Intoxicated Persons authorized under TEA 21 are combined into a consolidated grant program in SAFETEA.
Under TEA 21, funding for Safety Incentive Grants for Seat Belt Use and Safety Incentives to Prevent Operation of Motor Vehicles by Intoxicated Persons was appropriated to the Federal Highway Administration but administered by NHTSA.
FHWA does not receive funding for these programs under SAFETEA.
These programs are proposed to be part of the new consolidated grant program administered by NHTSA.
Within the consolidated grant program, SAFETEA creates a new safety belt incentive program to strongly encourage States to enact primary safety belt laws and achieve substantially higher safety belt usage rates.
SAFETEA also creates a new impaired driving grant program within the consolidated grant program.
This program provides funding to States with high numbers or high rates of alcohol-involved fatalities to identify causes of these high numbers and rates and to develop and implement programs to reduce these fatalities.
Funding Flexibility.
The Administrations proposal grants States broad new flexibility to transfer funds among safety programs administered by FHWA and NHTSA if they develop performance-based comprehensive strategic highway safety plans that identify their highest priority safety improvements.
This would allow FHWA funding for safety infrastructure improvements to be transferred to NHTSA for behavioral safety programs and vice versa.
WITNESSES PANEL I Federal Transit Administration The Honorable Jennifer Dorn Administrator National Highway Traffic Safety Administration The Honorable Jeffrey Runge Administrator
