International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2002* November Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
Criminals Have Stolen Identities of More Than 1,000 Dead Babies Associated Press Newswires, Dateline London, November 29, 2002 and Traffickers Stealing Identities, Lords Warn By Anne Perkins, The Guardian, November 29, 2002 In order to obtain false passports, criminals involved in people smuggling have stolen the identities of more than 1,000 babies who died before their first birthday.
British police uncovered the scam while cross-referencing birth and death certificates with passport applications and national insurance numbers.
But with a lack of resources, they've been able to follow up with only 41 investigations resulting in 39 arrests.
In emphasizing the importance of resources for investigations, police noted that a single financial investigation into the discovery of the bodies of 58 Chinese illegal immigrants who suffocated in a truck stopped at Dover uncovered 38 million pounds (US$59,017,800) sent back to China via Hong Kong in "post-entry" payment for people-smuggling operations, Perkins writes.
E.U. Agrees on Jail Terms for People Smugglers Reuters, Dateline Brussels, November 28, 2002 The 15 member nations of the European Union (E.U.) have agreed to set maximum jail terms of at least eight years for people found guilty of smuggling or hiding illegal immigrants for profit or if they endangered the lives of their victims in the process.
Some member states, however, will be allowed to impose jail terms of just six years if that is the most severe sentence available in their national judicial systems.
Britain, France and Italy have said they will set their jail terms for people smuggling at no less than 10 years.
Interpol (International Criminal Police Organization) estimates people smuggling generates $30 billion ($30,000 million) per year, making it the most lucrative crime after drugs and arms smuggling.
An estimated 500,000 illegal immigrants try to enter E.U. countries each year.
E.U. Agrees to Plan to Send Back Afghan Refugees By Marie-Louise Moller, Reuters, Dateline Brussels, November 28, 2002 European Union members agreed to a plan that will return "unwanted" Afghans to Afghanistan.
Under the plan, which would be carried out beginning in April 2003, the Afghans would be returned mainly on a voluntary basis, but the use of force would be endorsed if necessary.
It is estimated some 100,000 Afghans would be affected by the plan; returns, once the program begins, would average 1,500 per month.
E.U. ministers agreed to spend 17 million euros (U.S.$16,910,070) in 2003 on the return program, which would include setting up reception facilities in Afghanistan and possibly providing the Afghans with some financial support as an incentive to return home.
The Kabul government, however, is reported to feel "lukewarm" about the return program.
E.U. Links 1st Deal on Repatriation of Illegal Immigrants Kyodo News, November 28, 2002 and E.U., Hong Kong To Sign Immigration Agreement Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Brussels, Belgium, November 27, 2002 The European Union (E.U.) and Hong Kong have agreed to take back their nationals found living illegally on the other's territory.
The accord is the first of its kind for the E.U.
The deal is part of the E.U.'s plan to harmonize efforts of its 15 member nations to deal with illegal immigration.
E.U. Commission Faces Pressure Over Illegal Migrants Reuters, Dateline Brussels, November 27, 2002 The European Commission, the executive body of the 15 member nations of the European Union, is being accused by France and other members of being too slow in obtaining "readmission agreements" with other countries so that nationals who enter the European Union illegally are allowed to return home.
Commission officials reject the criticism.
An estimated half-million illegal immigrants attempt to enter European Union countries each year.
Chinese Trail Linked to Dover Lorry Deaths By Jonathan Watts, The Guardian, November 27, 2002 and Trial of Biggest Smuggling Ring Opens By Bill Savadove, South China Morning Post, Dateline Shanghai, November 27, 2002 and China Puts 42 on Trial in Largest Human Smuggling Case Agence France Presse, Dateline Beijing, November 26, 2002 and Large People-Smuggling Trial Begins in Eastern China By Christopher Bodeen, Associated Press, Dateline Beijing, November 25, 2002 Forty-two people went on trial in Nanjing this week for people smuggling, China's biggest-ever case in terms of defendants.
Ten people are on trial for organizing the trips; others are being tried as accomplices.
Chen Wenshu from Putian in Fujian province is the suspected ring leader.
His operation allegedly involved 100 employees from six international shipping companies.
The Hefei Meilinghua Shipping Company is said to have supplied the gang with 10 ocean-going vessels.
Between 1998 and 2000, Chen and his gang are said to have organized the smuggling of 700 illegal immigrants; 400 succeeded in reaching their destinations.
The illegal immigrants were from Fujian, Guangdong, Zhejiang, Jiangsu and Liaoning provinces.
The smugglers charged $20,000 to get to Japan, and $45,000 to get to the United States.
The Chinese government has cracked down on human smuggling in the last two years.
Hundreds of people smugglers have been arrested; ring leaders have received sentences of up to life imprisonment.
The official Chinese get-tough stance on people smuggling came about when 58 Chinese were found dead from suffocation in a truck at the English port of Dover in 2000.
In October 2001, South Korean police said 25 Chinese died by suffocation in a storage tank they were hiding in to reach South Korea.
The ship's crew dumped the bodies into the sea.
Norwegian Police Launch National Crackdown on Illegal Immigration Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Oslo, Norway, November 27, 2002 Norwegian police have launched a nationwide crackdown on illegal immigration, smuggling and organized crime.
"Police and customs agents stepped up controls along Norway's borders with Sweden, Finland and Russia, as well as at air and ship ports," this report says.
Norway, which has a population of 4.5 million, has "a few thousand illegal immigrants."
The increased police action, however, has led to "numerous arrests," according to this report.
September 11 Attacks Did Not Slow Immigration to U.S. Reuters, Dateline Washington, November 26, 2002 and New Report Examines California's Immigrants; Findings Show Numbers Continue To Climb in State U.S. Newswire, Dateline Washington, November 26, 2002 Terrorist attacks and tighter border controls have not slowed immigration to the United States, according to a report released November 26 by the Center for Immigration Studies (CIS), a Washington think-tank.
The study was based on a population survey of 200,000 people carried out in March 2002 by the U.S. Census Bureau.
It found that 33.1 million legal and illegal immigrants live in the United States, an increase of 2 million since the 2000 census.
About one-third of all immigrants come from Mexico.
The second largest group comes from China, at 4.5 percent of the immigrant population.
Steven Camarota, who wrote the report and is the director of research at CIS, says that while there are no certain figures, the number of illegal immigrants in the United States is probably in the range of 8.5 million.
Reuters quotes Camarota as saying: "Legal and illegal immigration are largely disconnected from economic conditions in the United States because life remains far better here than in most of the immigrant-sending countries."
Immigration is having a profound impact on states such as California.
Legal and illegal immigrants, plus births to immigrant women, account for all of the increase in California's population since the 2000 census.
See the entire report, entitled Immigrants in the United States 2002: A Snapshot of America's Foreign-Born Population, at the CIS web site.
Social Security Scam Alleged; Fraudulent Cards Issued in Atlanta By Bill Rankin, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution, November 26, 2002 Federal authorities have broken an alleged fraud ring that involved a Social Security Administration clerk and 28 others working in the metro Atlanta area.
They are said to have sold more than 1,900 fraudulent Social Security cards to illegal immigrants from around the globe, including Indonesia, Pakistan, Jamaica, Trinidad, Cameroon, Ecuador, and Haiti.
U.S. authorities are trying to locate the holders of the illegal Social Security cards and will move to deport anyone found to be in the United States illegally.
24,000 Turks and Iranians Arrived as Tourists.
Only 1,000 Went Home By David Williams, Daily Mail (London), Dateline Belgrade, November 26, 2002 Organized crime has made the Balkans the gateway to Britain and Western Europe for tens of thousands of asylum seekers and the biggest new drug route to the West, according to this article.
There are also fears that terrorists are using the same routes to move operatives and weapons.
"The United Nations International Organisation on Migration has warned that unless a joint initiative is agreed, Western Europe will be 'overwhelmed by migrants,'" Williams writes.
In 2001, some 24,000 Iranians and Turks came as tourists to the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo, but only 1,000 ever went home.
The rest were smuggled out to other countries.
In the last two years, an estimated 50,000 Chinese have crossed from Serbia into Bosnia, smuggled in through Romania and Bulgaria.
Belgrade has a thriving Chinese community where the illegal Chinese immigrants can await their chance to move to Western Europe.
Williams writes: "The implications of the crime crisis for the Balkan countries and their fledgling democracies are massive.
Mafia rackets are costing nations such as Bosnia more than their entire annual budgets.
Customs and tax scams alone are estimated to lose Bosnia at least GBP 400 million (US$625,800,000) annually."
Immigrants Pour Into U.S., Unabated by War on Terror By David R. Francis, The Christian Science Monitor, November 25, 2002 Tougher immigration enforcement and increased border patrols in the wake of the September 11 terrorist attacks have not significantly reduced the flow of immigrants, according to this article.
About 1.5 million immigrants came to the United States legally in 2001; this year the number is estimated to be 1.4 million.
The State Department issued 632,000 immigrant visas in the 2001 fiscal year; this year 609,000 have been issued.
Non-immigrant visas fell from 10 million in fiscal year 2001 to 7.9 million in the year that ended September 30.
The number of foreign students, however, increased by 6 percent, according to this report.
Pounds 50M Crime Wars By Lucy Panton, News Group Newspapers Ltd., November 24, 2002 The police war on ethnic crime gangs has already cost British taxpayers more than 50 million pounds (US$77,600,000).
These ethnic gangs, writes Panton, are "top heavy with bogus asylum seekers" and are fighting each other in violent turf wars.
For example, more established Chinese triads in London are extending their operations into Manchester and Nottingham.
Most of their earnings come from gambling, protection rackets and human trafficking.
But they are now facing competition from gangs made up of illegal immigrants from China's Fujian province.
Other violent ethnic gangs in England are: Jamaicans, Albanians, Turks and Kurds, Bangladeshis, and Colombians.
Mexicans' Bids To Enter U.S. Rebound to Pre-9/11 Levels By Jim Yardley, The New York Times, Dateline McAllen, Texas, November 24, 2002 The number of illegal immigrants crossing the U.S. southern border have returned to their pre-September 11 numbers despite tighter security, according to this article.
Even so, increased border security measures instituted before the terrorist attacks on Washington and New York are working, according to Mario Villarreal, a spokesman in Washington, D.C. for the U.S. Border Patrol.
He is quoted as saying the number of apprehensions has fallen from more than 1.6 million in 2000 to fewer than 1 million in fiscal year 2002.
Increased border controls are forcing illegal immigrants to use the ever more expensive services of smugglers, known in Mexico as "coyotes."
Smugglers charge up to $2,000 for a trip across the border to clients who might be lucky to find a $6-an-hour job in the United States.
The Reverend Mike Seifert, pastor of a Cameron Park border community Catholic church, is quoted as saying of the smugglers: "They traffic in human misery.
They make their living out of people's desperation, and their price goes up with it."
Gang Violence Prevalent on Tohono O'odham Nation Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, November 24, 2002 Gangs are a growing problem on the Tohono O'odham Nation, the second-largest native American reservation in Arizona and the United States.
"Tribal officials estimate 6.5 percent of the O'odham residents under 25 are in a gang," this report says.
"That's more than six times the estimate of less than 1 percent of gang members in the general population."
Gang-related crimes include aggravated assaults, burglaries, vandalism, drug-running and people smuggling.
Forty-Two Indicted in Asian Immigration Fraud Ring By Tim Whitmire, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Charlotte, North Carolina, November 22, 2002 Forty-two people were charged with either selling or purchasing illegally obtained immigration and identification documents.
In custody is the ringleader, Sai Wah Poon (also known as Stanley Poon), who allegedly paid an undercover agent $85,000 in March and April for fraudulent INS documents.
Poon and his associates are said to have paid more than $292,000 for fraudulent INS documents which were then sold to illegal immigrants from China, Hong Kong and Malaysia for $45,000 per document.
"In addition to making cash payments, the scheme's ringleaders also are alleged to have used cocaine and Ecstasy to pay for documents," Whitmire writes.
Don't Make Migrants "Political Scapegoats" -- Annan Reuters, Dateline The Hague, November 22, 2002 U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan warned politicians at a meeting in the Netherlands on migration and refugee policy not to make migrants "political scapegoats."
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, which was organized by the Society for International Development, Annan is quoted as saying: "For any number of illegal immigrants, there are thousands who are in our midst legally.
When we come up with laws, we have to be careful not to generalise from the particular."
Cuban-American Sentenced to Life for Smuggling Migrants Agence France Presse, Dateline Miami, November 21, 2002 A Cuban-American received a sentence of life in prison for human smuggling which resulted in one known death.
Jorge Aleman and an accomplice who was sentenced to 87 months in jail were charged in an 187-count indictment for smuggling migrants from Cuba to the United States between 1999 and 2001.
One of their clients died during an accident on a people-smuggling boat.
U.S. District Attorney Marcos Daniel Jimenez is quoted as saying: "Smugglers such as these men take advantage of and endanger individuals who are suffering and desperate to escape repressive regimes just to make a buck....
Trafficking in humans as cargo for profit is reprehensible, and we will continue to prosecute those, like these smugglers, who show no regard for the life of others."
CKS Airport Police Step Up Crackdown on Human Smuggling By Sofia Wu, Central News Agency, Dateline Taoyuan, November 20, 2002 In an effort to stem the rising tide of human smuggling, police at Taiwan's Chiang Kai-shek (CKS) International Airport are stepping up cooperation with their counterparts in foreign countries.
CKS International Airport, 40 kilometers south of Taipei, is Taiwan's major airport.
Authorities have in recent years apprehended hundreds of illegal immigrants using it as a transit stop on their way to the United States, Canada and Australia.
Officials of the American Institute in Taiwan and U.S. immigration officers stationed in Hong Kong visited CKS recently to discuss measures that could be taken to prevent crime rings from smuggling mainland Chinese into the United States.
Three Citrus Contractors Sentenced to Prison on Slavery Charges By Adrian Sainz, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Miami, November 20, 2002 Three Florida citrus contractors received long prison sentences for enslaving hundreds of illegal immigrant farm workers, threatening them with violence and holding them hostage over alleged debts.
Brothers Ramiro and Juan Ramos each received prison terms for 12 years and three months, and they must forfeit real estate and personal property worth $3 million.
Their cousin, Jose Ramos, is slated to serve 10 years and three months in prison.
Their convictions were for involuntary servitude, harboring undocumented workers, interfering with interstate commerce by extortion and using a firearm.
See the Department of Justice news release.
Ratio of Illegal Foreigners in Korea Four Times Higher Than That of Japan The Korea Herald, November 18, 2002 South Korea has four times the number of illegal aliens that Japan has, this article says.
Nearly 48 percent of South Korea's 603,294 illegal immigrants have overstayed their visas and nearly 88 percent are from Mongolia.
Other illegal immigrants come from China, Thailand, Iran, and Bangladesh.
South Korea's Justice Ministry plans to deport all of them by March 2003, but it may extend the deportation deadline by two years due to labor shortages.
Illegal immigrants fill many jobs unwanted by Korean citizens in small- and medium-sized domestic companies.
Immigrant Groups Decry Virginia Directive to Colleges By Nurith C. Aizenman and Amy Argetsinger, The Washington Post, November 16, 2002 Jerry W. Kilgore, the Republican attorney general for the state of Virginia, has warned Virginia's pubic colleges not to enroll illegal immigrants and to report to federal authorities any they may find on campus.
The directive has drawn criticism from immigrant rights organizations.
"There is no specific federal prohibition against colleges and universities enrolling illegal immigrants," according to this article.
"However, federal law places some restrictions on allowing such students to pay in-state tuition rates, and it prohibits them from receiving federal financial aid."
China, E.U.
To Strengthen Cooperation in Combating Illegal Migration Xinhua News Agency, Dateline Beijing, November 15, 2002 After a two-day seminar in Beijing on illegal migration and human trafficking, China and the European Union have agreed to strengthen cooperation in combating both problems by exchanging information as well as personnel of relevant departments.
U.N. Backs French Eviction of Refugees From Church Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Geneva, November 15, 2002 Spokesman for the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees Don Redmond said French police "handled the situation sensitively" when they ousted a group of refugees from a church they had refused to leave for five days.
Seventy illegal immigrants had been hoping to get to Britain via the nearby Channel Tunnel when they took up residence in a church.
They have now claimed asylum in France.
Redmond is quoted as saying: "We get the impression many people...did not know they were entitled to apply for asylum in France.
The people smugglers kept it from them."
Leader of Smuggling Ring Jailed for Getting Chinese Into U.S. Deutsche Presse-Agentur, Dateline Singapore, November 14, 2002 Tan Eng Seng was sentenced to two years and eight months in a Singapore jail for leading a syndicate that smuggled Chinese to the United States.
He helped at least eight Chinese nationals board flights to the United States by bribing an airport worker to allow them to enter a boarding area without checking their travel documents.
Fed Checkpoints Target Metro Area Smugglers By David Shepardson, Dateline Detroit, The Detroit News, November 13, 2002 The U.S. Border Patrol is stepping up security along the Michigan border with Canada by using random checkpoints.
Loretta Lopez-Mossman, acting chief patrol agent for the Border Patrol's Detroit office, is quoted as saying that the number of illegal Chinese immigrants caught in the fiscal year that ended September 30 more than doubled to 73, up from 37 in 2001.
Random checkpoint operations are also being conducted along the U.S.-Canadian border in norther Washington state, Vermont, New York and New Hampshire.
Since the terrorist attacks of September 11, more agents and better equipment in the form of cameras and patrol boats have been deployed in Michigan.
Costa Rican Immigrant Smuggler Sentenced to 12 Years in Prison By Marianela Jimenez, Associated Press, Dateline San Jose, Costa Rica, November 13, 2002 Gloria Nino Canales will spend 12 years in prison for running a smuggling ring that helped thousands of illegal immigrants to sneak into the United States.
Her accomplices, former Costa Rican immigration official Merlin Ocampo and Olga Carranza, received sentences of 12 and 6 years, respectively.
"U.S. officials have insisted for years that Nino Canales used bribes and an extensive network of airline officials, hotel owners and other contacts from Peru and Mexico to India to smuggle 300,000 people from Colombia to China into the United States," Jimenez writes.
She faced murder charges in Honduras in connection with the deaths of at least 10 immigrants traveling through Central America to the U.S.-Mexican border.
She escaped to Costa Rica, where she was arrested for selling false passports for as much as $20,000 each.
Immigrants Face Controls on Cash They Send Home By Susan Sachs, New York Times, November 12, 2002 The U.S. government is imposing strict new controls on companies that transfer money for immigrants.
Anyone who sends money overseas must present valid identification and be checked against lists of suspected money launderers and terrorists maintained by the federal Office of Foreign Assets Control.
According to this article, immigrant workers send $30 billion ($30,000 million) to relatives back home each year.
In New York State alone, money transfer companies handled an average of 160,000 transactions each day.
Studies done by the Inter-American Development Bank estimate that the remittance market generates some $2.4 billion ($2,400 million) in fees each year.
Sachs reports: "Some immigrants, though, do worry that closer government scrutiny of money transfer companies could mean that the Immigration and Naturalization Service might track them down."
Supermarkets Warning on Illegal Farm Workers By Chris Ryder, The Sunday Times, November 10, 2002 Supermarket chains in Northern Ireland are warning fresh food producers that their contracts will be terminated if they break the law by exploiting illegal immigrants.
A BBC expose publicized the problem in its "Spotlight" program, which revealed how workers paid European and Irish middlemen more than Euro 2,000 (about U.S.$2020) to get to Ireland.
Once there, some employers forced them to live in poor conditions and paid them as little as a quarter of the wages received by their local counterparts for the same work.
Officers Arrest Eight People Suspected of Helping Smuggle Asylum Seekers Associated Press Worldstream, Dateline London, November 9, 2002 Immigration officials arrested eight people suspected of being part of a ring that smuggled people from Britain to the United States.
The smugglers that were arrested were Heathrow Airport workers and employees of Virgin Atlantic Airways who falsified airplane boarding passes and passed their clients through airport security checks.
Steve Ridgway, chief executive of Virgin Atlantic, is quoted as saying his company intends to share the information from this investigation with other airlines to help reduce exploitation at the hands of gangs.
INS Announces Notice Concerning Expedited Removal Statement, Immigration and Naturalization Service Fact Sheet, Immigration and Naturalization Service The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) announced that all individuals who arrive in the United States illegally by sea will be placed in "expedited removal proceedings," and they will remain in detention at the discretion of the Justice Department during the period of time it takes U.S. authorities to review their cases.
INS said the decision is not a change in policy, but the "activation of pre-existing authority."
U.S. Adds Sea Patrols to Block Migrants Chicago Tribune, Dateline Miami, Florida, November 6, 2002 The U.S. Coast Guard announced it is increasing its sea and air patrols in anticipation of a possible upsurge in the numbers of illegal immigrants from Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Cuba trying to reach the United States.
Last week a freighter carrying about 225 Haitians ran aground in Miami; 19 have been repatriated so far.
France Bans New Arrivals at Refugee Center Known for Illegal Immigration to Britain By Elaine Ganley, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Paris, November 5, 2002 The Red Cross refugee center at Sangatte, France closed its doors to new arrivals on November 5.
It is slated to shut down completely in April 2003.
Sangatte, which had been set up three years ago in an abandoned Eurotunnel hangar, was used by thousands of illegal immigrants as a staging area to sneak across the English Channel to Britain, where asylum laws are more lenient.
Some 18,500 refugees tried to reach Britain using the Channel Tunnel during the first half of 2001; six were killed and 100 injured.
At the news of Sangatte's closure to new arrivals, British Home Secretary David Blunkett is quoted as saying: "From today, the Sangatte center will no longer draw would-be illegal immigrants to northern France, and traffickers will no longer be able to use it to ply their evil trade in human life."
More Armed Vietnamese Illegal Immigrants Sneaking In By Marcal Joanilho, South China Morning Post, November 3, 2002 More armed Vietnamese illegal immigrants are sneaking into Hong Kong to carry out robberies, according to this report.
Joanilho writes: "Though the number of Vietnamese illegals arrested has declined from 1,722 in 1997 to 186 in the first nine months of this year, the number of crimes committed by them has not come down.
Apart from serious immigration violations, the number of offences committed by this group averages about 40 each year."
Irresistible Attraction The Economist, November 2, 2002 This in-depth article explores migration issues.
It notes that "most very poor countries send few people abroad."
Since immigration flows are largely fueled by economic incentives, industrialization actually encourages it.
Factory jobs provide the money for people to travel to countries where wages are far higher.
This article notes a study done by Frank Pieke of Oxford University on emigration from China's Fujian province.
The typical scenario, according to Pieke, is that a woman will get a factory job in China to support a man who goes abroad to find a job that pays much more.
NOTE:Frank Pieke is the principal investigator for a project called "At the Margins of the Chinese World System: The Fuzhou Diaspora in Europe."
See the project web site and Pieke's briefing paper.
Pieke also described the project in a paper presented at the conference on "Transnational Communities" held in Manchester, England, May 16-18, 1998.
French Police Break Up People-Smuggling Gangs By Adam Sage, The Australian, November 2, 2002 French police broke up six British-controlled Iraqi-Kurdish gangs that may have smuggled up to 20,000 illegal immigrants into Britain across the Channel from Calais, France.
The gangs infiltrated the Sangatte Red Cross refugee center near Calais and charged would-be asylum-seekers $1400 each to board trucks or ferries headed for Britain.
More than 100 suspects have been arrested; they face up to five years in prison if convicted.
_________________________________________________________________
* Back to IN THE NEWS FOR 2002 index Most recent IN THE NEWS FOR 2003 articles IN THE NEWS FOR 2001 Journal Articles and Book Excerpts _________________________________________________________________
r
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
