International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2002* August Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
Southern Town Set To Be New Gateway for Illegal Immigrants By Flavia Munn, Western Daily Press, August 29, 2002 One of the most exclusive seaside resort towns in southern England is bracing itself for the arrival of up to 10,000 asylum seekers, according to this report.
Since the closure of Sangatte camp near Calais in France, asylum seekers have been flocking to the French port of Cherbourg.
It is feared they will try to get into Britain through connecting ports such as Poole and Portsmouth in Hampshire.
When the Sangatte camp was open, asylum seekers reached Britain using Dover, which gained the nickname "asylum alley."
Chris Bulteel, councillor for Poole's Harbour ward, is quoted as saying: "In Dover there has been a rise in crime and a plummet in property prices because of the reputation it has gained."
With an already desperate shortage of affordable housing in the area, he said: "Presumably any illegal immigrants who arrive here will expect to be housed locally and may even be found somewhere before the people on the waiting lists."
Thai Court Backs Claim of Smuggling By Melissa Stevens, The West Australian, August 28, 2002 In the first decision of its kind in relation to the extradition of a people smuggler, the Thai Criminal Court delivered a judgment upholding Australia's request for the extradition of a Pakistani man accused of smuggling almost 400 illegal immigrants from Indonesia to Australia.
The smuggler, Hasan Ayoub, could face up to 20 years in an Australian jail for his people-smuggling activities between December 2000 and April 2001.
He was previously deported from Cambodia after he served five months in prison for offences under Cambodian immigration law.
He was provisionally arrested in Bangkok in December 2001 in relation to Australia's extradition request.
Human Traffic on the Road to Ruin The Scotsman, August 26, 2002 Southwest Scotland is experiencing an influx of illegal immigrants attempting to reach Ireland, and Scottish criminals are finding that human smuggling is safer than trafficking heroin, this report says.
Ireland is increasingly attracting people-smuggling gangs because it is easy to enter the country by sea, according to information cited as coming from the International Organisation for Migration.
With a growing population of legal immigrants entering Ireland -- some 39,000 arrived last year -- illegal immigrants are able to blend in more easily.
Hospitals Feeling Strain from Illegal Immigrants By Dana Canedy, The New York Times, August 25, 2002 U.S. hospitals, which are required to provide emergency care to critically ill or injured patients regardless of their immigration status, are feeling the financial burden of illegal immigrants, according to this report.
"By some estimates," Canedy writes, "hospitals are collectively writing off as much as $2 billion a year in unpaid medical bills to treat the illegal immigrants, who, unlike American citizens and permanent residents, are ineligible for Medicaid."
(Medicaid is a government program that helps pay medical costs for low-income patients.)
"According to a study released last month by the National Association of Counties, 86 percent of 150 counties nationwide reported an increase in uncompensated health care expenses in the last five years," Canedy writes.
"Of those reporting an increase, 67 percent cited a growing number of immigrants as a factor in the rising costs for county hospitals and rescue services."
Bahamas: Government Discusses Illegal Immigration Issues with the USA BBC Monitoring, Source: Caribbean Media Corporation News Agency, Bridgetown, August 23, 2002 Officials from the United States and Bahamas have agreed to work together to stem the flow of illegal immigrants into their countries through an agreement reached August 22.
The two sides examined measures to increase cooperation on the high seas and proper procedures for processing illegal immigrants.
The government of the Bahamas says it needs resources to deal with more than 2,500 illegal Haitian immigrants it has captured so far this year.
Papua New Guinea Warns of Tough Measures Against Illegal Immigrants BBC Monitoring, Source: Papua New Guinea Post-Courier web site, Port Moresby, August 23, 2002 Papua New Guinea is implementing a tough new policy regarding illegal immigrants, according to this report.
Foreign Affairs and Immigration Minister Sir Rabbie Namaliu is quoted as saying: "Any non-citizen who has illegally obtained a PNG passport will be charged and then deported and prevented from re-entering Papua New Guinea.
That is non-negotiable.
Any official who has facilitated this gross abuse will be prosecuted as well."
Brazilians Turning to Mexican Smugglers By Daniel Yi, Los Angeles Times, August 23, 2002 Discouraged by their country's "perennial socioeconomic ills made worse by a stubborn recession," more Brazilians are using Mexican people smuggling rings to illegally enter the United States, according to this article.
The U.S. Border Patrol has arrested nearly 2,200 Brazilians so far this year.
"The great majority of those caught at the border are still Mexicans and Central Americans, but even as their numbers have dwindled in recent years -- from 1.55 million in 1998 to 1.24 million last year -- those of other countries have doubled in that same period from about 10,500 to 22,000," Yi writes.
Adele Fasano, Immigration and Naturalization Service director for the San Diego district, is quoted as saying: "Unfortunately, because there is such a well-developed infrastructure of Mexican smuggling rings, that infrastructure is now being used to support international smuggling."
Marine Police Detect New Tactics by Illegal Immigrants Bernama, The Malaysian National News Agency, August 22, 2002 Malaysia's Marine Police have detected a new tactic by illegal immigrants trying to enter the country: they use life boats, claiming their vessel has sunk and they are trying to reach land to save themselves.
Nine Indonesian illegal immigrants have been captured this way, according to this report.
Alleged People Smuggler on Trial in Indonesia for Visa Offenses Agence France-Presse, August 22, 2002 The alleged people smuggler who organized the ship voyage to Australia that resulted in the drownings of 350 illegal immigrants last October has gone on trial in Jakarta for mere visa offenses because Indonesia has no law against people smuggling.
Mootaz Attia Mohommad Hasan (also known as Abu Quasey), an Egyptian, is being tried for illegal entry and illegal residence, this report says.
The 44 survivors of the ill-fated smuggling ship claim to have paid him 2,000 to 4,000 dollars each.
"Thousands of people from the Middle East and elsewhere have used Indonesia as a stepping stone to reach Australia, trusting their lives to people smugglers who often use dilapidated and overlaoded boats," this report says.
"Australia has urged Indonesia to introduce a law against people smuggling."
French Minister Promises New Law to Crack Down on Illegal Immigrants Agence France-Presse, August 21, 2002 France's Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy has promised to quickly propose reforms to parliament in an effort to crack down on illegal immigration.
He has also promised to deploy a group of paramilitary police in Cherbourg, a port city where more and more illegal immigrants congregate in their bid to reach Britain.
The mayor of Cherbourg, according to this report, says his city has seen a rising influx of illegal immigrants since April, when the controversial Sangatte refugee camp near Calais was closed.
Spain Busts Chinese People-Smuggling Network Reuters English News Service, August 21, 2002 Spanish police arrested on August 21 the head of a Chinese people-smuggling ring along with four of his gang members and two clients.
The gang is said to have smuggled more than 100 Chinese from the Shanghai region to Europe and the United States.
"Spanish Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar has been one of Europe's most outspoken advocates of tougher controls on illegal immigration, which he made one of the central issues of Spain's six-month presidency of the European Union earlier this year," this report says.
Spain Arrests Moroccan Driver for Truck Deaths Reuters English News Service, August 20, 2002 Spanish police arrested on August 20 a Moroccan driver for "homicide through negligence" the day after discovering the corpses of four suspected illegal immigrants in a container in his sealed truck trailer.
The charges do not imply that the driver knew he was hauling illegal immigrants, just that he neglected to check his cargo.
The driver had called police when he heard banging coming from the trailer.
A number of similar incidents have been uncovered by police in the European Union.
In December 2001, Irish police found the bodies of eight illegal immigrants who suffocated in a freight container.
Days earlier, Italian police found four dead in a truck at the port of Livorno.
In June 2000, 58 Chinese were found dead of suffocation in a truck in the southeastern English port of Dover.
Experts Eye Decline, Shift in Immigration By David R. Francis, The Christian Science Monitor, August 19, 2002 The illegal-alien population in the United States has been rising by 400,000 to 500,000 per year, according to this article.
This year, however, it may drop by 100,000 to 200,000 people.
Among the reasons for the drop in illegal immigration: a weaker U.S. economy means fewer jobs for illegals; the Social Security Administration's major effort to clean up its records may have caused many undocumented workers to lose their jobs; tighter U.S. security since the September 11 terrorist attacks discourage some would-be illegal immigrants and catch others.
"The U.S. has a population of 285 million of which about 32 million, or 11 percent, are foreign born.
Naturalized citizens number about 12.5 million, or 40 percent of those who are foreign born," Francis writes.
"In the 1991-2000 decade, legal immigrants numbered 9.1 million.
The Census Bureau also estimates the illegal-alien population in the United States to be about 8.7 million.
Researchers at Northeastern University put the number as high as 11 million," this report says.
Promote Tourism, Not Trafficking Editorial, The Nation (Thailand), August 18, 2002 The demand for Chinese language training is being exploited by crime syndicates to smuggle mainland Chinese to third countries through Thailand, this editorial says.
Because economic and business ties between Thailand and China have grown significantly in the last few years and because Thailand promotes itself as an education center in the region, there is a huge demand for Chinese language teachers.
Human smuggling rings have taken advantage of the situation by bringing in Chinese language "teachers" who disappear soon after taking up their teaching jobs.
Some Chinese language schools have no teachers at all, acting instead as fronts for smuggling rings by issuing certificates allowing mainland Chinese to apply for Thai immigration visas and work permits.
Illegals Add Risk to Sex Industry By Nick Taylor, Perth Sunday Times, August 18, 2002 Illegal immigrants working in Western Australia as prostitutes are increasing the risk for AIDS, according to this report.
Some of the women smuggled into the country were prostitutes in their own countries -- Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Korea, and China -- and have contracted for up to $40,000 to organized crime rings.
The smuggled-in prostitutes charge less than the Australian born and are more willing to engage in unprotected sex practices.
Law Offers Chinese a Path to U.S.; Policy Giving Asylum to Those Facing Coerced Birth Control Benefits Mostly Men By Patricia Wen, The Boston Globe, August 18, 2002 Three out of four Chinese seeking political asylum in the United States based on China's one-child policy are men, this report says.
If a man's asylum case is approved, he petitions for the rest of his family to join him in the United States.
U.S. law, enacted in 1996, provides that asylum be granted to some Chinese who are victims of China's coercive one-child population control policies.
"INS spokesman Russ Bergeron said when the 1996 law was passed, Congress put an unprecedented cap on the number of people who could be approved each year," Wen writes.
"They capped it at 1,000 people, even though an unlimited number of 'conditional' approvals can be granted.
In those cases, the person is essentially approved, but waiting to be among the 1,000 approvals allowed each year.
The wait can take several years."
In 2000, the most recent year for which figures are available, the U.S. Justice Department received 2,046 applications for asylum based on China's one-child policy, up 40 percent from 1998.
See the Immigration and Naturalization Service web site How do I apply for asylum?, and the study entitled Chinese State Birth Planning in the 1990s and Beyond.
Guatemala and Mexico Cooperate To Bolster Border Security By Monica Medel, EFE News Service, August 17, 2002 Guatemala and Mexico have agreed to improve infrastructure and security along their border in an effort to control illegal immigration, according to this report.
Currently there are only three official checkpoints along the 597-mile border between the two countries, most of which runs through jungle.
"Strengthening border controls was approved at last week's meeting in Mexico City of the Binational Commission, the principal mechanism for dialogue between the two countries," Medel reports.
Dutch Minister Unveils Tough Measures Against Illegal Immigrants By Andrew Osborn, The Guardian, August 17, 2002 A new immigration policy to take effect within six months will make the Netherlands one of Europe's least welcoming places for illegal immigrants.
Hilbrand Nawijn, the new immigration minister, announced that asylum seekers will be detained in converted army barracks for up to two months and then expelled from the country immediately if their applications are turned down.
Currently asylum seekers live in open accommodation and can travel freely; they cannot work while their applications are being considered, a process which can take years.
Companies will be liable to a fine of 1,350 pounds (about 2,078 U.S. dollars) for every illegal immigrant they hire.
Governments Agree on Need to Fight People Smuggling By Kintto Lucas, Inter Press Service, August 16, 2002 The Third South American Conference on International Migration ended two days of meetings in Quito, Ecuador with a plan to "regularize" migration flows in South America, promote human rights, and crack down on people smuggling.
"The meeting, which drew 40 government delegates from twelve South American countries, representatives of non-governmental organizations, and United Nations delegates also decided to set up a 'regional observatory of migration' in Chile, to provide information on migration flows in the region," Lucas reports.
Ecuadorean Foreign Minister Heinz Moeller is quoted as saying: "Migration flows cannot be stopped by walls or other physical barriers or armies, because the hunger and desperation caused by an unjust economic system have that effect, which will be uncontrollable if measures are not urgently adopted....
"If we could create enough sources of employment in our countries, our people would not be forced to emigrate....The region is going to explode if the economic crisis is not overcome, but it will also explode in the pockets of the developed countries that insist on closing their borders to our competitive products," Moeller said.
Remittances sent home by Latin American emigrants amounted to $23 billion last year, comprising "an essential pillar of support for many economies is crisis," Lucas writes.
Ruddock Defends Hard Line on Illegal Immigrants Australian Associated Press General News, August 16, 2002 Australia's tough stance on illegal immigration has dramatically cut the number of potential illegal arrivals, according to Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock.
Ruddock is quoted as saying: "We've had very significant impact on the operations of people smugglers, and we have not seen any unauthorised border arrivals of substantial carriers by boat on the Australian mainland or any of our territory for nine months."
Illegal immigration, he said, has "gone down by 99.999 per cent."
The Australian navy diverts illegal boat arrivals to neighboring Pacific islands for processing; asylum seekers who reach the mainland are detained in outback camps.
Principal Russian Criminal Groups Agence France Presse, August 15, 2002 Chechen gangsters have found a lucrative niche smuggling Chinese immigrants to Japan, according to this article.
The Obshina is the largest Chechen mafia and one of the most important organized crime groups in the former Soviet Union.
"There are hundreds of Russian mafia groups, believed to control a significant sector of the economy in Russia and boasting operations worldwide," according to this article.
The largest and most powerful is Solntsevo, with some 5,000 members specializing in drugs, gun-running, extortion and money-laundering.
The Tambov is the most dangerous extortion gang; and the Odessa Mafia is the dominant Russian organized crime group operating in the United States.
Mideast Immigrants' Effect in U.S. Weighed By Elizabeth Shogren, The Los Angeles Times, August 15, 2002 and Immigration from the Middle East: Report Shows Rapid Growth, with One Million Newcomers Expected by 2010 U.S. Newswire, August 14, 2002 While the overall immigrant population (both legal and illegal) in the United States has tripled since 1970, immigrants from the Middle East have grown seven-fold -- from fewer than 200,000 in 1970 to nearly 1.5 million in 2000.
Most -- 73 percent -- are Muslims, according to a study recently released by The Center for Immigration Studies, a Washington-based non-profit, non-partisan research organization.
Both the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) and the Census Bureau estimate that 10 percent (about 150,000) of Middle Eastern immigrants in the United States are in the country illegally.
There is no evidence, however, that Middle Easterners violate U.S. immigration laws at rates higher than other ethnic groups.
As of 2000, the most common countries of origin of Middle East immigrants in the United States are: Iran, Pakistan, Israel, Iraq, Bangladesh, Turkey, Egypt and Lebanon.
Most have settled in California, followed by New York, Texas, Michigan, Virginia, New Jersey, Illinois and Florida.
The study, Immigrants form the Middle East: A Profile of the Foreign-Born Population from Pakistan to Morocco by Steven A. Camarota, notes that more Middle Eastern immigrants (55 percent versus 38 percent overall) become citizens.
Camarota is quoted as saying: "Continued Mideast immigration appears likely to lead to changes in U.S. policy toward the Arab-Israeli conflict as elected officials respond to this population's growing electoral importance."
Government Insists on Tough Stance To Limit Illegal Immigration Korea Times, August 15, 2002 The Republic of Korea (ROK) plans to crack down on illegal immigration, according to this report.
New immigration laws require that the estimated 260,000 illegal immigrants now in South Korea must leave by the end of March 2003 or face deportation.
In recognizing the need for foreign manpower, however, the ROK government plans to increase the quota of "industrial trainees" to 130,000 from the current 80,000.
South Koreans are engaged in a heated debate over the industrial trainee system versus the proposed work permit system.
"The business world has strongly opposed the introduction of the work permit system, which will give foreign workers the same working conditions as locals, citing the fear of huge expenses," this report says.
AFP in $43M Expansion By Peter Clack, Canberra Times-Australia, August 14, 2002 The Australian Federal Police (AFP) is expanding its overseas liaison network to combat people smuggling, drug trafficking, terrorism and other transnational crimes.
Some $43 million has been earmarked for the expansion.
The AFP already has officers in Bangkok, Bogota, Jakarta, Hong Kong, Beirut, Phnom Penh, The Hague and Beijing.
It is negotiating to open offices in Belgrade, Ho Chi Minh City, Pretoria, Bali, Chiang Mai, Mandalay, and Dubai.
IOM Says Human Trafficking Moves $10 Billion a Year EFE News Service, August 14, 2002 The International Organization for Migration (IOM) says migrant trafficking and human smuggling nets criminals between $7 billion and $10 billion a year.
Brunson McKinley, IOM's general director, is quoted as saying that people smuggling is "the second largest generator of illegal funds" worldwide and has become one of the most preferred activities of organized crime.
McKinley was in Quito, Ecuador for a South American conference on irregular migration.
Spain To Line Coast with Radar To Stop Immigrants Reuters English News Service, August 14, 2002 Spain, in a project said to be the first of its kind in Europe, will set up a network of radar, sensors and cameras along 70 miles of its coast closest to Morocco.
The effort is aimed at stopping thousands of illegal immigrants who try to enter the country each year.
Some 12,000 illegal immigrants have been stopped and expelled so far this year.
According to this report, 730 people have had to be rescued from the sea in the Strait of Gibraltar since 2000; 13 bodies were found near Tarifa on August 1 after their smugglers forced them into the water off shore; thousands more may have drowned in the recent past in similar scenarios.
Guatemala Follows Mexico on ID Card By Mark Bixler, Atlanta Journal and Constitution, August 14, 2002 The Guatemalan government plans to follow the Mexican government's lead by issuing identity documents to its citizens who are in the United States illegally.
El Salvador, Honduras and Poland are also considering granting similar identity documents.
The card could help illegal immigrants open U.S. bank accounts and cash checks.
U.S. financial service institutions require some proof of identity, and most U.S. states limit their identification cards and/or driver's licenses to U.S. citizens and people with permission to be in the United States.
According to this report, the Mexican government says 61 U.S. banks and 798 U.S. police department accept the "matricula consular," a laminated card with a Mexican citizen's photo, name, address in the United States and date and place of birth in Mexico.
"Banks stand to make money by managing billions of dollars illegal immigrants earn each year," Bixler writes.
"They also earn fees for money transfers; the Mexican government says its citizens in the United States sent $10 billion to Mexico last year."
Huge Child Smuggling Ring Broken By Greg Krikorian, Jennifer Mena, and T.C. Miller, The Los Angeles Times, August 14, 2002 U.S. authorities, after breaking the largest child-smuggling ring ever, are now worried that many more are still in operation.
The child-smuggling rings charge an average of $5,000 per child and thrive on the loneliness of illegal immigrants in the United States who wish to be reunited with their children.
Hipolito Acosta, of the Immigration and Naturalization service is quoted as saying that these parents need to understand that "they are literally turning over the lives of their children to smugglers who don't really care about anything but the money."
Mexican Officials Report More Juveniles Being Smuggled Across Border The Associated Press, August 13, 2002 Mexican officials report an upswing in cases of smugglers trying to sneak children into the United States through legal border crossings in southern Arizona.
According to this report, the would-be smuggler is typically a female U.S. citizen who drives to the port of entry and tries to claim the child or children in her vehicle as her own.
Some carry borrowed or fake birth certificates to back their assertions.
"In the first six months of this year, there have been more than 1,500 repatriations of unaccompanied Mexican juveniles handled by Mexico's southern Arizona consulates," this report says.
Child-Smuggling Ring Broken Up by the U.S. Immigration Agency By Eric Schmitt, The New York Times, August 13, 2002 and 5 Held in Alleged Immigrant Child Smuggling Ring By Michelle Munn, Los Angeles Times, August 13, 2002 The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) announced on August 12 that it had broken up a multimillion-dollar smuggling ring that transported children to their parents living illegally in the United States.
Since 1994, the family-run smuggling ring transported hundreds of children from Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras at a cost of $5,000 to $7,000 per child.
The children were smuggled through Mexico into Los Angeles, then moved throughout the United States.
Many of the children suffered from hunger or exposure, enduring treks through deserts and mountain passes.
The smuggling suspects face up to 10 years in prison and fines of $250,000 if convicted.
Those who are not legal permanent residents of the United States could be deported after serving their prison terms.
The fates of the 53 children rescued when authorities arrested their smugglers will be determined on a case-by-case basis.
See the INS news release INS Breaks Up Major Child Smuggling Ring.
People-Smuggling Operation Foiled by U.S. Border Patrol; Canadian Held After Residents See Suspicious Boat on Niagara River By Rochelle White, The Standard (St. Catharines), August 13, 2002 The U.S. Border Patrol nabbed a Canadian smuggler with his two Chinese clients.
U.S. authorities credited local residents, who spotted a suspicious boat on the lower Niagara River and reported their sighting to the U.S. Coast Guard.
Ed Duda, U.S. Border Patrol deputy chief, is quoted as saying: "Since 9/11, Americans and Canadians have become more involved in policing the border."
"The most worrisome new issue the border patrol faces is the involvement of children in smuggling," White reports.
"Last week two infants were involved in a smuggling attempt and neither one had a lifejacket."
UK To Invest in Belgian Seaports' Security in Bid To Curb Illegal Immigration BBC Monitoring, Source: De Standaard web site, Groot-Bijgaarden, in Dutch, August 12, 2002 The British government will help finance improvements in foreign ports that are used by illegal immigrants trying to cross the Channel.
The Belgium ports of Zeebrugge and Ostend will be among them.
The 58 asphyxiated Chinese citizens discovered in June 2000 were found in a container that had been shipped from Zeebrugge.
Another container shipped from Zeebrugge in December 2001 contained eight dead Turkish and Albanian illegal immigrants.
Illegal immigrants found in Ostend have jumped 12 percent this year.
City To Target Immigrant Legal Scams; Says Suspect Law Firms Could Face Legal Action By Anthony M. DeStefano, Newsday (New York, NY), August 12, 2002 Gretchen Dykstra, New York City's commissioner of the Department of Consumer Affairs, says her office will be scouring the Chinese language press for ads falsely touting legal services for immigrants.
Bogus law offices could face injunctions and fines from the city for false advertising.
Dykstra is taking action in the wake of reports that certain Manhattan-Chinatown businesses presently advertise themselves as immigration law firms yet have no lawyers actually working for them.
"Law enforcement and legal sources have also said that federal criminal investigators are probing a number of attorney and service agencies to see if they have committed fraud," DeStefano reports.
Those probes were sparked in part by the case of Robert and Sheery Lu Porges, who ran a law firm dealing with asylum fraud and people smuggling.
The pair, responsible for illegally moving thousands of Chinese into the United States, will spend 8 years in prison for racketeering and tax evasion.
Smugglers Tempting Indian Reservation Residents with Cash The Associated Press, August 12, 2002 and Smuggling in Drugs, Immigrants Fuel Corruption on Arizona Reservation By Tim Steller, The Arizona Daily Star, August 12, 2002 People and drug smugglers are increasingly tempting the Native Americans of the Tohono O'odham Nation, according to these reports.
"Smugglers are willing to pay locals for stashing illegal entrants or drug loads in their houses, for driving people or drugs across the border or into the interior, and for spying," Steller writes.
Even some children have dropped out of school to join the smugglers' payrolls as spies.
Seventeen thousand Tohono O'odham residents live on a vast reservation in Arizona, which has a 75-mile-long border with Mexico.
Unemployment on the reservation runs about 25 percent.
It is among the most active areas in Arizona for illegal border crossing.
U.S. Border Patrol apprehensions of illegal entrants doubled in the first six months of this year, rising from 34,522 to 60,270.
"In the first nine months of this fiscal year," Steller writes, "U.S. Customs Service agents working on the Nation have seized more marijuana than in all of the last fiscal year, 94,956 pounds compared with 76,285 pounds last year."
Italian Police Seize Drugs Landed by Illegals Agence France-Presse, August 12, 2002 Italian customs police seized about 1,650 pounds of marijuana abandoned by Albanian illegal immigrants who landed by rubber boat on the coast of Puglia August 12.
One was arrested and charged with drug smuggling; some nine others escaped.
Dishonest Lawyers, Businesses Team To Scam Immigrants in Chinatown By Anthony M. DeStefano, Newsday (Queens), August 11, 2002 Unscrupulous immigration lawyers and business people in New York's Chinatown have been teaming up to file bogus or defective asylum claims, DeStefano writes.
Such parnerships are estimated to generate most of the 9,000-plus Chinese asylum claims filed each year and are a multimillion-dollar business.
But slipshod work often means that even immigrants who might have had good asylum claims find themselves involved in fraud and facing deportation.
Some of these businesses appear to be involved in the unauthorized practice of law, soliciting clients, giving legal advice, drawing up asylum claims that are sometimes fabricated, and securing documents that are sometimes fake.
Some actually work closely with snakeheads.
Their key attaction is their relative low cost -- $1,000 to $2,000 per asylum case, about half what a regular lawyer might charge.
While other ethnic groups have their share of crooked immigration lawyers or non-lawyers illegally practicing law, the problem seems especially acute in New York's Chinatown.
"Statistics from the federal Executive Office of Immigration Review show that aside from Mexicans, Chinese nationals file the most asylum applications," DeStefano writes.
"In fiscal year 2001, 9,142 asylum applications were filed by Chinese, out of a total nationwide of 60,853.
There were 662 claims granted, 1,966 awaiting approval and some 3,405 denied, the data shows, with other cases pending, abandoned, or withdrawn."
Migrant Smuggling Grows More Ruthless, Deadly By Rene Sanchez, The Washington Post, August 11, 2002 In the past two months, more than 110 illegal immigrants have died along the U.S.-Mexico border.
They died from desert heat or the cold in mountain passes, drowned in rivers and canals, or died in van crashes trying to elude highway checkpoints.
Hundreds more who had to be rescued have told investigators of abuse and abandonment at the hands of the smugglers they paid to bring them illegally into the United States.
"Today, authorities say that nearly all migrant smuggling along the border here is managed by syndicates that charge expensive fees, control routes and employ a variety of operatives -- guides, scouts, decoys, drivers -- linked by cell phones and following meticulous plans," Sanchez writes.
Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney John R. Kraemer in San Diego is quoted as saying: "The price and danger of smuggling is rising.
And more people are turning to smugglers."
His office expects to prosecute more than 500 alleged migrant smugglers this year.
Smugglers have been known to dupe their clients into believing the desert crossings will be easy, then rob and abandon the weak.
Others separate the illegal immigrants from their children or force them to take drugs such as cocaine so that they can more easily endure the rigors of the trip.
Couple Sentenced for Roles in Immigrant Smuggling Ring By Benjamin Weiser, The New York Times, August 10, 2002 and Pair Facing Jail for Smuggling; Couple Made Millions Moving Immigrants By Anthony M. DeStefano, Newsday (New York, NY), August 9, 2002 Robert E. Porges, a New York immigration lawyer, and his wife Sheery Lu Porges, a naturalized American citizen from China, were each sentenced to just over eight years in prison for their roles in bringing thousands of Chinese into the United States illegally between 1993 and 2000.
Porges was also fined $125,000 and his wife fined $25,000.
They were ordered to forfeit to the U.S. government $6 million, which included their home in Stamford, Connecticut and $2.1 million in cash.
Porges admitted to helping illegal immigrants make up false stories of persecution to obtain asylum.
Sheery Lu Porges supervised contacts with the snakeheads and handled the cash payments brought in by the smugglers -- an estimated $60,000 per month.
The pair came to the attention of U.S. law enforcement through the debriefing of arrested smugglers and paralegals who had worked for the Porges' law firm.
States Move To Halt Fraud in Licensing of Drivers; September 11 Attacks Exposed Weaknesses Nationwide By Dale Russakoff, The Washington Post, August 8, 2002 State governments all around the United States are moving "to crack down on driver's license fraud and demanding more extensive documentation of identity before issuing licenses," Russakoff writes.
Jason King, of the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators, is quoted as saying: "September 11th raised to public attention just what the driver's license has become -- America's ID of choice.
Once you have one, you can rent an apartment, rent a car, open a bank account, cash a check, board an airplane."
Although driver's license security has become a matter of national urgency in the fight against terrorism and identity theft, state agencies are facing enormous challenges trying to update their operations due to decades of underfunding.
Drivers Are Victims as Refugees Flee By Rachel Baird, The Express, August 8, 2002 One in four lorry drivers has been attacked either by illegal immigrants or by the criminals smuggling them into Britain, according to a survey based on the results provided by 29 haulage firms represented by the Freight Transport Association.
Three-quarters of the drivers said they have had illegal immigrants try to break into their vehicles; a number have been robbed by their uninvited passengers.
The British government fines drivers found to be smuggling people into the country 2,000 pounds (about U.S. $3080), but plans to double the fines.
"More than 1,430 drivers have been fined more than 15 million pounds in connection with the 7,500 plus illegal immigrants found in their lorries since April 2000," Baird writes.
Banks Discover Lure of Mexican Migrants By John Authors, Financial Times, August 8, 2002 The estimated 23 million Mexicans living in the United States are believed to have sent home $9.3 billion last year; this year the amount of money is expected to top $10 billion.
"According to Mexico's National Population Office, more than 42 per cent went to communities with fewer than 2,500 inhabitants, many with no bank branch," Authors writes.
"Recent surveys by Mund Americas, the market research firm, suggest that this money functions like a development bank, with more than half of income from remittances going towards investment in small companies."
Since only about one in five Mexicans has a bank account, U.S. banks are making serious attempts to tap into this market.
Well Fargo was the first U.S. financial service to accept identity cards issued by Mexican consulates in the United States to undocumented workers without passports.
It opened more than 35,000 new accounts since November 2001.
European Union Turns Blind Eye to East European Workers By Marcin Grajewski, Reuters English News Service, August 7, 2002 Authorities in many European Union (E.U.) countries are turning a blind eye to illegal workers who enter on tourist visas and take jobs shunned by most Westerners, according to this article.
"The moonlighters typically earn about half the wages paid to legal employees, but that is still four or five times more than they would get at home,"
Grajewski writes.
E.U. Social Affairs Commissioner Anna Diamantopoulou is quoted as saying: "Illegal immigration certainly causes a lot of concern as far as social cohesion is concerned, because they live in poverty, without rights and undermine the labor market."
E.U. politicians, Grajewski writes, "fret about a growing world of untaxed jobs, informal housing, transport and forged documents that have emerged to facilitate immigrants' life and conceal them from the authorities."
Poland, which has an official unemployment rate of nearly 18 percent, is a main source of illegal workers.
It is also the largest of the 10 candidates hoping to join the European Union in 2004.
The European Commission, the executive arm of the 15-nation European Union, predicts that if the 10 mostly East European countries are admitted into the European Union, about 330,000 people -- two-thirds seeking jobs -- would move into current E.U. member states each year.
Marshall Islands Cracks Down on Asian Overstayers Agence France-Presse, August 7, 2002 In an attempt to deal with a growing illegal immigration problem, officials in the Marshall Islands have stopped allowing Asians to obtain 30-day visas on arrival.
Asians who overstay their visas and illegally obtain jobs have become a significant issue in Majuro, the capital, according to this report.
The Marshall Islands has issued new visa guidelines that require many Asians to apply for visas in advance of their arrival.
"The focus is largely on China," this report says.
Number of Immigration Violators Prosecuted Doubled Between 1996 and 2000 By Christopher Newton, The Associated Press, August 6, 2002 The number of people prosecuted in federal court for immigration offenses more than doubled -- from 6,605 to 15,613 -- between 1996 and 2000, according to Bureau of Justice Statistics released August 6.
About 75 percent of the immigration offenders in 2000 were charged with unlawfully entering or re-entering the United States, 20 percent were charged with alien smuggling, and 5 percent were charged with the misuse of visas.
Of those prosecuted in 2000, 57 percent were Mexican citizens, 7 percent were U.S. citizens, 3 percent were Chinese, and 28 percent were other nationalities.
Immigration and Naturalization Service spokesman Russ Bergeron is quoted as saying: "I think what you're seeing is a byproduct of the increased levels of enforcement both at the ports of entry and between the ports of entry along the Southwest border.
More inspectors and more border patrol agents mean more apprehensions of individuals violating criminal provisions of federal law.
That results in more prosecutions."
See full report on Bureau of Justice Statistics web site: Immigration Offenders in the Federal Criminal Justice System, 2000
Illegal Immigrant Death Rate Rises Sharply in Barren Areas By Evelyn Nieves, The New York Times, August 6, 2002 Deaths are reaching "record rates" in remote and dangerous areas along the U.S.-Mexico border as illegal immigrants attempt to evade stepped-up border patrols, this article says.
Even so, border deaths in general are down 20 percent, Nieves writes, and illegal immigration from Mexico has fallen about 29 percent, mostly because of tighter security and a faltering U.S. economy.
The U.S. Border Patrol is mounting a public service campaign in Mexico and Central America warning would-be migrants of the dangers of illegal border crossings.
Most illegal border crossers die of heatstroke or dehydration, but others die by drowning, being struck by lightning, experiencing vehicle crashes, or suffocating in airless trucks.
The United States began tightening border security back in 1994 with "Operation Gatekeeper."
Before that, "most of the illegal traffic from Mexico entered through cities like San Diego and El Paso, where migrants became targets for muggers and other assailants," Nieves writes.
Unscrupulous smugglers known as "coyotes" are becoming more necessary -- and more expensive -- for the more remote illegal border crossings.
"Possibly hundreds of migrants have died because they have been abandoned by these smugglers, or because they have been led by people who themselves could not manage a brutal landscape," Nieves writes.
Records Checks Displace Workers; Social Security Letters Cost Immigrants Jobs By Mary Beth Sheridan, The Washington Post, August 6, 2002 As many as 100,000 immigrants may have lost their jobs because they could not or would not adequately respond to the Social Security Administration's effort to match workers' names and Social Security numbers to information on the Administration's files.
Earlier this year, the Social Security Administration sent out letters to more than 800,000 businesses asking employers to clear up discrepancies in information regarding their workers.
Carolyn Cheezum a Social Security spokeswoman, is quoted as saying: "We were not out targeting anybody, any group.
It was strictly to improve wage reporting."
In recent years, the Social Security Administration has received increasing amounts of money from taxpayers whose names or Social Security numbers don't match information in its files.
"Such contributions from workers and employers totaled $4.9 billion in 1999, the most recent year for which data were available," Sheridan writes.
Social Security's records check has highlighted "an open secret," Sheridan writes.
"A huge number of illegal immigrants work 'on the books,' providing stolen or made-up Social Security numbers to employers and having U.S. taxes deducted from their paychecks."
As more employers receive Social Security Administration letters of inquiry, workers who can't clear up discrepancies either are fired or quietly leave.
Coast Guard Cuts New Path in Terror War By Daniel B. Wood, The Christian Science Monitor, August 6, 2002 This article discusses the challenges facing the U.S. Coast Guard as Congress discusses the possibility that the Guard, along with 21 other federal agencies, may be folded into the new Homeland Security Department.
In discussing the Coast Guard's duties, the article notes that on a typical day, the Coast Guard interdicts 14 illegal migrants, saves 10 lives, conducts 109 search and rescue missions, seizes 206 pounds of cocaine and 169 pounds of marijuana, responds to 20 oil or hazardous chemical spills, and assists 2,509 commercial ships entering and leaving U.S. ports.
Germany Mirrors Europe's Move To Curb Immigration By Andreas Tzortzis, The Christian Science Monitor, August 6, 2002 Germany's new law on immigration reflects the harder line Europe is taking on immigrants, this article says.
Slated to take effect in January 2003, Germany's new immigration law aims to draw highly skilled workers to Germany and provide public money for language programs designed to better integrate the estimated 7 million foreigners already in-country.
At the same time, the law will crack down on bogus asylum seekers.
Germany has had more than 88,000 people apply for political asylum in 2001, the highest number in the European Union.
Supporters of the new law say it will ferret out fraud and streamline rules for asylum seekers.
Critics say it will lead to the deportation of legitimate refugees and encourage illegal immigration.
According to European Union statistics, an estimated 300,000 to 500,000 people arrive illegally in Western Europe each year.
Legal asylum applicants number only about 380,000, a number that has been declining with the end of the Bosnian war.
River Can Be Fatal Lure at U.S. Border; Niagara Claims Illegal Immigrants By Cindy Rodriguez, The Boston Globe, August 5, 2002 So far this year, government authorities have found the bodies of 19 people who drowned in the Niagara River; most are believed to be illegal immigrants.
The waters of the Niagara River can look deceptively calm, but the raging Niagara Falls several miles downstream creates undertows that swallow people and can rip off their clothing and hair, according to Dr. Steve Gerhardt, the coroner for Niagara County.
About 12,000 illegal immigrants are caught each year along the U.S.-Canadian border; 70 percent of them east of the Great Lakes.
Most are attempting to get to cities like New York, where they can blend in with large immigrant communities, this report says.
Netherlands Antilles Lawman Wants New Human-Smuggling Law Dow Jones International News, August 5, 2002 Cor Merx, chief prosecutor in the Netherlands Antilles, is working for laws that would criminalize people smuggling in the Dutch Caribbean territory.
Currently, people smuggling is a misdemeanor carrying a $280 fine; as a crime, offenders could face up to eight years in prison.
Like other Caribbean islands, the Netherlands Antilles has problems keeping illegal immigrants from taking advantage of its difficult-to-patrol coastlines.
In the past two years, 60 illegal immigrants have been detained or deported; another 60 died off its coast when their unseaworthy boats either exploded or capsized.
Southern California Border Smugglers Raise Alarm Over Wrong-Way Driving By Ben Fox, The Associated Press, August 5, 2002 A people and drug smuggling ring is using dangerous new tactics to cross the San Diego border, according to this report.
The smugglers drive in the opposite direction of traffic and use cars that are reinforced with extra steel on their bumpers to knock oncoming cars out of their way.
Their tires are filled with silicone to resist road spikes meant to thwart wrong-way drivers.
This smuggling ring is believed to be responsible for a June 24 wrong-way crash on Interstate 8 in the mountains east of San Diego.
Six of 27 illegal immigrants carried in a smuggler's van were killed when the van crashed into oncoming traffic.
Immigrant Spouse's Permanent Residence By Christine Flowers, The Legal Intelligencer, August 5, 2002 Is marriage to a U.S. citizen all it takes for a non-U.S. citizen to get permanent residency in the United States? No.
This article explains that U.S. law requires a number of criteria be met.
Briefly, these are: 1.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) must be satisfied that marriage is legal and binding under the laws of the U.S. state in which it took place.
2.
There must be proof that the marriage is valid; e.g., children born to the couple, shared leases, shared utility bills, joint bank accounts, jointly-filed tax returns, and similar documents to establish that the couple are living together as husband and wife.
3.
The alien spouse must be found to be admissible; that is, the alien spouse must not have a record of past criminal activity, financial instability, habitual drug use, or have entered the United States illegally to begin with.
If a marriage-based visa is granted before the couple has been married for two years, the visa is only temporary.
The alien spouse must reapply within 90 days of the visa's expiration and re-establish the good faith of the marriage to "remove the condition" on permanent residence.
Treat the Illegals Issue The Palm Beach Post, August 4, 2002 This opinion piece notes the strain illegal immigrants create on U.S. hospitals.
"When illegal immigrants and their families get sick or injured, they go to emergency rooms," this article says.
"Federal law requires hospitals to provide care to anyone with a life-threatening condition who walks through the door, regardless of the ability to pay or immigration status."
The hospitals' uncollectible bills, however, run into the billions.
Illegal Workers in Western Europe Do Continent's Heavy Lifting By Keith B. Richburg, The Washington Post, August 3, 2002 There may be as many as 3 million illegal immigrants working and living in the 15 countries of the European Union, most of whom do the dirty, heavy jobs the native-born don't want, according to this report.
Focussing on France, where there are an estimated 300,000 illegal immigrants, Richburg notes that the illegal immigrant workers "enjoy none of the workers' rights and protections or social benefits of the state.
They are paid less than the legal wage, and are often paid late, with no legal recourse.
And although many have lived and worked in France for years, they have no right to vote or even complain openly about their condition."
Besides Turks, there has been a more recent influx to France of illegal Chinese workers, most of whom are employed in the clothing and textile industries.
Smugglers Pick Profit Over Immigrants' Lives; INS Braces for More Summer Deaths in Sweltering 18-Wheelers By David McLemore, The Dallas Morning News, August 3, 2002 and Police Find More Migrants in Stifling Tractor-Trailer By Dick Stanley, The Austin American Statesman, August 1, 2002 The 18-wheel truck appears to have become the human smuggler's vehicle of choice, according to these articles.
"Just in the last week in Dallas and San Antonio, authorities found nearly 200 undocumented immigrants abandoned in tractor-trailer rigs.
For two immigrants, the 8-foot-by-106-foot trailers had become a tomb," McLemore writes.
Commenting on the San Antonio case, Denton Langford, INS spokesman, is quoted as saying: "You could see the blood smeared on the back doors where they clawed at the doors trying to open them.
You can see the desperation of being locked in there with no light and no ventilation."
Frank Chavarria, assistant district director for the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) at San Antonio, is quoted as saying: "To the alien smuggler, it's a matter of economics.
An 18-wheeler loaded with illegal immigrants is an easy $100,000 to $200,000.
It's a business venture, and any death or suffering of the cargo is merely collateral.
We don't see a lot of remorse on the part of the people we catch."
The truck driver is considered by the smuggling rings to be low-echelon and expendable.
Knowing only his contract, the driver is unable to reveal much, if anything, about the larger smuggling enterprise.
Human smuggling has become a multimillion-dollar industry.
Citing figures provided by the International Organization for Migration, a Belgium-based migrant watchdog group, McLemore writes that about 70 percent of migrants attempting to gain illegal entry into the United States use smugglers.
"The smugglers may range from individuals or 'mom-and-pop' organizations along the border to highly organized rings based in Central and South America," McLemore writes.
"Authorities have found evidence of smugglers in Mexico being subcontracted by Chinese criminal gangs to smuggle human cargo across the U.S. border."
The INS arrested 8,403 smugglers along the U.S.-Mexican border in 2001; so far in fiscal year 2002, which ends in September, there have been 5,758 arrests.
22 Asian Immigrants Detained in Puerto Rico EFE News Service, August 2, 2002 Puerto Rican police arrested 22 illegal Asian immigrants August 2 at the western coastal town of Rincon.
The illegal immigrants, who spoke to officials with the help of a local Chinese businessman, said only that they had left Asia three months ago and landed in the Dominican Republic, where three Dominicans took them by boat to Puerto Rico and then fled.
The illegal immigrants are now in the custody of Immigration and Naturalization Service officials, who will initiate deportation proceedings.
International Asylum System Failing - Ruddock South African Press Association, August 2, 2002 and Australia, South Africa Sign New Deal on People Smuggling Agence France-Presse, August 2, 2002 The international asylum system is being hopelessly abused and risks collapsing, says Philip Ruddock, Australia's minister for multicultural and indigenous affairs.
Bogus asylum seekers, Ruddock said, "asylum shop" by moving through countries where they could have applied for asylum to countries they prefer.
According to Ruddock, developed countries are spending some $10 billion each year to deal with asylum issues, while only about 50,000 of 500,000 asylum seekers are genuine refugees.
Ruddock was in Cape Town to sign a new agreement with South Africa to cooperate on people smuggling, migration and refugee issues.
The agreement ensures that illegal asylum seekers who try to use South Africa as a transit point to Australia will be immediately returned to South Africa.
Immigrant Populations of Europe Birmingham Post, August 1, 2002 Hundred of thousands of illegal migrants from Africa, eastern Europe, the Middle East, central Asia and China try to enter the European Union (E.U.) annually, according to this report.
Of the E.U. countries named in this article, Germany topped the list with between 500,000 and 1.5 million illegal immigrant living in-country; about 100,000 illegal are smuggled in each year.
France has an estimated 400,000 illegal immigrants living inside its borders.
In 2000, the most asylum applications in France were made by Chinese, followed by Turks, this report says.
Italy has about 300,000 illegal immigrants, which is a conservative estimate.
Malaysia Arrests 135 Illegal Migrants as Tough New Laws Take Effect By Eileen Ng, Agence France-Presse, August 1, 2002 Malaysian police arrested 135 illegal immigrants on August 1, the first day Malaysia's new immigration laws take effect.
"Under the new laws, both immigrants and their employers face a mandatory six months in jail and possibly up to six strokes of the cane," Ng writes.
Malaysia's Director General Mohamad Jamal Kamdi is quoted as saying that some 300,000 illegal immigrants had already left under the four-month amnesty which began March 22.
Those remaining will be granted a one-month grace period before being arrested only if they can prove they are willing to leave the country.
Spain Finds 13 Drowned Immigrants on Coast By Reuters English News Service, August 1, 2002 The bodies of 13 illegal aliens were found washed up on Spain's southern coast August 1.
All were Moroccan and sub-saharan Africans; two or three of the five women among them appeared to have been pregnant.
Spanish police, who had spotted a boat earlier during a helicopter patrol, suspect the immigrants were forced into the water offshore by their smuggler so he could make his getaway.
The Moroccan Workers' and Immigrants' Association in Spain (ATIME) says some 4,000 people have died or disappeared since 1997 in the Strait of Gibraltar and in the Atlantic waters between Africa and Spain's Canary Islands.
"Last year Spanish police intercepted around 18,000 immigrants trying to illegally enter Spain by sea and expelled, deported or refused entry to 44,800 immigrants without papers," this report says.
Spain is a major southern European entry point for Africans fleeing poverty and war; last year it tightened its immigration laws, making it more difficult for immigrants to get papers in country.
_________________________________________________________________
* Back to IN THE NEWS FOR 2002 index Most recent IN THE NEWS FOR 2003 articles IN THE NEWS FOR 2001 Journal Articles and Book Excerpts _________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
