Link Back to the Instructor Guide References for Lesson 9: Civil Air Patrol Inspector General Bibliography 1.
Civil Air Patrol Regulation (CAPR) 123-2(E).
Complaints, 01 September 1999
2.
Civil Air Patrol Regulation (CAPR) 123-3.
Civil Air Patrol Assessment Program, 01 March 1999
Useful Links
1.
http://www.capnhq.gov
The Civil Air Patrol website is a great resource for general information on the Civil Air Patrol.
It includes access to CAP Forms, publications and news.
Additionally, you can find access to Member Services, Education and Training resources, and links to other websites.
2.
http://afpubs.hq.af.mil/
The official website for Air Force administration publications and forms.
It includes access to on-line ordering as well as viewing for all Air Force Instructions.
3.
Sample 1 Headquarters Civil Air Patrol Inspector General Report
This sample report is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information on Civil Air Patrol assessments.
4.
Sample 2 Headquarters Civil Air Patrol Inspector General Report
This sample report is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
5.
Sample 1 Finding Responce to Headquarters Civil Air Patrol Inspector General Report
This sample finding responce is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
6.
Sample 2 Finding Responce to Headquarters Civil Air Patrol Inspector General Report
This sample finding responce is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
7.
Sample of a Letter of Complaint.
This sample Letter of Complaint is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
8.
Sample of an Investigative Officer Appointment Letter.
This sample appointment letter is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
9.
Sample of an Inspector General (IG) acknowledgement of receipt of a Letter of Complaint
This sample acknowledgment letter is attached as a resource to be used for training or general information.
10.
Example of a Summary Report of Investigation.
This is an example of IG Summary Report of Investigation to be used as a training resource.
11.
Example of a Wing IG Complaint Letter of Resolution.
This is an example of a Wing IG Complaint Letter of Resolution to be used for training.
OPR: CAP NHQ/ET Last Revised 03/22/00
