Midwest Archeological Center title image with National Park Service Arrrowhead Header Image Archeology at The Battle of the Little Bighorn.
Graphic Bibliography ------------------------ * Applied Ground Imaging 1996.
1996 Little Bighorn Battlefield, Montana, Non-Intrusive Characterization Survey Field Project, Ground Pentrating Radar Survey.
Manuscript report on file Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, Nebraska.
Applied Ground Imaging conducted experiments with new geophysical remote sensing instruments to see if they were capable of finding any features that might be associated with the soldiers reportedly buried in Deep Ravine.
An anomaly was located that is consistent with a deeply buried disturbed area in the same location as that predicted by earlier geomorphological studies.
* Bennett, Connie 1977.
1977 Preconstruction archeological investigations at Custer Battlefield National Monument.
Memo report on file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
A short report on monitoring utility work in the park.
No cultural resources were found.
* Bozell, John R. 1989.
Non-Human Vertebrate Faunal Remains from Custer Battlefield National Monument.
In Archaeological Perspectives On the Battle of the Little Bighorn, by Douglas D. Scott, Richard A. Fox, Jr., Melissa A. Connor, and Dick Harmon, pps 283-298.
Norman, University of Oklahoma Press.
Identifies horse and mule bones found during the archeological investigations.
* Bray, Robert 1958.
A report of archeological investigations at the Reno-Benteen site Custer Battlefield National Monument June 2 - July 1, 1958.
Ms on file Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
The first archeological report on the battlefield.
Excavations of riflepits and three soldier burials are described.
* Coleman Research 1996.
Little Bighorn Measurements II Processing Results.
COR/96-101.
Manuscript report on file Midwest Archelogical Center, Lincoln, Nebraska.
Coleman Research also conducted experiments with new geophysical remote sensing instruments to see if they were capable of finding any features that might be associated with the soldiers reportedly buried in Deep Ravine.
An anomaly was located that is consistent with a deeply buried disturbed area in the same location as that predicted by earlier geomorphological studies.
* Connor, Melissa 1986.
Exhumation of Grave 402, Block B, Custer Battlefield National Cemetery.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated April 8, 1986.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
A short report on the exhumation of some soldiers remains for identification.
1991.
The Application of Comparative Bone Histology to Fragmented Archeological Bone from the Reno-Benteen Dump, Custer Battlefield National Monument.
Appendix B of Archeological Investigations at the Reno-Benteen Equipment Disposal Site, in Papers on Little Bighorn Battlefield Archeology: The Equipment Dump, Marker 7, and the Reno Crossing, edited by Douglas D. Scott, pps 148-166.
Reprints in Anthropology Volume 42, J and L Reprint Co., Lincoln.
A report of microscopic examination of small bone fragments found in the equipment dump excavations, and the identification of cow and pig as remains of meals eaten by the soldiers.
1994.
Exhumation of Human Remains on the Pitsch Property Near Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, Montana.
Midwest Archeological Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
Describes the excavations, on private property, of some human remains that were missed in a 1928 exhumation.
* DeVore, Steven L. 2002a.Search for the Horse Burial Pit: Conductivity and Magnetic Gradient Investigations at Last Stand Hill, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, Montana.
Appendix B in Archeological Investigations of the"Horse Cemetery" Site, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, by Douglas D. Scott.
Midwest Archeolgical Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
This report details the use of geophysical remote sensing instruments as part of an effort to locate the 1881 horse burial pit.
The work was conducted in support of construction of the new Indian Memorial access trails.
2002b Trip Report - Inadvertent Discovery of Remains Related to Fort Phil Kearney reinterments.
Memorandum on file, Midwest Archeolgical Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
During construction of a new traffic island in the parking lot at Last Stand Hill some human bone and possible burial box nails and wood were uncovered.
These proved to be parts of a human skeleton from the Fort Phil Kearny burials that were placed on Last Stand Hill around 1890 and moved again to Custer National Cemetery in the early 1900s.
The remains were reburied with the Fort Phil Kearny dead.
* Fox, Richard A., Jr.
1988.
Discerning History Through Archaeology: The Custer Battle.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Archaeology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta.
Uses the archeological data to analyze the progress of the battle.
1993.
Archaeology, History, and Custer's Last Battle.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
The published revision and reinterpretation of his dissertation, which suggests Custer moved further north and west than previously thought.
1996.
West River History: The Indian Village on Little Bighorn River, June 25-26, 1876.
In Legacy, New Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn, edited by Charles E. Rankin, pp 139-166, Montana Historical Society Press, Helena.
A study of oral history sources and limited archeological data to suggest where the Indian camp circles were located before and during the battle.
* Fox, Richard A., Jr. and Douglas D. Scott 1991.
The Post-Civil War Battlefield Pattern.
Historical Archaeology 25(2):92-103.
A theoretical model of how to do battlefield archeology and what can come from the study of conflict sites.
* Glenner, Richard A., P. Willey, and Douglas D. Scott 1994.
Back to the Little Bighorn: Remains of a 7th Cavalry Trooper, Recovered at the Little Bighorn battlefield in 1903, Provide A Glimpse of Nineteenth Century Dental Practices.
Journal of the American Dentistry Association, 125:835-843.
The description and analysis of gold and tin dental fillings in the remains identified as Corporal George Lell.
* Greene, Jerome A. 1979.
Evidence and the Custer Enigma: A Reconstruction of Indian-Military History.
Reno, Nev.: Outbooks.
The classic reconstruction of the battle from oral history and relic finds around the battlefield.
* Haynes, C. Vance Jr. 1989.
Archaeological Geology of Deep Ravine, Custer Battlefield National Monument.
In Archeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Big Horn.
by Douglas D. Scott, Richard A. Fox Jr, Melissa A. Connor, and Dick Harmon, pp. 224-242, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Uses the principles of geology to explain the changes in Deep Ravine since the battle.
1991.
Geoarcheological Investigations at Custer Battlefield National Monument.
Appendix C. of Archeological Investigations at the Reno-Benteen Equipment Disposal Site, in Papers on Little Bighorn Battlefield Archeology: The Equipment Dump, Marker 7, and the Reno Crossing, edited by Douglas D. Scott, pps 167-184.
Reprints in Anthropology Volume 42, J and L Reprint Co., Lincoln.
Uses the principles of geology to explain the changes at the Reno-Benteen equipment dump site since the battle.
* Heinz, Ralph 1989.
Tack rivets. pp. 205-206.
In Archaeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman by Douglas D. Scott, Richard A. Fox Jr., Melissa Connor, and Dick Harmon, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Description and identification of the saddle and tack rivets from the battlefield.
1990.
Cavalry Equipment From Reno/Benteen Dump Site (1989).
Ms on file Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
Description and identification of the saddle and tack from the Reno-Benteen equipment dump site.
* Nickel, Robert K. 2002 A Ground-Penetrating Radar Search for a Horse Burial Pit Associated with the 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn, Appendix A in Archeological Investigations of the "Horse Cemetery" Site, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, by Douglas D. Scott.
Midwest Archeolgical Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
This report details the use of geophysical remote sensing instruments as part of an effort to locate the 1881 horse burial pit.
The work was conducted in support of construction of the new Indian Memorial access trails.
* Phillips, Patrick
1981.
Tin Cans.
In Archaeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn by Douglas D. Scott, Richard A. Fox Jr., Melissa Connor, and Dick Harmon, pp. 215-221.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Describes and analyzes the tin cans found on the battlefield.
Most post-date the battle.
1987.
Cannibalism, Combat and Post Battle Mutilation: Observed Similarities Between Cannibalism Criteria and Human Remains From Custer Battlefield.
Master of Arts Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Nebrasaka, Lincoln.
A comparison of cut marks on human bone that is often described in physical anthropological reports as evidence of cannibalism to known mutilation marks from the battlefield.
Concludes that care should be exercised in making blanket statements that cut marks equal evidence of cannibalism.
* Scott, Douglas D.
1987a The Recovery and Replacement of a Cremated Burial at Custer Battlefield National Monument.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated February 27, 1987.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
Reports on finding an unreported recent cremation deposition site at the battlefield.
1987b Prehistoric Resources of Custer Battlefield.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated April 1, 1987.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
Describes and interprets the archeological evidence of the park's prehistoric occupation.
1987c Surviving the Second Battle of the Little Bighorn: Effective Means of Dealing with a Media Blitz.
In Captivating the Public through the Media While Digging the Past.
Technical Series No. 1, Baltimore Center for Urban Archaeology. (edited by Kristen Peters, Elizabeth A. Comer, and Roger E. Kelly).
Describes the manner in which project personnel dealt with a barrage of media contacts during the field work in 1984 and 1985.
1989.
Testing and Evaluation of Two Prehistoric Sites at Custer Battlefield National Monument.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated September 1989.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
Determines the prehistoric sites in the park have little integrity remaining.
1990.
Interpreting Archaeology at Custer's Last Stand.
In What's Past is Prologue Our Legacy Our Future, edited by David L. Kulhavy and Michael H. Legg, pp 159-163.
National Interpreters Workshop, Center for Applied Studies, School of Forestry Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogodoches.
Describes some of ways project personnel and park rangers interpreted the field investigations to the park visitors.
1991.
Archeological Investigations at the Reno-Benteen Equipment Disposal Site, in Papers on Little Bighorn Battlefield Archeology: The Equipment Dump, Marker 7, and the Reno Crossing, edited by Douglas Scott.
Reprints in Anthropology Volume 42, J and L Reprint Co., Lincoln, pp 1-184.
Describes and interprets the remains of boxes and saddle gear found in the Reno-Benteen equipment dump.
1992a Exhumation of Little Bighorn Battle-related Human Remains from the Custer Battlefield National Cemetery.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated May 20, 1992.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
Describes the excavation of several graves in the national cemetery which contained remains from the battle.
The purpose of the excavations was to recover remains for identification purposes.
1992bDeep Ravine Overlook Site Little Bighorn National Battlefield, Montana.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated July 14, 1992.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
A short report dealing with the archeological potential of developing a Deep Ravine overlook near the national cemetery.
No archeological resources were found.
1993a Archeological Mapping of the Pitsch Property: The Valley Fight Segment of the Battle of the Little Bighorn, Montana.
Rocky Mountain Region Archeological Project Report, dated August 31, 1993.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
A report on mapping of archeological finds on the Pitsch property located in the area of the Reno Valley fight.
This report is not available without the landowners' permission.
1993b Trip report on the Reno-Benteen Walkway fill project, Little Bighorn National Battlefield.
Memorandum to Chief, Midwest Archeological Center, dated September 20, 1993.
On file, National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
This short report documents the absence of archeological battle artifacts in the area of the concrete walkway at the Reno-Benteen defense site.
1996.
Archaeological Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn: A Retrospective.
In Legacy, New Perspectives on the Battle of the Little Bighorn, edited by Charles E. Rankin, pp 167-188, Montana Historical Society Press, Helena.
This chapter reviews the accomplishments of the archeological project and points out how this effort has stimulated other battlefield archeological work.
1996.
A Look at Cedar Coulee and Sharpshooter Ridges: Archeological Inventory of the Faron Iron Property Near Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument.
Midwest Archeological Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
Describes the archeological finds related to the retreat from Weir Point on some private property near the Reno-Benteen defense site.
* Scott, Douglas and Richard Fox, Jr. 1987.
Archaeological Insights into the Custer Battle: A Preliminary Assessment.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
This is the preliminary report of the 1984 archeological investigations.
* Scott, Douglas, and Melissa Connor 1986.
Post-Mortem at the Little Bighorn.
Natural History 95(6):46-55.
This article provides a review of the archeological work at the Little Bighorn in a popular format.
1988.
Reburial at the Little Bighorn.
CRM Bulletin 11(5-6):6-8.
National Park Service.
This brief article describes the manner of the reburial of the excavated soldiers remains in the national cemetery with full military honors.
* Scott, Douglas, Melissa Connor, and Clyde Snow 1988.
Nameless Faces of the Little Bighorn.
Greasy Grass 4:2-5
This article identifies two set of human remains as those of Mitch Boyer and Sergeant Miles O'Hara.
* Scott, Douglas and Dick Harmon 1988a A Sharps Rifle from the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
Man at Arms 10(1):12-15.
This work uses firearms identification to confirm that a Sharps rifle was really used at the battle by the Indians.
1988b A Sharps Rifle from the Battle of the Little Bighorn, pp 12-15.
In Guns at the Little Bighorn, Lincoln, Rhode Island, Andrew Mowbray Inc.
This is a reprint of the earlier article that uses firearms identification to confirm that a Sharps rifle was really used at the battle by the Indians.
* Scott, Douglas D., Richard A. Fox, Jr., Melissa A. Connor, and Dick Harmon 1989.
Archaeological Perspectives On the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
This book reports the results of the 1984 and 1985 archeological investigations at the battlefield.
* Scott, Douglas D. and Clyde Collins Snow 1991a Mitigative Excavations at Marker 7, in Papers on Little Bighorn Battlefield Archeology: The Equipment Dump, Marker 7, and the Reno Crossing, edited by Douglas Scott.
Reprints in Anthropology Volume 42, J and L Reprint Co., Lincoln, pp 185-206.
This report describes and interprets a soldiers remains found at Marker 7 on the battlefield.
1991b Archeology and Forensic Anthropology of the Human Remains from the Reno Retreat Crossing, in Papers on Little Bighorn Battlefield Archeology: The Equipment Dump, Marker 7, and the Reno Crossing, edited by Douglas Scott.
Reprints in Anthropology Volume 42, J and L Reprint Co., Lincoln, pp 207-236.
This report describes a soldier's bones found at the Reno Retreat Crossing in 1989.
The bones were subsequently identified as those of Sergeant Botzer.
* Scott, Douglas and Douglas Owsley 1991.
Oh, what tales bones could tell - and often do! Greasy Grass volume 7: 33-39.
This article describes a soldier's skull found by a military surgeon in 1877 during a scout of the battlefield.
* Scott, Douglas and P. Willey 1995.
The Custer Battlefield National Cemetery Human Remains Identification Project.
8th Annual Symposium,Custer Battlefield Historical and Museum Association, Inc., pp 12-29, no publisher or location noted.
This article briefly describes the findings of the analytical work done on the soldiers' remains from the national cemetery.
Two individuals are tentatively identified, and the manner and cause of death is discussed.
1996.
Custer's Men Took Names to Their Graves.
Greasy Grass12:20-28.
This article briefly describes how the bones of two individual soldiers' were tentatively identified as to who they were.
* Scott, Douglas and P. Willey 1997.
Little Bighorn: Human Remains from the Custer National Cemetery.
In In Rememberance: Archaeology and Death edited by David A. Poirier and Nicholas F. Bellantoni, pp 155-171.
Bergin and Garvey, Westport, Connecticut.
This chapter is an overview of the findings of the national cemetery identification project.
* Scott, Douglas D. and Peter Bleed 1997.
A Good Walk Around the Boundary: Archeological Inventory of the Dyck and other Properties Adjancet to Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument.
Special Publication of the Nebraska Association of Professional Archeologists and the Nebraska State Historical Society, Lincoln.
This report describes the artifacts and interprets the battle from finds made on private lands and Crow Tribal lands surrounding Custer field, Weir Point, Medicine Tail Coulee, and the Reno-Benteen defense site.
* Snow, Clyde Collins and John Fitzpatrick 1989.
Human Osteological Remains from the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
In Archaeological Perspectives On the Battle of the Little Bighorn, by Douglas D. Scott, Richard A. Fox, Jr., Melissa A. Connor, and Dick Harmon, University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
This chapter describes the results of the study of the soldiers' remains found during the 1984 and 1985 investigations.
* Willey, P. 1994.
Human Osteology of the Pitsch Burials.
Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, Nebraska.
A report on human remains related to the battle and found on private lands in 1994.
1995.
Osteological Analysis of Scattered Human Bones from the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument.
MS on file, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, Crow Agency, Montana.
This is a study of several recently deposited cremated remains scattered on the battlefield by unidentified persons.
1996.
Human Skull and Mandible (LIBI 1996 HR-1 and HR-2) Attributed to and Non-Human Bones (LIBI HR-3 through HR-6) Found on the Little Bighorn Battlefield, Montana.
Department of Anthropology, Chico State University, Chico, California.
A report of bones returned to the battlefield from old private collections.
1997.
Osteological Analysis of Human Skeletons Excavated from the Custer Battlefield National Cemetery.
National Park Service, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, Nebraska.
A full analysis and interpretation of the soldiers' remains found in the national cemetery.
* Willey, P. and Douglas D. Scott 1996.
'The Bullets Buzzed Like Bees': Gunshot Wounds in Skeletons from the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
International Journal of Osteoarchaeology 6(1):15-27.
This article describes a variety of gunshot wounds found in the skeletons of the soldiers.
1997.
Abstract: Who's Buried in Custer's Grave? Proceedings of the American Academy of Forensic Sciences 3.
An overview of some reason's that all of George Custer may not be buried at West Point.
* Willey, P., Richard A. Glenner, and Douglas D. Scott 1996.
Oral Health of Seventh Cavalry troopers: Dentitions from the Custer National Cemetery.
Journal of the History of Denistry 44(1):3-14.
This article descibes the overall very poor dental health of the soldiers as determined from the teeth of the skeletal remains found on the battlefield and in the national cemetery.
* Scott, Douglas D. 1998a Archeological Inventory of the Indian Memorial Site, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument.
Ms on file, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
The site of the new Indian Memorial was intensively metal detected in 1998.
The report details the findings of additional bullets and cartridge cases during that effort.
1998b Archeological Inventory of the Western Portion of the Irons Property and the Stops Property, Bighorn County, Montana.
Ms on file, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln.
This small inventory report describes the findings of a variety of artifacts along the route of advance and retreat to Weir Point.
The artifacts, including a spur, curry comb, and bullets and cartridge cases follow a line that defines the retreat route taken by Reno and Benteen's command.
1999a Archaeologists: Battlefield Detectives.
In Little Bighorn Remembered: The Untold Story of Custer's Last Stand edited by Herman J. Viola, pp 165-177, Times Books, New York.
This chapter describes the work of the archeologists at the Little Bighorn in general terms.
1999b Archeological Inventory of the Site of a Water Gauging Station on the Little Bighorn River, Montana.
Ms on file, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, NE.
A new water gauging station required inventory to insure no archeological resources were present.
None were found.
2000a Outside the Boundaries: The 1999 Archeological Inventory of Properties Near the Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument, 24BH2175.
Ms on file, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, NE.
The 1999 metal detecting inventory work concentrated on the Reno attack line in the Little Bighorn Valley.
The work was on private lands and only a few artifacts were found.
These confirmed the earlier accounts of Judge Vaughan and Don Rickey.
2000b Archeological Investigations of Custer's June 23, 1876 Campsite, Rosebud County, Montana.
Ms on file, Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, NE.
Custer's June 23rd campsite on Rosebud Creek is marked by a stone pyramid on the highway.
The archeological team was granted access to this private land for inventory purposes.
A few 1876 era artifacts, including buttons, a fired cartridge case, horse shoe nails, and a coffee tin were recovered providing some insight into the size and layout of the camp.
2002 Archeological Investigations of the "Horse Cemetery" Site, Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument.
Midwest Archeolgical Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, NE.
The access walkways to the new Indian Memorial were laid out in such a manner that it was believed that one might affect the 1881 horse burial pit site.
Excavation proved the site was smaller than originally believed and was located a few feet beyond the walkway alignment.
The burial pit and horse bones were documented in place and covered over without removal of the horse bone.
* Scott, Douglas D., P. Willey, and Melissa A. Connor 1998 They Died with Custer: Soldier's Bones from the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman
This book builds a story of the men who rode with Custer from their enlistment records and health records.
The soldiers remains recovered during the various archeological studies add significantly to the story.
The work demonstrates the men had poor dental health, that they led hard lives and even at 20 to 25 years of age suffered bad backs, many broken bones, and many showed traces of arthritis and other degenerative conditions.
The soldiers' lives were not as romantic as movies and books would lead us to believe.
* Scott, Douglas D., Peter Bleed, Andrew E. Masich, and Jason Pitsch 1997 An Inscribed Native American Battle Image from the Little Bighorn Battlefield.
Plains Anthropologist 42(161):287-302.
A brass kettle fragment, inscribed with a battle scene was found on private property in the Sitting Bull village site by the land owner.
This article describes the artifact and its probable association with the Rosebud or Little Bighorn battle.
* Willey, P 1997 Osteological Analysis of Human Skeletons Excavated from the Custer National Cemetery.
Technical Report No. 50, Midwest Archeological Center, National Park Service, Lincoln, Nebraska.
Willey describes the bones of some of the Little Bighorn soldiers recovered in the years after the battle and reburied in the National Cemetery.
Possible identifications of several men are offiered.
* Willey, P. and Douglas D. Scott 1999 Clinkers on the Little Bighorn Battlefield: In Situ Investigations of Scattered Recent Cremains.
In Forensic Osteological Analysis: A Book of Case Studies edited by Scott I. Fairgrieve, pages 129-140, Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
This book chapter describes work that has been done to monitor the long-term taphanomic processes associated with modern cremated human remains that were illegally placed on the battlefield by friends and relatives.
* Willey, P. and Douglas D. Scott 1999 Who's Buried in Custer's Grave? Journal of Forensic Sciences 44(3):656-665.
This article discusses some human remains found on the battlefield about 1940.
The bones are consistent in age and height with Custer himself.
The article concludes that they may or may not be Custer's remains, but what is important is that the 19th century recovery efforts by the army was at best a poor effort, leaving many bones of the soldier's still on the field.
Little Bighorn Main | History | Methods | Excavations | Artifacts | Firearms | Bibliography graphic link MWAC Home MWAC Home graphic link NPS Home NPS Home Privacy Notice | Disclaimer and Ownership | SEARCH | SITE MAP
