Skip Over Navigation Links NIH National Institutes of Health, DHHS Health Information Grants 
The NIA is responsible for conduct and support of biomedical, social, and behavioral research, training, health information dissemination, and other programs with respect to the aging process and diseases and other special problems and needs of the aged.
Important Events in NIA History
December 2, 1971 The White House Conference on Aging recommended the creation of a separate National Institute on Aging.
May 31, 1974 Public Law 93-296 authorized the establishment of a National Institute on Aging and required that the institute develop a national comprehensive plan to coordinate the HEW agencies involved in aging research.
October 7, 1974 The National Institute on Aging was established.
April 23, 1975 First meeting of the National Advisory Council on Aging was held.
July 1, 1975 The Adult Development and Aging Branch and Gerontology Research Center were separated from their parent institute to become the core of the National Institute on Aging.
December 8, 1976 The research plan required by P.L. 93-296 was transmitted to the Congress.
September 20, 1982 NIA Laboratory of Neurosciences Clinical Program admitted the first inpatient to a new unit at the NIH Clinical Center.
September 9-11, 1983 The institute marked the 25th anniversary of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging.
The first volunteers joined this unique study in 1958.
1984 NIA funded Alzheimers Disease Centers around the country where researchers at medical institutions work to cure and prevent this disorder, while improving care and diagnosis.
November 14, 1986 P.L. 99-660, section 951-952, authorized the NIAs Alzheimers Disease Education and Referral (ADEAR) Center as a part of a broad program to conduct research and distribute information about Alzheimers disease to health professionals, patients and their families, and the general public.
November 4, 1988 P.L. 100-607 established the Geriatric Research and Training Centers (GRTC).
1988 Congress authorized NIA to make LEAD awards to researchers who had made significant contributions to Alzheimers disease research.
1990 The GRTCs were expanded and renamed the Claude D. Pepper Older American Independence Centers and charged with conducting research in diseases that threaten independent living.
1993 Six Edward Roybal Centers for Research on Applied Gerontology were authorized to convert research findings into programs that improve the lives of older people and their families.
NIA funded six Exploratory Centers for Minority Aging and Health Promotion in collaboration with the NIH Office of Research on Minority Health.
1994 Nine demography of aging centers were funded to provide research on health, economics, and aging to make more effective use of data from several national surveys of health, retirement, and long-term care.
1995 Three Nathan Shock Centers of Excellence in Basic Biology of Aging were established to further the study of the basic processes of aging.
The Federal Task Force on Aging Research report is published containing nearly 200 specific recommendations for increased emphasis in ten general areas of research.
1999 As part of NIAs 25th anniversary celebration, a strategic plan was formulated and made available for public comment.
The plan addressed scientific topics holding the greatest promise for advancing knowledge in areas such as the basic biology of aging, geriatrics, and social and behavioral functioning.
Biographical Sketch of NIA Director Richard J. Hodes, M.D.
Dr. Hodes was appointed NIA director on May 27, 1993.
He was born on December 31, 1943, in New York City.
He received his B.A. from Yale University (summa cum laude) in 1965 and his M.D. from Harvard Medical School (magna cum laude) in 1971.
His postgraduate training included an internship and residency at Massachusetts General Hospital department of medicine.
Before attending medical school, he was a research fellow at the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm, Sweden.
Before joining NIA, he was senior investigator and chief of the immune regulation section at NCIs Experimental Immunology Branch.
Since 1982 Dr. Hodes has served as program coordinator for the U.S.-Japan Cooperative Cancer Research Program; since 1992 on the scientific advisory board of the Cancer Research Institute; and since 1995 as a member of the Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives.
He is an editor of several journals including the Journal of Experimental Medicine and Therapeutic Immunology and is a diplomate of the American Board of Internal Medicine.
In 1997 he was elected as a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
He received a PHS Commendation Medal in 1977, a PHS Outstanding Service Medal in 1988, and a PHS Distinguished Service Medal in 1996.
In 1999 Dr. Hodes was elected to membership in the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences.
NIA Directors Name Date of Birth In Office From To Norman Kretchmer (Acting) October 1974 July 1975 Richard C. Greulich (Acting) July 1975 April 1976 Robert N. Butler Jan. 21, 1927 May 1, 1976 July 1982 Robert L. Ringler (Acting) Mar. 27, 1922 July 16, 1982 June 30, 1983 T. Franklin Williams Nov. 26, 1921 July 1, 1983 July 31, 1991 Gene D. Cohen (Acting) Sept. 28, 1949 July 1, 1991 May 31, 1993 Richard J. Hodes Dec. 31, 1943 June 1, 1993
Intramural Research Programs
NIAs Intramural Research Program (IRP) comprises nine scientific laboratories and a research program that include the scientific disciplines of biochemistry, cell and molecular biology, structural biology, genetics, behavioral sciences, epidemiology, statistics, and clinical research and the medical disciplines of neurobiology, immunology, endocrinology, cardiology, rheumatology, hematology, oncology, and gerontology.
Medical problems associated with aging are pursued in-depth using the tools of modern laboratory and clinical research.
The central focus of research is understanding age-related changes in physiology and the ability to adapt to environmental stress.
This understanding is then applied to developing insight about the pathophysiology of age-related diseases.
The program seeks to understand the changes associated with healthy aging and to define the criteria for evaluating when any change becomes pathologic.
Thus, not only are the common age-related diseases under study (e.g., Alzheimers disease, atherosclerosis, osteoarthritis, diabetes, cancer), but the determinants of healthy aging are also being defined.
Most IRP research is conducted at the Gerontology Research Center in Baltimore, Maryland.
The section of Brain Physiology and Metabolism is located in the Clinical Center on the NIH main campus in Bethesda.
The interests of the Laboratory of Biological Chemistry (LBC) cover a wide range of topics devoted to understanding biochemical and molecular events contributing to basic mechanisms of aging, as well as the development of age-related disabilities and diseases.
The LBC has six research programs.
A common goal of these programs is the elucidation of critical events associated with various age-related deficits that could serve as targets for therapeutic strategies aimed at preventing or delaying the onset of disabilities and disease processes.
The LBC is currently comprised of six independent research programs headed by either a tenure-track scientist or senior investigator.
These programs include the Cell Stress and Aging Section, the T Lymphocyte Signaling Unit, the Stress Signaling Unit, the Cell Cycle Control Unit, the Cancer Molecular Genetics Unit, and the Molecular Neurobiology Unit.
Major areas of emphasis common to the individual programs include: 1) the elucidation of signal transduction processes and genes involved in regulating cellular responses to environmental signals such as growth factors, cytokines, and stress stimuli; 2) the determination of mechanisms contributing to the maintenance of cellular homeostasis and cell cycle control; and 3) the contribution of dysregulated gene expression or loss of critical gene functions to the development of cancer.
These processes have direct relevance to our understanding of critical events associated with various age-related deficits and/or development of age-related diseases including cancer and Alzheimers disease.
The ultimate goal of the programs is to uncover knowledge that can be applied to prevent or delay the onset of age-related disabilities and disease processes, and/or provide new strategies for their treatment.
While the individual research programs within the LBC generally function as independent groups, they are highly interactive, conduct biweekly joint meetings, and engage in collaborative projects.
Combined, the programs within the LBC provide extensive and broad expertise in the areas of biochemistry, cellular and molecular biology and genetics.
Specialized expertise in a variety of approaches used to analyze or manipulate gene expression is also available within the LBC.
The LBC is equipped with state-of-the-art instrumentation and an extensive computer network.
The Laboratory of Cardiovascular Sciences (LCS), established in 1985, is organized into three sections: Cardiac Function, Membrane Biology, and Behavioral Hypertension.
The overall goals of the Laboratory of Cardiovascular Sciences are 1) to identify age-associated changes that occur within the cardiovascular system and to determine the mechanisms for these changes; 2) to study myocardial structure and function and to determine how age interacts with chronic disease states to alter function; 3) to study basic mechanisms in excitation-contraction coupling and how these are modulated by surface receptor signaling pathways in cardiac muscle; 4) to determine the chemical nature and sequence of intermediate reactions controlling the movement of ions through ionic channels and pumps present in myocardium, and how these are affected by aging and disease; 5) to determine mechanisms that govern behavioral aspects of hypertension; 6) to determine mechanisms of normal and abnormal function of vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells; and 7) to establish the potentials and limitations of new therapeutic approaches such as gene transfer techniques.
In meeting these objectives, studies are performed in human volunteers, intact animals, isolated heart and vascular tissues, isolated cardiac and vascular cells, and subcellular organelles.
In the LCS environment, discoveries are integrated within and among individual research areas, and many projects become multi-faceted, spanning the range from humans to molecules.
The Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology (LCMB) currently only has one section.
The Molecular Dynamics Section focuses on the interplay between structure and dynamics and how these influence biological function.
The section is presently involved in studying the structural and dynamic factors in hemoglobin, which regulate the binding of oxygen as well as autoxidation with its associated release of superoxide.
The finding that autoxidation of hemoglobin is appreciably enhanced at reduced oxygen pressures, has led to the proposal of a novel method for producing oxyradicals under hypoxic conditions.
Studies are being performed on erythrocytes, interaction of erythrocytes with other tissues and with whole animals to determine to what extent this mechanism contributes to the pathophysiology of aging.
The Laboratory of Clinical Investigation (LCI) conducts research on age changes and the mechanisms underlying these changes in both humans and laboratory animals.
Much of the clinical work deals with volunteers in the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA), but additional clinical research protocols are also ongoing.
The goals of the LCI are 1) to identify, explore, and conduct translational research on new therapeutic targets that may be particularly promising in the aging cancer patient (Hematology/Oncology Section); 2) to study mechanisms of insulin signaling and insulin action and to study pancreatic islet cell differentiation which will allow identification and study of potential new therapies for type II diabetes mellitus (Diabetes Section); 3) to study the role of growth and reproductive hormone augmentation in the maintenance of strength and function in the aging individual (Endocrine Section); 4) to study the applicability of current recommendations for definitions of obesity using body mass index and waist circumference to define cardiovascular and other risk in the aged individual (Metabolism Section); 5) to explore mechanisms of calcium channel calcium gating in the L-type calcium channel, to define the effects of age and disease on the expression of splice variants and function of this channel, and to define the role of polymorphisms of vascular effectors such as endothelial nitric oxide synthase in age and ethnic differences in peripheral vascular function (Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology Section); and 6) in the context of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging to study physiological, pathological, and behavioral measures such as body composition, muscle strength and function, cardiovascular risk, glucose tolerance, osteoporosis, prostate and breast cancer, cognitive function, and emotion over time in this select panel of subjects (Longitudinal Studies Section).
The general approaches are those of linking laboratory investigation to clinical research, both to allow insight into the pertinence of laboratory findings to aging human health and disease, and to permit in depth laboratory study of clinical observations.
Newly incorporated into LCI, the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Units major research includes imaging studies of connective tissue biophysics (whole cartilage, chondrocytes in culture, and in vivo cartilage imaging), spectroscopic studies of muscle metabolism under a variety of pharmacologic and physiologic conditions, and methodology development in imaging and spectroscopy.
Instrumentation consists of a double-resonance Bruker ABX 1.9T/31 cm Biospec with shielded gradients, and a triple-resonance, wide-bore Bruker DMX 400 with microimaging and solids capability.
The Laboratory of Genetics (LG) was established in the fall of 1997, with a Human Genetics Unit, a Transcription Remodeling and Regulation Unit, and a Gene Recovery and Analysis Unit.
A fourth unit, the Developmental Genomics Section, was established in December 1998.
The interests of the laboratory are based on the view that aging has genetic determinants as an integrated part of human development, with a profound dependence on the interplay of synthetic and degradative processes that are initiated in utero.
Major studies include: 1) transitions between immortal and mortal cells, such as the transition of immortal embryonic stem cells to mortal differentiating cells that is a fundamental feature of the initiation of aging in metazoans; 2) cohorts of genes involved in the development of selected nonrenewable systems.
To understand and ultimately try to compensate for loss of cells and tissues during aging, the examples of skin appendage and pronephros-kidney development are being studied; and 3) genes involved in embryonic events that prefigure aging-related phenomena.
This includes studies of overgrowth syndromes, in which the set-point of size of tissues and organs is determined in fetal life, and studies of premature ovarian failure, in which the aging phenomenon of early menopause is determined by an increased rate of follicular atresia during fetal life.
The laboratory is equipped with state-of-the-art resources for genomic approaches in the Gene Recovery and Analysis Unit, including large-insert clones and recovery methods, high throughput sequencing, nuclear fractionation and chromatin analysis techniques, and the potential to make and analyze high-quality cDNA libraries from very few cells from subregions of embryos.
It also benefits from collaborative efforts with other groups and resource providers both within the NIA and at a number of extramural sites in the United States and abroad.
The Laboratory of Immunology (LI) conducts studies to provide a greater understanding of the biological, biochemical, and molecular alterations in immune functions that occur within individuals during both normal and pathology-associated aging processes.
The Laboratory includes the Clinical Immunology Section, the Lymphocyte Differentiation Unit, the Lymphocyte Cell Biology Unit, and the B-Cell Development Section.
The common goal of these research programs is the elucidation of the age-related deficits in immune function that could be potentially targeted by various therapeutic strategies.
In collaboration with investigators at the National Cancer Institute (NCI), studies in the Clinical Immunology Section suggest that the importance of both Th1 and Th2 subsets in AIDS pathogenesis transcends clonal differences in their ability to support HIV replication.
Studies also suggest that T-cells derived from older individuals are more susceptible to T-cell trophic HIV-1 infections than are lymphocytes derived from younger donors.
Other studies in this Section lead researchers to believe that the ability of inflammatory cytokines such as chemokines to induce neuronal cell apoptosis may have significant implications in Alzheimers disease and AIDS and age-related dementia.
Because chemokines can mediate neuronal cell apoptosis, there is a potential role for chemokines in initiation and effector phases of neurodegenerative disease states.
The research interests of the Lymphocyte Differentiation Unit are focused on two areas: 1) the molecular and cellular mechanisms of lymphocyte differentiation and immunological memory, and 2) the molecular basis of learning and memory formation.
Another area of interest is the mechanisms of learning and memory formation and aging effects on this process.
The rat stone maze is used as a model in concert with techniques to analyze gene expression dynamics in hippocampus during maze learning in rats.
The Lymphocyte Cell Biology Unit has three major interests: Bcl-2 function in the prevention of apoptosis from chemotherapy agents, the control factors in the regulation of growth fraction in tumor cells, and the mechanisms of tumor induced immunosuppression.
The B-Cell Development Unit studies B-cell development in transgenic, knock-in and knockout mice expressing rearranged genes which encode for the heavy (H) and Light (L) chains of antibodies having specificity for phosphocholine (PC).
In the past several years, work has been concentrated in three distinct areas, vaccine development, immunoglobulin transgenic mice as models for vaccine development, and the autoreactive nature of PC-specific B cells.
The Laboratory of Molecular Genetics (LMG) is investigating this molecular basis for aging and age-dependent diseases, notably cancer.
Studies focus on DNA-related mechanisms such as DNA repair, replication and transcription, and genomic instability.
The increased occurrence of DNA damage that has been observed with increasing age in many biological systems may be due to changes in DNA repair.
The Laboratory has a special interest in study of the DNA repair processes in individual genes.
Studies are being conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in DNA repair and in genomic instability in normal, senescent, and cancer cells.
The goal of the LMG is thus to understand the underlying mechanisms involved in DNA damage formation and its processing as well as the changes that take place with aging and that make aging cells susceptible to cancer.
A major goal of research in the Laboratory of Neurosciences (LNS) is to understand, at the molecular and cellular levels, the mechanisms responsible for age-related neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimers, Parkinsons and Huntingtons diseases, and stroke.
Knowledge gained in such basic research is then being used in preclinical studies to develop approaches (diet, lifestyle, drugs and cell therapy) for preventing and treating these disorders.
LNS is currently comprised of four sections which include: the Cellular and Molecular Neurosciences Section, the Neurochemistry and Behavior Section, the Diet and Molecular Physiology Section, and the Medicinal Chemistry Section.
In the future this lab will likely add units on stem cell biology, invertebrate molecular genetics and synaptic plasticity as these are critical areas of scientific investigation of age-related neurodegeneration.
The fundamental scientific paradigm guiding research in the Laboratory of Personality and Cognition (LPC) is the analysis of individual differences.
Few phenomena are more basic than the fact that human beings differ in health, in rates of aging, in cognitive ability, in personality, in happiness, and in life satisfaction.
The LPC conducts basic and clinical research on individual differences in cognitive and personality processes and traits.
The laboratory investigates the influence of age on these variables and their reciprocal influence on health, well-being, and adaptation.
It employs longitudinal, experimental, and epidemiological methods in the analysis of psychological and psychosocial issues of aging, including health and illness, predictors of intellectual competence and decline, models of adult personality, and correlates of disease risk factors.
The Personality, Stress, and Coping Section has conducted systematic basic research in personality guided by the Five Factor Model (FFM) which asserts that personality traits can be understood as aspects of five factors: Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness.
The FFM is now the prevailing conception of personality in psychological research.
A large cross-cultural study has shown consistency of factor structure in the model across cultures.
Recent work using the FFM indicates that some personality changes may be early indicators of Alzheimers disease.
The Cognition Section conducts studies that attempt to distinguish pathological from healthy, age-related cognitive changes in a broad range of cognitive tasks, including short-term and long-term memory, visual/spatial rotation, attention, and decision tasks.
Performance of Baltimore Longi- tudinal Study on Aging (BLSA) participants on the Benton Visual Retention Test has led to the tests identification as a potential early marker for Alzheimers disease.
That finding is being followed up using neuroimaging techniques.
Work is ongoing to determine whether estrogen provides a protective effect on memory.
Brain Physiology and Metabolism Section (BPMS) This section studies brain function, metabolism, and structure with regard to aging and disease, including Alzheimers disease.
Investigators are currently working to improve the sensitivity and specificity of diagnostic tools including Positron Emission Tomography (PET), functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI), structural magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, as well as neuropsychological and behavioral assessment.
Epidemiology, Demography, and Biometry Program
This program collects and evaluates data on health and illness in the older population.
The intramural scientific research carried out by EDBP staff is supplemented by research contracts, interagency agreements, and numerous working arrangements with Federal and non-Federal organizations.
Basic information is generated on current and projected health, and social status of older people.
A multicenter, prospective study of 14,000 older Americans, entitled Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly (EPESE), was initiated in 1980 to prospectively evaluate social, behavioral and environmental factors related to morbidity and mortality.
A public use version of the EPESE baseline dataset for all four sites, as well as followup data from the sites, was made available to investigators in the United States.
The EPESE serves as a primary resource for a broad variety of epidemiologic studies of the elderly, including minorities.
In 1989 NIA joined NHLBI in supporting the Honolulu Heart Program (HHP), an ongoing, prospective study of coronary heart disease and stroke among men of Japanese ancestry born between the years 1900 and 1919 and living on the island of Oahu, Hawaii, in 1965.
The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS), a study of dementia and aging, was added to the HHP in 1991.
Approximately 80 percent of the surviving cohort (3,734), then aged 71 to 93 years, was examined and interviewed.
The HAAS and the contract with Kuakini Medical Center have been extended through May 2001 to ascertain episodes of sleep apnea using NHLBI methods and procedures and other studies.
Autopsy acquisition protocol for neuropathology will continue, by approval of a research grant to continue specimen collection, analysis and reporting.
Major HAAS analyses have focused on the determination of prevalence of various types of dementia in the cohort.
The current estimates suggest that the prevalence of total dementia is similar to other Western estimates but that the ratio of vascular dementia to AD is higher than in mainland populations.
However, the increased Alzheimers rate compared to that of Japan suggests the possibility of identifying possible environmental risk factors in the Hawaii population.
The Womens Health and Aging Study, launched in 1991, is a comprehensive study of functional decline in older women with moderate to severe disability.
The multi-year effort, being conducted under a contract awarded to Johns Hopkins Uni- versity School of Medicine, closely followed approximately 1,000 women to evaluate changes in physical status over a 3-year period.
Follow-up assessments were performed in participants homes every 6 months for 3 years, with brief telephone assessments performed 4 and 5 years after the initial baseline assessment.
The 5 years of followup ended in February 2000.
Other factors, such as mortality and use of long-term care, are being evaluated.
The Veterans Study of Memory in Aging was initiated in 1994 with Duke Un versity.
The project recruited about 3,000 U.S. Navy and Marine veterans who served 1944-45.
Half of these men suffered closed head injury with loss of consciousness in 1944-45 and possibly at other times in their lives; the other half suffered no such head injury.
Based upon cognitive screening, researchers studied the association between head trauma with Alzheimers disease.
Severe head injury appeared to be related to an increased risk of Alzheimers disease.
Progressive loss of muscle mass, or sarcopenia, has been hypothesized to be a common pathway by which multiple diseases contribute to disability.
EDBP initiated the Dynamics of Health and Body Change (Health ABC) study to characterize the extent of loss of muscle mass in older men and women, identify clinical conditions accelerating the loss of muscle, and examine the health impact of loss of muscle on strength, endurance, disability, and diseases common in old age.
Approximately 3,000 men and women, ages 70 to 79, about half of whom are African American, are followed for 7 years for new onset of physical disability.
The Health ABC will provide invaluable information on optimal timing for interventions to prevent or reverse muscle loss and on high-risk groups most likely to benefit.
The EDB program supported the collection and analysis of data on cause of death and characteristics of the last year of life in the 1993 National Mortality Followback Survey (NMFS) conducted by NCHS, CDC.
This survey supplements information from death certificates in the vital statistics file with information on characteristics of the decedent featuring an over sampling of centenarian decedents.
Agreements are in place with the SSA and HCFA to link the NMFS data with administrative records from those two agencies.
Analytic plans call for a joint effort in the production of a report on life and death amongst the oldest of the old.
Other areas of interest include disability and physical function; hip fracture and osteoporosis; heart disease; dementia; sleep disturbance; hearing and vision disorders; methodologic issues in aging research; and cross-cultural and international studies of aging and the diseases of aging.
Biology of Aging Program
The program supports biomedical studies through various NIH grant mechanisms and contracts.
The program plans, implements, and supports fundamental molecular, cellular and genetic research on the mechanisms of aging.
It also supports resource facilities that provide aged animals and cell cultures for use in aging research.
Animal Models.
The objective of the Animal Models Program is to identify and develop new animal models, both mammalian and lower organism, for use in aging research.
This includes research on rats, mice, rabbits, non-human primates, insects, nematodes and yeast.
Mutant and genetically-engineered rodent models of both normal aging and specific age-related pathologies are of particular interest.
Cardiovascular Biology.
The objectives of the Cardiovascular Biology Program are to support basic research on age-related changes in cardiovascular function, e.g. gene expression, and on factors affecting cell death in heart tissue.
Cell Structure and Function Program.
The objectives of the Cell Structure and Function Program are to support research on the molecular basis of age-related changes in signal transduction mechanisms; microenvironment ECM; cell senescence/apoptosis/cancer; telomeres; and membranes and membrane receptors.
Endocrinology Program.
Hormones secreted by the endocrine system play major roles in informing various organs of the status of other organ systems and in coordinating the functioning of various organ systems.
As humans and various animal models age, average serum levels of some of these hormones decline while others rise, changing the overall hormonal milieu of the organism.
Also, the sensitivity of some intracellular signaling pathways responsive to endocrine factors change with age, altering tissue response to hormonal signals.
The purpose of the endocrinology of aging program is to support basic molecular and cellular research into the causes and effects of age-related changes in the endocrine system of humans and various animal models.
Areas of investigation in this program include age-related changes in hormone production, metabolism, and action; diabetes; reproductive aging: biology of menopause and animal models of menopause; age-related changes in control of prostate growth; endocrine aspects of age-dependent tumors; and the hypothalmic/pituitary/adrenal axis.
Genetics Program.
The objectives of the Genetics Program are to support research on identification and characterization of longevity assurance genes (LAGs) and senescence assurance genes (SAGs); genome stability; genomics; mouse mutagenesis; single nucleotide polymorphisms/genetic epidemiology; and Werners syndrome.
Immunology Program.
Changes in the immune system of older people may contribute to the increased incidence of infection and cancer in the elderly.
Research directed towards understanding the age-related regulation of immune function in health and disease is supported by BAP.
Areas of investigation in this program include regulation of lymphocyte proliferation; regulation of immune specificity; response of immune system to biochemical stimuli; autoimmune disease and other immunopathology; endocrine and neuroendocrine control of immune function; molecular basis of the age-related decline in immune function; and interventions to retard and/or correct age-related decline in immune function.
Metabolic Regulation.
Areas of investigation in the Metabolic Regulation Program include nutrition and metabolism; age-related changes in mitochondrial function/mitochondrial dysfunction; mechanism of life span extension by caloric restriction; and generation of free radicals and oxidative stress.
Musculoskeletal Biology.
The age-related change of function of various physiologic systems often negatively impacts the health of the elderly.
The purpose of this program is to support high quality basic molecular and cellular research to understand the causes and effects of these changes, thereby encouraging the development of preventative and interventional strategies to extend the health span of the elderly.
Areas of investigation in this program include age-related changes in osteoblast and osteoclast function and bone matrix; age-related changes in muscle structure and function; age-related changes in cartilage, connective tissue and skin; molecular mechanisms of the above age-related changes; and molecular basis of osteoporosis and osteoarthritis.
The Biology of Aging Program also includes the Office of Biological Resources and Resource Development.
Because most investigators have neither the facilities nor the resources needed to develop and maintain colonies of aged animals in a barrier facility, the NIA provides support for both rat and mouse colonies for use by the scientific community.
The cost of these animals is partially subsidized by the NIA through contracts.
The Geriatrics Program (GP) supports research and research training directed at the pathophysiology, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of age-related diseases, degenerative conditions, and disabilities.
An issue of special relevance is physical frailty (deficits in strength, mobility, balance, and endurance).
A second important theme is the elucidation of previously unappreciated pathologies that contribute to morbidity in late life (new diseases of old age).
A third major emphasis is on the development of new interventions and testing them in controlled clinical trials.
Below is a description of GPs research program areas:
The Endocrine and Osteoporosis Group supports research in the following two areas of study: * Endocrinology.
This program area develops and supports research aimed at providing an understanding of the age-related changes in endocrine function.
New areas of emphasis include the physiologic processes and sequelae of menopause, and the impact of these changes on other physiologic systems.
Sheryl Sherman, Ph.D. * Osteoporosis.
This program area develops and supports basic and clinical research to identify age-associated processes which contribute to bone loss and osteoporosis; markers and risk factors that are related to decrements in bone mass, bone competence and the predisposition to fractures; and strategies based on modifying or reversing these processes.
GP especially emphasizes research on osteoporosis in advanced age, when the consequences, particularly those of hip fracture, become more severe and result in escalating morbidity and mortality.
Sheryl Sherman, Ph.D.
The Cardiovascular/Pulmonary/Renal Section develops and supports research in such areas as alterations in blood-pressure regulation with age; isolated systolic hypertension; orthostatic hypotension; aging changes in microcirculation; age-associated alterations in arteries and the effect of these alterations on cardiovascular function; age-related change in quality, quantity, and function of the myocardium and the conduction system of the heart; and changes with age in kidney and pulmonary function.
Andre Premen, Ph.D.
The Geriatrics Centers Section supports the Claude Pepper Older American Independence Centers that support a broad spectrum of research relevant to health concerns of older people.
Stanley Slater, M.D.
The Geriatrics Research and Training Section supports clinical research on disorders that are concentrated predominately among older people or that are associated with increased morbidity and mortality in the elderly.
In addition to these specific clinical problems, the program also addresses the lack of research on clinical problems in nursing homes and other sites of long-term care for the elderly.
Another mission to attract new investigators to the field of aging and to further the development of active investigators in clinical medicine and biomedical research.
Stanley Slater, M.D.
The Infectious Diseases Section develops and supports research on the relationship of physiologic changes associated with age or chronic disease to susceptibility to infections.
Other priorities include new strategies for evaluating vaccine efficacy in the elderly, potential prophylactic techniques against infections in the elderly, age-related changes in the effects of stresses such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and infection on granulopoiesis and lymphopoiesis, age-related changes in circulating levels of amyloid proteins and effects of amyloid deposition, and the interaction of aging and processes of carcinogenesis.
Stanley Slater, M.D.
The Nutrition/Gastroenterology/Metabolism Section develops and supports basic and clinical research on effects of nutritional factors throughout the life span; longevity and age-associated morbidity; effects of aging on nutrient digestion, absorption, and utilization; and the contribution of nutritional status to the etiology and pathogenesis of diseases prevalent in the elderly.
Chhanda Dutta, Ph.D.
The Cancer Section develops and supports research on the aging/cancer interface.
Research focuses on: age-related changes that contribute to increased cancer incidence and mortality in older persons; time, and its importance to development of cancer during a persons life span; aggressive tumor behavior in the context of the aged patient; effects of age and aging on anti-tumor drugs; and the impact of previous illnesses, disabilities, and degenerative conditions on the cancer experience of older patients.
Etiologic insights acquired from the development of multiple primary tumors in the elderly are of special interest.
Research on tumors that primarily affect older persons (e.g., breast, prostate, colon, lung, and non-Hodgkins lymphoma) is of major importance to the program.
Rosemary Yancik, Ph.D.
The Musculoskeletal Section develops and supports basic and clinical research on age-related changes in function of bone, muscle, and cartilage.
The program supports research on risk factors, prevention and treatment of falls, gait disorders and hip fractures in the elderly, osteoarthritis, and urinary incontinence.
Chhanda Dutta, Ph.D.
Neuroscience and Neuropsychology of Aging
This program fosters and supports extramural and collaborative research and training to further the understanding of neural and behavioral processes associated with the aging brain.
Research on dementias of old age in particular Alzheimers disease is one of the highest program priorities.
Neurobiology of Aging.
The Neurobiology of Aging Branch fosters research on age-related cellular, molecular, and behavioral changes in the structure or function of the nervous system.
Studies of neuroimmunology, neurovirology, neuroendocrinology, neuropharmacology, sensory and motor processes, sleep, biorhythmicity, cell death and neural plasticity are of particular interest.
The Fundamental Neuroscience Section supports research at cellular, molecular, and behavioral levels that explore age-related structural and functional changes in brain.
The Integrative Neurobiology Section supports research on neural mechanisms underlying age-related changes in endocrine functions; neurodegenerative diseases of aging associated with infectious agents; and central nervous system, neuroendocrine system, and immune system interactions in aging.
The Sleep and Biological Rhythms Section focuses on studies of epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of sleep disorders or older people, age-related mechanisms underlying sleep-wakefulness cycles and behavioral sequelae in the aged, and on biorhythmicity in the aging nervous system.
The Sensory Processes Section focuses on mechanisms of normal aging and disease-related alterations in visual, auditory, somatosensory, vestibular, and chemosensory functions, and pain from the level of the gene to the whole organism as well as epidemiological studies of populations.
The Motor Function Section supports research on proprioception, postural control, sensory motor integration, vestibular, and movement disorders in aging, including Parkinsons disease.
Dementias of Aging.
The Dementias Branch supports studies of etiology, pathophysiology, epidemiology, clinical course/natural history, diagnosis and functional assessment, drug design, drug development and trials, and behavioral management and intervention in the dementias of later life.
It also supports the Alzheimers Disease Centers Program.
The Basic Research Section supports research on Alzheimers disease and other age-related neurodegenerative disorders, including identification of genetic loci associated with inherited forms of these diseases and biochemical and molecular genetic analysis of the components of amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and other abnormal structures found in the brains of Alzheimers disease victims.
The Population Studies Section supports research in the epidemiology of cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment, and Alzheimers disease including prevalence, incidence, and risk and protective factors and on models for large-area registries for Alzheimers disease.
The Clinical Studies Section supports research on the diagnosis, treatment, and management of patients with cognitive decline or Alzheimers disease.
Research on diagnosis is aimed at the development and evaluation of reliable and valid multidimensional procedures and instruments for diagnosis, progression, and response to treatment.
Research in the treatment and management of Alzheimers seeks to develop the knowledge required to interrupt the course of the disorder, to manage its behavioral manifestations, and to ultimately prevent it.
Treatment approaches include clinical trials of pharmacologic agents and studies of behavioral and environmental interventions.
Preclinical drug discovery, development, and animal testing studies are important aspects.
The Research Centers Section supports Alzheimers Disease Research Centers and Alzheimers Disease Center Core programs, which provide a multifaceted approach to research on Alzheimers disease, including clinical and other core services, neuropathological evaluation, basic and clinical research, professional and public information, and educational activities.
It also supports the National Alzheimers Coordinating Center.
Neuropsychology of Aging.
The Neuropsychology of Aging Branch emphasizes research, including the use of animal models, on the neural and psychological mechanisms underlying age-related changes in basic cognitive processes, including learning, memory, attention, and language.
Studies of age-related changes in emotion also are supported.
The use of neural modeling, and computational neuroscience approaches, and the integration of these approaches, to understanding these structural and dynamic brain changes and adaptations is encouraged.
Behavioral and Social Research
This program supports basic social and behavioral research on the aging process and the problems and needs of older people.
It focuses on understanding how psychological and social aging interact with biological aging processes; how older people relate to social institutions (e.g., the family, health care systems); and the antecedents and consequences of the dramatic changes in age composition of the population.
The goal of the program is to produce a scientific knowledge base which by informing professional practice, public policy, and everyday life can maximize peoples health, effective functioning, independence, and well-being in their middle and later years.
In order to explain the wide diversity among older people, it encourages comparisons between males and females; persons with differing racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic background; and inhabitants of countries that vary in styles and standards of living.
Special attention is given to studies of the oldest old (those age 85 and over), one of the fastest growing segments of the population.
Of special concern is the care of Alzheimers disease patients and their families.
Emphasis is also placed on many kinds of interventions that can prevent, postpone, or reverse such decrements of old age as chronic ill health, sense of incompetence, memory loss, functional disability, or withdrawal from active participation in social and economic roles.
Adult psychological development supports research concerned with behavioral and social mechanisms and processes influencing cognitive and intellectual functioning, personality, attitudes, and interpersonal relationships over the adult life course.
Emphasis is placed on research relevant to maintaining and improving well-being, independence, and effective functioning.
Research is needed for seeking out the conditions under which age-related individual changes occur or do not occur, and for supplying information to use in the design of roles and environments that can utilize the special strengths of middle-age and older people and that can maintain and enhance their functioning.
The two sections included are: cognitive functioning and aging and personality and social psychological aging.
Social science research on aging aims to understand the social and environmental conditions influencing health, well-being, and functioning of people in their middle and later years.
Its three sections focus respectively on dynamic processes linking health, behavior, and aging and on those linking social structures with behaviors, attitudes, health, and status of older people.
The sections are concerned with social and behavioral factors in health and functioning and with assessment and testing of planned and natural interventions for health promotion/disease prevention.
Special attention is given to research on aging and health care, especially such issues in long-term care as: family structures and relationships affecting provision of home care, and interventions to prevent the need for long-term care (e.g., injury prevention and control).
Particular emphasis is placed on studies of long-term care of Alzheimers disease patients and their families in line with the NIA initiative.
This program also encompasses social science research on two other institute-wide initiatives: gender, health, and longevity, and minority health.
The three sections included are: behavioral geriatrics research, health care organizations, and older people in society.
Demography and population epidemiology (DPE) supports research and training on the dynamics and consequences of population aging, and aims to describe and understand the changing elderly population in terms of its social, demographic, economic, health, and functional characteristics, and the impact of these changes on society as a whole.
DPE also coordinates policy on aging-related statistical data within the NIA and across other institutes at NIH as well as with other relevant Federal agencies.
The Office on Demography of Aging is located in the DPE/BSR, the focal point for coordinating demographic and economic research within NIA.
The demography office is also the center of activity for the Federal forum of aging-related statistics, a group which serves a similar function in coordinating research government-wide.
DPEs three sections are: health and retirement economics, demography of aging, and population epidemiology.
NIA Appropriations Grants and Direct Operations Fiscal year
Total grants^1
Direct operations
Total
(Amounts in thousands of dollars)
1975^2
$9,565
$6,424
$15,989
1976
11,445
7,843
19,288
1977^
19,852
10,148
30,000
1978
24,375
12,930
37,305
1979
37,888
19,023
56,911
1980
43,952
26,036
69,988
1981
50,260
25,348
75,608
1982
55,410
26,493
81,903
1983
63,483
30,513
93,996
1984
79,872
35,420
115,292
1985
103,530
39,438
142,968
1986
112,127
38,819
150,046
1987
134,686
42,772
177,461
1988
148,575
45,973
194,548
1989
172,708
49,837
222,545
1990
184,111
54,816
238,927
1991
257,905
65,886
323,791
1992
302,908
79,974
382,882
1993
316,107
83,336
399,523
1994
337,975
82,291
420,266
1995
350,253
83,035
433,288
1996
370,728
82,167
452,895
1997
398,144
86,174
484,318
1998
429,295
87,787
517,082
1999
490,775
103,781
594,556
This page was last reviewed on November 1, 2001.
[ Q
[ Contact Us | Privacy Notice | Disclaimers | Accessibility ]
N I H logo - link to the National Institutes of Health
National Institutes of Health (NIH) 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, Maryland 20892 H H S logo - link to U. S. Department of Health and Human Services
Department of Health and Human Services
