The nasa.gov site requires that JavaScripts be enabled in your browser.
For instructions, click here
Follow this link to go to the text only version of nasa.gov
NASA -National Aeronautics and Space Administration Follow this link to skip to the main content + Low Bandwidth + Contact NASA FIND IT @ NASA _________ Go
ABOUT NASA NEWS AND EVENTS MULTIMEDIA MISSIONS POPULAR TOPICS MyNASA
+ Home MISSIONS
MISSIONS HIGHLIGHTS NASA MISSIONS TIMELINE SHUTTLE AND STATION LOOKING AT EARTH EXPLORING OUR SOLAR SYSTEM SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY DEEP SPACE MISSIONS RESEARCH AIRCRAFT
FEATURE The Hubble Space Telescope Space Shuttle view of the Hubble Space Telescope Space Shuttle view of the Hubble Space Telescope
In the 1920s, as famed astronomer Edwin Hubble was discovering the vastness of the cosmos through the lens of his Earth-bound telescope, others were trying to break free of the planet and its turbulent atmosphere by launching unmanned rockets into space.
No one dreamed then the two pursuits would become intertwined decades later when scientists used rocket technology to launch orbiting observatories, including NASA's Hubble Space Telescope.
Hubble, the astronomer, looked beyond the boundaries of our home galaxy, the Milky Way, and discovered that the universe is much larger than we thought.
Hubble, the telescope, has peered even farther into the outer reaches of our universe, further enhancing our understanding of the cosmos.
Named for Edwin Hubble, the telescope has brought the universe into view with far greater clarity than ever before.
Since its launch in 1990 aboard the space shuttle Discovery, Hubble has confirmed the existence of black holes, refined our knowledge of the age and size of the universe, and stared back to nearly the dawn of time, revealing a jumble of primordial galaxies.
HUBBLE'S SUPER VIEW
Larger earthbound telescopes can see as far as Hubble can.
All telescopes are essentially "time machines."
Probing the secrets of "deep" space means looking farther back in time.
That's because light from faraway galaxies takes millions to billions of years to reach Earth, providing astronomers with a record of how those objects appeared long ago.
But the "eye" in space has sharper vision because of its super location.
At 368 miles above our planet, the orbiting observatory is outside Earth's turbulent blanket of air that makes star images wiggle.
Hubble can snap those sharper images while moving.
Unlike terrestrial observatories, which are perched on mountain tops, Hubble doesn't stay put.
It whirls around Earth every 90 minutes at 17,000 mph (27,200 kph).
The telescope has no rocket motor: it is in orbit around Earth and runs on sunlight.
Hubble also does what it's told.
Earthbound computers send detailed instructions, telling it where to point and which cameras to use.
A VERSATILE TELESCOPE
Other orbiting observatories have probed the secrets of space, but Hubble is the largest and most versatile.
Its visible-light camera -- called the Wide Field and Planetary Camera 2 -- has consistently delivered stunning images of celestial objects, including the pillars of dust and gas that harbor nascent stars and the colorful death shrouds of aging, Sun-like stars.
Although the visible-light camera may be Hubble's "bread and butter" instrument, it's by no means the telescope's only source of celestial revenue.
Hubble has a fleet of other science instruments that covers a broad range of light, from ultraviolet to near infrared.
These instruments allow Hubble to probe a galaxy's hottest stars and to peer far across space to study the evolution of galaxies.
With Hubble's help, astronomers have monitored weather patterns on our solar system planets and harvested important information about stars and galaxies.
HOUSE CALLS TO HUBBLE
Regular maintenance visits to the telescope keep the steady stream of pictures rolling off the Hubble assembly line.
In fact, NASA designed the telescope for servicing in space.
Earthbound telescopes receive routine checkups to ensure they're functioning properly; they also receive regular upgrades when new advances in technology come around.
Hubble is no different.
That's why astronauts visit the telescope every few years, replacing older equipment and adding state-of-the-art science instruments.
Future servicing missions are planned for 2001 and 2003.
In 2001 astronauts will install the Advanced Camera for Surveys, which will capture an even wider swath of the sky and will yield even sharper pictures than Hubble's current wide-field camera.
IN THE BEGINNING
Orbiting space observatories like Hubble can trace their roots to the 1920s.
While most scientists considered a space telescope as pure science fiction, some were seriously exploring the idea.
Rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth, for example, speculated about orbiting telescopes in his writings, and scientist Robert Goddard began testing his newly invented liquid-fuel rockets.
As these men were pushing the technological envelope, Edwin Hubble was unveiling new heavenly horizons.
Before Hubble came along, astronomers had a restricted view of the universe, believing that the only galaxy in the heavens was our Milky Way.
But Hubble used the latest technology, a powerful 100-inch telescope, and made some startling discoveries that changed our concept of the cosmos.
First, he observed that galaxies exist beyond the Milky Way.
Then he found that those galaxies are flying away from each other, an observation that helped him determine that the universe is expanding.
It takes powerful telescopes to study the uncharted territories of the vast cosmos.
But it became increasingly clear to astronomers that Earth's atmosphere distorted starlight, which made it difficult to obtain razor-sharp views of celestial objects.
The idea of placing a telescope in space, above Earth's turbulent air, had been kicked around for several years.
But scientists pondered how to transport a telescope into space.
The rocket technology pioneered by Oberth and Goddard and revolutionized by the Germans during World War II became the means of transportation.
DREAM BECOMES REALITY
After scientists figured out the means, they focused on coming up with the money to develop and build a space telescope.
The newly established NASA (created in 1958) and well-known American astronomers such as Lyman Spitzer began championing the cause, trying to convince Congress that such a project was useful.
In 1977 Congress finally agreed to allocate the money.
But it took a decade of research, planning, and testing before NASA successfully launched its first space observatory.
And two more decades passed before NASA launched the Hubble telescope, which has expanded our heavenly vistas far more than its namesake ever dreamed.
FirstGov - Your First Click to the US Governmnet + 2003 Strategic Plan + Freedom of Information Act + The President's Management Agenda + FY 2002 Agency Performance and Accountability Report + NASA Privacy Statement, Disclaimer, and Accessibility Certification + Freedom to Manage + Erasmus Executive Dashboard (NASA Only) NASA Editor: Dennis Armstrong NASA Official: Brian Dunbar Last Updated: November 8, 2003 + Contact NASA
