Portrait of Congressman Mike Ross Representing the 4th District of Arkansas Contact Information Constituent Services Legislative Affairs News 
Over 2,300 Americans were killed, hundreds more were wounded, and countless Americans lives were forever changed by the events of that day.
As we mark the 60th anniversary of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, we pay tribute to the many brave soldiers who lost their lives on that day, and we honor the thousands of Americans who served their country so valiantly during World War II.
On Veterans Day, I had the privilege of presenting a Purple Heart to one of the many heroes of World War II.
The men and women who served during that time were among the most courageous in our nations history, and I am deeply grateful for their service to our nation.
Just over three months ago, America suffered its greatest tragedy since Pearl Harbor in the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.
As our country rose up to respond to the horrific attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, so too is America coming together to defeat the evils of terrorism that perpetrated the acts of September 11th.
The compassion and patriotism that the American people have shown in the days since September 11th fill me with great pride and show that our nation remains strong and resilient.
As we commemorate those who served at Pearl Harbor, I hope that all Americans will pause to remember the victims of both of these great tragedies, to honor our veterans, and to pray for the men and women in Armed Forces currently defending our freedoms at home and abroad.
ROSS STANDS UP FOR ARKANSAS FARMERS, WORKERS
Thursday, the House of Representatives passed by one vote a measure to grant trade promotion authority, or fast track, to the President.
The Constitution gives Congress the power to regulate commerce with foreign nations.
This oversight was granted to Congress for a reason.
Trade agreements have a major impact on American jobs and communities.
The legislation considered by the House would take away much of Congresss oversight ability to make sure that our trade agreements dont injure American farmers and workers.
This legislation would also give the President the authority to eliminate integral subsidy programs for our farm families that are outlined in this years Farm Bill if he believed they conflicted with trade agreements.
As a member of the House Agriculture Committee, I fought hard earlier this year to help write a Farm Bill that truly supports our farm families.
Without the programs provided in this Farm Bill, we will continue to lose more and more farm families.
We must enact and maintain these programs to assist farm families when market prices are down.
I support fair trade.
We have to recognize that we live in a global society, and we want our farmers and our businesses and industries to have access to global markets and be strong players in the global economy.
However, as a result of some of our recent trade agreements, I have spent much of this year fighting the dumping of foreign steel, Canadian-subsidized softwood lumber, and so-called catfish from Vietnam into our markets.
Ive seen lumber mills and catfish processing plants in the Fourth District forced to cut back to three or four days a week or shut down altogether.
I could not support granting the President trade authority that takes away powers granted to Congress in the Constitution and that leaves us without assurances that the livelihoods of the farmers and workers in our district and across America would be protected.
Before this year comes to close, its time for Congress to address the important priorities facing our nation by enacting a new Farm Bill, passing an economic stimulus package that will truly boost our economy, providing relief to the hundreds of thousands of workers who have been laid off as a result of the terrorist attacks of September 11 and the sagging economy, and finishing the appropriations measures for the current fiscal year.
I am focused on addressing those priorities.
The House approved H.R. 3005, the Fast Track Trade Authority bill, by a vote of 215-214.
RAYTHEON AWARDED MULTI-MILLION DOLLAR CONTRACT FOR MISSILE PRODUCTION
(WASHINGTON, DC) Raytheon Company, of Tucson, Arizona, has been award a $34,080,483 contract modification for Tomahawk missile support for the United States Navy and production of one cruise missile for the United Kingdom.
Thirty percent of the work associated with this contract will be performed in Camden, Arkansas, with the remainder being performed in Tucson, Arizona.
Specifically, according to Raytheon, the contract awarded is a ceiling-priced modification to an existing firm-fixed-price, indefinite-quantity contract.
The modification exercises an option to procure Tomahawk missile depot support, maintenance, operational test launch support and related spare parts and components for the U.S. Navy as well as one United Kingdom cruise missile for the government of the United Kingdom, under the Foreign Military Sales Program.
Current contract funds in the amount of $33,805,423 are set to expire at the end of the current fiscal year.
The contract was awarded by the Naval Air Systems Command at Patuxent River, Maryland.
This contract modification is good news for the city of Camden and surrounding areas and the many people employed at the Raytheon facility, said U.S. Representative Mike Ross (D-AR).
The jobs associated with Raytheon and the other defense contractors located at Highland Industrial Park are vital to the people and communities in Ouachita and Calhoun counties as well as the security of our nation.
In light of our current war against terrorism, it is important that we not only maintain adequate security at the park, but more importantly, ensure that these companies continue to provide the many jobs that this area relies on.
This contract shows evidence that our military remains confident in the work performed at East Camden.
I want to assure the citizens of this area that I support the needs of the working families employed by the defense contractors there, and I will continue to do all I can to promote these jobs, Ross said.
Please Contact Mike at 1-800-223-2220 or mike.ross@mail.house.gov
Contact Information Constituent Services Legislative Affairs News 
Washington: 1-800-223-2220 | Pine Bluff: 870-536-3376 | Hot Springs: 501-520-5892 | El Dorado: 870-881-0681 | Prescott: 870-887-6787
Next Previous Newsletter Newsletter List Newsletter
