Your pattern of eating may be important.
Snacks and meals eaten away from home provide a large part of daily calories for many people.
Choose them wisely.
Try fruits, vegetables, whole grain foods, or a cup of low-fat milk or yogurt for a snack.
When eating out, choose small portions of foods.
If you choose fish, poultry, or lean meat, ask that it be grilled rather than fried.
Like younger adults, overweight and obese older adults may improve their health by losing weight.
The guidance of a health care provider is recommended, especially for obese children and older adults.
Since older people tend to lose muscle mass, regular physical activity is a valuable part of a weight-loss plan.
Building or maintaining muscle helps keep older adults active and reduces their risk of falls and fractures.
Staying active throughout your adult years helps maintain muscle mass and bone strength for your later years.
If you need to lose weight, do so gradually
If you are overweight, loss of 5 to 15 percent of your body weight may improve your health, ability to function, and quality of life.
Aim to lose about 10 percent of your weight over about 6 months.
This would be 20 pounds of weight loss for someone who weighs 200 pounds.
Loss of 1/2 to 2 pounds per week is usually safe.
Even if you have regained weight in the past, it's worthwhile to try again.
Encourage healthy weight in children
Children need enough food for proper growth, but too many calories and too little physical activity lead to overweight.
The number of overweight U. S. children has risen dramatically in recent years.
Encourage healthy weight by offering children grain products; vegetables and fruits; low-fat dairy products; and beans, lean meat, poultry, fish, or nuts -- and let them see you enjoy eating the same foods.
Let the child decide how much of these foods to eat.
Offer only small amounts of food high in fat or added sugars.
Encourage children to take part in vigorous activities (and join them whenever possible).
Limit the time they spend in sedentary activities like watching television or playing computer or video games.
Help children to develop healthy eating habits.
Make small changes.
For example, serve low-fat milk rather than whole milk and offer one cookie instead of two.
Since children still need to grow, weight loss is not recommended unless guided by a health care provider.
Serious eating disorders
Frequent binge eating, with or without periods of food restriction, may be a sign of a serious eating disorder.
Other signs of eating disorders include preoccupation with body weight or food (or both -- regardless of body weight), dramatic weight loss, excessive exercise, selfinduced vomiting, and the abuse of laxatives.
Seek help from a health care provider if any of these apply to you, a family member, or a friend.
Imgage of Advice for Today title bar
Image of teal arrow bullet Aim for a healthy weight.
If you are at a healthy weight, aim to avoid weight gain.
If you are already overweight, first aim to prevent further weight gain, and then lose weight to improve your health.
Image of teal arrow bullet Build a healthy base by eating vegetables, fruits, and grains (especially whole grains) with little added fat or sugar.
Image of teal arrow bullet Select sensible portion sizes.
Image of teal arrow bullet Get moving.
Get regular physical activity to balance calories from the foods you eat.
Image of teal arrow bullet Set a good example for children by practicing healthy eating habits and enjoying regular physical activities together.
Image of teal arrow bullet Keep in mind that even though heredity and the environment are important influences, your behaviors help determine your body weight.
- Previous - Table of Contents - Next -
