AIDS Information Center AIDS Service, VA Headquarters [Red_and_Blue5372.gif] AIDS INFORMATION NEWSLETTER Michael Howe, MSLS, Editor AIDS Information Center AIDS Service, VA Headquarters (202) 273-9206 April 5, 1996 Opportunistic Infections (Part XXIII) Kaposi's Sarcoma by Harvey S. Bartnof, MD Harvey S. Bartnof, MD, has been a Member of the Scientific Advisory Committee at the San Francisco AIDS Foundation since 1987.
He has been Course Director of "AIDS-HIV: Overview and Update" at the University of California at San Francisco School of Medicine since 1985.
[From: Bulletin of Experimental Treatments for AIDS, published by the San Francisco AIDS Foundation.
Subscription Services, Infocom Group, 1250 45th Street, Suite 200, Emeryville, CA 94608-2924.
Tel: 1-800-959-1059.
In 1981, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) published a report of 21 cases of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) among previously healthy gay/bisexual men from California and New York City.
This outbreak represented the beginning of the recognized AIDS epidemic.
Even in 1996, KS is the most common tumor in people with AIDS.
When compared with the risk for HIV negative people, HIV positive people have a more than 20,000-fold increased risk of KS.
The majority of this risk is among men who have sex with men.
Several advances in KS research and treatment have occurred in the past few years.
These advances include identifying potential causes and the approval of new treatments.
A New Herpesvirus: a Cause of KS? Certain viruses are known causes of cancer.
In the past, several infectious agents have been hypothesized to be associated with KS, including cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis B virus, Mycoplasma penetrans, human herpesvirus type 6 (HHV-6) and human herpesvirus type 7 (HHV-7).
With the possible exception of HPV, none have been definitively linked with KS.
In December 1994, a research team from Columbia University published findings of a new human herpesvirus as the possible cause of KS (see BETA, March 1995, page 10 and BETA Treatment Alert, December 20, 1994).
Molecular biologist Yuan Chang, MD, epidemiologist Patrick Moore, MD, and their colleagues published data in the journal Science.
Over the last 14 months, over 35 research papers have appeared on this new herpes virus.
It has been called both Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) and human herpesvirus type 8 (HHV-8).
Donald Ganem, MD, and colleagues from the University of California at San Francisco have isolated and grown KSHV in vitro.
The Chang and Moore team used a unique method of amplifying DNA sequences called representational difference analysis (RDA), followed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
The method isolates unique DNA sequences found only in diseased but not normal tissues from the same individual.
Chang, Moore and co-workers isolated the unique herpesvirus sequences from: (1) 93% of 27 AIDS-KS tissue samples, (2) 11% of 27 AIDS-related lymphoma tissue samples, and (3) 25% of lymph node samples from people with AIDS who did not have KS.
They also found the sequences in normal appearing skin biopsies adjacent to KS lesions in 2 patients.
They were unable to isolate the sequences from control samples including other organs from the same AIDS-KS patients, opportunistic infection biopsies from other AIDS patients and various biopsies from HIV negative people.
Chang and Moore noted that the unique sequences were dissimilar to other human herpesviruses, except for a 56% homology (similarity) with EBV. EBV is associated with lymphoma, nose-throat cancer and HIV-related oral hairy leukoplakia.
In addition, the new virus sequence had a 55% homology with herpesvirus saimiri, a cause of lymphoma in New World monkeys.
Chang and Moore concluded that KSHV represents a new human herpesvirus.
Since the original report of KSHV, numerous laboratory groups worldwide have reported finding KSHV DNA sequences in all types of KS and in various bodily tissues.
KSHV has been detected in KS tissue from men, women and children.
In the lymph nodes of asymptomatic HIV positive persons with persistent lymphadenopathy, KSHV has been detected among gay/bisexual men, but not among injection drugs users or heterosexual men.
In skin cancers (squamous cell and basal cell carcinomas), KSHV has been detected among immunocompromised transplant patients, but not among immunocompetent patients.
Similarly, benign skin tumors (actinic and seborrheic keratoses) from immunocompromised transplant patients contain KSHV, but those from immunocompetent patients do not.
The CDC was able to find KSHV in semen samples from 30 of 33 (91%) HIV positive gay/bisexual men.
Also, they found the virus in 7 of 30 (23%) control HIV negative healthy male semen donors.
The sexual orientation of the controls was not stated.
Half were CMV positive and half were CMV negative.
Preliminary results of this study were discussed in the December 1995 issue of BETA (page 30).
Contrasting with the CDC, Jay A. Levy, MD, and co-workers, from the University of California at San Francisco, have been unable to isolate KSHV from seminal fluid or cells from AIDS-KS patients.
Neither were they able to isolate KSHV from fluid or cells in saliva.
LevyOs group has determined that the blood cells containing KSHV are B-lymphocytes.
When examined by the laboratory of D. Whitby, R. Weiss, PhD, and colleagues, of the University College London School of Medicine, KSHV was detected in none of 18 stool samples and in only 1 of 21 throat swab samples from AIDS-KS patients (the 1 patient with throat swab KSHV had KS in the lung).
The authors state that the lack of KSHV in the stool is not inconsistent with the epidemiologic finding of an increased risk of KS with oral-anal contact.
They believe that the virus would be expected to be found in immune cells of the rectal lining.
Additional studies are necessary.
Alvin Friedman-Kien, MD, and colleagues from New York University have found that KSHV DNA is localized to the nuclei of the abnormal spindle-shaped cells that are characteristic of KS. Whitby and co-workers have also localized KSHV to KS spindle cells, in addition to finding the virus in KS endothelial lining cells.
Robert Gallo, MD, of the Institute for Human Virology at the University of Maryland, is skeptical that KSHV is the cause of KS because his laboratory cannot isolate the virus from established KS cell lines in vitro.
However, KS cell lines in vitro appear to be unable to sustain the virus.
C. Lebbe and colleagues from the Hopital Saint-Louis in Paris, France have found KSHV in original primary cell cultures of KS cells.
However, KSHV recovery decreases with subsequent passages (growth cycles) in vitro.
They found that KS cell cultures were all negative for KSHV by the third and fourth passage.
Moreover, Yuan Chang agrees with the findings of Lebbe and colleagues.
Clinical Manifestations, Symptoms and Diagnosis of AIDS-KS Clinical Manifestations KS can occur anywhere on the skin, in the mouth or on any mucous membrane lining.
Common locations are the mouth, neck and head, particularly the tip of the nose or behind the ears.
Common internal organs involved include the lung and intestines.
When found on the skin, KS also occurs in the intestinal tract 40% of the time.
KS occurs on the skin most commonly as nodules, raised round or oval hard lumps.
The size of the nodules is usually 0.5-2.0 cm (3/16-3/4 inches) in diameter.
In light-skinned individuals, the color is usually violet, bluish or reddish (reflecting the presence of red blood cells).
In dark-skinned individuals, the color is more brown or black.
A bruise-like discoloration and minor swelling often appear at the edges of the KS nodules when they are enlarging.
Less commonly, KS skin nodules can ulcerate, bleed and become secondarily infected.
Before the KS has grown to full nodule size, it may first appear flat with a pink or blood-bruise color (patch stage).
Often, 1 or 2 KS lesions in the patch stage may go unnoticed by the patient.
When many nodules are present on the skin, they often appear in patterns, with symmetry on both sides of the body.
The patterns can be linear or slightly curved, following the skin fold lines (Langer's lines).
Sometimes, the KS can form large plaques on the skin, with larger raised areas of skin involved.
Common locations are the thighs and soles of the feet.
Often, there is painful swelling involved.
KS in the mouth is common, often on the roof (palate) or gums.
The color is usually violet or red.
On the roof of the mouth, KS is usually flat.
Sometimes mouth KS can swell, bleed or ulcerate.
Less commonly, 1 or more lymph nodes may be involved without skin involvement.
This form of KS can also cause potentially painful swelling.
The clinical course of AIDS-KS is usually progressive over time.
Flat lesions tend to grow into nodules and new lesions appear.
Often, an opportunistic infection will cause an accelerated growth of KS.
However, there can be periods of weeks to months when the KS remains stable in size, shape and number.
KS is not a common cause of death among AIDS patients.
In 1987, KS was the cause of death in 10% of AIDS patients.
By 1992, this number increased slightly to 12%.
However, death often occurs when KS is in the lungs.
Symptoms Usually, skin KS does not cause symptoms of pain or itching.
Larger lesions can be painful.
There can be associated swelling, particularly on the face or legs, and this may be painful.
KS on the soles of the feet may be painful when walking.
When KS occurs in the mouth, usually there are no symptoms.
Sometimes, however, there can be swelling, bleeding and ulcers, with associated pain.
Uncommonly, KS in the mouth or throat may cause difficulties with chewing or swallowing.
When KS occurs in the intestines, usually there are no symptoms.
Sometimes, however, internal bleeding or a blockage with pain can occur.
A blockage can also cause nausea and vomiting.
Intestinal KS is associated with malabsorption of nutrients.
The most serious organ involvement is KS of the lung.
There may be shortness of breath, wheezing and a cough that is usually dry, but can be bloody.
Lung KS is life-threatening.
Sometimes, KS is associated with fevers, night sweats and weight loss.
However, these symptoms are common in AIDS, and are often due to an associated opportunistic infection.
Diagnosis The diagnosis of KS usually is made by taking a biopsy or piece of the KS lesion.
On the skin, a small punch biopsy is used.
The biopsy specimen is then examined under a microscope to look for typical abnormalities.
For KS of the internal organs, a biopsy may be obtained during endoscopy or bronchoscopy.
While the patient is sedated, a narrow flexible tube with a lens tip is inserted into either the swallowing tube, stomach and small intestines or the rectum and colon (endoscopy) or the windpipe and lungs (bronchoscopy).
Sometimes, the KS is deep enough under the mucosal lining that the biopsy misses the KS. Taking a biopsy of the windpipe or lungs may be risky, sometimes causing a lung to collapse.
This is a treatable complication, however.
According to CDC protocol, a presumptive diagnosis of AIDS-KS may be made without a biopsy if: (1) the person has documented HIV infection, and (2) there is an erythematous (red) or violaceous (purple) plaque-like lesion on the skin or mucous membrane.
Through 1994, 17% of U.S. AIDS-KS cases were made presumptively, while the remaining 83% were made definitively with a biopsy.
Routine blood tests are performed, including complete blood counts, CD4 cell counts and possible viral load testing.
Sometimes, skin tests are done to help measure immune functioning.
In the future, it is possible that blood levels of KSHV, spindle cells, growth factors and certain hormones may be measured to aid in the diagnosis of KS, or to follow up when therapies are given.
Treatment for KS There is no cure for AIDS-KS, and treatments for KS are not associated with a prolongation of life.
However, KS treatments can markedly improve the quality of life and ameliorate symptoms caused by the disease.
Improving the cosmetic appearance of KS lesions often improves individual outlook as well.
KS treatment is helpful when there are painful lesions, bulky lesions, associated swelling, lung or intestinal KS symptoms, rapidly progressive disease or disfigurement.
After a diagnosis of KS is made, several factors enter into the decision as to the type(s) of therapy: * What is the total KS tumor burden (total quantity or volume of KS in the body)? * What is the state of the immune system? Is the CD4 cell count low or normal? * Are there associated symptoms of fever, night sweats or weight loss? * Were there any prior opportunistic infections? * What is the overall functional ability of the patient? A better prognosis for KS is expected when: (1) there is a low tumor burden, (2) the CD4 cell count is normal or only mildly decreased, (3) there are no associated symptoms of fever, night sweats or weight loss, (4) there have been no prior opportunistic infections, and (5) the patient has essentially normal functional capabilities.
For those with minimal KS disease that is stable or only slowly progressive, the choice may be observation only.
When the KS appears to be increasing in number or size, or if there are associated symptoms, a decision may be made to initiate appropriate therapy.
Treatments for KS fall into 2 categories, local and systemic.
LOCAL THERAPIES Due to the disfigurement and stigma of skin and mouth KS, local therapies are often indicated.
One should be mindful, however, that KS is a systemic disease, and that new lesions are likely to appear in the future.
Radiation Therapy Localized radiation therapy (radiotherapy) is very effective for those with a single lesion or a localized group of lesions.
It is effective for relieving localized swelling, particularly on the face, and less so on the legs.
Painful or cosmetically displeasing lesions are often successfully treated with radiotherapy.
The eyelids and conjunctiva (white parts of the eye) respond well to radiotherapy.
Mouth and throat KS can be treated this way as well, although painful inflammation of the mucous membranes (mucositis) is a common side effect.
For this reason, many clinicians try to avoid radiotherapy to the mouth.
Toxic side effects limit the use of radiotherapy for the soles of the feet.
Symptoms associated with lung or intestinal KS can be improved temporarily with radiotherapy.
Localized Chemotherapy Injections Small KS lesions on the skin or in the mouth may be successfully treated with 1 or more injections of chemotherapy.
Injecting directly into the KS lesion is somewhat painful, and sometimes repeated injections are necessary for an optimal cosmetic result.
Usually, diluted vinblastine (Velban) is used.
Vinblastine therapy may leave some hyperpigmentation (darkening of the skin), even after the lesion has resolved.
Response rates are 92%, for a mean duration of 4.5 months (including complete and partial response rates).
Some oral surgeons and dentists may use sodium tetradecyl (Sotradecol) for lesions in the mouth.
Multiple local injections of interferon alpha (IFN-a) have also led to significant response rates of individual lesions.
Cryotherapy Freezing a lesion on the skin with liquid nitrogen (cryotherapy) has also proved successful in treating unsightly skin lesions, especially on the face.
Cryotherapy is usually reserved for thinner skin areas on the face and the thin skin of the genitals.
Often, the lesion needs more than 1 treatment.
Response rates are 88%, including complete and partial responses.
Cryotherapy is most successful if the KS lesion is smaller than 4/5 inch in diameter and flat, not nodular.
SYSTEMIC THERAPIES When KS is widespread, rapidly progressive or in more than 1 organ, systemic therapy is indicated.
Since most of the systemic therapies for KS have toxic side effects, often to cells of the immune system itself, sometimes the side effects may outweigh the potential benefits of therapy.
There are several cancer chemotherapies that lead to significant response rates in KS.
The chemotherapies may be single drugs or combinations of drugs.
Vincristine and Vinblastine Both vincristine (Oncovin) and vinblastine are active against AIDS-KS.
These 2 drugs are often given as a single drug at a time alternating weekly with the other drug, to minimize toxicities.
Vincristine can cause peripheral neuropathy pain and tingling in the feet, legs and hands).
This may be increased when taking anti-HIV therapies that also cause peripheral neuropathy, including ddI (Videx) and ddC (Hivid).
Vinblastine can cause toxicity to the bone marrow, leading to low white cell counts (neutropenia) and increased risk of infection.
Low white cell counts may be offset by using the white cell boosters granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF [Neupogen]) or granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF [Leukine]
Etoposide Etoposide (VP-16) is an active agent against KS, but is not usually a first choice drug.
It is available in an oral formulation, an attractive characteristic.
However, like some cancer therapies, it can cause reversible hair loss.
This side effect makes it somewhat unattractive when KS is being treated for cosmetic purposes.
Doxorubicin As a single agent, doxorubicin (Adriamycin) has significant activity against AIDS-KS.
It is helpful for those who have not responded to other therapies or for those with more advanced disease.
This agent is toxic to white blood cells.
Triple combination therapy with doxorubicin, bleomycin and vincristine (ABV) is more effective than doxorubicin alone.
In late 1995, the FDA approved a new formulation of doxorubicin called Doxil (liposomal doxorubicin).
The drug is encapsulated in liposomes (fat bubbles).
This allows for greater uptake of the drug by KS cells and fewer toxicities.
In one study, the concentration of drug in KS cells was 5-10 times higher with the new formulation than with the non-liposomal type.
Doxil is approved for those whose KS has progressed while on prior combination therapy or those who were intolerant to such treatment.
Phase II studies have yielded an 80-100% response rate to the new formulation and its first cousin, liposomal daunorubicin.
A study of Doxil was presented at the December 1995 American Society of Hematology meeting in Seattle by Donald Northfelt, MD, and colleagues, from the University of California at San Francisco.
In 228 AIDS-KS patients with extensive, progressive disease (skin and mouth and/or internal organs), Doxil was significantly more effective than ABV in producing partial or stable responses.
Also, side effects were more favorable in the Doxil group.
Side effects for Doxil and ABV, respectively, were: fever (24%, 37%), nausea (31%, 56%), neuropathy (5%, 9%), leukopenia (low white cells: 44%, 47%), and severe toxicities (54%, 66%).
Bone marrow toxicity appears to be similar with the liposomal and non-liposomal formulations of doxorubicin.
One Doxil patient and 6 ABV patients had progressive disease.
Daunorubicin FDA approval has been granted for the first liposomal drivative of daunorubicin (DaunoXome) for advanced AIDS-KS; exact labelling is now being worked out.
It is closely related to doxorubicin.
KS response rates were in the 80-100% range in Phase II trials of the drug, significantly higher than response rates with older regimens.
Toxicities with liposome-encapsulated daunorubicin and doxorubicin reveal lower rates of vomiting, mouth inflammation and hair loss than non-liposomal formulations.
Doxorubicin plus Bleomycin and Vincristine Triple combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin, bleomycin and vincristine (ABV) is well tolerated and successful in treating AIDS-KS that is widespread, including cases involving the lung and/or swelling of the extremities.
Sometimes, 1 treatment with the 3 drugs can lead to marked improvement of leg swelling and shortness of breath.
Due to pre-existing low white cell counts, sometimes bleomycin and vincristine are used as a double therapy without doxorubicin.
Alternatively, GM-CSF or G-CSF may be added to the triple therapy.
Common AIDS drugs that cause low white cell counts include AZT (Retrovir), ganciclovir (Cytovene) and alfa-containing drugs (e.g., Septra, Bactrim).
Alpha Interferon Alone or with Anti-HIV Therapy Alpha interferon (IFN-a [Intron A, Roferon A]) with or without AZT has shown significant benefit in treating AIDS-KS.
It is used alone for those with progressive disease with minimal or no symptoms and with a CD4 cell count greater than 200 cells/mm3.
The drug does not work as well when the CD4 cell count is low or if there have been prior opportunistic infections.
IFN-a has anti-tumor and anti-HIV effects.
When used alone, a dose greater than 20 million units/meter2 daily has led to the highest response rate.
However, side effects are significant, including flu-like symptoms (fever, weakness, sweats, fatigue), loss of appetite and weight loss.
Long-term treatment with the drug can be difficult because some of these symptoms persist.
Response to IFN-a may take as long as 1-2 months.
Optimal response may take 6 months.
If patients respond to the drug and can tolerate it, treatment continues indefinitely.
Otherwise, KS returns when IFN-a is stopped.
Patients can give themselves injections of IFN-a, obviating the need for a clinic or office visit for therapy.
Combining AZT with IFN-a is a common drug regimen used to treat AIDS-KS.
When used with AZT, a lower dose of IFN-a is used, 4-18 million units/meter2 daily.
Low white cell counts are common with this regimen, often requiring the use of GM-CSF or G-CSF.
Even though a lower dose of IFN-a is used with AZT, the response rate is better using the 2 drugs than IFN-a alone.
One recent study evaluated the use of an even lower dose of IFN-a with AZT for early limited but progressive KS.
In 1995, S. Mauss, MD, and H. Jablonowski, MD, from the Heinrich-Heine University in Duesseldorf, Germany, reported their findings in the Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human Retrovirology.
They treated 17 AIDS-KS patients who had a median of 8 lesions.
All had skin KS; 3 also had oral KS, and another 7 also had lymph node or intestinal KS.
The median entry CD4 cell count was 315 cells/mm3.
The researchers used an IFN-a dose of 3 million units injected 3 times weekly along with AZT 250 mg twice daily.
A complete response occurred in 3 of 17 patients (18%), while a partial response occurred in 8 of 17 (47%).
Stable disease occurred in 2 of 17 (12%), while progressive disease occurred in 4 of 17 (24%).
KS tumor reduction was documented after 6-8 weeks among responders.
Those with complete responses had CD4 counts greater than 513 cells/mm3, while those with progressive disease had CD4 counts less than 222 cells/mm3.
Remissions among responders were maintained for a median 2.5 years while still taking IFN-a and AZT.
Such responses are similar to or slightly better than responses in earlier studies using higher doses of IFN-a.
Side effects were much milder than those observed with higher doses of IFN-a.
Mild flu-like symptoms occurred.
No patient required white cell boosters since severe neutropenia did not occur.
The authors conclude that this low-dose regimen of IFN-a plus AZT for AIDS-KS patients with a low tumor burden and CD4 cell counts greater than 250 cells/mm3 has a substantial and sustained antiproliferative (anti-KS) effect.
They recommend large scale studies.
It remains to be seen whether using IFN-a with other anti-HIV drugs will be better than a combination with AZT alone.
It will be particularly interesting to see whether combining IFN-a with AZT and 3TC (Epivir) and/or a protease inhibitor (e.g., saquinavir [Invirase]) will yield even better responses than the double combination of IFN-a and AZT.
Photodynamic Therapy Photodynamic therapy for AIDS-KS, which involves exposure to ultraviolet light after the ingestion of hematoporphyrin (Photofrin), has led to disappointing cosmetic results due to scarring and increased pigmentation.
Lower doses may have more favorable results.
References Chang Y and others.
Identification of herpesvirus-like DNA sequences in AIDS-associated KaposiOs sarcoma.
Science 266: 1865-1869.
December 16, 1994.
Charnow J. NCI's Gallo downplays evidence that a herpesvirus causes KS. Infectious Disease News 8(9):3,9.
September 1995.
Chuck S and others.
Frequent presence of a novel herpesvirus genome in lesions of human immunodeficiency virus-negative Kaposi's sarcoma.
Journal of Infectious Diseases 173:248-251.
January 1996.
Denning P and others.
Current trends in the epidemiology of Kaposi's sarcoma.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
35th Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy, San Francisco, CA, September 17-20, 1995.
Abstract and poster I23.
Harris PJ. Treatment of Kaposi's sarcoma and other manifestations of AIDS with human chorionic gonadotropin.
The Lancet 346:118.
July 8, 1995.
Kaposi M. Archives of Dermatology and Syphilology 4: 742-749, 1872.
Levy JA.
A new human herpesvirus: KSHV or HHV8? The Lancet 46(8978):786.
September 23, 1995.
Lin J-C and others.
Is Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus detectable in semen of HIV-infected homosexual men? The Lancet 346:1601-1602.
December 16, 1995.
Moore, P and others.
Detection of herpesvirus-like sequences in Kaposi's sarcoma in patients with and without HIV infection.
New England Journal of Medicine 332(18):1181-1185.
May 4, 1995.
Morfeldt L and others.
Long-term remission of Kaposi's sarcoma following foscarnet treatment in HIV-infected individuals.
Scandinavian Journal of Infectious Diseases 26(6):749-752.
1994.
Northfelt DW and others.
Randomized comparative trial of Doxil vs Adriamycin, bleomycin, and vincristine (ABV) in the treatment of severe AIDS-related Kaposi's sarcoma.
37th Annual Meeting of the American Society of Hematology.
Seattle, WA, December 1-5, 1995.
Abstract 1515.
Rady PL and others.
Herpes-like DNA sequences in non-Kaposi's sarcoma skin lesions of transplant patients.
The Lancet 345:1339- 1340.
May 27, 1995.
Schalling M and others.
A role for a new herpes virus (KSHV) in different forms of Kaposi's sarcoma.
Nature Medicine 1(7):707- 708.
July 1995.
Whitby D and others.
Detection of Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus in peripheral blood of HIV-infected individuals and progression to Kaposi's sarcoma.
The Lancet 346:799-802.
September 23, 1995.
Copyright (c) 1996 - San Francisco AIDS Foundation, Bulletin of Experimental Treatments for AIDS.
Distributed by AEGIS, your online gateway to a world of people, knowledge, and resources.
714.248.2836 * 8N1/Full Duplex * v.34+ / ISDN OI TOC * Home Page * Newsletters TOC * Safer Sex TOC * AV Reviews TOC HIV Links
