Statement of John D. Bell, Owner, dba Reata Resources, Kermit, Texas
Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight, of the House Committee on Ways and Means
Hearing on the Incentives for Domestic Oil and Gas Production and Status of the Industry
February 25, 1999
Low oil prices are stealing the jobs, savings and future from those of us who produce and work in the oil industry.
I've been repeatedly told that "low oil prices are good for the American economy" but I ask, "Are the American people willing to close our children's schools and shut down our hospitals?" Low oil prices have already stolen tens of thousands of our jobs.
My family's future including my children's education and our family's savings for retirement are being taken from us while I'm being told "Low oil prices are good for America".
I refute that statement.
Doesn't America remember the 1973 Arab Oil Embargo?" Are you willing to trade today's low oil prices for the security of America's defense and future? How are you as our elected representatives going to explain the gas lines of tomorrow?
Today's extremely low oil prices are not good for America's long term economy or the world's economy.
Let's look at low oil prices from a world view.
This price war is devastating the economies of countries around the world.
The situation in Russia is horrid.
Russia and some of the countries of the former Soviet Union earn most of their foreign income from the sale of oil.
I estimate that a $10.00 per barrel drop in the price of oil is costing these FSU countries about $2 billion per month.
In a recent US New and World report article, the situation in Russia has been compared to pre World War II Germany prior to Hitler.
Yelstin is very sick and Russia is ripe for revolution.
Today Russia is more dangerous than pre WW II Germany due to Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles.
How long are you going to allow low oil prices to punish the people of Russia?
While America's economy is booming, the Russian economy is being destroyed.
Why must the Russian people starve to death while Americans drives around in large sport utility vehicles? If Americans can afford SUV's, they can afford to pay a reasonable price for the gasoline to fuel them.
How selfish are the American people? Oil is Russia's largest export commodity.
Oil is how they have earned most of their foreign income.
Low oil prices are not only damaging the Russian economy but also the economies of Mexico, Venezuela, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nigeria, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Norway, and many other nations.
Mr. Chairman and Honorable Representatives, the world needs your help.
Please listen.
The United States government recently approved an emergency funding bill which uses our tax dollars to provide billions of dollars as "loans" to the IMF.
The IMF (International Monetary Fund) is providing "loans" to help stabilize the economies of these and other countries who are suffering from deflation.
Much of this money is being stolen by dishonest politicians and never reaches the people for whom it was intended.
Increased oil prices would provide jobs which would allow these countries to take care of their own needs rather than receiving government to government welfare in the form of "loans".
Wake up America! Low oil prices are causing terrible and painful repercussions to much of the world and we are paying for the cost of low oil prices in the form of "loans".
As we endure the oil price collapse of 1998 and 1999, we need to ask ourselves why is this occurring.
Some have suggested that it is a result of the economic depression which occurred in the Pacific Rim Countries.
While that may have played a minor role, we need to look deeper to find the real answers.
OPEC countries are fighting an oil price war.
This is a battle over market share! Why are OPEC countries allowing this price war to continue while it hurts their own economies? It is to their advantage to eliminate the competition.
OPEC could make the necessary production cuts needed to balance supply and demand and to stabilize oil prices now, but if they do they will continue to face world wide competition.
If John D. Rockefeller were doing this, the trust busters world be attacking him instead of allowing his former oil companies to merge.
How long will the price war last? What are the battle strategies? We need to find out what is happening and who is involved.
How does the rush for the majors to merge fit in to the current scenario? In Austin, I requested that Governor Bush order the Texas Attorney General to investigate the cause of the recent price drop in order to see if the oil market is being manipulated.
Now we ask you to initiate an investigation into the situation in order to answer these questions.
This is not a difficult request.
We have a right to know why our businesses and our lives are being destroyed!
Who is winning and who is losing? The obvious losers are the people who drill, service, and produce oil wells.
This affects not only oil field workers but also their families and their communities.
Schools in West Texas and other oil producing regions of the country are being financially devastated by this war.
Enclosed is a document from Carol Rylander, our Texas State Comptroller, which shows how low oil prices are hurting Texas schools.
Many schools are facing the probability of losing millions of dollars which will financially devastate their ability to educate our children.
This may force some school districts in Texas to close next year.
Entire communities and counties are being severely damaged by this oil price war.
Ward and Winkler Counties in West Texas are facing severe cuts.
This will not just threaten senior citizens centers and recreational centers but in all probably will force the closure of their hospitals.
My neighbors in Kermit and West Texas face dire consequences.
We need serious help in order to deal with low oil prices.
Low oil prices are not just hurting people in Texas and the Permian Basin but also those who live in the oil producing areas of New Mexico, Louisiana, Mississippi, Oklahoma, Kansas, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, North Dakota, Utah, California, and Alaska.
Northeastern states such as Michigan, Pennsylvania, Ohio, and upstate New York will be affected as well.
The publisher of the Rocky Mountain Oil Journal, Mr. Cody Huseby of Bismarck, North Dakota, stated that not a single drilling rig is operating up there for the first time since oil was discovered in North Dakota in the early 1950s.
Who is benefitting from low gasoline and fuel prices? The airlines, transportation, and the driving public seem to be reaping the benefits of low prices.
Yes, there are many areas of the country and even the world that are currently reaping the reward of low energy prices but I question "How long can low prices last?" Are today's benefits worth the long term costs? In order to answer some of these questions, we need to understand what is happening.
Due to the drop in oil prices, drilling for oil has slowed in the US to the lowest level since rig counts started being reported in 1949.
Thousands of oil workers have been laid off in the United States, Russia, and around the world.
Oil production is dropping sharply especially in the United States and other so called high cost producing areas of the world.
Who are the world's high cost producers? Some have suggested that the high cost oil producers are US independents.
I maintain that Persian Gulf oil is more expensive than US oil.
The United States government is currently subsidizing foreign oil production from the Persian Gulf by providing the military build up there.
A recent IPAA letter to Congress stated "US taxpayers are paying about $50 billion per year to maintain a strong military contingent in the Gulf."
This does not include the additional billions which we spent to pay for the bombing cost of Desert Fox and the continuing daily effort in Iraq.
Why should American taxpayers pay these costs? Why shouldn't Persian Gulf oil pay the cost for its own defense? The real cost to the American taxpayer for oil imported from the countries in the Persian Gulf includes the cost of maintaining stability in the region.
How much are we really paying for Persian Gulf oil? This cost can be calculated by dividing $50 billion by 2.5 million barrels per day multiplied by one year.
(In 1998 US imports averaged less than 2.5 million barrels of oil per day from the Persian Gulf .)
Therefore, Persian Gulf oil cost US tax payers about $54.00 per barrel plus the purchase price.
The total cost is about $65.00 per barrel.
By comparison the United States produces about 6.2 million barrels per day and it is worth only $23 billion per year at the current price of $10.00 per barrel.
Even at $20.00 per barrel it is still worth less than $50 billion.
During the oil boom of the 1970's and early 1980's US oil producers were penalized for excessive profits.
About $77 billion were taken out of the US oil industry in the name of windfall profits.
Now when the oil industry is facing a serious crisis due to low prices and severe losses, very little relief is being offered to help us.
The unfairness of the situation is frustrating.
Foreign oil is subsidized while domestic producers are taxed and penalized out of existence.
In 1986 the Reagan administration, in their efforts to destroy the former Soviet Union and win the cold war, encouraged Saudi Arabia to lower the price of oil by increasing oil production.
The leaders of both the US and Saudi Arabia felt their countries could benefit from lower oil prices and increased market share.
As I consider what occurred, I suppose maybe the sacrifice of the US oil business was justified in order to win the cold war.
I feel that if an industry is going to be sacrificed there should be some type of compensation.
Why have we not been compensated? Is a similar agenda being played out today? If so, who is the enemy now?
Saudi Arabia is considering the option of inviting the major oil companies back into their country.
Is Saudi Arabia trying to stabilize the market or increase their market share? Who are they trying to drive out of the market place? US Independents? Russia? Mexico? It is obvious that they intend to increase their production in order to gain a larger market share if they are willing to share part of their income with the major oil companies.
Have you considered what will happen if the Saudis increase their production and continue to flood the market? Major disruptions will continue to drive other producers out of business.
Why should Saudi Arabia be allowed to increase their market share? Are they declaring an economic war on other producers such as US independents, Russia, Mexico, and even their neighboring OPEC producers? If so, is the US military ready to defend Saudi Arabia from other oil producers of the world?
Even more frightening is the UN decision which allows Iraq to increase their market share while they shoot missiles at our American pilots.
It is obvious that Saddam Hussein is not using Iraq's oil money to provide for the Iraqi people.
We request that Iraqi oil imports be severely restricted as long as Iraq threatens the region's security.
We should deny Saddam Hussein the money to build missiles and weapons of mass destruction.
Please demand that American oil companies, such as Exxon and Chevron, stop buying oil from Iraq while they are at war.
Low crude oil prices are a contributing factor in the world wide deflationary crisis.
Oil prices must be viewed in relation to other industries.
For example, the oil and gas industry is a large consumer of steel products.
A new oil well requires about the same amount of steel required to manufacture 40 to 50 cars.
Low oil prices have reduced the number of wells being drilled in the US to the lowest level since the late 1940s.
Because fewer wells are being drilled, the volume of steel needed to manufacture rigs, tanks, casing, tubing, drill pipe, and pipelines has been dramatically reduced.
Due to low oil prices and weak economies abroad, foreign steel manufacturers can't find enough buyers so they increased their steel imports into the US.
This resulted in an over supply of steel in the US which caused steel prices to drop.
US steel companies have ask Congress and the President to restrict steel imports.
If you agree to limit steel imports, we expect you to restrict oil imports! If much of the steel industry's problems stem from a drop in oil prices, don't independent oil producers deserve the same protection as steel manufacturers? .
Are today's extremely low oil prices really good for America? We must consider the short and long term benefits and costs.
As consumers becomes dependent on cheap oil, the available supply drops.
The situation is like a drug addict.
The more we become addicted to cheap oil, the more we risk supply disruption.
We cannot find and produce enough oil to meet the world's needs at current prices.
The current posted price of oil is below $10.00 per barrel while the price for paper oil ( NYMEX futures contracts) is about $12.00 per barrel.
There will not be enough $10.00 to $12.00 oil available to supply the world's needs for very long.
Oil needs to exceed $18.00 per barrel in order for producers to have the incentive to explore for and drill and the additional reserves needed to stabilize production.
If you do nothing and wait a few years for the situation correct itself, you are risking a return to supply disruptions similar to the 1970's.
The market is out of balance by less than 5%.
When oil supplies are reduced below demand, a price spike will occur.
The domestic industry is being permanently damaged and it will take years to reverse the decline rate.
Is America better off when oil supplies exceed demand or when supplies are short?
The low price of oil will correct itself over a period of time at a very high cost to consumers.
This correction will probably occur after much of the US oil industry is bankrupt and destroyed.
To find and produce large volumes of oil requires major investments of money and time.
The longer the price is low, the higher the price spike will be on the other end.
It is a natural consequence.
During the early 1970s the low price of oil resulted in a shortage.
This resulted in a huge price spike, economic chaos, and inflation which took years to correct.
If oil prices remain too low for too long we will repeat the same experience.
If corrective actions aren't implemented soon, I predict the price of oil may exceed $50.00 per barrel in a few years.
A serious supply disruption could take place as early as January 1, 2000.
Much of the world's oil loading and pipeline capacity is located in third world countries.
Most of these facilities are controlled by computers or computer components which may experience Y2K problems.
Have you considered what will happen if 25% to 50% of the world's oil supply is disrupted for 30 days? We have less than a 30 day supply on hand now.
It won't take very long for oil shortages to occur and oil prices to spike.
It will take 5 to 10 years to revive the US industry because our workers are leaving and our equipment is being stacked.
Serious corrective action should be taken now.
I recognize that this committee is primarily interested in tax matters.
In that regard, the most meaningful tax relief measures which would help the industry are a Marginal Well Tax Credit as proposed by Senator Hutchison, an increase the depletion allowance to the original 27 1/2% level, changes in the Alternative Minimum Tax to eliminate intangible drilling costs as a preference item, and allowing geologic and geophysical costs to be expensed in the current year.
Most important of all, a program should be developed to allow the industry to recoup a substantial portion of the $77 billion in Windfall Profits Taxes which it paid between 1980 - 1986, now that we are making little or no money.
That is nothing more than basic fairness.
While these tax breaks are not going to fix our problems or save our jobs nor save our schools or hospitals, our communities will benefit from some tax changes.
The troubled independent oil industry is similar to a seriously hurt accident victim.
First aid is required but a few Band-Aids will not save our industry nor our communities.
The surgery of cutting off Iraqi oil is required.
We request that you restrict imports temporally until US production and prices are stabilized and a responsible National Energy Policy is in place.
The current US National Energy Policy is inadequate.
A responsible energy policy should be implemented to help level out the price spikes on both ends.
Prices that are either too high or too low hurt America's and the world's economies.
The longer you wait and the more addicted America becomes to cheap oil, the more our economy will be disrupted by the correction which will inevitably occur.
Chairman Houghton, and Honorable Representatives, I implore you to take action immediately.
For the sake of America's future, please restrict imports now.
___________________________________
News Release from Texas Comptroller Carole Keeton Rylander
Comptroller Supports Emergency Legislation To Aid Oil And Gas Industry
(AUSTIN)--According to an analysis issued by the Comptroller of Public Accounts today, a decline in oil prices could have a devastating impact on some local school districts.
"While some consumers may welcome lower prices at the gas pumps," Comptroller Carole Keeton Rylander said today, "the trickle down effect on some local property values could have a serious financial impact for some Texas school districts."
In some areas of the state, where oil and gas reserves comprise more than 20 percent of the school's value or where oil and gas are valued at more than $250 million, it is estimated total school district losses for the next year will be approximately $150 to $160 million.
The Comptroller's analysis estimates at least 30 districts will sustain losses of more than a million dollars for fiscal year 2000, ranging from a high of $8.3 million in the Iraan-Sheffield school district located in Pecos to $1.07 million in the Post school district in Garza.
"The financial shortages facing some school districts as a result of the crisis in the oil and gas industry are staggering," Rylander said.
"Without emergency assistance Texas homeowners may see their property tax rates climb even higher."
An analysis of declining oil prices on individual school districts can be found on the Comptroller's Window on State Government Internet site at http://www.window.state.tx.us.
___________________________________
Carole Keeton Rylander Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts Local Property Taxes
Potential Oil and Gas Property Tax Levy Losses To Texas School Districts
The Comptroller's Office surveyed the appraisal districts or their contract appraisal firms that appraise oil and gas reserves for property tax purposes.
These appraisers are currently working on appraised values as of January 1, 1999.
Their appraisals will not be complete until about July 25, 1999, after they have been through a local appeals process and are certified to each taxing unit.
The appraisers' consensus is that oil properties will decline in value from January 1, 1998 to January 1, 1999 by about 40% and that gas properties will decline by about 15%.
This decline in value is caused primarily by oil and gas price declines.
The Comptroller's Office asked for more specific information from the appraisers for school districts where oil and gas reserves comprise more than 20% of the school's total value or where oil and gas are valued at more than $250 million as of January 1, 1998.
These value losses were translated into property tax levy losses.
The losses will affect school districts in FY 2000 and will affect the state (through the school funding formula) in FY 2001.
The total statewide FY 2000 school district loss will be approximately $150 - 160 million.
This is a very rough estimate based on our informal survey of preliminary figures from local appraisers.
1998 tax rates and 1998 local values for oil and gas properties were reported to us by school districts.
Below is a listing of FY 2000 school district oil and gas property tax levy loss estimates sorted from highest to lowest loss.
These estimates may vary from the actual levy losses that occur after the local appraisal process is complete.
School District County Appraisal District Levy Loss IRAAN-SHEFFIELD Pecos $8,332,800 ANDREWS Andrews 7,468,380 ECTOR COUNTY Ector 6,438,346 SEMINOLE Gaines 5,486,371 DENVER CITY Yoakum 5,250,000 CRANE Crane 3,905,638 MIDLAND Midland 3,624,481 CARTHAGE Panola 3,233,200 SUNDOWN Hockley 3,094,789 LEVELLAND Hockley 2,792,254 PINE TREE Gregg 2,448,679 FT STOCKTON Pecos 2,398,770 JAYTON-GIRARD Kent 2,333,697 CROCKETT CO Crockett 1,933,014 ZAPATA Zapata 1,918,152 PLAINS Yoakum 1,875,000 MONAHANS-WICKETT-P Ward 1,651,418 REAGAN Reagan 1,596,000 MCCAMEY Upton 1,580,250 WHITEFACE-BLEDSOE Cochran 1,533,445 GLASSCOCK Glasscock 1,461,129 UNITED Webb 1,355,525 RANKIN Upton 1,309,000 BORDEN COUNTY Borden 1,305,000 EDINBURG Hidalgo 1,197,232 WINK-LOVING Winkler 1,170,000 CONROE Montgomery 1,145,670 CLEAR CREEK Galveston 1,116,226 WEBB CONS Webb 1,107,173 POST Garza 1,074,930 KERMIT Winkler 939,000 REFUGIO Refugio 852,183 STERLING CITY Sterling 830,363 SNYDER Scurry 825,000 LOOP Gaines 816,204 WHITE OAK Gregg 802,329 WEST RUSK Rusk 799,494 GUTHRIE King 777,537 DUMAS Moore 763,095 PECOS-BARSTOW-TOYA Reeves 757,979 CANADIAN Hemphill 747,004 BROOKS Brooks 746,462 BROWNFIELD Terry 742,371 DAWSON Dawson 737,639 FORSAN Howard 734,082 IRION COUNTY Irion 729,682 BRECKENRIDGE Stephens 707,865 BECKVILLE Panola 689,108 CALDWELL Burleson 684,600 LA GRANGE Fayette 680,278 LA JOYA Hidalgo 664,266 SONORA Sutton 662,400 HAWKINS Wood 637,500 LA POYNOR Henderson 632,450 MIAMI Roberts 626,503 __________________________________________________________________
