AIDS Information Center AIDS Service, VA Headquarters [Red_and_Blue5372.gif] AIDS INFORMATION NEWSLETTER Michael Howe, MSLS, Editor AIDS Information Center AIDS Service, VA Headquarters (202) 273-9206 j.michael.howe@mail.va.gov Patient Health Education Materials Part VIII - June 5, 1998 Low Platelet Count 1.
What are platelets? 2.
What is a platelet count? 3.
What are the symptoms and signs of low platelet count? 4.
What causes a low platelet count, and what is its relationship to HIV disease? 5.
How is a low platelet count diagnosed? 6.
What should I do if my platelet count is low? 7.
What is the treatment for a low platelet count?
What are platelets?
Platelets are cell fragments formed in the bone marrow that circulate through the bloodstream, helping your blood to clot.
In places where there are breaks in blood vessels, platelets form plugs that prevent blood loss while healing takes place.
What is a platelet count?
A platelet count is a blood test done by counting the number of platelets in a known quantity of blood.
A normal platelet count is in the range of 150,000 to 450,000 pr microliter.
A low platelet count is also called thrombocytopenia.
If your platelet count drops below 50,000, you might not be able to stop bleeding if you have a serious injury or if you have another condition, such as liver disease or hemophilia, that puts you at risk for bleeding.
If your platelet count is below 20,000, you may have bleeding problems even without these other risk factors.
What are the symptoms and signs of low platelet count?
Persons with a low platelet count may bruise easily under the skin or bleed from the mouth or rectum.
If any of these symptoms occur regularly, you might have a low platelet count.
What causes a low platelet count, and what is its relationship to HIV disease?
Platelets are normally used up by aging and by plugging small breaks that occur in daily wear and tear in your body tissues.
Your bone marrow continuously produces new cells to form platelets to replace the ones that are used up.
Platelet destruction, impaired platelet production, or a combination of these can cause your platelet count to be low.
Immune-related thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), a relatively common condition in early HIV disease, is one cause of platelet destruction.
With ITP, the body develops antibodies that attach to platelets as if they were a foreign substance.
When these platelets circulate through lymph organs such as the spleen, the attached antibody causes the spleen to filter out the platelets and destroy them.
This may lead to swelling of the spleen, which in turn, traps more platelets.
Fortunately, the platelet count in persons with ITP is usually not low enough to risk serious bleeding.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) are two conditions that use up platelets and cause a low platelet count.
In contrast to persons with ITP, those with DIC or TTP usually are quite ill and have other symptoms.
Impaired bone marrow production of platelets may result from medications or the use of alcohol.
The platelet count usually returns to normal once the drug is opened.
Infections associated with HIV disease can cause thrombocytopenia either by directly infecting the bone marrow or, in some cases, by releasing chemicals that block production of cells in the marrow.
Examples of such infections include tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
HIV itself may also cause thrombocytopenia by directly infecting bone marrow cells.
Tumors that grow in the bone marrow, most notably lymphoma, sometimes result in thrombocytopenia.
In addition, lymphoma may occasionally produce antibodies against platelets or cause an enlarged spleen that prematurely removes platelets from the bloodstream.
How is a low platelet count diagnosed?
A low platelet count is determined by a blood test called a complete blood count.
If the platelet count is low, your doctor will review your medications to see if one of them could be causing the problem.
Your doctor will also check other components of the blood that help it clot by performing prothrombin time (PT) and partial thromboplastin time (PTT) tests.
In some cases, the cause of thrombocytopenia may be uncertain, and your doctor may suggest a diagnostic test called a bone marrow aspiration.
In other cases, however, if you feel well and your platelet count is not dangerously low, your doctor may presume the condition is ITP and perform additional tests only if the evidence suggests another cause.
A bone marrow aspiration is a procedure in which the doctor inserts a needle through your skin and into bone underneath, draws up (aspirates) into a syringe some cells form the marrow of the bone, and send them to the laboratory for examination.
Usually the doctor inserts the needle into the iliac bone, which is between your hip and the middle of your lower back.
Your doctor will make the skin numb so the needle does not hurt going through it.
Most people who have had this procedure performed say that there is significant pain for a brief period of time when the needle enters the bone and again when marrow cells are aspirated.
What should I do if my platelet count is low?
If your platelet count is low, do not take any new medications without consulting your doctor because some of these may affect your body's clotting process in other ways.
For example, aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti- inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such as ibuprofen and naproxen, prevent platelets from functioning normally.
Alcohol should be avoided because it may block platelet production and also prevent the liver from making other factors necessary for your blood to clot properly.
In addition, you should not risk trauma from contact sports like touch football where an injury to your abdomen or head could cause internal bleeding.
What is the treatment for a low platelet count?
The best treatment for a low platelet count is to identify the cause and eliminate it.
Drugs are the most common reversible cause.
In some cases, infections or tumors can be diagnosed and treated.
Most cases of HIV-related ITP do not require treatment.
If you have ITP and feel well, have no bleeding problems, and your platelet is above 50,000 you do not need specific therapy.
If your platelet count is below 20,000 or if you have other risk factors for bleeding, several treatments are available.
These include antiretroviral drugs, corticosteroids, intravenous gammaglobulins, splenectomy, and platelet transfusions.
Studies have shown that zidovudine (AZT) increases the platelet count in many HIV-infected persons with thrombocytopenia.
Other antiretroviral drugs may do so as well.
If you have a low platelet count and are not already taking AZT, your doctor may try this treatment first.
However, it may take several weeks before your platelet count increases.
Many persons with HIV-related ITP have been successfully treated with prednisone or other corticosteroid medications.
However, there has been some concern about their use in this setting because steroids interfere with immune function.
Thus, treatment with them could increase the risk of infection.
Surgical removal of the spleen (splenectomy) results in an increased platelet count in persons with significant thrombocytopenia who are not helped by antiretroviral therapy or steroids.
Because the spleen is a lymph organ and plays a role in the body's defense against infection, there is concern that its removal could increase the risk of infection.
Intravenous gammaglobulins can increase platelets for a short period of time.
This treatment is sometimes used to prepare patients for invasive diagnostic tests or surgery.
Platelets can be transfused like whole blood, and these transfusions temporarily increase the platelet count.
However, because transfused platelets are generally used up very quickly, this procedure is performed only if you are actively bleeding or need surgery.
It is not practical as a long term treatment.
Reference:
This is one of a series of Information Sheets prepared by the National AIDS Treatment Information Project (NATIP) with funding from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
The materials are designed for self-education by HIV-infected persons and for counseling by community advisors, case managers, social workers, and clinicians.
For more information about NATIP, call 617- 667-5520 or write: Helen E. Woods Wogan, Project Manager, Libby 317, Beth Israel Hospital, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215.
Fax: 617-667-2885.
Internet: hwoods@bih.harvard.edu
Low White Blood Cell Count
1.
What are white blood cells? 2.
What are lymphocytes? 3.
What are neutrophils? 4.
What causes a low neutrophil count? 5.
How is a low neutrophil count diagnosed? 6.
What is the treatment for a low neutrophil count?
What are white blood cells?
White blood cells, also called leukocytes, are cells that your body makes to help fight infections.
There are several kinds of white blood cells.
The two most common types are lymphocytes and neutrophils.
Neutrophils are also sometimes called granulocytes or polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs or "polys").
A white blood cell count (WBC) is performed by counting the number of white blood cells in a sample of your blood.
A normal WBC is in the range of 4,000 to 11,000 cells per microliter.
A low WBC is also called leukopenia, a finding common in persons with HIV disease.
What are lymphocytes?
Lymphocytes come from your lymph tissue (spleen, lymph nodes, thymus glad).
There are different kinds of lymphocytes, including CD4 cells (T-helper or T4 cells) and CD8 cells (t-suppressor cells).
Lymphocytes identify foreign substances from germs (bacteria or viruses) in your body and produce antibodies and cells that specifically target them.
It takes from several days to weeks for lymphocytes to recognize and attack a new foreign substance.
What are neutrophils?
Neutrophils are a major part of your body's defense against bacterial infections.
When the WBC is low, there may not be enough neutrophils to defend you against bacterial infections.
Neutrophils are made in the bone marrow and circulate in the bloodstream.
Neutrophils move out of the blood vessels into the infected tissue to attack the bacteria.
The pus in a boil (abscess) is made up mostly of neutrophils.
Normally a serious bacterial infection causes the body to produce an increased number of neutrophils, resulting in a higher than normal WBC.
A normal absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is in the range of 1,500 to 8,000 cells per microliter.
If your ANC is below 500 for an extended period of time, your risk of serious bacterial infection may increase significantly.
A low neutrophil count is also called neutropenia.
What causes a low neutrophil count?
Neutrophils die continuously from age or from fighting infections, and your bone marrow must make new neutrophils to replace them.
When something reduces the production of neutrophils in your bone marrow, the neutrophil count will drop and may eventually be low enough to become dangerous.
Common causes of reduced neutrophil production are medications, infections, and tumors.
Prescription medications are the most frequent cause of neutropenia.
Drugs that often result in neutropenia in HIV-infected persons include trimethroprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX, Bactrim, Septra), ganciclovir (DHPG), zidovudine (AZT), interferon-alpha, pyrimethamine, primaquine, and many agents used for the chemotherapy of Kaposi's sarcoma and lymphoma.
In almost all cases, medication-induced neutropenia resolves after the drug is stopped or its dosage is reduced.
Infections can cause neutropenia directly by infecting the bone marrow or indirectly through the release of chemicals that block production of cells.
Examples of conditions that infect the bone marrow include tuberculosis and Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
HIV infection itself may also cause neutropenia, but other possibilities need to be excluded.
Tumors such as lymphoma that grown in the bone marrow are another potential cause of neutropenia.
How is a low neutrophil count diagnosed? A low neutrophil count is diagnosed by a blood test called a complete blood count.
If the ANC is low, your doctor will review your medications to see if one of them could be the cause.
Sometimes the cause of neutropenia is unclear, and your doctor may suggest a test called a bone marrow aspiration.
A bone marrow aspiration is a procedure in which the doctor inserts a needle through your skin and into bone underneath, draws up (aspirates) into a syringe some cells from the marrow of the bone, and sends them to the laboratory for examination.
Usually the doctor inserts the needle through your skin and into bone underneath, draws up (aspirates) into a syringe some cells from the marrow of the bone, and sends them to the laboratory for examination.
Usually the doctor inserts the needle into the iliac bone, which is between your hip and the middle of your lower back.
Your doctor will make the skin numb so the needle does not hurt going through it.
Most people who have had this procedure performed say that there is significant pain for a brief period 0f time when the needle enters the bone and again when marrow cells are aspirated.
What is the treatment for a low neutrophil count?
The best treatment for a low ANC is to identify the cause and to eliminate it.
As discussed above, this may mean stopping or adjusting the dose of a medication or treating an infection or tumor.
If your ANC is below 1,000, you should pay close attention to any symptoms, especially fever, chills, pain, or tiredness, that may indicate a new infection in your body.
You should call your doctor promptly if any of these occur.
If you have an intravenous (IV) line placed to receive medications or fluids, your risk for serious bacterial infection is especially high.
You should look carefully each day at the place the IV line enters your skin for any redness, tenderness, or drainage.
Colony stimulating factors are natural substances that stimulate the growth of bone marrow cells; synthetic versions are available by prescription.
The most common is granulocyte stimulating factor (GCSF).
This drug is effective at increasing the neutrophil count but must be given by injection and may have side effects.
These may include bone pain and pain or soreness at the injection site.
If your ANC drops below 500, GCSF may be used if there is a temporary cause of neutropenia, such as recent cancer chemotherapy or new infection.
If your ANC remains below 500 and no cause of neutropenia is identified, your doctor may recommend long term treatment with GCSF.
Reference:
This is one of a series of Information Sheets prepared by the National AIDS Treatment Information Project (NATIP) with funding from the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation.
The materials are designed for self-education by HIV-infected persons and for counseling by community advisors, case managers, social workers, and clinicians.
For more information about NATIP, call 617-667-5520 or write: Helen E. Woods Wogan, Project Manager, Libby 317, Beth Israel Hospital, 330 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215.
Fax: 617-667- 2885.
Internet: hwoods@bih.harvard.edu
PHE TOC * Home Page * Newsletters TOC * Safer Sex TOC * AV Reviews TOC
HIV Links
