U.S. Department of State
Media Note Office of the Spokesman Washington, DC January 15, 2002 Religious Leaders from Kyrgyzstan Examine Islam in the United States
A group of six religious leaders from Kyrgyzstan, including Imams and heads of Islamic institutions, have begun a 14-day professional program "Islam in the United States," sponsored by the International Visitor Program of the Departments Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs.
This program is designed to strengthen the participants understanding of the relationship between religion and government in the United States and to deepen their awareness that religious diversity is a result of this nations history of tolerance and religious freedom.
The participants will gain an understanding of the first amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which prohibits our governments intervention in religious affairs, as well as U.S. policy and official statements related to Islam.
Intended to establish links between the Islamic community in the United States and Muslims in Kyrgyzstan, the program will reflect not only that Islam and democracy are compatible, but that the United States respects Islam and acknowledges the important contributions of Muslims in this country.
Islam is the single most widely practiced faith in Kyrgyzstan.
(U.S. State Department estimates are that up to 80% of the population is Muslim, 17% is Russian Orthodox, and 3% is Jewish, Buddhist, or Catholic.)
In Washington, DC (January 14-16), Los Angeles (January 17-23), and Houston, Texas (January 23- 26) the participants (see attached list) will meet with American Muslims, consult with experts at university studies centers, and visit a range of religious institutions.
The group will gain first-hand exposure to American religious diversity and to community interfaith initiatives aimed at building religious tolerance.
The program topics include the relationship between religion and government in the United States; the history and development of Islam in the United States; the implications and contributions of religious diversity in U.S. society and approaches to encouraging religious tolerance in religiously diverse communities; and current issues in U.S. policy and the Islamic world.
The International Visitor Program of the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs brings participantscurrent or potential leaders in government, politics, the media, education and other fieldsto the United States from all over the world each year to meet and confer with their professional counterparts and to experience the United States firsthand.
More information about the Program is available at the web site http://exchanges.state.gov/education/ivp.
Media Contact: Catherine Stearns, telephone 203-5107 or e-mail cstearns@pd.state.gov.
PARTICIPANTS
Islam in the United States
Mr. Sadykjan KAMALOV
Chairman, International Center of Islamic Cooperation, 1995-present
Mr. Yusup KEMALO
Deputy Mufti, Spiritual Administration of Muslims, Kyrgyz Republic, 2001-present
Mr. Abdishukur NARMATOV
Rector, Bishkek Islamic Institute, affiliate of the Spiritual Administration of Muslims of the Kyrgyz Republic, November 2000-present
Mr. Avaskhon MARIPOV
Imam-Khatib, Kara-Suu district, 1991-present
Mr. Dilmurat OROZOV
Kazy (leader of Muslim community), Djalal-Abad Oblast, 1997-present
Mr. Anaskhon TASHKHUJAEV
Imam-Khatib, Osh Mosque, 2001
Accompanied by:
Ms. Regina KOZAKOVA
United States Interpreter
Mr. Dmitry ZOLOTOV
United States Interpreter [End]Released on January 15, 2002
