This site will look much better in a browser that supports current Web standards, but the contents are accessible to any browser.
[Bypass left navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
[ Kentucky Historical Society Home Page ] [ Features 
History ] [ Museums 
[ Publications ] [ Research ]
Search Options...
KYHistorical Society [Bypass top navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
KHS: About | | Calendar | | Research Databases | | Table of Contents | | Visiting 2003 Kentucky Folklife Festival Thursday through Saturday, September 25 - 27 in historic downtown Frankfort Festival Demonstrators | Old State Capitol - Area A | Broadway and St. Clair - Area B | Riverview Park - Area C | Old State Capitol Area A Community Crossroads: As a focal point of the Kentucky Folklife Festival itself, Community Crossroads is an area where diverse communities come together to share their culture.
What makes each community unique, and what human experiences do they all share? Explore the area for this interaction, as it unfolds through shared expressions of language, games, dance, food, art, and more! Indian Community - Within this tent East Indian community members from Louisville share traditions like mehendi (henna painting), rangoli, North and South Indian dance forms, and singing.
Also on site each day will be the Yoga Club from the Hindu Temple in Louisville.
Latino Community - Members of Kentuckys flourishing Latino communities come together to share their folklife.
Learn about Guatemalan alfombras in Shelbyville, Cuban traditions of gathering to play dominoes, and Mexican Dia de los Muertos celebrations in the state.
Here and elsewhere on the site, Hector Falu-Mendoza demonstrates various Latino dances.
Deaf Community - The Kentucky Commission on Deaf and Hard of Hearing present deaf artists and storytellers.
Visit the tent to learn about deaf culture, language, social gatherings, and everyday life.
Carcassone Community - The Carcassone Community Center in Letcher County hosts several community gatherings, including square dances and quilting bees.
Join members of Carcassone who have recently returned from the Smithsonian Folklife Festival representing Appalachian culture.
Basketmaking Traditions: In this tent, several regional basketmakers from the Edmonson, Barren, and Hart County area will be featured.
Nationally and internationally known for their distinct construction style using mainly white oak, these basketmakers pride themselves in time-honored detail.
Come and learn about this important central Kentucky tradition and the newly formed Mammoth Cave Basketmakers Guild.
Back to top Broadway and St. Clair Area B Highway 31W Cavelore - In this area, Mammoth Cave guides and explorers, along with independent cave personnel will present a historical, environmental, and educational glimpse of the caving life in the region.
Shake Rag - Shake Rag is an African American community established in Bowling Green during the late 1800s.
YMCA Basketball Traditions: Basketball is a widely popular recreational activity that features many levels of folk culture.
The game was invented in 1891 at the YMCA in Springfield, Massachusetts, by Dr. James Naismith, who sought a way to keep members in top physical shape during winter months.
At this years festival, the Frankfort YMCA features basketball exhibits, activities, interviews, and a 3-on-3 Street Ball Tournament.
Woodcarvers: Join skilled woodworkers as they share the experience of turning a piece of wood into a work of art.
Willie Rascoe from Cerulean creates driftwood sculptures that express his African American identity.
In Knott County, Harvey Amburgey draws on local design principles passed through several generations to create duck decoys, spoons, bowls, and other household utensils.
Building Restoration Arts: Building restoration is an occupation with its own distinct artistic sensibilities and skills.
Paul Blasing, Patrick Rymer, and Alan Vance will demonstrate traditional techniques in restoring windows.
This demonstration is sponsored by the Kentucky Heritage Council.
Back to top Riverview Park Area C Community Scholars: The Community Scholars are groups of individuals from an area that are trained by the Kentucky Folklife Program to document and present the folk traditions of their communities.
The northern Kentucky scholars from Covington will present artists and exhibits based on research done in three local neighborhoods representing German Americans, African Americans, and urban Appalachian communities.
The eastern Kentucky Community Scholars have created an exhibit of family folklife that will be featured, as well as demonstrations and performances by artists, musicians, and storytellers from community festivals in the eastern Kentucky counties of Leslie, Estill, Madison, Jackson, Rockcastle, and Laurel.
Farming Traditions: Here Kentucky farmers and Western Hills High School FFA members discuss farming traditions, past and present.
Demonstrators share the culture of tobacco farming with machinery, tools, and a tobacco patch.
Also in the area is mule trainer Wayne Noland.
Stonemasonry: While building a stone wall, representatives of the Dry Stonemasonry Conservancy will demonstrate traditional techniques used to construct the rock fences that appear throughout central Kentuckys landscape.
Kentucky Derby Traditions: In this area, education staff from the Kentucky Derby Museum in Louisville will offer hands-on Derby activities for students.
Hatmaker Ernest Trent displays some of the hats he has created over the years to help celebrate this famous Kentucky sporting event.
Boat Building: Kentuckys diverse waterways lends itself to many regional variations in boat construction.
At this years Festival meet traditional boat builders Raymond and Sarah Hicks, who build jonboats and skiffs using old family techniques first brought over from Ireland by Raymonds grandfather.
The boats created by the Hickses are well known among local fisherman in need of stability on the big Kentucky and Ohio River waters.
Bluegrass Music Area Instrument Making - Three of Kentuckys best-known luthiers set up shop at the River area to demonstrate the art of creating musical instruments.
Join Homer Ledford, Arthur Hatfield, and Bryan England, as each shows his own unique ways of creating instruments with good looks and great sounds.
Parking Lot Campers - (River Parking Area) Come and join veteran bluegrass festival campers/musicians Ed and Loraine Bush (Slick and Peanuts), L. G. and Bonnie Lee, and Ruby and Ira Whitaker as they show festival visitors the elements of living right at a bluegrass festival.
Throughout the three days, bluegrass musicians will converge both here and at the riverside jamming area to play together informally and share stories about the music they love to play.
Riverboat Lore?: A variety of workers who have earned their living on Kentuckys waterways will share their knowledge of the riverboat industry.
Marble Yard: From Rolley Hole to Tennessee Square, marble players from Monroe and Barren counties will demonstrate traditional marble games as they compete in the 2003 Kentucky Folklife Festival Marble Tournament.
Back to top Folklife: What is Folklife? | | Folklife Program | | Folklife-in-the-Schools | | Folklife Grants 
Governor Patton's Education Pays site ] [ The Kentucky Historical Society is an agency of the Education, Arts 
] | About this Site | Privacy | Disclaimer | | Individuals with Disabilities | | Feedback: KHSWebManager@mail.state.ky.us | Copyright © 2002 Commonwealth of Kentucky.
All rights reserved.
Updated: September 3, 2003
This page is:
[ Bobby WorldWide Approved AAA ] [ Bobby WorldWide Approved 508 ]
Site Meter
