The Blue Moon KAC Home Publications [blue.gif] May/June 2003 [clear.gif]
Please send comments, questions and information to The Blue Moon, Kentucky Arts Council, Old Capitol Annex, 300 West Broadway, Frankfort, KY 40601-1980 or call 502/564-3757V/TDD Toll Free: 1-888-833-2787 E-mail: kyarts@mail.state.ky.us
For other Kentucky Government sites visit:
KY Direct logo
[color2lin.gif]
Focus on Folklife
The Kentucky Folklife Festival is back: September 25-27!!!
The Kentucky Folklife Festival i Logo After a one-year hiatus the Kentucky Folklife festival, the Kentucky Folklife Program's largest educational outreach endeavor, is back! As has been reported in past issues of the Blue Moon, taking 2002 off has given us time to reflect and take into account the festival's strengths and weaknesses.
Over the past year we have had the help of several work teams in examining such issues as marketing and local community support for this event.
Many new understandings about the effectiveness of the festival have been reached and we are now well underway in the planning of a quality event that highlights Kentucky's many forms of traditional culture.
New 2003 Programming
In addition to revisiting the theme of the folklife along Highway 31 the Kentucky Folklife Festival will feature several special programs that will underscore the diversity of folklife across the Commonwealth.
Here is a sneak peak at what we are planning.
Carcassonne Community Center Quilter Ruby Caudill
Carcassonne Community Center Quilter Ruby Caudill shares some needle working pointers with a young festival visitor.
Kentucky Folklife Festival in Frankfort. (photo by Kentucky Folklife Program/ Kentucky Historical Society)
Community Crossroads
An over-arching goal of the Kentucky Folklife Program is to foster a shared understanding of the diverse folklife that abounds in the commonwealth.
It is our continuing mission to help people, all people, understand that folklife is an integral part of our lives.
This year's festival will see the beginning of a newly featured area called the Community Crossroads.
Through the Community Crossroads we will bring three distinct folk groups together on the grounds of the Old State Capitol to share components of their culture with visitors from across the state and beyond.
This year we will feature members of Kentucky's Hispanic, East Indian, and deaf and hard of hearing communities.
In this area visitors will find a stage on which these groups can come together to share, compare and contrast the elements of folklife that are a deep part of individual group identity.
East Indian Odissi dance
East Indian Odissi dance was a favorite of the 2001 Kentucky Folklife Festival.
(photo by Kentucky Folklife Program/ Kentucky Historical Society)
A Chance to Dance
In direct response to visitor requests for more emphasis on dance, the staff of the KFP is planning a new element for the 2003 festival: A Chance to Dance.
Throughout the three days (particularly on Friday the 26th) a range of dance traditions that are alive today in the commonwealth will be featured.
Friday the 26th will be a day of intense instruction as dance leaders from several of Kentucky's ethnic and regional dance communities come together to share the types and variations of their kinesthetic culture.
Included among them will be diverse elements of Hispanic-based dance, as well as East Indian and African-American dance, and what many think of as the traditional dance of Kentucky, Appalachian square dance.
It is the hope of the KFP that visitors will leave "A Chance to Dance" with a broadened understanding of the many types of dance found in the commonwealth.
The Kentucky Folklife Festival Bluegrass Committee
The Kentucky Folklife Festival Bluegrass Committee includes (from l to r): Tom Adler, Don Rigbsy, J.D. Crowe, Wes Atha and Brent Bjorkman. (photo by Bob Gates)
Bluegrass in the Bluegrass
This year we will pay tribute to bluegrass music and one of the genres favorite sons, bluegrass legend J.D. Crowe.
Lexington area native Crowe has made a life for himself playing the music he loves and influencing a great number of bluegrass performers throughout the years.
This year at the festival, we will pay tribute both to Crowe and to the way that this regional musical style has thrived in the central part of Kentucky.
All day Saturday at the festival's river site we will feature the many elements that make up bluegrass in hopes of educating the uninitiated (and giving a refresher course to the experts) about this truly Kentucky-based musical genre.
On the 27th visitors can learn about bluegrass festivals, "parking lot picking" and "jamming," how specific instruments fit together to create the perfect "sound of bluegrass," and so much more.
If you are a player bring your instrument and if you are a listener just bring excited enthusiasm.
Closing the festival on Saturday night will be a tribute concert to J.D. Crowe that will include Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, Don Rigsby and Friends, and J.D. Crowe and the New South.
This will be a night of bluegrass to remember.
The dual message of the festival is simple.
Through the festival, the Kentucky Folklife Program hopes that people will recognize that each and every one of us has our own important traditions, and at the same time that we all add to the diversity of folk culture present throughout the state.
Friends of the Festival
The Friends of the Festival e-newsletter brings you in touch with the latest happenings, changes and special events that surround the Kentucky Folklife Festival.
To subscribe to this free service simply e-mail KFP folklife specialist Mark Brown and ask to be part of the "in the know" Friends of the Festival.
[grey.gif]
Back | Next
