Statement of John Doble President, Doble Reasearch Associates, Inc.
Testimony Before to the Subcommittee on Social Security of the House Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on The Future of Social Security for this Generation and the Next Current State of Public Opinion on Social Security Reform October 23, 1997
Each year, hundreds of National Issues Forums are held in communities across the country - this year in at least 23 states.
Our findings come from analyzing over 700 questionnaires people filled out before and after the forums, conducting interviews with five moderators across the country about what happened in their forums, listening to what people said in three forums we monitored directly, and six we reviewed on video tape, and conducting three forum-like focus groups ourselves.
We believe this procedure enables us to reach a deep understanding of how Americans are thinking about this issue.
Here are our findings.
1.
The issue of "entitlements for seniors" was, in participants' minds, not one issue, but two: Social Security, and Medicare, which they saw as part of a larger issue, health care.
People in the forums considered "retirement programs" as synonymous with Social Security, while Medicare was seen as part of a larger and more formidable problem - the cost and availability of health care.
Although experts see Medicare as a pressing problem but feel that Social Security is a problem the U.S. will not fully encounter until the year 2020, to forum participants, Social Security was the more urgent issue, with concern centered on what they saw as its possible insolvency.
2.
No matter what changes we make to Social Security, participants concluded that we, as a people, have an obligation to provide adequate health care and enough income to keep elderly Americans out of poverty.
As well as being a moral imperative, a universal retirement system is vital for practical reasons.
A theme sounded by both younger and older respondents was that no matter how we change Social Security or Medicare, we, as a society, have an obligation to make sure elderly Americans receive the health care they need along with an income that keeps them out of poverty.
"These programs have worked," said a woman from Lake Worth, Florida.
"Not long ago, the number of seniors living in poverty was much higher than it is now."
While there were differences of opinion between young and old, sometimes marked differences, we saw in the forums no signs of an "intergenerational war."
But young and old felt that this is a common problem, something we must solve together.
3.
Participants generally opposed making Social Security a means-tested program both before and after they deliberated.
However, while opposing the concept of means-testing, many favored some incremental change that would have a disproportionate effect on those in upper-income brackets.
Turning Social Security into a means-tested program could, apparently, threaten the program's political base of support.
But majorities favored three changes worth considering: first, raising the ceiling on the Social Security tax (indeed, many did not realize Social Security taxes are paid on only about the first $61,000 earned each year); second, treating Social Security benefits like other retirement income; and third, adjusting the Social Security COLA.
4.
Younger participants, in particular, feared that because of pressure from the deficit and demographics, Social Security will not be there when it is time for them to retire.
A sense that, to save Social Security, change is inevitable was especially pronounced among those under 30.
Again and again, younger participants said if nothing is done, Social Security will be bankrupt before they retire.
An irresistible force, they felt, is the large number of baby boomers who will soon become eligible for benefits.
Among those under 30, 73 percent were very concerned that "Social Security and Medicare funds will run out before long."
A grandmother from New Jersey said, "Social Security is there for us.
But when our children are ready [to collect], it won't be there, Social Security will run out of money by then."
Fears based on demographics and the deficit played into a broader cynicism about government competence and trustworthiness.
5.
There was great interest in exploring the idea of mandatory private retirement accounts, especially among younger respondents.
While they raised serious questions as they discussed the idea, participants' comments suggest this is an idea whose time may be coming.
Participants considered whether to replace Social Security with a Chilean-style system of mandatory private retirement accounts in which people would have to save for retirement but could control their money themselves.
Large numbers, especially those under 30, wanted to talk about this concept.
Participants said private retirement accounts would give them more control over their savings, and 67 percent said it is very important that people take more responsibility for their own retirement.
But the key reason why so many were attracted to the idea was, explained a moderator from Alexandria, "It eliminates the fear."
Her high school students, she said, believed this was the only possible option that might be there when they reached retirement age.
After the forum, she said, students "were optimistic because they had seen something to give them an answer" to what will happen to them if Social Security collapses.
As people deliberated, serious questions arose.
Would everyone invest wisely or would some end up with too little to live on? Wouldn't transition costs be enormous? Would switching to a private system cut some of the bonds that hold society together.
Should people's choices be limited? But these questions notwithstanding, interest in this idea remained high after the forums.
6.
As people deliberated, one effect was crystal clear: they moved from thinking of Social Security as a senior's only source of income to seeing it as one leg of a three-legged stool.
At the start of the forums, many participants spoke of Social Security as something designed to support retirees, to be their main, or even sole source of income.
But as they deliberated and heard from others, participants increasingly came to see it as one source of a retiree's income.
7.
In these forums, participants said our retirement system faces a crisis and agreed something must be done.
People's thinking about retirement was markedly different from 15 years ago, when NIF first took up this issue.
While leaders saw a crisis, the public was then just learning about the issue and the forums did little more than raise consciousness.
But now, when many leaders see the problem as less urgent, there was a general sense among participants that the issue must be dealt with, with 59 percent saying they are very concerned that "Social Security and Medicare funds will run out before long."
__________________________________________________________________
