Logo SPECIAL EVENTS General Butler 2003 Request Event Updates by Email Navigation Bar February 14-16 Perfect Harmony Weekend General Butler State Resort A weekend made for two! Romance, high stakes and plenty of fun have you whispering sweet nothings! Package price includes two nights' lodging, dinner Friday and Saturday, breakfast buffet Saturday and Sunday.
Friday evening we indulge ourselves in some special entertainment.
Saturday morning we hit the park running with romance.
The weekend concludes with a high stakes evening of Monte Carlo and music for holding that special someone close.
$225 package price brings this weekend home to your baby! May 9 Wee Scots Day General Butler State Resort A day for school children to explore and learn about Scottish culture and heritage through music, art, dance, drama and athletic games.
$2.50 per student.
Preregistration required.
Preregistration deadline is April 25.
May 9-11
21st Annual Kentucky Scottish Weekend General Butler State Resort Scottish bagpipes and pipe bands, highland country dancing, athletic games, Celtic music, seminars, British car show, vendors and clan tents bring Scotland to you!
A Saturday night Ceilidh and a Sunday Kirkin' of the Tartan.
Music concerts highlight the weekend.
Admission fee. www.kyscottishweekend.org April 25-27 Camper's Appreciation Weekend - annual event Camp two nights for the price of one.
Join in planned activities and entertainment.
June 9-13 JR Lifesaving Camp General Butler State Resort Like the water? Need Cash? Learn what it takes to become a lifeguard.
Camp is geared towards nurturing the interest in becoming a lifeguard.
Campers will gain knowledge beyond just fun in the sun.
If you go, you'll receive training in first aid, CPR, lifesaving techniques and how to handle emergencies.
We do have a few "fun in the sun" surprises.
Open to ages 8-12 years.
In a few years, you could receive a paycheck for this training.
$50 per camper.
Each camper gets a T-shirt, whistle and end of the camp cookout.
Preregistration deadline is June 2.
Minimum/maximum number of participants required.
June 21 Run to the River 
Cost before June 13 is $15.
Cost day of race is $20.
First 50 participants to preregister receive a T-shirt.
June 21 Kentucky National Guard Day Butler-Turpin Historic House, in General Butler State Resort A day of tribute to Kentucky's 1st Adjutant General, Percival Pierce Butler.
Celebrate with special tours of the historic house, family cemetery and Kentucky Veterans memorial.
Military exhibits, demonstrations, living history and more.
Admission fee.
October 25-26 Halloween Campout Blue Licks Battlefield State Resort Park This weekend features concerts, storytelling, haunted trail walks and spooky mini golf.
Soup supper and costume competition, trick or treating and campsite decorating make this weekend a "treat" for the whole family.
June 28 2nd Annual 'Play It Again' Music in the Park Butler-Turpin Historic House, in General Butler State Resort Enjoy a rich variety of Americana music including Blues, Bluegrass, Jazz and Celtic on the lawn of the historic site at the park.
The evening includes tours of the historic house and more.
July 12, July 26 2nd Annual 'Play It Again' Music in the Park Butler-Turpin Historic House inside General Butler State Resort Enjoy a rich variety of Americana music including Blues, Bluegrass, Jazz and Celtic on the lawn of the historic site at the park.
The evening includes tours of the historic house and more.
August 16-17 General Butler/Bike Butler XTERRA Off-Road Triathlon General Butler State Resort The Nissan XTERRA Triathlon racing series is coming to Kentucky.
"Tri" a 1/2 mile lake swim, a 3-mile trail run and a 10-mile off-road bike race.
Enter as an individual or two person team.
Pre-ride and run on the 16th, and the race is on the 17th.
Fees, more information, registration form.
September 12-14 Derby City Mustang and All Ford Car Show General Butler State Resort Derby City Mustang Car Club of Louisville host their annual show at General Butler's front entrance.
The show features Mustangs from the past and present.
Other Ford vehicles are also highlighted.
Door Prizes and 50/50 drawing.
Registration Friday noon-5 pm and Saturday 8 am-noon.
Enjoy a Welcome Bash Friday night, and dinner/entertainment Saturday.
Free train rides, putt-putt and paddle boats coutesy of sponsors for all registered attendees and their families.
Awards Sunday.
Vendor spaces available.
For more information, link to www.derbycitymustangclub.com September 20 Night Owl Golf Tournament General Butler State Resort Experience the excitement of golf in a new way! No work conflicts and the temperature is cooler.
Registration per foursome is $100.
Prizes awarded in a variety of categories.
Extra glow balls will be sold as mulligans for $5.
Limited to nine teams.
Preregistration deadline is September 19.
September 20 2nd Annual 'Play It Again' Music in the Park Butler-Turpin Historic House inside General Butler State Resort Enjoy a rich variety of Americana music including Blues, Bluegrass, Jazz and Celtic on the lawn of the historic site at the park.
The evening includes tours of the historic house and more.
October 4, October 18 2nd Annual 'Play It Again' Music in the Park Butler-Turpin Historic House inside General Butler State Resort Enjoy a rich variety of Americana music including Blues, Bluegrass, Jazz and Celtic on the lawn of the historic site at the park.
The evening includes tours of the historic house and more.
October 18-19 The "Last" Mountain Bike Race-Off Road General Butler State Resort Gear up for the last mountain bike ride of the year.
Sponsored by the Kentucky Recreation 
Activity fee.
October 31 - November 2 Halloween Family Fun Weekend General Butler State Resort Who is afraid of the dark? Do you have a brave soul? If you answered yes to these questions, then spend a fun, haunting weekend with us.
Our fright fest includes some ghoulish games, creepy fingers pottery workshop, trick or treating in the campground, hayrides, haunted train rides and mummy mini golf (both open to the general public), plus many other activities for those daring enough to stay with us! November 8 Dinner Theater General Butler State Resort The best time for a murder mystery game is anytime! Everybody loves a good mystery, especially the thrill of watching a "Who Dunnit" unravel before their very eyes.
From the first introductions of the mystery "characters" to the final revelations, you are transported into an amazing experience.
Advanced tickets are sold for this event, along with Crime Time Dinner Theatre.
Butler lodging package available for $130 per couple, which includes one night's lodging, dinner theatre and Sunday breakfast.
$30 per person for dinner theatre only.
November 24 - December 15 Christmas Tea Butler-Turpin Historic House, General Butler State Resort Enjoy historic elegrance this holiday season with a reservation at the Butler-Turpin home.
tea times are Monday, tuesday, and Wednesday from noon until 1:30 pm. Reservations required.
$15 per person.
Groups only.
Minimum/maximum number of participants required.
November 24 - December 15 A Patriotic Christmas Butler-Turpin Historic House, General Butler State Resort Step back to the year of 1863 to the time of the Civil War and Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.
Steeped in military heritage the Butler-Turpin home is decorated in 19th century Christmas tradition with a patriotic theme.
Cut evergreens, holly, fruit garlands and magnolia make your visit a cherished Christmas tradition.
$3 for adults; $1 for children.
December 5-7 Christmas in the Park Weekend General Butler State Resort Feel the spirit of Christmas while viewing the grand opening of the "Festival of Trees."
Friday eveing features a special visitor from the North Pole! Santa has promised to stay overnight and join us for breakfast.
Special activities all day Saturday with horse-drawn carriage rides, entertainment, holiday treats and an evening holiday concert.
December 5 - 31 Festival of Trees General Butler State Resort View an array of decorated trees sponsored by local businesses, churches, schools, clubs and social organizations.
