This site will look much better in a browser that supports current Web standards, but the contents are accessible to any browser.
[Bypass left navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
[ Kentucky Historical Society Home Page ] [ Features 
History ] [ Museums 
[ Publications ] [ Research ]
Search Options...
KYHistorical Society [Bypass top navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
KHS: About | | Calendar | | Research Databases | | Table of Contents | | Visiting Click here to go to the 2003 Kentucky Folklife Festival page Press Room | Press Releases | Multimedia | Links | NOTICE: Due to circumstances beyond our control, riverboat rides will not be available as previously advertised.
For additional photos or information, please contact: Tami Vater Communications/Marketing Kentucky Historical Society 100 West Broadway Frankfort, KY 40601 502-564-1792 ext. 4457 502-696-1999 (fax) history.ky.gov Press Releases: Kentucky Folklife Festival Returns to the Capitol City | HTML | PDF | Word | Festival concert pays tribute to bluegrass music legend J.D. Crowe | HTML | PDF | Word | Basketmakers to be highlighted at the Kentucky Folklife Festival | HTML | PDF | Word | Folklife Festival Highlights States Diverse Communities | HTML | PDF | Word | Musical traditions from all over the commonwealthand worldcome together at the Kentucky Folklife Festival | HTML | PDF | Word | Back to top Multimedia: Television spot: | Windows Media Player (56K) | Windows Media Player (Broadband) | Quicktime | To view captioned versions of video in Windows Media Player, open Windows Media Player, choose "View", then "Now Playing Tools", then "Captions."
Now play the file.
Radio spots: Track 1 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 2 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 3 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 4 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 5 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 6 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 7 | MP3 | Transcription | Track 8 | MP3 | Transcription | Back to top Links: General Information Demonstrators Performers Sponsors Site Map | HTML | PDF | Back to top Kentucky Folklife Festival Returns to the Capitol City The Kentucky Folklife Festival returns to Frankfort September 25-27, with new improvements and old favorites! The event, the states largest celebration of Kentucky traditions and cultures, attracts citizens from across the state, including up to 10,000 schoolchildren.
This years festival will feature seven stages, multiple jamming areas and exciting new components such as Community Crossroads and hands-on workshops.
This year we are putting on a festival that you just dont want to miss, said folklife specialist Brent Bjorkman.
Visitors of all ages will find many fun and engaging activities to enjoy while they learn about the diversity and creativity of the people who call Kentucky home, he said.
Our hope is that visitors and demonstrators alike will come away from the festival with a better understanding of themselves, their neighbors, and their communities.
Centered as always at the Old State Capitol, the festival will expand in 2003 to the streets of downtown Frankfort, enabling Kentuckians to experience the heart of their capitol city.
On St. Clair Street, visitors will find skilled woodcarvers, building artists, and a stage featuring music and dance traditions.
Restaurants on St. Clair Street will be open during the festival, showcasing traditional Kentucky foods.
Broadway will be the site of folklife demonstrations highlighting the states communities along Dixie Highway (U.S. 31W), from the traditions of the Mammoth Cave area to Bowling Greens once-thriving African American community, Shake Rag.
Also included will be participants representing the basket making of south central Kentucky, recreational traditions of the YMCA and educational activities provided by the Kentucky Derby Museum.
The Kentucky River venue at Frankforts Riverview Park will feature occupational and recreational folklife, tents devoted to the folklore and folklife of farming, the river and Kentucky families.
Visitors to the site can learn about stonewall masonry and will be able to observe the 2003 Kentucky Rolly Hole Marble Championship.
And guided historical tours will be added to the boat rides that have been a mainstay of past festivals.
A highlight of the river site will be re-creation of a bluegrass music festival, complete with parking lot picking and campers.
Workshops will be offered on Saturday by bluegrass musicians who will perform on the main stage at Saturday evenings Bluegrass in the Bluegrass tribute to J.D. Crowe.
Included will be vocal instruction with Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, a vocal and mandolin session with Don Rigsby, and a banjo-playing workshop with J.D. Crowe himself.
Whether you are a lifetime fan of bluegrass or just interested in learning what all the fuss is about, you are sure to enjoy the atmosphere at the river.
Back downtown on the grounds of the Old State Capitol, visitors will find an exciting new component, Community Crossroads.
This area will introduce visitors to several of Kentuckys communitiesor folk groupsrepresenting specific commonalities, including the Carcassonne community of Letcher County, Latinos from Mexico, Cuba and Puerto Rico, Louisvillians with roots in India and members of the deaf and hard-of-hearing communities.
Each of these folk groups will provide demonstrations, performances and special events highlighting the cultural expressions that make them unique while providing perspective on the similarities among various folk groups.
The Old Capitol lawn will be the place to find representatives of Kentuckys diverse foodways traditions.
Visitors will have the chance to experience a re-created version of Frankforts La Chiquita Mexican restaurant and market, a sampling of the burgoo tradition that has simmered many a political event and the ever-popular barbecue fare of Owensboros St. Mary Magdalene Church.
Of course the Old Capitol lawn will once again be the site of the evening concerts that have become a favorite feature of the Kentucky Folklife Festival.
Friday night will provide visitors with A Chance to Dance! following afternoon workshops exploring Latino and Appalachian dance traditions, as well as those of India.
The festival will conclude on Saturday night with Bluegrass in the Bluegrass, a tribute to J.D. Crowe.
The lineup will include such bluegrass greats as Don Rigsby, Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, in addition to J.D. Crowe and the New South.
It will be an evening of music you wont want to miss.
The festival is a program of the Kentucky Historical Society and Kentucky Arts Council, agencies of Kentucky State Governments Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet and showcases the continuing efforts of the Kentucky Folklife Program to document, conserve, and promote the states folk traditions.
There is no general admission charge, but there are fees for some festival activities such as boat rides.
Donations are accepted and appreciated.
For more information about the Kentucky Folklife Festival, visit the website folklife.ky.gov or call, toll free, 1-877-4HISTORY (1-877-444-7867).
Back to top Festival concert pays tribute to bluegrass music legend J.D. Crowe Bluegrass music fans will have a rare opportunity to meet, hear and learn from a legend at the 2003 Kentucky Folklife Festival, Sept. 25-27 in downtown Frankfort.
The festival will celebrate bluegrass music with playing sessions, workshops and, on Saturday, Sept. 27 at 7 p.m., with a tribute to legendary performer J.D. Crowe.
The river area of the festival siteFrankforts Riverview Parkwill be filled with bluegrass, as festival organizers re-create the atmosphere of a bluegrass festival, with impromptu jamming sessions, campers and all.
On Saturday, festival visitors will have hands-on opportunities to learn more about this style of music through a variety of bluegrass workshops, including a session with Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, vocal and mandolin instruction with Don Rigsby, and a banjo-playing workshop with J.D. Crowe himself.
The Frankfort-based band No Tools Loaned will also be on hand to jam with festival visitors and talk about the way the bands instruments contribute to its musical style.
The Saturday evening concert, Bluegrass in the Bluegrass, will be a tribute to J.D. Crowe.
Music will begin at 7 p.m. on the Old State Capitol lawn.
The lineup will include Rigsby, former member of the New South and director of the Kentucky Center for Traditional Music, as well as Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek.
The festival is a program of the Kentucky Historical Society and Kentucky Arts Council, agencies of Kentucky State Governments Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet and showcases the continuing efforts of the Kentucky Folklife Program to document, conserve, and promote the states folk traditions.
There is no general admission charge, but there are fees for some festival activities such as boat rides.
Donations are accepted and appreciated.
For more information about the Kentucky Folklife Festival, visit the website folklife.ky.gov or call, toll free, 1-877-4HISTORY (1-877-444-7867).
J.D. Crowe J.D. Crowe has been interested in music since he was old enough to recognize what music was.
At age 4, Crowe recalled, he toted a guitar and listened attentively to the radio, especially the banjo playing of Lester Flatt and Earl Scruggs.
By the time he was 13, Crowe was playing the banjo, unaware of the influence he would have on a generation of musicians.
The Lexington, Ky., native eventually started a band called the Kentucky Mountain Boys, which, by 1971, had become J.D. Crowe and the New South.
The band was a training ground for such talented artists as Keith Whitley, Ricky Skaggs, Doyle Lawson, Bobby Slone, Red Allen, Jerry Douglas, Glenn Lawson, Jimmy Gaudreau, Bobby Slone and Tony Rice.
The band, when not recording, built a following performing at festivals.
From 1968-74, whenever they werent on the road, they played at Lexingtons the Holiday Inn North.
J.D. Crowe and the New South was already well on its way to legendary status, attracting bluegrass fans and musiciansas well as musicians working in other types of music.
After a brief try at retirement, Crowe returned in the 1990s with an updated version of the New South and the band headed back out onto the road.
J.D. is one of the most influential banjo players in history, said bluegrass great Don Rigsby, a former New South band member who is today director of the Kentucky Center for Traditional Music.
He has taken his instrument to new heights and played in every genre he ever wanted to just because he can, Rigsby explained.
I would in no way be the same musician that I am today without his firm yet caring guidance throughout the yearseven after I left the band.
J.D. is an icon, added Dale Ann Bradley, celebrated headliner of the Coon Creek band.
His music is one major reason my heart was led to bluegrass.
His playing and recordings today are still as exciting as the first one I heard.
Crowe and his band have produced six albums, including Flashback, which was nominated for a Grammy for Best Bluegrass Album of 1994 and for the 1995 International Bluegrass Music Associations Album of the Year.
In 1994, Crowe was named Instrumental Performer of the Year for his five-string banjo playing by the International Bluegrass Music Association.
In 2001, Crowe received the Kentucky Governors Award in the Arts Folk Heritage Award.
Back to top Basketmakers to be highlighted at the Kentucky Folklife Festival The Old Capitol Grounds in Frankfort will once again come alive on Sept. 25-27 with the Kentucky Folklife Festival, the greatest sampling of the states folklife found anywhere.
Each year the festival highlights the unique cultural heritage of everyday Kentucky life.
Featured this year are the communities along Dixie Highway (U.S. 31W) and a celebration of the areas basket making traditions.
Visitors will see some of the finest of the states folk artists up close through demonstrations by members of the Mammoth Cave Basketmakers Guild.
The guild, formed in 2002 is a group of central Kentucky folk artists who organized to better promote, through education and marketing, the time-honored tradition of basket making unique to south central Kentucky.
Basket making has been an important part of the folklife along Dixie Highway for different reasons at different times.
The traditional white oak egg basket familiar to many was, of course, originally made for egg gathering.
But as U.S. 31W became a major route for tourists headed to and through the Mammoth Cave region, the baskets became a source of financial support for families who carried on the tradition.
Today these handmade baskets are a source of pride for Kentucky basket makers, as folk art enthusiasts from around the world seek them out and they become highly collectable.
Basket makers present at the festival will include Charlene and Charles Long, who will demonstrate weaving techniques used in the construction of their willow and honeysuckle creations, Leona Waddell and members of the family of early basket makers Lestel and Ollie Childress.
The festival is a program of the Kentucky Historical Society and Kentucky Arts Council, agencies of Kentucky State Governments Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet and showcases the continuing efforts of the Kentucky Folklife Program to document, conserve, and promote the states folk traditions.
There is no general admission charge, but there are fees for some festival activities such as boat rides.
Donations are accepted and appreciated.
For more information about the Kentucky Folklife Festival, visit the website folklife.ky.gov or call, toll free, 1-877-4HISTORY (1-877-444-7867).
Back to top Folklife Festival Highlights States Diverse Communities Kentucky boasts a surprising number of communities, cultures and traditions in its 120 counties.
The Kentucky Folklife FestivalSept.
25-27 in historic downtown Frankfortwill highlight four.
The festivals Community Crossroads area on the grounds of the Old State Capitol will feature the states Latino, East Indian, Appalachian and Deaf and Hard of Hearing communities, along with their traditions and customs.
Community Crossroads will allow visitors to see the folk groups side-by-side and learn about both their similarities and differences.
Members of the four communities will share elements of their identities, such as dance, music, and storytelling and the artistic expression of everyday life.
Demonstrators will present a re-creation of a typical room in a traditional household and provide a chance for visitors to further explore that particular cultures recreation, visual arts, and family traditions.
Latino art forms in the Community Crossroads area will include Central American alfombras (sawdust carpets) created by residents of Shelbyville, dominoes as a form of recreation among Cuban communities, and Mexican Dia de los Muertos (Day of the Dead) traditions.
There will also be dance demonstrations and instruction in the Salsa, Merengue, and Cha-Cha styles.
Members of Louisvilles East Indian community will demonstrate mehendi (painting complex patterns on the skin with henna) and rangoli (the traditional art of decorating floors with patterns using colored powder), in addition to examples of North and South Indian dances.
Again this year, Louisville Hindu Temple yoga club members will guide visitors through a series of yoga poses and movements.
While we most often associate community with ethnicity, race, and religion, community is also defined in large part by language and culture.
Kentuckians who are deaf or hard of hearing provide a good example of how a community can be created among people with shared language, culture and life experience that is not based on such things as ethnicity.
This section of Community Crossroads will spotlight the history of deaf communities and schools in Kentucky.
It will feature American Sign Language activities, technological innovations used in deaf households and deaf storytellers and artists.
Members of Letcher Countys Carcassonne Community Center were included in the Smithsonian Institutions American Folklife Festival in Washington, D.C., in 2003.
They will also appear at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, demonstrating square dancing, quilting and other aspects of Appalachian life.
Make plans now to visit this year's Kentucky Folklife Festival, where visitors will explore questions like: What makes a community? What do these groups have in common and what sets them apart? How is my community similar or different? Can one person belong to more than one community? The festival is a program of the Kentucky Historical Society and Kentucky Arts Council, agencies of Kentucky State Governments Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet and showcases the continuing efforts of the Kentucky Folklife Program to document, conserve, and promote the states folk traditions.
There is no general admission charge, but there are fees for some festival activities such as boat rides.
Donations are accepted and appreciated.
For more information about the Kentucky Folklife Festival, visit the website folklife.ky.gov or call, toll free, 1-877-4HISTORY (1-877-444-7867).
Back to top Musical traditions from all over the commonwealthand worldcome together at the Kentucky Folklife Festival Music is always a favored attraction for visitors to the Kentucky Folklife Festival, and this years offerings are sure to attract.
The festival, the states largest celebration of the art and culture of the commonwealth, will take place in downtown Frankfort on September 25, 26, and 27.
Major themes this year will include a greater emphasis on bluegrass music, and an introduction to the many types of music that accompany various dance traditions found throughout Kentucky.
Music from multiple traditions and regions will be heard at the festival, both night and day.
Visitors will have the chance to watch and listen to performers on seven stages, participate in the music through workshops and jamming sessions, and gain an understanding of various musical traditions as folklorists interview musicians on narrative stages.
According to Brent Bjorkman, folklife specialist with the Kentucky Folklife Program, Music plays such an important role in all of our lives.
When we learn about the music of our neighbors, we also learn about their values, feelings, and the many things we have in common.
The music at this years festival will range from the lined out hymns of the Indian Bottom Association of Old Regular Baptists from Blackey in Letcher County to the Appalachian-themed but contemporary sounds of festival favorite Zoe Speaks, a duo made up of Carla Gover and Mitch Barrett.
Other festival favorites returning this year include National Heritage Award winner Eddie Pennington and Bowling Greens John Edmonds of John Edmonds and the Gospel Truth.
Dance will be a major theme of this years festival.
Throughout the three-day event there will be opportunities to learn about dance from many cultural groups here in Kentucky.
For instance, Latin dances like Salsa, Rumba, Cha-Cha, Merengue, and Cumbia and Appalachian dances such as Contra dance, English dance, and Square dance will be demonstrated and practiced.
Visitors will be encouraged to attend workshops on Friday afternoon to learn Latino, East Indian, and Appalachian dance traditions.
The Friday night dance party, A Chance to Dance, will provide an opportunity for everyone to try out some new steps.
Another major theme at this years festival will be bluegrass.
Performers will include Hays Brothers (Bowling Green), Arthur Hatfield and Buck Creek (Glasgow), Homer Ledford and Cabin Creek (Winchester), the Reynolds Family Band (Elizabethtown) and the Licking River Ramblers (Paintsville).
The atmosphere of a bluegrass festival will be re-created at the festivals river area, and will include parking lot picking, complete with campers.
Bluegrass in the Bluegrass will be Saturdays theme, and visitors will be able to enjoy participatory workshops along with performances.
Workshops will include a vocal workshop with Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, a vocal and mandolin workshop with Don Rigsby, and a banjo-playing workshop with J.D. Crowe.
The festival will conclude on Saturday night with Bluegrass in the Bluegrass, a tribute to bluegrass great J.D. Crowe.
The lineup will include bluegrass greats Don Rigsby, Dale Ann Bradley and Coon Creek, and of course J.D. Crowe and the New South.
Whether you are a lifetime fan of bluegrass or just interested in learning what all the fuss is about, you are sure to enjoy this taste of bluegrass.
The Kentucky Folklife Festival will take place on September 25th, 26th, and 27th in downtown Frankfort.
Dont miss this chance to listen to, watch, participate in, and learn about many of the exciting musical traditions that Kentuckians have to share.
For more information about the Kentucky Folklife Festival, visit folklife.ky.gov or call 502-564-1792.
The festival is a program of the Kentucky Historical Society and Kentucky Arts Council, agencies in the Education, Arts and Humanities Cabinet and showcases the continuing efforts of the Kentucky Folklife Program to document, conserve, and promote the folk traditions of Kentucky.
There is no general admission charge, but there are fees for some festival activities such as the boat rides.
Donations are accepted and appreciated.
Back to top Track 1: 30 seconds [Music: Bluegrass] Hi, Im Heather French Henry.
Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Bluegrass and barbecue and everything in between.
Its all there at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th.
For more information, please call 502-564-1792 or www.kyhistory.org.
Back to top Track 2: 30 seconds [Music: Bluegrass] Hi, Im Heather French Henry.
Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Join us as we celebrate bluegrass music with J.D. Crowe in concert Saturday night on the Old State Capitol lawn.
Its all there, at the Kentucky Folklife Festival.
For more information, please call 502-564-1792 or log on to kyhistory.org.
Back to top Track 3: 30 seconds [Music: Gospel] Hi, Im Heather French Henry.
Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Bluegrass and barbecue and everything in between.
Its all there at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through 27th.
For more information, please call 502-564-1792 or www.kyhistory.org.
Back to top Track 4: 30 seconds [Music: Appalachian Dulcimer] Ms. Certain: "I was born April the 21st, 19-and-15, but I am young at heart.
I love children.
To be among children, it keeps us young."
Interviewer: "What are your hobbies, Ms. Certain?" Ms. Certain: "My hobby, honey, Im a quilter.
I love to quilt."
Narrator: Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Back to top Track 5: 30 seconds [Music: Folk] [Train whistle blowing in background.]
Jean Ritchie: "I could have had a train song sung by now.
"The L 
. . ."
[Clapping in background].
[Singing]."When I was a curly-headed baby, my daddy sat me down on his knee . . ."
Fade out . . .
Narrator: Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Back to top Track 6: 15 seconds Hi, Im Heather French Henry.
Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Bluegrass and barbecue and everything in between.
Back to top Track 7: 15 seconds [Music: Old Time] Banjo player: "This one here is an old-timer called Shady Grove."
[Banjo music fades low] . . .
Hi, Im Heather French Henry.
Celebrate the many Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic downtown Frankfort.
Back to top Tract 8: 15 seconds Celebrate Kentucky traditions at the Kentucky Folklife Festival, September 25th through the 27th in historic Frankfort.
Back to top Folklife: What is Folklife? | | Folklife Program | | Folklife-in-the-Schools | | Folklife Grants 
Governor Patton's Education Pays site ] [ The Kentucky Historical Society is an agency of the Education, Arts 
] | About this Site | Privacy | Disclaimer | | Individuals with Disabilities | | Feedback: KHSWebManager@mail.state.ky.us | Copyright © 2002 Commonwealth of Kentucky.
All rights reserved.
Updated: September 2, 2003
This page is:
[ Bobby WorldWide Approved AAA ] [ Bobby WorldWide Approved 508 ]
Site Meter
