This site will look much better in a browser that supports current Web standards, but the contents are accessible to any browser.
[Bypass left navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
[ Kentucky Historical Society Home Page ] [ Features 
History ] [ Museums 
[ Publications ] [ Research ]
Search Options...
KYHistorical Society [Bypass top navigation bar and go directly to the page content.]
KHS: About | | Calendar | | Research Databases | | Table of Contents | | Visiting 2003 Kentucky Folklife Festival Thursday through Saturday, September 25 - 27 in historic downtown Frankfort Festival Performers Nana Yaa Asantewa Yaya Diallo and Harilina Churn-Diallo East Indian Dance John Edmonds and the Gospel Truth J. P. Fraley and Andrew Bevans Grupo Fugaz Grupo Los Jancos Hays Brothers Arthur Hatfield and Buck Creek Indian Bottom Old Regular Baptists Kaintuck Homer Ledford and Cabin Creek Licking River Ramblers Fred Murphy and the 10th Street Blues Revue No Tools Loaned Eddie Pennington Rabbit Hash String Band Steve Rector Reynolds Family Band River City Drum Corps Anupama Sahasrabudhe Sexton and Slone Art Stamper TimbaSon Tri-City Messengers Jesse Wells Zoe Speaks: Carla Gover 
Her art comes out of and directly relates to the African American community of South Louisville.
She tells stories throughout Kentucky as a part of school residencies, concerts, and library programs.
Back to top Yaya Diallo and Harilina Churn-Diallo: This husband and wife team will be bringing drumming and dance of West Africa to the Festival.
Harilina grew up in Louisville and learned many kinds of dances within her community.
She was drawn into African dance by working with master dancers during her trips to African.
Yaya Diallo is a master drummer from Mali.
Together they will explore traditional African music and its effect on modern highlife music.
Back to top East Indian Dance: Dancers Akila Iyer and Chandrika Srinivasan join the Festival this year and will present several of the regional classical and folk dances that exemplify the rich diverse heritage of Indians living in Louisville.
Classical dances like bharathanatyam and folk varieties such as garba and dandia are creative and expressive forms that will be featured on stages throughout the festival site.
Back to top John Edmonds and the Gospel Truth: This gospel group, led by Edmonds, began in 1964 in Bowling Green, Kentucky.
Since that time they have played all over the globe bringing their inspirational high-energy gospel sounds to thousands.
Also, join John on Thursday and Friday as he leads local Frankfort choirs and school kids in a special gospel practice on the River Music Stage (Thursday at 11 a.m. and 1 p.m. and Friday at 10 a.m.).
Back to top J. P. Fraley and Andrew Bevans: J. P. Fraley is certainly one of Kentuckys most cherished fiddlers.
This Carter County native first learned to play from his father.
For years J. P., along with his wife Annadeen, were active participants in the American Folk Song Festival put on annually by Jean Thomas.
Throughout 2002-3, J. P. has been the master fiddler in the Kentucky Folklife Programs Folk and Traditional Arts Apprenticeship Program.
During this year Fraley passed along many of the techniques and songs in his repertoire to his apprentice Andrew Bevans.
Back to top Grupo Fugaz: "Fugaz" translates roughly as "starlight," a word this group felt described their personalities.
The family band started out a few years ago in Hidalgo, Mexico, playing various types of Mexican music.
More recently, they moved to Lexington, Kentucky, bringing their culture and music with them.
On Friday night, Grupo Fugaz plays cumbia dance music at the Chance to Dance concert.
Back to top Grupo Los Jancos: Formed in Frankfort, Kentucky, in 2000, this bands members moved here from different states in the Republic of Mexico, except one who comes from Colombia.
They play a variety of Mexican music styles and will focus on performing cumbia dance music at the Folklife Festival.
The name Janco is a Mexican regional nickname for the name Adrian, so the group named themselves Los Jancos in honor of Adrian Betancourt, who initiated the band.
Back to top Hays Brothers: The Hays Brothers is a Warren County bluegrass group that has been performing for over 25 years.
Brothers Gary and Jeff Hays descend from three generations of singers and musicians.
This year the Hays Brothers band members celebrate their twenty-eighth year together.
They play bluegrass with a traditional feel but with their own sense of direction.
Back to top Arthur Hatfield and Buck Creek: Originally formed in 1994, each member of Buck Creek brings to the group a strong personal connection to regional bluegrass music.
Multi-instrumentalist Arthur Hatfield is the leader of the band.
Most recently Buck Creek has been concentrating on a newly refined repertoire of bluegrass gospel but still credit much of their musical style to Kentucky greats like J.D. Crowe and the Osborne Brothers.
Aside from performing on the various stages with Buck Creek, Arthur can also be found in the instrument-making tent at the Festivals River Site.
Come and talk to him about his other passion creating banjos! Back to top Indian Bottom Old Regular Baptists: In the coal-mining region of the southern Appalachian Mountains, Old Regular Baptists sing lined-out hymns.
The roots of the high, lonesome sound found in the music of this region emerged from this tradition of congregational hymnody.
This way of making music, once common in the American colonies, continues in the worship and singing of the Indian Bottom Association of Old Regular Baptists in Blackey.
Members from over thirty different congregations from Letcher and surrounding counties comprise the Kentucky Indian Bottom Association, which remains faithful in keeping alive the lined-out older hymns.
Back to top Kaintuck: Led by Dan Jones this bluegrass ensemble is one that brings years of traditional talent to stages across the U.S. and Canada.
Originally hailing from Grayson County and now living in Louisville, Jones is a seasoned veteran of the music business, having played with such bands as the Bluegrass Alliance, the Goins Brothers, and Bill Monroe and The Bluegrass Boys.
Kaintuck also consists of Loren Johnson on bass, Bill Wolf and Cecil Jackson on guitar, and Donnie Hughes on banjo.
In addition to playing on different festival stages, Kaintuck will also be anchoring the parking lot jamming area at the River Site of the Festival.
Back to top Homer Ledford and Cabin Creek: Homer Ledford seems to have made more instruments than any other individual luthier in the southeastern U.S.
Some 5,600 of these are lap dulcimers, but Homer has a good output of other instruments: over 500 banjos, ranging from fretless models to bluegrass instruments; 25 guitars; 13 mandolins; and more.
Homers first instrument was a fiddle, made at age 12 from a discarded dynamite box and matchsticks.
Before making his second, he noticed that the Sears-Roebuck catalogue described violin tops as being made from spruce and violin backs and sides from maple.
As a result, he found some spruce, cut a maple tree that grew in the hog lot, and dried a piece behind his mamas stove.
Homer still plays his hog lot fiddle.
Join him in the instrument-making area at the Festivals River Site to learn his construction skills, and come listen to him and his band, Cabin Creek, on Saturday.
Back to top Licking River Ramblers: The Licking River Ramblers were formed by Morehead State University Vice President Keith Kappes in the year 2000 to serve as a student-based group for the campus of MSU.
The group features the finest student musicians involved in the Traditional Music Program (connected to the Kentucky Center for Traditional Music).
The musicians are auditioned for placement in the group and receive a yearly scholarship through KCTM.
The young and talented group features Brett Ratliff, Roger Coleman, J. T. Cure, and Jesse Wells.
Back to top Fred Murphy and the 10th Street Blues Revue: Whether performing with guitarist Pen Bogert or with his full band, Fred Murphy electrifies his audience with his powerful blues presence.
Murphy and Bogert will be performing as a duo during the day on Thurs day.
The 10th Street Blues Band will join them for an evening blues party on the Plaza Stage at 6 p.m.
This year Louisvilles own Billy Bird joins the band and adds some special vocals and harp playing.
Back to top No Tools Loaned: Frankforts No Tools Loaned describes their music as third generation bluegrass.
Their performances range from original compositions to traditional bluegrass favorites.
Although this band is newly formed, each of its members is a seasoned veteran and has played at venues ranging from concert halls and festivals to weddings and churches.
Back to top Eddie Pennington: A 2001 National Heritage Fellowship Award winner, Pennington was born in Hopkins County and now lives in Princeton in Caldwell County.
Whether playing as part of the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta as a feature performer of the Wolf Trap/Folk Masters radio series, or just jamming at home with friends, he remains one of the top musicians in this truly Kentucky-based style of guitar.
Back to top Rabbit Hash String Band: The Rabbit Hash String Band takes its name from the small town on the Ohio River that is home to fiddler Tommy Taylor.
Taylor grew up listening to the music of older brother Ballard Pappy Taylor, who had a long career as fiddler, banjoist, and comedian.
Like other traditional sting musicians in the Cincinnati area, Rabbit Hash members were heavily influenced by the early string bands, especially by Skillet Lickers Bert Layne and Clayton McMichen, who lived in Kentucky later in their careers.
The Rabbit Hash String Band includes Tommy Taylor, fiddle; Warren Waldron, second fiddle; Judy Waldron, guitar; Russ Childers, banjo; and Barb Childers, banjo-uke.
Back to top Steve Rector: Growing up in the area of Muhlenberg and Ohio counties, Steve Rector was strongly influenced by the legendary Mose Rager, the man who helped develop the thumbpicking style popularized by Merle Travis.
Rector is winner of numberous awards, including the National Thumbpicking Championship and National Fingerstyle contest.
As part of this years Kentucky Folklife Programs Folk and Traditional Arts Apprenticeship Program, Rector has begun to teach his unique regional style of playing to up-and-coming guitarist Krystal Miller.
Check the stage schedule for performance times to see this great pairing.
Back to top Reynolds Family Band: Traditional bluegrass/gospel groups combine the secular sounds of bluegrass with the sacred sounds of church hymns to create a rich and varied musical repertoire.
The Reynolds Family Bluegrass Band, like most bluegrass groups, plays music for enjoyment rather than for a living.
They perform regularly at churches and community events in the region.
"#top"
Members of the group make their own drums according to traditional designs and create their own rhythms.
Led by Ed White, this group conducts workshops and performances throughout the state.
Back to top Anupama Sahasrabudhe: Originally from Nagpur, Maharashtra, India, Anupama Sahasrabudhe has been involved in Indian vocal music from the age of five.
Since moving to the U.S. in 1992, she has become a sought-after performer throughout Indian communities across Kentucky and beyond.
During the Festival in the Community Crossroads area, Anupama will share pieces of traditional classical and popular Indian song and talk about the structural composition of the notes, called ragas.
Back to top Sexton and Slone: For old-time music and square dance fans throughout Kentucky, the premiere names are Lee Sexton and Ray Slone.
Sexton is one of the states finest drop-thumb banjo players in the state.
In 1999 he was given one of the prestigious Governors Awards in the Arts.
At the festival, Lee, along with a fiddle player from Hindman, Ray Slone, and guitarist Sean Stamper will be backing up the Carcassonne Dancers.
This past summer, both Sexton and Slone traveled with this dance group and performed in Washington, D.C., as part of the Smithsonian Folklife Festivals Appalachia: Heritage and Harmony theme.
Back to top Art Stamper: Art Stamper recalls that his first musical experience was listening to his father back in his old Knott County home.
Since this time Stamper has been heralded as one of the great fiddlers able to play both countless fiddle tunes and excellent bluegrass.
Over the years Stamper has lent his talents to bluegrass groups such as the Stanley Brothers, Jim McReynolds, the Osborne Brothers, the Goins Brothers, Wayne Lewis, Bill Monroe, Joe Isaacs, Bill Clifton, Ralph Stanley, and Larry Sparks.
Currently, he makes his home in Shepardsville and is taking part in the Kentucky Folklife Programs Apprenticeship Program, where he is teaching fiddler Sheila Nichols skills and tunes he has mastered over the years.
Back to top TimbaSon: With a repertoire ranging from traditional Cuban music to modern Latin-jazz and swinging original compositions, TimbaSons performances have excited listeners all over the commonwealth.
This 10-piece ensemble, comprised of accomplished Cuban and Kentucky instrumentalists, generates a party atmosphere with sounds that get people dancing.
Back to top Tri-City Messengers: This a capella gospel group made up of retired mine workers from the Benham/Lynch/Cumberland area of southeastern Kentucky has been singing praises for the Lord together since 1999.
Members include Alfonzo Simms, Benny and George Massey, Willis Bates, Sanford Baskin, and Ray Wilson.
Make sure also to look for Benny Massey on the Foodways Stage on Saturday.
Massey recently returned from the Smithsonian Folklife Festival in D.C., where he shared his famous regional barbeque recipes with visitors on the Capitol Mall area.
Back to top Jesse Wells: Wells grew up in a little community called Red Bush, Kentucky (Johnson County).
His father is an old-time fiddler, and Jesse was exposed to traditional Kentucky music at a very early age.
He grew up traveling to many concerts, festivals, and picking sessions with his father and ended up being exposed to some of the finest music and musicians in old-time music.
He has taught fiddle, banjo, and other stringed instruments at various camps and clinics throughout the southern U.S.
He is currently the education coordinator and acting archivist/curator for the Kentucky Center for Traditional Music at Morehead State University, as well as a performing musician.
Back to top Zoe Speaks: Carla Gover 
Gover is also a talented clogger, while Barrett is a gifted storyteller.
Back to top Folklife: What is Folklife? | | Folklife Program | | Folklife-in-the-Schools | | Folklife Grants 
Governor Patton's Education Pays site ] [ The Kentucky Historical Society is an agency of the Education, Arts 
] | About this Site | Privacy | Disclaimer | | Individuals with Disabilities | | Feedback: KHSWebManager@mail.state.ky.us | Copyright © 2002 Commonwealth of Kentucky.
All rights reserved.
Updated: September 2, 2003
This page is:
[ Bobby WorldWide Approved AAA ] [ Bobby WorldWide Approved 508 ]
Site Meter
