Congresswoman Louise M. Slaughter, New York's 28th Congressional District subbanner, New York's 28th Congressional District, Home page link [navigation_tab_trans_begin.gif] Welcome [navigation_tab_trans_middle.gif]
Legislative Accomplishments - Women's Issues
Working to Ensure the Equality of Women in our Society
Rep. Louise Slaughter is an outspoken champion of women's rights.
As Democratic Co-chair of the Congressional Caucus for Womens Issues, she has fought for laws including funding for international family planning, equality in womens health research, and and equal pay legislation.
Rep. Slaughter has made a career out of expanding the boundaries of women's opportunities.
In an era when young women were expected to simply settle down and get married, she went to college, earning a bachelor's degree in microbiology and then a master's degree in public health from the University of Kentucky.
She has a keen understanding of the important role both education and opportunities play in women's lives.
Protecting Equality of Athletic Opportunities
Rep. Slaughter has taken the lead in the House of Representatives in the fight to save Title IX, a 1972 law that ensured equality of athletic opportunities for men and women.
The Bush Administration appointed a commission to recommend changes in the regulation of Title IX. Rep. Slaughter was the lead author on a letter to Secretary of Education Rod Paige that encouraged him to keep Title IX intact.
She also authored H.Res. 137, a bipartisan resolution that urges the Bush Administration and the Department of Education to maintain the spirit of Title IX by not changing the way in which it is enforced.
Rep. Slaughter will continue to fight to ensure the integrity of this and all legislation that has brought about parity for women.
In April, Rep. Slaughter hosted an event in the Capital that brought together Members of Congress, including Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi, with athletes and athletic administrators to talk about the importance of preserving Title IX.
The standing-room-only crowd heard from panelists including Olympic athletes Mia Hamm and Dominique Dawes, as well as other Title IX experts.
Fighting for Equality in the Workplace
Rep. Slaughter was proud to sponsor the HHS Women Scientists Employment Opportunity Act, legislation requiring all agencies under the Department of Health and Human Services to establish policies to ensure that women scientists are treated equitably in areas like research and publishing opportunities and conference attendance.
She has endorsed legislation requiring equal pay for equal work, reflecting the fact that women still earn an average of 76 cents to a man's dollar.
She has cosponsored a bill to revive the Equal Rights Amendment, a vital constitutional statement of women's equality in our nation.
Rep. Slaughter supported legislation to protect battered women in the workplace and enable them to take time off from work for necessary court appearances, legal assistance, and other needed measures.
In addition, she championed women's pension equity through legislation like the Comprehensive Women's Pension Protection Act and her sponsorship of a successful amendment to the Financial Services Reform Act to urge financial advisers to revise their materials and methods to promote, rather than hamper, women's financial independence.
In her capacity as Co-chair of the Congressional Caucus for Womens Issues, Rep. Slaughter is committed to ensuring equal procurement opportunities for women-owned businesses.
She sent a letter to the Department of Defense urging them to report to the Caucus on the status of women-owned businesses and how frequently they are awarded government contracts.
Rep. Slaughter intends to fight to ensure that the federally mandated goal of 5% of all government contracts, which is guaranteed by public law, are awarded to women-owned businesses.
Prosecuting Crime and Violence Against Women
Rep. Slaughter was the author of the Protection from Sexual Predators Act, a "two strikes, you're out" bill that would allow prosecutors to seek a life prison sentence against repeat sex offenders.
She served as a driving force behind the Violence Against Women Act, writing provisions to protect battered immigrant women against summary deportation, the fear of which kept many in abusive relationships.
In the 107th Congress, Rep. Slaughter was the lead sponsor of H.R. 28, the Violence Against Women Office Act, a bill that made permanent the Office on Violence Against Women within the Department of Justice.
Rep. Slaughter worked successfully with her colleagues to include the provisions of her bill in H.R. 2215, the 21st Century Department of Justice Appropriations Authorizations Act.
The Office on Violence Against Women handles the Departments legal and policy issues regarding violence against women.
It also funds grant programs to help state, tribal, and local government, as well as community-based agencies, train personnel, establish specialized domestic violence and sexual assault units, assist victims of violence, and hold perpetrators accountable.
In addition, Rep. Slaughter has supported numerous bills to assist victims of domestic violence, including legislation to protect battered women against insurance discrimination and improve access to legal services.
In the 108^th Congress, Rep. Slaughter has cosponsored H.R. 1704, a bill to provide transitional housing for domestic violence victims and their children.
She is also a cosponsor of the Debbie Smith Act, which provides funds to eliminate the DNA evidence backlog to help prosecute and convict sex offenders.
Recently, Rep. Slaughter joined several of her colleagues in writing to Secretary of the Air Force James Roche urging the Air Force, along with the House and Senate Armed Services Committees to formulate a comprehensive strategy to deal with sexual assault at the Academy.
She also sent letters to the Chair and Ranking Member of the House Armed Services Committee encouraging the House to take up an independent investigation in to the Air Force Academy.
She is committed to seeing true reform, focusing on both punishment and prevention, occur in the service academies.
Highlighting Women's Issues Around the Globe
Rep. Slaughter has a long record of activism on international women's issues.
In January 2003, Rep. Slaughter authored a letter to President Bush, signed by many of her colleagues, urging him to pressure officials in Afghanistan to respect the rights and dignity of women, particularly in regions where women continue to be marginalized and persecuted.
In April 2003, Rep. Slaughter also signed a letter to Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge, urging him to protect regulations that grant asylum to women fleeing domestic violence.
Rep. Slaughter has spoken out vocally against female genital mutilation (FGM), which is practiced in some cultures allegedly to protect girls against sexual temptation.
She requested and obtained a landmark report from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) compiling information on the persistence of FGM among immigrant communities in the U.S. and ways to discourage this practice.
Based on the report, she authored appropriations report language urging HHS to continue educating immigrant communities about the physical, emotional, and sociological risks associated with FGM.
Rep. Slaughter has served as a tireless advocate in favor of international family planning, a vital right for women around the globe to plan pregnancies, reduce maternal mortality, increase child survival, and decrease the burden of overpopulation.
She is cosponsoring legislation to provide funding for the United Nations Population Fund, which provides family planning and maternal health services to the poorest women around the globe.
This fund was eliminated under the Bush Administration.
She has also cosponsored legislation in the 108^th Congress urging the Senate to approve the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
Promoting the Heritage of Women's Rights
In July 2000, Rep. Slaughter was honored to be elected Chair of the Women's Progress Commemoration Commission (WPCC), a body created by legislation authored by her and passed by Congress in late 1998.
In 2001, the community marked the 153rd anniversary of the First Women's Rights Convention, held in Seneca Falls.
At the commemorative events at the Women's Rights National Historic Park, Rep. Slaughter was proud to release the final report and recommendations of the WPCC.
This report outlined seven important steps that can be taken to preserve sites important to women's history.
To review a copy of the report, please visit following Internet web site: http://www.nps.gov/wori/historysites.htm
In the 106th Congress, Rep. Slaughter secured funding for the National Park Service to study the establishment of such a trail, with a significant portion of the network located in the Western New York area.
The network would link a variety of sites important to women's history, such as the Women's Rights National Historical Park, the Susan B. Anthony House, and the Harriet Tubman House.
In the 108^th Congress, Rep. Slaughter, along with Sen. Clinton, introduced legislation to establish Votes for Women History Trail, which would link sites in New York State that were in the womens suffrage movement.
During the 150th anniversary of the first Women's Rights Convention in Seneca Falls in 1998, Rep. Slaughter organized a delegation of current and former women Members of Congress to participate in these and related events in Rochester.
She served as an active facilitator and advisor in planning the Seneca Falls 150th anniversary events, and joined First Lady Hillary Rodham Clinton on the stage to speak during the celebration's inaugural ceremonies.
Rep. Slaughter has been involved in a number of other efforts on women's history.
She actively promoted moving the historic Women's Suffrage Statue of Susan B. Anthony, Lucretia Mott, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton from the Capitol's basement into the Rotunda and delivered a speech at the celebration marking the placement of the monument in the Rotunda.
She also cosponsored legislation directing Congress to procure a bust or statue of Sojourner Truth for placement in the Capitol Rotunda in recognition of this heroine's contribution to the women's rights movement.
Official site of Congresswoman Louise M. Slaughter Rochester Office 3120 Federal Building 100 State Street Rochester, New York 14614 (585) 232-4850 [phone] (585) 232-1954 [fax]
(Last Updated: Friday, October 10, 2003) | Privacy Policy | Problems, questions, suggestions about this site? Contact the Web Administrator Welcome - Contact Louise - News - Serving You - Legislation - 28th District - Photo Gallery - About Louise - Students' Page
