Image Map for the What's New in Food Safety Section BSE: LESSONS FROM CANADA December 24, 2003 Commentary from the Food Safety Network Justin Kastner and Douglas Powell http://www.foodsafetynetwork.ca U.S. food safety officials have been on the lookout for mad cow disease.
Now that they have finally found it, they should note how Canada managed a very similar scenario just a few months ago.
The U.S. Agriculture Department was cited as saying on Wednesday that a tissue sample from a Washington state dairy cow sat in a federal laboratory for a week before it was tested and diagnosed as mad cow disease because of a backlog of samples.
Canada's experience reveals the value of transparently showcasing to the public a vigilant, proactive regulatory system, while acknowledging the likelihood that the disease is most likely not limited to just one animal.
In Canada, this strategy has paid real dividends, engendering enough consumer confidence to yield an actual increase in domestic beef consumption.
No other country with a BSE discovery has accomplished that.
Tuesday's announcement of the presumptive discovery of a case of BSE in the U.S. will test whether the two North American giants can learn from each other.
Since the 1800s, agricultural trade and scientific cooperation have been hallmarks of Canadian-American relations.
Nineteenth-century tariff wars, ongoing squabbles over agricultural subsidies and softwood lumber, and last May's discovery of mad cow disease in western Canada have all tested economic interdependence and scientific harmonization at the 49th parallel.
Yet the two countries have persisted as each other's most important trading partner and, historically, the two nations have adopted scientifically similar approaches to ensure the safety of the food supply.
Today, Canada's and the United States' economic partnership and scientific like-mindedness are conspicuous in international fora, and hopefully, the two countries will continue to mimic each other's evidence-based approaches to food safety regulation.
As Canadian Food Inspection Agency officials did six months ago, USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service officials should focus on the real question at hand: can the disease be controlled and contained? Based on current information, the answer is yes, which should lend some comfort to consumers and the international community.
Canada's and America's findings were both made courtesy of proactive, vigilant surveillance systems.
In the Washington state case, a veterinary inspector followed routine procedures by singling out a sick animal and requesting that it be tested for BSE.
High-risk materials (including the brain and spinal cord) were removed from the animal, and a series of tests were begun.
But even ahead of this confirmation, USDA officials went ahead and quarantined the herd from which the diseased animal was sourced.
Meanwhile, other questions remain.
Like Canada, the U.S. must now begin an investigation into how the animal might have contracted the disease.
The BSE find, while reassuringly made before high-risk materials from the infected cow made it into the food chain, begs several questions.
The first of these cascade from whether or not the animal was born in the U.S..
If US-born and US-reared, how many other herd mates are infected?
BSE is a slowly progressing, fatal nervous disorder of adult cattle that causes a characteristic staggering gait and is similar to a handful of rare, neurological diseases that affect humans and other animals.
While North American regulators have detected and summarily dealt with BSE before (in 1993 and May 2003 in Canada), both Canada and the U.S. have not yet experienced widespread BSE outbreaks like those seen in the U.K.
This is a tribute to skilled veterinarians and regulatory programs that, situated in the context of elusive science, are cautious.
For years regulators understood this connection (in veterinarian lingo, the "ruminant-to-ruminant" feeding link), prompting the British to ban such feed in 1989, yet they failed to enforce the rules on the books at least until 1996, when public health research demonstrated that the consumption of BSE-infected beef was strongly linked to a new variant of the human disease Creutzfelt-Jacob disease (vCJD).
In 1997, recognizing that the input of BSE-infected feed into cattle production might spawn an outbreak of BSE, and following the suggestion of a link between BSE and vCJD, the use of ruminant protein in ruminant feed was banned in North America.
Checks by CFIA and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ensure that compliance by feed mills is high.
But banning ruminant-to-ruminant feeding practices may not, in fact, be a sure firewall for the spread of BSE.
That is why, since 1990, both the U.S. and Canada have banned cattle imports from several European countries, and during the last few years has extended the ban to other countries.
USDA must explore, as CFIA did, the following questions: Where did the animal originate? Were there, perhaps, lapses in feed manufacturing procedures? Will other animals test positive? Indeed, the great unknown is how many cattle are quietly harboring the disease and potentially passing it on to meat eaters.
How are sickly animals being dealt with? Unlike the Alberta BSE case, which was completely removed from the human food chain, muscle meat from the Washington state cow was allowed forward for further processing.
Should this practice be allowed, even though muscle meat has been shown to be of negligable BSE risk?
Publicly asking and answering these questions is where the Canadian experience comes in.
Dealing with these legitimate questions in a transparent manner is an important extension of a vigilant regulatory system.
As CFIA opened their books to domestic and international watchdog groups, they undertook to answer them.
In doing so, they gained public confidence; and despite international bans on Canadian beef, domestic demand went up.
Like microbial foodborne illness, as surveillance activities increase, more cases will be found, creating a paradox of headlines against a food safety infrastructure that has never been stronger.
Transparency, along with demonstrable efforts that actions match words are the best way to enhance consumer confidence.
Justin Kastner is a research assistant professor in agricultural security at Kansas State University.
Douglas Powell is an associate professor and scientific director of the Food Safety Network at the University of Guelph, and the co-author of the 1997 book, Mad Cows and Mother's Milk.
red bar
AGRICULTURE SECRETARY PREDICTS MAD COW CASE 'ISOLATED' December 24, 2003 Reuters/AP
WASHINGTON -
U.S. Agriculture Secretary Ann Veneman was cited as saying on Wednesday she believed the mad cow case found in Washington state will be restricted to a single or small number of cows but that the government has recalled meat from plants that could have processed the animal.
Veneman, appearing on several U.S. television morning news programs, was cited as acknowledging it was possible that other cases will be detected but said the United States has taken safety measures since 1990 to minimize the risk, adding, "We believe it will be either an isolated case or a small number of cases," while noting that an earlier case found in Canada was restricted to a single animal.
Michael Hansen, a senior research associate at Consumers Union, the publisher of Consumer Reports magazine, was cited as calling on the government to test more cows for the disease, adding, "The U.S. needs to be far more proactive in protecting the American food supply.
We are very concerned that the diseased animal made it into the food supply and that the processing plants could be contaminated."
red bar
FDA
BELIEVES MAD COW WAS INFECTED IN BIRTH HERD December 24, 2003 Reuters WASHINGTON - Stephen Sundlof, director of FDA's Center for Veterinary Medicine, was cited as telling Reuters on Wednesday that FDA believes the Holstein cow in Washington state contracted mad cow disease after eating infected animal feed in its birth herd, adding, "That is our current thinking."
The USDA is still trying to determine the farm where the infected animal was born.
The cow was purchased by a large dairy operation in October 2001.
red bar
EU NOT PLANNING EXTRA PRECAUTIONS OVER US BEEF SCARE December 24, 2003 Agence France Presse English
BRUSSELS - Officials were cited as saying Wednesday that the European Union has no plans to impose extra restrictions on its imports of US beef after the United States reported its first suspected case of mad cow disease.
EU Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner David Byrne was quoted as saying, "the EU already has in place a number of protective measures to ensure that bovine material at a risk of carrying BSE is not imported to the EU.
These measures, in place since October 1999, are a result of scientific risk assessment procedure, which identified the US as a country at risk."
He said such risk assessments had already been carried out on a number of countries exporting beef to the EU and had correctly predicted the existence of BSE in countries that previously had no cases -- Canada and Japan.
red bar
US COMPLYING WITH ALL INTERNATIONAL PROCEDURES ON BSE OUTBREAK: AGENCY December 24, 2003 Agence France Presse English
PARIS - OIE director general Bernard Vallat was cited as saying in a statement Wednesday that the United States had notified its partners about a suspected case of mad cow disease and was striving to trace what had happened to meat processed from the sickly animal, adding, "We are pleased to see that the procedure followed by the US authorities is complying with all OIE (World Organisation for Animal Health) procedures in this context."
The Paris-based OIE will continue to closely follow the situation in the United States and swap scientific and other data with the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), the statement said.
red bar
LABORATORY BACKLOG DELAYED USDA TEST FOR MAD COW December 24, 2003 Reuters/AP
WASHINGTON -
The U.S. Agriculture Department was cited as saying on Wednesday that a tissue sample from a Washington state dairy cow sat in a federal laboratory for a week before it was tested and diagnosed as mad cow disease because of a backlog of samples.
Head USDA veterinarian Ron DeHaven was cited as saying all brain samples from "downer" cattle -- animals too sick or injured to walk -- are sent to its federal laboratory in Ames, Iowa and that the lab tested 20,526 head of cattle for mad cow disease last year, adding, "There was no delay here other than normal processing and the fact that we are testing tens of thousands of samples a year in that laboratory.
Because of the volume we have been doing, we have not gone to any of the rapid screening tests that typically you can run in a matter of hours.
We have been using strictly the gold standard testing ... for all of these samples."
Paul Brown, a mad cow expert with the National Institutes of Health, was cited as saying that companies were scrambling to produce faster mad cow tests for the U.S. market, adding, "Somebody is going to be made a billionaire.
Someone is going to make a huge amount of money on this."
red bar
'MAD COW' MECHANISM MAY BE INTEGRAL TO STORING MEMORY December 24, 2003 Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
CAMBRIDGE, Mass Scientists have discovered a new process for how memories might be stored, a finding that could help explain one of the least-understood activities of the brain.
What's more, the key player in this process is a protein that acts just like a prion a class of proteins that includes the deadly agents involved in neurodegenerative conditions such as mad cow disease.
The study, published as two papers in the Dec. 26 issue of the journal Cell, suggests that this protein does its good work while in a prion state, contradicting a widely held belief that a protein that has prion activity is toxic or at least doesn't function properly.
"For a while we've known quite a bit about how memory works, but we've had no clear concept of what the key storage device is," says Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research Director Susan Lindquist, who coauthored the study with neurobiologist Eric Kandel at Columbia University.
"This study suggests what the storage device might be but it's such a surprising suggestion to find that a prion-like activity may be involved."
Central to a protein's function is its shape, and most proteins maintain only one shape throughout their lifetime.
Prions, on the other hand, are proteins that can suddenly alter their shape, or misfold.
But more than just misfolding themselves, they influence other proteins of the same type to do the same.
In all known cases, the proteins in these misfolded clusters cease their normal function and either die or are deadly to the cell and ultimately to the organism.
For this reason, Kausik Si, a postdoc in Kandel's lab, was surprised to find that a protein related to maintaining long-term memory contained certain distinct prion signatures.
The protein, CPEB, resides in central-nervous-system synapses, the junctions that connect neurons in the brain.
Memories are contained within that intricate network of approximately 1 trillion neurons and their synapses.
With experience and learning, new junctions form and others are strengthened.
CPEB synthesizes proteins that strengthen such synapses as memories are formed, enabling the synapses to retain those memories over long periods.
For the study, the team extracted the CPEB protein from a sea slug.
This lowly creature has achieved high status in neurobiology because its neurons are so big, they can be manipulated and turned into unusually powerful investigative tools.
The researchers fused this CPEB to other proteins that would serve as reporters of activity, and then observed its behavior in a variety of yeast models.
The researchers discovered that CPEB altered its form and caused other proteins to follow functioning exactly like a prion.
A second unexpected finding was that CPEB carried out its normal function protein synthesis when it was in its prion state.
"This is remarkable not just because the protein executes a positive function in its prion-like state," says Lindquist.
"It also indicates that prions aren't just oddballs of nature but might participate in fundamental processes."
The finding contradicts the notion that converting to a prion state is a bad thing, says Kandel.
"We show instead that the normal state of CPEB may be the less active state, and the prion state may be the effective way of utilizing the normal function of the protein."
The work suggests it's possible that in mammalian neuronal synapses, CPEB's prion properties may be the mechanism that enables the synapses and nerve cells to store long-term memory, a theory the researchers plan to investigate next.
Theoretically at least, prions are perfect for this, says Lindquist.
Prions could shift into this state quickly without the energy-intensive cellular mechanics that fuel most protein synthesis.
The prion state is very stable and can maintain itself for months, even years.
But, "We still need to demonstrate that this prion mechanism operates not just in yeast but in neuron cells," says Kandel.
Lindquist believes that these findings will not be the last time prions are discovered to have normal biological roles.
In fact, she has long speculated that researchers will discover them to be essential to many cellular functions.
Kandel adds that he wouldn't be surprised if this sort of prion mechanism was discovered in areas such as cancer maintenance and even organ development.
red bar
GOVERNMENT, INDUSTRY REACT TO BSE DISCOVERY IN WASHINGTON STATE December 24, 2003 Meatingplace.com Daniel Yovich http://www.meatingplace.com/DailyNews/init.asp
The first-ever case of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or mad cow disease, in the United States has been found in a single cow in Washington state, government officials announced on Tuesday.
The single Holstein cow arrived at a Washington state processing plant as a downer and subsequently tested presumptively positive for the brain-wasting illness, Agriculture Secretary Ann Veneman said in a late afternoon news conference.
Preliminary tests showed the presence of BSE in the animal, Veneman said, and tissue samples were being flown Tuesday to a United Kingdom laboratory for additional tests to confirm the disease.
Those test results can take up to five days, she said.
"A single cow has tested presumptive positive for BSE, commonly known as mad cow disease.
Despite this finding we remain confident in the safety of our food supply," said Veneman.
"While this would represent the first finding of BSE in the United States we have worked hard to ensure our response is swift and effective.
This incident is not terrorist-related.
I cannot stress this point strongly enough."
Veneman said the apparently diseased cow was shipped a farm in Mabton, Wash., about 40 miles southeast of Yakima.
She said the farm has been quarantined.
Veneman said USDA is mounting a thorough investigation to trace the origins of the cow and to determine what happened to the meat processed from it.
Veneman noted the spinal column, tissue and brain were rendered and never entered the food chain.
USDA officials are unsure of the disposition of the animal's whole muscle cuts.
"As part of our response plan, that farm has been quarantined," Veneman said.
"After the animal was slaughtered it was processed in Washington state.
The inspection service is working quickly to accurately determine the final disposition of the products from the animal."
Industry groups were quick to reiterate their confidence in the federal monitoring system.
"The finding of a single non-ambulatory dairy cow presumptive positive for BSE, slaughtered in a small USDA-inspected plant in Washington, is confirmation that USDA's targeted sampling system is working, and should not be a cause of concern about the safety of beef produced in the United States," said Rosemary Mucklow, executive director of National Meat Association.
Mucklow noted that this first finding of the disease in the United States cattle herd is not entirely a surprise, but should be considered a reassurance to American consumers that the efforts to target testing to the most likely livestock to be infected, the non-ambulatory, and the removal from the human food chain at slaughter of potentially infected tissue from the brain, spinal cord and distalileum are added safeguards that the BSE surveillance program is working.
Bracing for impact
Canada's May 20 announcement of the discovery in that country of a BSE-infected animal ravaged that country's beef and cattle industries.
In a separate news conference, National Cattlemen's Beef Association CEO Terry Stokes declined to estimate the economic fallout Tuesday's announcement might have for the U.S. beef industry, but said he believes American consumers will remain confident in the safety of U.S. produced and processed beef.
"While this one case is unfortunate, systems have been built over the past 15 years to prevent this disease from spreading and affecting either animal health or public health," Stokes said, noting the Harvard Center for Risk Analysis has conducted a comprehensive multi-year assessment of the risk of BSE in the United States.
While the Harvard study noted there was some level of risk, the analysis concluded that "measures taken by the U.S. government and industry make the U.S. robust against the spread of BSE to animals or humans should it be introduced into this country."
"While this one case is unfortunate, systems have been built over the past 15 years to prevent this disease from spreading and affecting either animal health or public health," Stokes said.
The United States exports about 10 percent of its beef, about 2.6 billion pounds this year, according to the United States Meat Export Federation.
NCBA Vice President of Government Affairs Chandler Keys said it is too soon to gauge how overseas markets will react to the discovery.
Keys said his staff plans a visit to the Japanese Embassy in Washington, D.C. on Wednesday to lobby for any decision the country makes to be "based on science" and is hopeful there will be minimal trade disputations.
For its part, NCBA has launched a Web site, http://www.bseinfo.org, to disseminate updated information to the public.
Eyes will be focused early today on futures trading at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, where analysts suspect live cattle futures could plummet.
Shares of fast-food chains, such as McDonald's Corp. and Wendy's International, initially fell more than 4 percent after Tuesday's closing bell on the mad cow news.
McDonald's stock fell as low as $24.20 after hours on the Instinet electronic brokerage system from its New York Stock Exchange close at $25.28.
Downer debate
Tuesday's announcement comes on the heels of a court decision earlier this month that revived a lawsuit against the government's policy on so-called "downer" animals (see Court resurrects lawsuit that seeks processing ban on downers).
The suit, pushed by members of the New York-based animal rights group Farm Sanctuary, claims the Department of Agriculture is not doing enough to protect consumers from mad cow disease in the meat of downed animals.
red bar
8 ASIAN NATIONS BLOCK U.S. BEEF IMPORTS December 24, 2003 Associated Press Emma Ross
LONDON --
Fears about a suspected U.S. case of mad cow disease spread quickly abroad Wednesday, with eight Asian nations blocking the import of American beef after a cow in Washington state tested positive for the illness.
The story says that Japan, the world's top importer of U.S. beef, imposed an indefinite ban and planned to recall certain meat products already on the market, while South Korea halted customs inspections of American beef and suspended sales for meat already on supermarket shelves.
Hong Kong, Australia, Taiwan, Singapore, Thailand and Malaysia followed suit.
Later Wednesday, Russia also issued a temporary ban, Agriculture Minister Alexei Gordeyev said.
In Brussels, Belgium, the European Union, which already bans much U.S. beef because of fears about growth hormones, said it would not take any additional measures.
red bar
AUSTRALIA BANS US BEEF PRODUCTS December 25, 2003 Sydney Morning Herald/The Age/AAP
Australia was cited as imposing a temporary ban on American beef products because of a suspected mad cow disease outbreak in the US.
Agriculture Minister Warren Truss was quoted as saying the federal government had "decided to temporarily hold beef products imported from the US at the border while it gets more information".
The ban will have little practical effect.
Mr Truss said Australia has imported small quantities of fresh beef from the US in the past for specialist restaurants, but no recent imports had taken place because the businesses were no longer operating.
Very small quantities of beef extracts, which were recognized as not carrying BSE, were imported.
Up to 350 live breeder cattle had been imported since 1996.
Animals that were still alive were traced after the detection of a BSE case in Canada in May and all will remain under lifelong surveillance.
None would be allowed to enter the human food chain.
He said Australia was free of BSE and Australian beef was safe.
This was achieved by stringent controls on imports, feeding bans and surveillance of livestock.
Cattle Council of Australia president Keith Adams was cited as saying the case was bad news for Australian exporters sending product into the lucrative market and that he was not even thinking about the possibility of any positives coming from potential worldwide bans on US beef exports, adding, "This is bad news for everybody - there's no upside to this.
USA is one of our major markets and if this is true, if this is actually a confirmed case of BSE, then there will in a short period of time be a hell of a glut of beef in the US owing to the fact that they won't be able to export in the immediate future, so they'll have a mountain of
Richard Raines of Sanger Australia Ltd., one of the biggest independent exporters of Australian beef, was cited as saying the news was not all doom and gloom and that the case showed that the testing regime for mad cow disease is working worldwide, which should comfort consumers, adding, "Australia is still at this stage in a very enviable position of being on the lowest risk category.
We've had no incidents here and touch wood, keep the fingers crossed, we won't.
But if America is excluded from Asia, which will be the main market for their exports, if we were able to replace some of those exports that could be a windfall for Australia."
Truss was further quoted as saying, "We will be seeking to ensure that our export markets are aware of our BSE-free status so that they can be confident that Australian beef remains safe."
In a related story, Mexico has halted imports of U.S. beef over fears of mad cow disease and will maintain the ban until Mexican inspectors can determine whether the meat is safe, the government said Wednesday.
Chile as well, said on Wednesday it has suspended imports of beef and live animals from the United States as a precautionary measure after the United States reported its first case of mad cow disease.
red bar
SOME U.S. BEEF IMPORTS CURTAILED; PARTIAL BAN 'PRECAUTIONARY MEASURE,' OTTAWA ANNOUNCES December 24, 2003 Canadian Press/AP/Reuters
OTTAWA Canadian Agriculture Minister Bob Speller was cited as saying that Canada will restrict some beef imports from the United States as a "precautionary measure" while authorities try to determine whether the U.S. is dealing with a real case of mad cow disease.
Speller was further cited as saying that Canadian risk assessments couldn't rule out that the disease exists there, so Ottawa must act, adding, "As a precautionary measure, we're implementing import restrictions to limit the range of ruminants and ruminant products eligible to be imported from the United States."
That will include some processed meats, officials said.
Canada will continue to allow imports of products and animals "which, on the basis of scientific risk assessment and measures do not pose a risk to human health," Speller added.
Those include boneless beef from cattle 30 months of age or younger at slaughter, live cattle destined for immediate slaughter and all dairy products, he added.
If test results on the suspect American cow come back negative, restrictions will be lifted, said Speller.
Canadian officials believe it is unlikely any part of the cow would have crossed the border into Canada, as it was slaughtered at a small facility that doesn't normally export beef.
Still, federal authorities are carefully tracing where the animal came from and Dr Brian Evans, Canada's chief veterinarian, was cited as telling Wednesday's briefing that Canada was only imposing a partial ban because it considered there was an extremely low risk from the products it was still allowing in, adding, "I think it would be very irresponsible of Canada to act in a way contrary to how we have continued to advance our interests at an international level."
red bar
The news stories posted daily on this page are extracted from a listserv.
Information for this listserv is found in the following links.
1.
To subscribe to FSnet, send mail to: listserv@listserv.uoguelph.ca Leave subject line blank in the body of the message type: subscribe fsnet-L firstname lastname i.e. subscribe fsnet-L Doug Powell 2.
To unsubscribe to FSnet, send mail to: listserv@listserv.uoguelph.ca leave subject line blank in the body of the message type: signoff fsnet-L For more information about the FSnet research program, please contact: Dr. Douglas Powell, Dept. of Plant Agriculture; University of Guelph; Guelph, Ont.; N1G 2W1; tel: 519-824-4120 x2506; fax: 519-763-8933; dpowell@uoguelph.ca; http://www.plant.uoguelph.ca/safefood
red bar
Updated: Daily USDA - ARS - NAL - FSRIO http://www.nal.usda.gov/fsrio/ fsrio@nal.usda.gov
