Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary Diesel Retrofit Program Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
Under the Clean Air Construction Initiative, 25% of the permanent Central Artery construction equipment will be retrofitted with advanced pollution control devices during the next 12 months.
This effort will achieve air emissions reductions that are the equivalent of removing 1,300 diesel buses off Boston streets for a full year.
As a model public/private collaborative, this program will showcase the clean air opportunities achievable through diesel equipment emissions controls.
James Kerasiotes, Chairman of the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority which oversees the Central Artery/Tunnel Project, said, "In building a project as large as the Panama Canal through an urban center, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project has developed many innovative construction techniques and approaches that are models for the nation.
The Clean Air Construction Initiative will utilize state-of-the-art clean air technologies that other construction projects in the nation can replicate."
Under this Initiative, 70 pieces of contractor-owned equipment such as front-end loaders, backhoes, cranes and excavators will be retrofitted with oxidation catalysts, particulate filters or both.
These devices filter out and break down harmful diesel emissions of hydrocarbons, particulate matter, and carbon monoxide.
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Commissioner David B. Struhs added, "With this construction project, we have one of the largest concentrations of heavy-duty diesel equipment in the world working in some of our most populated neighborhoods.
This historic initiative to put new control technologies on this equipment should make a real difference in people's health in those neighborhoods."
A report issued last year by Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management (NESCAUM) drew attention to the significant amount of pollution emitted by off-road vehicles and equipment in the Northeast.
The report found that the fleet of non-road diesel equipment in the Northeast emits more air pollution than the diesel trucks and buses that operate in the region.
To test the on-site efficacy of modifying on-road emissions control devices for use on construction equipment, a five vehicle pilot project was conducted earlier this year at U.S. Generating Company's Salem Harbor power plant facility in Salem, Massachusetts.
The pilot project achieved air emissions reductions up to 95%.
The Clean Air Construction Initiative was formed as a means to leverage the technological achievement of the pilot effort into a significant large-scale public project.
Jason Grumet, Executive Director of NESCAUM, stated, "This Initiative demonstrates that heavy construction need not come at the cost of clean air.
By taking technology from the demonstration phase direct to the Big Dig, this project reveals the national opportunity to achieve significant emissions reductions from construction equipment and other non-road diesel machinery."
"Today's announcement is great news for Boston area residents.
Hats off to the Big Dig Project leadership - in particular the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection,. and NESCAUM," said John P. DeVillars, EPA's New England Administrator.
"Earlier this year, EPA promulgated emission standards for new non-road diesel engines that will reduce NOx emissions by about a million tons a year by 2010.
Until these new technology vehicles dominate the fleet, the Initiative announced today holds the key to achieving significant emission reductions from the construction equipment on the ground today."
The Clean Air Construction Initiative is sponsored by the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project, EPA-Region I New England, Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, Manufacturers of Emissions Control Association, and NESCAUM.
Altogether, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project is building 161 lane miles of highway in a 7.5 mile corridor, about half in tunnels, including four major highway interchanges.
The new underground Central Artery will carry about 245,000 vehicles per day with an additional 94,000 vehicles per day through the Ted Williams Tunnel.
[ Diesel Retrofit: Glossary | Site Map ]
Begin Site Footer
About Office of Transportation and Air Quality | Definitions | What are Mobile Sources? | Related Internet Resources | Free Viewers and Readers
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
