Lewis And Clark Journey of Discovery Header And Links The Bicentennial Corps of Discovery The Journey Timelines Circa 1804 Activities 
That is probably why people love holidays and celebrations so much.
Holidays give us the opportunity to intermingle with family, friends, and community members on joyous, sacred, or historically important occasions.
One such occasion coming up in the near future is the Lewis and Clark Bicentennial Commemoration (2003-07).
Many activities, ceremonies, and exhibits are being planned for this event, both on the Lewis and Clark Trail and in many other places around the nation Many American Indian tribes whose ancestors met and assisted the expedition are also participating.
Courtesy of Missouri Historical Society
How French Colonial citizens (the time of Lewis and Clark) Celebrated Weddings, Holidays, etc.
GOALS * To validate the importance of special events in human society.
* To acquaint students with the Lewis and Clark Bicentennial Commemoration.
* To stress the historical significance of the commemoration.
OBJECTIVES When the lesson is completed, students will be able to: * List three ways in which celebrating special events helps people feel happy, excited, proud, etc.
* Define centennial and bicentennial.
* State two reasons why the Lewis and Clark Bicentennial is an important event.
ADVANCE PREPARATION Preview the contents and teachings aids for this unit by clicking on the following capitalized titles: The INTRODUCTION provides an overview of the unit's contents and organization.
The Lesson Plan (A DIFFERENT KIND OF HOLIDAY: THE LEWIS AND CLARK BICENTENNIAL) examines the importance of holidays, celebrations, and commemorations in human society.
The Lewis and Clark Bicentennial is used as an example.
The lesson plan includes a reproducible arithmetic worksheet--CENTENNIAL AND BICENTENNIAL PROBLEMS.
JOURNAL EXCERPTS "F" presents passages from the expedition journals telling how the Corps of Discovery members celebrated holidays and birthdays while on the trail.
A follow-up activity (HOW DO YOU CELEBRATE A BICENTENNIAL, ANYWAY?) allows students to use their communication skills to learn more about the Bicentennial.
Be sure to look over the supplemental materials also.
To refresh your recollections of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, CLICK HERE for a summary of the entire expedition.
For suggestions about choosing Lewis and Clark resources, click on LEWIS AND CLARK RESOURCE MATERIALS.
For additional information, see TEACHING AIDS "F".
The GLOSSARY AND PRONUNCIATION GUIDE provides assistance with names and terms associated with the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Finally, the EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS AND MULTIPLE-INTELLIGENCES CHARTS E, F, G contain educational standards and multiple-intelligences goals fulfilled by this unit.
1.
If the class members are a homogeneous group, collect pictures of special days celebrated by other groups as well as their own.
Be sure to include American Indian festival days.
For references, click on TEACHING AIDS "F" and scroll to "Holidays and Festivals."
2.
Refresh your recollections of the Lewis and Clark Expedition by clicking on http://www.nps.gov/jeff/LewisClark2/TheJourney/TheJourneyMain.htm.
This website provides a summary of the entire expedition.
3.
Download and copy CENTENNIAL AND BICENTENNIAL ARITHMETIC PROBLEMS.
(One per student)
IMPLEMENTATION "Today we are going to talk about something that everyone likes--holidays! What is your favorite holiday, and why do you like it best?" (Write students' answers on the chalkboard and allow students from different ethnic groups to make their presentations) "Most of the holidays we have discussed are celebrated annually, meaning once a year.
However, some celebrations are held only once in a hundred years! Those celebrations are called CENTENNIALS (Write centennial on the board and discuss other related words such as century, centimeter, etc.)
"Centennials remind us of something important that happened one-hundred years ago.
For example, a very important date in American history is the day and year the Declaration of Independence was signed.
(Have students do problem #1 on the arithmetic worksheet.)
"Now that we know what centennial means, what does the word bicentennial mean?" (Write "BI" in front of CENTENNIAL.)
"How do those two letters, B and I, change the meaning of centennial? Here's a hint--how many wheels does a bicycle have? How many sets of wings is on a biplane? So a bicentennial is a celebration of something that happened when? Two hundred years ago."
(Have students do problem #2 on the arithmetic worksheet.)
"When you get home this evening, ask your parents and grandparents if they remember celebrating the bicentennial of the Declaration of Independence, and if so, what they did on that day.
"Right now, America is getting ready to celebrate the bicentennial of another [ClarkPortrait.jpg] important event in American history--the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Most holidays and festivals last only a [b_LewisPortrait.jpg] day or two, but centennial and bicentennial celebrations usually continue for a long time.
For instance, the Lewis and Clark Bicentennial officially begins in 2003 and continues through 2007--four years! That is even longer than the expedition itself lasted.
The expedition members--called the Corps of Discovery--left St. Louis on May 14, 1804 and returned on September 21, 1806.
(Have students do problem #3 on the arithmetic worksheet.)
"Four years may seem like a long time to celebrate.
However, this bicentennial includes not only the actual expedition, but the preparations for it as well.
It also includes the Louisiana Purchase that took place before the expedition, and events that occurred after the Corps returned.
"With so many activities and special events being planned, cities, towns, parks, and museums along the trail are getting ready for thousands of visitors.
American Indian tribes whose ancestors met and assisted Lewis and Clark are also planning events to commemorate (remember) the expedition.
Books, articles, films, videos, games, and Internet sites about the expedition are already available and many more will appear throughout the bicentennial commemoration.
"You may wonder what was so important about the Lewis and Clark expedition that all this money, time, and effort are being spent on the bicentennial.
That's a good question, so let's review what we already know about the expedition and see if we can discover the answer.
(Lead the class in a discussion of the expedition--its origins, main events, and consequences.
All of these points are summarized at the following National Park Service website: http://www.nps.gov/jeff/LewisClark2/CorpsOfDiscovery/CorpsOfDiscoveryMa in.htm.
Also point out that the Corps of Discovery members often celebrated special events as they traveled west.
For journal excerpts click on JOURNAL ENTRIES/SPECIAL DAYS ON THE TRAIL.)
CONCLUSION "Holidays and festivals are very special days in our lives.
Some holidays are just for fun, some are holy days for people of various religious beliefs, some are times set aside to remember our country's important historical events.
The Lewis and Clark Bicentennial is one of the latter.
Many events, exhibits, and activities are now being prepared for the official commemoration period that will last from 2003 through 2007."
RELATED ACTIVITY: To Follow up this lesson plan with its related research activity, click on HOW DO YOU CELEBRATE A BICENTENNIAL, ANYWAY?
Click To Return To Top Of Page
