Testimony of John Carr President National Air Traffic Controllers Association before the U.S. House of Representatives
Transportation and Infrastructure Committee
Aviation Subcommittee
Airline Delays
September 28, 2000
Good morning Chairman Duncan, Congressman Lipinski, and members of the Subcommittee.
I want to thank you for this opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee to discuss the problem of airline delays and proposed solutions.
I am John Carr, President of the National Air Traffic Controllers Association (NATCA), the exclusive representative of over 15,000 air traffic controllers serving the FAA, Department of Defense and private sector.
In addition, NATCA represents approximately 1,200 FAA engineers, over 600 traffic management coordinators, agency operational support staff, regional personnel from FAA's logistics, budget, finance and computer specialist divisions, and agency occupational health specialists, nurses and medical program specialists.
NATCA's mission is to preserve, promote and improve the safety of air travel within the United States, serve as an advocate for air traffic controllers and other safety-related employees, and promote competence and pride within our profession.
We are also responsible for promoting technological advances, providing reliable and accurate information for our members, and serving as a credible source of information for this Committee, the traveling public, and the news media.
Continued dissatisfaction with the progress of national air system (NAS) modernization and the mounting problem of aviation gridlock has led to many industry and government officials calling for privatization/restructuring of the FAA.
Proponents argue that alternative organizational structures for air traffic control operations and/or the entire agency would improve modernization efforts and solve the problem of delays.
I am here today to tell you that privatization of air traffic control operations is not the answer.
Privatization will not speed up the process of building new runways and airports.
Safe, reliable, user accepted equipment will not be developed and installed any faster.
Privatization would, instead, fracture the delicate balance of a workforce that holds the system together.
AVIATION DELAYS
Delays, as defined by the FAA, refer to any problem that causes any segment of flight to be more than 15 minutes late.
Last year, there were 306,234 commercial and general aviation delays in the United States.
Airline delays, as we all know, are at an all time high.
Passenger frustration is over the top.
And, predictably, when something goes wrong, the finger pointing and blame game begins.
To that end, airlines have embarked on a well-financed campaign of misinformation blaming air traffic control for their delays.
It is unproductive and unfair for one segment of the aviation industry to place responsibility entirely on another.
It is simply untrue to say that air traffic control is primarily at fault for the hundreds of thousands of delays each year.
Aviation delays are a multi-faceted problem.
No single element is responsible.
Rather, a number of contributing factors including growth in the number of travelers, scheduling decisions by airlines, bad weather, slow pace of airport construction, under utilization of airports, and the infusion of regional jets have led to the record number of aviation delays.
And, just as there is not one cause, there is also no blanket solution or quick fix to the problem.
NATCA has identified the following factors as the leading causes of aviation delays.
I. CROWDED SKIES
The United States air traffic control system is the not only the largest, most complex and most demanding in the world, but it is also the safest.
This is, no doubt, due primarily to the dedication and professionalism of the nearly 15,000 FAA air traffic controllers.
Air traffic control is a 7 days a week, 24-hour operation.
Today, controllers are under extreme pressure to squeeze more aircraft into an already congested airspace.
Controllers have no incentive to delay or hinder air traffic.
Our motivation is to move aircraft as safely, efficiently and quickly as possible.
The longer a delayed aircraft is in our airspace or occupies concrete on the ground, the more difficult our jobs become.
However, the primary function of air traffic controllers is to ensure the safety of the flying public, and this should not be compromised to accommodate more passengers, more flights, or more profits for the airlines.
In the past 5 years, air traffic has increased by 27 percent to 655 million commercial passengers annually.
If the economy remains strong and fuel prices remain low, we can expect more passengers and more delays.
In fact, the number of passengers is expected to exceed 1 billion annually by 2010.
An airport's capacity to handle air traffic is a function of its size, the layout of its runways, the air traffic patterns, both arriving and departing, and the time frame in which a surge of traffic must be dealt with due to airline scheduling.
II.
UNREALISTIC HUB SCHEDULING
The inefficient hub and spoke system used by airlines to schedule flights is a major source of delays.
Flight departure and arrival scheduling is at the sole discretion and control of the individual airline NOT Congress, NOT the FAA, NOT the air traffic controllers, NOT the airports, and NOT the public.
It is time for the airlines to acknowledge their responsibilities in creating delays.
To maximize profits, airlines are intentionally overloading the system.
Delays from airline scheduling occur every day at every major U.S. airport.
Schedules are blindly made to reduce operating costs and maximize revenue without regard for other airlines, terminal airspace or airport capacity.
At "peak" times, dozens of planes are simultaneously taxiing for take-off or queuing above the airport in a finite amount of terminal airspace.
This is where the laws of physics kick in.
Given runway capacity, only certain number of flights can depart and arrive within a specified time period.
Therefore, airline over scheduling during peak hours guarantees delays at busy airports even in good weather.
It is like trying to cram 10 pounds of sand into a 5 pound bag.
All scheduled flights will not be able to depart or arrive on time.
Examples of airline induced delays:
· At Dallas/Fort Worth airport, the approximate airport acceptance rate during a 15-minute period is 32 aircraft under perfect (VFR) weather conditions and 24 aircraft in IFR weather.
However, day after day airlines repeatedly schedule more arrivals than DFW can handle - often as many as 58 arrivals during a 15-minute period.
In fact, during one 15-minute period, 57 aircraft were scheduled to arrive.
Fifty-two of these were from American Airlines which use DFW as one of its hubs.
Even if the weather is perfect, 25 arrivals will be delayed.
· At Dallas/Fort Worth airport, the approximately airport departure rate is 11 aircraft in a 5-minute period and 32 aircraft in a 15-minute period.
Again, day after day airlines repeatedly schedule more departures than DFW can handle - often as many as 16 departures at the exact same minute.
It is physically impossible to depart that many aircraft in one minute.
In fact, during one 15-minute period, 59 aircraft were scheduled to depart.
Fifty-five of these were from American Airlines which use DFW as one of its hubs.
Even if the weather is perfect, 27 departures will be delayed.
· At Cleveland airport, the acceptance rate during a 15-minute period is 10 aircraft.
Due to airline scheduling, 18 of the 56 15-minute segments in a 14-hour period are over capacity.
In acknowledging that delays are inevitable from over scheduling at peak times, airlines pad their schedules so as not to negatively affect their on-time percentages.
For example, a flight from Washington, D.C. to Atlanta takes a little over an hour in actual flight time.
But, the airlines' schedule the flight to last two hours because they know the runways will be overbooked on departure and/or arrival.
According to the DOT Inspector General, between 1988 and 1999, airlines expanded flight schedules on 82 percent of their domestic routes ranging from 1 to 27 minutes to compensate for delays.
Regardless, the airlines would rather have passengers sit on the tarmac with no space to take off than lose money.
Competition among airlines exacerbates this situation.
For example, one airline claimed a loss in excess of $1 million by scheduling a flight at 12:05 rather than exactly matching the time of a competitor's noon flight.
Therefore, if airline A offers a noon flight from Washington, D.C. to New York, then airline B will offer the same flight.
As long as the airlines continue to overbook runways, especially during peak hours, air traffic delays will continue and passengers will wait.
Cramming extra flights into an already over-taxed system only creates congestion in the terminal space, on the runways and at the gates.
Even if controllers had the most up-to-date equipment, air traffic delays will not be eliminated.
Controllers would simply be able to keep better track of the planes.
III.
WEATHER
Inclement weather has, and will continue, to play a significant role in air traffic delays - accounting for approximately 75 percent.
Unfortunately, nobody but Mother Nature has any control here.
Planes fly on a complex set of invisible "highways in the sky" with intersections, speed limits, separation requirements, etc.
After takeoff, the controllers in the airport tower hand the plane over to controllers at terminal radar approach controls (TRACON) and thereafter, to controllers at one of the 21 regional centers.
Depending on where the plane is going, it may be passed on to another regional center and another until it nears its destination.
Storms or inclement weather cause blockage or closing of one or many of these unseen highways.
When this occurs, air traffic bottlenecks just like it does on the interstate at rush hour.
Controllers must then reroute all air traffic.
In addition to air traffic, ground holds may be placed on planes if their destination airport is unable to accept traffic.
It can take hours to recover from a brief shut down of one air route.
Most often large storms are predicted early enough to ensure flight safety.
However, sudden weather shifts require controllers and pilots to alter flight operations to ensure safety.
Controllers need timely, accurate information to reroute traffic to avoid turbulence and delays.
The following four technologies dominate aviation weather information: the Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS); the Digital Automated Information Service (D-ATIS); the Next Generation Weather Radar (NEXRAD); and Terminal Doppler Weather Radar (TDWR).
However, funding levels limit deployment of these technologies to large hubs and primary "bad" weather facilities.
In addition to funding, adequate training is needed to provide controllers with a better understanding of weather activity.
Most controllers receive weather training early in their careers at the Oklahoma City academy and biannual briefings on thunderstorms and ice.
Only those controllers with ASOS observation duties receive complete weather observer training, and little to no training is provided for using weather radar systems.
IV.
PACE OF AIRPORT CONSTRUCTION
One of the major factors contributing to airline delays is that airport construction - terminals, taxiways, runaways, gates - has not kept pace with passenger growth.
According to the July 25, 2000 DOT Inspector General Audit Report, only nine new runways were opened at the country's 100 largest airports between 1995 and 1999.
And, only three of these nine runways were built at the nation's 28 largest airports.
While proposals exist for 15 new runways at our nation's largest airports, construction has only begun at five of these facilities.
Capacity can be increased through construction.
And, NATCA commends the Committee on passage of AIR-21 which provides substantial financial resources (approximately $9.9 billion over the next three years) for airport improvements.
The problem, however, is that any airport construction or expansion plan faces a number of obstacles including political hurdles, space limitations, community opposition, noise restrictions and environmental concerns.
It can take years for a project to be approved.
Meanwhile, we are fast approaching a crisis situation with respect to aviation gridlock.
V. UNDER UTILIZATION OF AIRPORTS
The DOT Inspector General notes in the July 25, 2000 Audit Report, "Air Carrier Flight Delays and Cancellations" that the majority of the increase in flight operations and passenger enplanements over the next 15 years will occur at the nation's 28 largest airports.
However, the problem is that most of these airports and the surrounding airspace have already exceeded existing capacity.
That is why a close examination of the use of our nation's existing airports is needed.
NATCA believes that certain city airports are better suited for originating and/or terminating flights than associated hub airports.
Most hub airports throughout the country have associate airports nearby.
These associate airports are underused.
NATCA believes that increased usage of these airports by passengers and airlines will alleviate congestion and delays at the hubs.
In fact, some of these associate airports are not being used at all.
· Consider Chicago's Midway and O'Hare Airports.
Midway may be better suited for passengers destined for Chicago than O'Hare Airport.
If passengers destined for the city of Chicago use Midway, this may alleviate some of the delays at O'Hare.
· Consider St. Louis Lambert Airport.
The runways at Mid America Airport (approximately 25 miles east of St. Louis) are 7,000 feet apart making it suitable for parallel approaches.
Yet, St. Louis/Lambert Field, with runways too close together for parallel approaches, is the hub airport.
Why is Lambert Field so congested while Mid America Airport is ignored?
VI. PENALTIES FOR OPERATIONAL ERRORS AND DEVIATIONS
NATCA believes that a close examination of the requirements for separating aircraft and penalties imposed for operational errors and deviations is warranted.
Separation standards are designed to ensure the safety of aircraft and its passengers from other aircraft.
The FAA separation standards, which date back to 1950, require 5 miles laterally in the en route environment, 3 miles laterally in the terminal airspace, and 1,000 to 2,000 feet vertical depending on altitude.
Therefore, an operational error can occur when one aircraft is trailing another by 2.8 miles instead of the requisite three miles.
NATCA believes that it is time to consider safe and reasonable changes to these separation standards.
While air traffic controllers are using 1970s radar with 1980s radios and 1990s scopes, they are using 1950s separation standards.
Under the current system, air traffic controllers or supervisors are to report operational errors immediately to facility managers.
En route control centers are equipped with the Operational Error Detection Patch that automatically detects when aircraft are less than 5 miles apart (i.e. 4.99 miles apart) and sends out an alert.
Prompt reporting allows situations to be analyzed, mistakes pinpointed and training or procedures improved to prevent future mishaps.
However, both pilots and air traffic controllers face serious disciplinary actions for operational errors and deviations.
Generally, once an operational error occurs, that air traffic controller is relieved of duty for retraining.
A controller with three operational errors could face suspension or transfer to another facility.
Therefore, air traffic controllers may add a "buffer" to the separation requirements to ensure against an operational error.
This increase in separation, no matter how slight, has a direct impact on delays and system capacity.
The current system is too focused on assessing blame and instituting the appropriate disciplinary action.
NATCA believes that the aviation system would benefit from decriminalization of minor infractions by both pilots and air traffic controllers that do not jeopardize safety.
In fact, NATCA commends FAA Administrator Jane Garvey for promptly creating an eight-member working group to look into the matter.
VII.
INCREASE USE OF REGIONAL JETS
The dramatic increase in the use of regional jets is a contributing factor to airline delays.
In 1999, 407 regional jets were in service carrying 78 million passengers.
This trend is expected to continue and the FAA estimates that regional jets will comprise 19 percent of the total domestic fleet by 2011.
NATCA does not disagree with the benefits provided by regional airlines in servicing smaller communities and linking them with larger cities and hub airports.
However, the increase in the number of small jet aircraft with frequently scheduled flights exacerbates the problem of airport and airspace congestion.
Unlike small turbo-prop and propeller driven aircraft, these regional jets operate in the same airspace as larger commercial jets but fly at a slower pace.
ATC MODERNIZATION
The FAA modernization effort consists of over 100 projects.
Admittedly, there have been a number of problems and obstacles but the FAA has turned the corner.
And, we would like to commend Administrator Jane Garvey on her efforts in getting many of the ATC modernization projects, specifically DSR and STARS, back on track.
We are firm supporters of Administrator Garvey's "build a little, test a little, deploy a little" strategy, and NATCA will remain an advocate of this throughout the modernization effort.
We would also like to commend the Subcommittee on passage of the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21^st Century.
This three-year, $40 billion Act will provide necessary funding for modernization and airport construction projects.
NATCA has long believed that stable and guaranteed funding is essential to the modernization of the national air system (NAS).
Many are quick to point the finger at the "outdated and antiquated" air traffic control system as a major cause of delays.
However, I am here to tell you that not only is this not true, but to refer to the air traffic control system as "outdated and antiquated" is no longer an accurate characterization.
· Installation of Display System Replacement (DSR) at 20 air route traffic control centers (ARTCCs) is complete.
DSR modernizes the computer equipment and provides the platform for future air traffic control system upgrades.
With DSR in place, controllers have the necessary tools to more efficiently handle today's traffic volume and to accommodate the projected increases in air traffic.
While DSR installation was not without difficulty, only three percent of delays last year were attributable to these equipment failures and upgrades.
Controllers needed to adjust to the new platform where the computer human interface is completely changed from the old system.
DSR installation was like trying to change a tire while traveling at 60 miles per hour.
· With respect to the Standard Terminal Automated Replacement System (STARS), the FAA has revamped the budget and deployment schedule.
STARS will replace aging computer and radar scopes at 172 terminal air traffic control (TRACON) facilities and 362 airport control towers.
Installation of STARS is already complete in Syracuse, NY and El Paso, TX.
Yes, the current system can be improved, but improvements take time to develop, test and implement.
Privatization will not speed up this process.
If anything, fracturing the system will slow progress in evaluation, testing and deployment of needed systems.
And, while continuing upgrades and new technological advances are necessary to ensure safe, efficient travel in the future, they will not solve the problem airline-created delays.
Newer equipment will not increase airport capacity or change the number of aircraft that can land or depart at any given time.
PRIVATIZATION
Privatization is not the solution to aviation delays, NAS modernization, or the other problems plaguing the air traffic control system.
Privatization will not increase airport capacity, or build more runways or airports.
It is simply a business-oriented solution being offered by - surprise - the airlines and others who stand to make a profit.
Proponents argue that competition in the private sector allows companies to provide services more efficiently while reducing costs.
Yet, private companies will constantly balance the bottom line against safety.
Some things should not be reduced to dollars and cents.
Given the nature of the air traffic control system, privatization is foolish and unfounded.
The safety of the flying public should never be in competition with corporate profits.
The most sophisticated, top-of-the-line computer system can not guarantee a safe and efficient air traffic control system.
Only a highly trained and adequately staffed workforce can do this.
With or without working technology, the human element is the last line of defense in maintaining the safety (separation of aircraft).
For FAA controllers, safety is the number one priority.
Private companies, however, have little accountability to the public - only to their stockholders.
Moreover, profits are achieved at the expense of the employee.
All one has to do is look at the current Federal Contract Tower (FCT) Program which is characterized by inadequate training and staffing, lower salaries and fewer benefits, communication lapses and poor working conditions.
Privatization of air traffic control operations would further erode the homogenous management structure and the seamless nature of our air traffic control system.
The air traffic control system operates through teams of highly skilled and well-trained controllers linked together with highly sophisticated communication and radar systems.
A smooth, safe and efficient system depends on the seamless transition of aircraft from control towers to Terminal Radar Approach Controls (TRACON) to Air Route Traffic Control Centers (ARTCC).
A breakdown in communication between controllers at these facilities reduces safety, capacity and overall system performance.
When one link in the chain is broken, communication breaks down and safety is compromised.
FAA controllers share common language, background and management.
Piecemeal privatization of air traffic control operations eliminates standard phraseology and procedures.
Contract controllers do not receive the same training as FAA controllers and are not required to follow the same work rules and agreements.
OTHER COUNTRIES
Proponents of privatization often point to restructured aviation departments by governments abroad.
NATCA believes, however, that any comparison is illogical.
In countries that have partially or totally privatized air traffic control systems, the airspace is relatively confined and compact, with fewer number of employees, planes, air traffic control facilities, and smaller budget requirements.
The United States, on the other hand, maintains the largest, most complex and most demanding air traffic control system in the world.
Most of the FAA's nine regions handle airspace and operations that far exceed that of any single country that has privatized.
Together, all nine FAA regions are responsible for moving at least half of the world's aviation passengers and cargo.
While the same type of air traffic control problems may arise in many countries, it would be foolish to assume that a blanket solution would effectively correct the problem(s) and operate the same in each country.
This is because the magnitude of airspace and the number of flights daily differ drastically from country to country.
The U.S. air traffic control system is funded through a combination of general and aviation specific taxes, where most nations have a user fee system.
In the U.S., commercial passengers pay a large portion of the air traffic control system, and general and business aviation (the U.S. has the largest general aviation community in the world) receive substantial benefits at little cost.
Yet, each entity is treated as an equal with services conducted on a first-come, first-serve basis.
CONCLUSION
I would like to again thank the members of the Committee for allowing NATCA to testify on the problems facing air traffic control.
Without expanding domestic airspace and airport capacity, and addressing the issue of airline scheduling, delays will not only continue to increase but they will reach the point of gridlock in the foreseeable future.
As an industry, we must stop pointing fingers and placing blame.
Teamwork and collaboration are needed to develop and implement long-term solutions and procedural changes to alleviate air traffic delays.
