Testimony of Randy Schwitz, Executive Vice President National Air Traffic Controllers Association before the U.S. House of Representatives
Transportation and Infrastructure Subcommittee on Aviation
Air Traffic Control System Delays
October 14, 1999
Good morning Chairman Duncan, Congressman Lipinski, and members of the Subcommittee.
Thank you for this opportunity to testify on the problems contributing to aviation delays.
I am Randy Schwitz, Executive Vice President of the National Air Traffic Controllers Association, the exclusive representative of over 15,000 federal air traffic controllers and engineers within the Federal Aviation Administration.
Delays, as defined by the FAA, refer to any problem that causes any segment of flight to be more than 15 minutes late.
Last year, there were 306,234 commercial and general aviation delays in the United States.
In May 1999, 40,053 delays were reported, an increase of 37 percent over 1998.
Aviation delays are a multi-faceted problem.
No single element is responsible.
Rather, a number of contributing factors including the growth in the number of travelers, scheduling decisions by airlines, bad weather, implementation of new air traffic controller equipment, an antiquated system, and policy and procedural changes have led to the record number of aviation delays.
And, just as there is not one cause, there is also no blanket solution or quick fix to the problem.
One simple, yet controversial, solution would be to construct new airports and/or expand existing airports by adding or extending runways to accommodate larger planes.
However, any airport construction or expansion plan faces a number of obstacles including political hurdles, space limitations, community opposition, noise restrictions and environmental concerns.
It can take years for a project to be approved.
Meanwhile, we are fast approaching a crisis situation with respect to aviation gridlock.
The current system can be improved, but improvements will take time to develop, test and implement.
As an industry, we must stop pointing fingers and placing blame.
We need to work together to address those factors which have and will continue to plague the system.
NATCA has identified the following five factors as the leading causes of aviation delays.
I. CROWDED SKIES
The United States air traffic control system is the not only the largest, most complex and most demanding in the world, but it is also the safest.
In 1998, approximately 630 million passengers traveled on commercial airlines without a single domestic fatality.
This is, no doubt, due primarily to the dedication and professionalism of the nearly 15,000 FAA air traffic controllers.
Today, controllers are under an extreme amount of pressure to squeeze more planes into an already congested airspace.
Controllers have no incentive to delay or hinder air traffic.
However, the sole function of controllers is to ensure the safety of the flying public, and this should not be compromised to accommodate more passengers, more flights, or more profits for the airlines.
In the past 5 years, air traffic has increased by 27 percent to 655 million commercial passengers annually.
If the economy remains strong and fuel prices remain low, we can expect more passengers and more delays.
In fact, the number of passengers is expected to exceed 1 billion annually by 2010.
II.
UNREALISTIC HUB SCHEDULING
The inefficient hub and spoke system used by airlines to schedule flights is a major source of delays.
Flight departure and arrival scheduling is at the sole discretion and control of the individual airline NOT Congress, NOT the FAA, NOT the air traffic controllers, NOT the airports, and NOT the public.
To maximize profits, airlines are intentionally overloading the system.
Delays from airline scheduling occur every day at every major U.S. airport.
Schedules are blindly made to reduce operating costs and maximize revenue without regard for other airlines, terminal airspace or airport capacity.
At "peak" times, dozens of planes are simultaneously taxiing for take-off or queuing above the airport in a finite amount of terminal airspace.
This is where the laws of physics kick in.
Given runway capacity, only certain number of flights can depart and arrive within a specified time period.
Therefore, airline over scheduling during peak hours guarantees delays at busy airports even in good weather.
It is like trying to cram 10 pounds of sand into a 5 pound bag.
All scheduled flights will not be able to depart or arrive on time.
Examples of airline induced delays: 1.
At Dallas/Fort Worth airport, airlines schedule 57 operations in a 10-minute period around the six oclock rush hour.
Airport capacity is 35 operations.
Even if the weather is perfect across the United States and there are no equipment problems, 22 flights will be automatically delayed during this 10-minute period.
2.
At Minneapolis/St.Paul International Airport tower, 44 operations are scheduled in a 15-minute period.
Since airport capacity is 30 operations, 14 of these planes will be delayed under perfect conditions.
3.
At Atlanta Hartsfield International Airport the runways are overbooked nearly one-third of the time.
Due to airline scheduling, 22 of the 72 10-minute segments in a 12-hour period are over capacity.
In acknowledging that delays are inevitable from over scheduling at peak times, airlines pad their schedules so as not to negatively affect their on-time percentages.
For example, a flight from Washington, D.C. to Atlanta takes a little over an hour in actual flight time.
But, the airlines schedule the flight to last two hours because they know the runways will be overbooked on departure and/or arrival.
Regardless, the airlines would rather have passengers sit on the tarmac with no space to take off than lose money.
Competition among airlines exacerbates this situation.
Recently, one airline claimed a loss in excess of $1 million by scheduling a flight at 12:05 rather than exactly matching the time of a competitors noon flight.
Therefore, if airline A offers a noon flight from Washington, D.C. to New York, then airline B will offer the same flight.
As long as the airlines continue to overbook runways, especially during peak hours, air traffic delays will continue and passengers will wait.
Not including commuter service, airlines added about 600 daily flights this year.
Cramming extra flights into an already over-taxed system only creates congestion in the terminal space, on the runways and at the gates.
Even if controllers had the most up-to-date equipment, air traffic delays will not be eliminated.
Controllers would simply be able to keep better track of the planes.
III.
WEATHER
Inclement weather has, and will continue, to play a significant role in air traffic delays accounting for approximately 75 percent.
Unfortunately, nobody but Mother Nature has any control here.
Planes fly on a complex set of invisible "highways in the sky" with intersections, speed limits, separation requirements, etc.
After takeoff, the controllers in the airport tower hand the plane over to controllers at terminal radar approach controls (TRACON) and thereafter, to controllers at one of the 21 regional centers.
Depending on where the plane is going, it may be passed on to another regional center and another until it nears its destination.
Storms or inclement weather cause blockage or closing of one or many of these unseen highways.
When this occurs, air traffic bottlenecks just like it does on the interstate at rush hour.
Controllers must then reroute all air traffic.
In addition to air traffic, ground holds may be placed on planes if their destination airport is unable to accept traffic.
It can take hours to recover from a brief shut down of one air route.
What many do not understand is that Traffic Management Coordinators (TMCs), not air traffic controllers, are responsible for imposing flight restrictions dues to weather or equipment problems.
TMCs issue directives for shutting down air routes, increasing separation requirements, imposing ground stops, etc.
Controllers simply implement and comply with those decisions communicated to them by TMCs.
Most often large storms are predicted early enough to ensure flight safety.
However, sudden weather shifts require controllers and pilots to alter flight operations to ensure safety.
Controllers need timely, accurate information to reroute traffic to avoid turbulence and delays.
The following four technologies dominate aviation weather information: the Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS); the Digital Automated Information Service (D-ATIS); the Next Generation Weather Radar (NEXRAD); and Terminal Doppler Weather Radar (TDWR).
However, funding levels limit deployment of these technologies to large hubs and primary "bad" weather facilities.
In addition to funding, adequate training is needed to provide controllers with a better understanding of weather activity.
Most controllers receive weather training early in their careers at the Oklahoma City academy and biannual briefings on thunderstorms and ice.
Only those controllers with ASOS observation duties receive complete weather observer training, and little to no training is provided for using weather radar systems.
IV.
MODERNIZATION:
The FAA modernization effort consists of over 100 projects.
Admittedly, there have been a number of problems and obstacles but the FAA has recently turned the corner.
And, we would like to commend Administrator Jane Garvey on her efforts in getting many of the ATC modernization projects, specifically DSR and STARS, back on track.
NATCA has long believed that adequate and sustained funding is essential to the modernization of the national air system (NAS).
We are firm supporters of Administrator Garveys "build a little, test a little, deploy a little" strategy, and NATCA will remain an advocate of this throughout the modernization effort.
Current installation of Display System Replacement (DSR) at 20 air route traffic control centers (ARTCCs) is ongoing.
DSR modernizes the computer equipment and provides the platform for future air traffic control system upgrades.
With DSR in place, controllers have the necessary tools to more efficiently handle todays traffic volume and to accommodate the projected increases in air traffic.
Thus, adequate resources must be provided not only to complete DSR installation in all ARTCCs, but also to allow DSR to evolve to accomplish a seamless integration of each new system that will be designed to achieve controller productivity, efficiency, and above all safety.
While DSR installation has not been without difficulty, only three percent of delays are attributable to these equipment failures and upgrades.
Controllers must adjust to a new platform where the computer human interface is completely changed from the old system.
At first, controllers will be spending a great deal of time with their heads down trying to find all the function keys and numeric keypad keys.
DSR installation is like trying to change a tire while traveling at 60 miles per hour.
As for the Standard Terminal Automated Replacement System (STARS), the FAA has revamped the budget and deployment schedule.
STARS will replace aging computer and radar scopes at 172 terminal air traffic control (TRACON) facilities and 362 airport control towers.
Preliminary versions are to be installed in Syracuse, NY and El Paso, TX by early next year.
Many are quick to point the finger at the antiquated air traffic system, but the reality is that, while new equipment is a necessary step for ensuring safe, efficient travel in the future it will not solve the problem airline-created delays.
Collaboration and teamwork have been instrumental in ensuring the success of the DSR and STARS modernization projects.
Working together, FAA officials, staff, air traffic controllers, and engineers, were able to identify feasible and affordable solutions and make the necessary fixes for STARS and DSR suitability in the air traffic controller environment.
And, that is precisely what needs to be done in addressing the issue of delays.
V. POLICIES CHANGES AFFECTING DELAYS:
Land and Hold Short (LAHSO)
The decision by airlines and pilots earlier this year to restrict the use of land and hold short operations (LAHSO) has reduced capacity and been a contributing factor to the increase in delays.
LAHSO is when pilots are cleared to land on one runway but told to stop short of an intersecting runway where simultaneous operations are taking place.
This procedure has been used safely and effectively for over 30 years to reduce airport delays and congestion.
Yet at a time when terminal airspace has become severely restricted and airlines refuse to decrease the number of flights to meet capacity, airlines and pilots have decided to exacerbate the situation by further limiting the use of LAHSO.
Now, when a controller calls for the use of this procedure, pilots often refuse because of airline policy or personal reasons.
Then, the controller is forced to go back and filter that flight through an already congested system.
When the airlines agreed to use LAHSO, they should have guaranteed that their pilots would be properly training comfortable with the procedure.
Refusal to perform LAHSO only adds to delays.
A recent FAA study found LAHSO restrictions resulted in a 210 percent increase in delays at Las Vegas McCarran International Airport.
The study also noted that the maximum arrival rate at Philadelphia International Airport dropped from 70 operations per hour under perfect conditions to 52 after LAHSO restrictions were imposed.
Increasing Number of Commuter Flights
In order to achieve a competitive advantage and reduce costs, airlines have increased the number of small jet planes with frequently scheduled flights.
This has resulted in crowded airports and increased en route congestion.
These planes use the same airspace as larger jets but fly at a slower pace.
CONCLUSION:
I would like to again thank the members of the Subcommittee for allowing NATCA to testify on the increasingly problematic issue of aviation delays.
Without expanding domestic airspace and airport capacity, delays will not only continue to increase but they will reach the point of gridlock in the foreseeable future.
Something must be done now to address the issue because it is only going to get worse.
It is time to stop pointing fingers.
NATCA proposes a working group comprised of representatives from all sectors of the aviation industry.
Teamwork and collaboration are needed to develop and implement long-term solutions and procedural changes to alleviate air traffic delays.
