1 
47 
54 55 
Ryanair has been the.
No.1 on time airline on the Dublin-London route for the last five years (the busiest international route in the world), so that passengers flying with Ryanair can be confident that they will face less delays than flying with any other airline on the route.
Nevertheless this figure, which is amongst the lowest in the entire airline industry, is still too high and Ryanair will continuously strive to improve this figure with an ultimate target of zero lost/mishandled bags.
In the case of any mishandled bags, Ryanair will make every reasonable effort to deliver the mishandled bag to the passenger within one working day of its arrival at final destination, free of charge.
This changeability will allow Ryanair customers to change flights times, dates and names of passengers travelling.
Because all of our lowest fares are sold on a first come first served basis, and once the booking and payment has been confirmed, that lowest fare may be denied to all subsequent passengers booking travel after that time.
79 80 
86 
In the case of wheelchair passengers travelling in their own wheelchairs, Ryanair will pay for and absorb the cost of this service at all of our airports.
Where passengers are not travelling in a wheelchair but request wheelchair assistance at airports, Ryanair will direct those passengers to the relevant third party wheelchair assistance provider, and if a fee is charged by that provider at that particular airport, then the individual passenger will be asked to pay for it.
Ryanair will continue to lobby those few airports (currently 6 out of 56 airports served) who do not provide this service free of charge, to do so.
92 93 
<
Ryanair will continue to refine and implement measures which speeds up passenger check-in, and reduces transit times through terminal buildings.
127 
However if for technical or passenger convenience reasons, it becomes necessary to accommodate passengers on another flight, Ryanair will seek to prioritise the needs of those passengers whose flight was disrupted and minimise the delay for passengers effected.
136 
153 154 
163 We will not expect passengers to wait 28 days from the date of receipt, as in 164 the case with the high fare airlines' passenger service commitment.
<
183 
