CHAPTER 1 AN INTRODUCTION TO ASSISTED LIVING If any of the following scenarios seem familiar to you, assisted living may be an option to explore.
Your arthritis prevents you from cooking, and some days it is so bad that you cannot even feed or bathe yourself.
You cannot keep your medications straight even with the pill reminder system your daughter bought you.
Or perhaps you cannot get around anymore on your own, even with a walker, and there is no family around to help you regularly.
In short, it is getting harder to manage on your own, and you, your friends, or your family are beginning to worry.
Deciding whether assisted living is the best solution for you is not easy.
To arrive at the best answer you should: 1.
Read the rest of this booklet; 2.
Explore options other than assisted living; 3.
Think about your abilities, your needs, and your finances; and 4.
Visit some assisted living facilities.
This booklet explains the role and function of assisted living providers, but does not take the place of applicable laws and regulations.
It also discusses other options available, legal protections for residents, and area resources where you can get more information.
In addition, there are tips to assist you in the following areas: deciding if assisted living is for you, electing an assisted living provider, entering into a contract for care, and paying for care.
What Is Assisted Living? Assisted living is a way to provide care to people who are having difficulty living independently, but do not need the daily nursing services provided in a nursing home.
Assisted living providers furnish a place to live, meals, and assistance with daily activities, such as dressing, bathing, eating, and managing medications.
People who live in assisted living facilities generally have less complicated medical problems than people in nursing homes.
Assisted living facilities also tend to have a less institutional look than nursing homes.
However, these facilities are not as highly regulated by the government as nursing homes.
Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 7
In Maryland, an assisted living provider is defined as: A residential or facility-based provider that provides housing and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, health-related services, or a combination of these services to meet the needs of residents who are unable to perform, or who need assistance in performing, the activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living, in a way that promotes optimum dignity and independence for the residents.
Code of Maryland Regulations 10.07.14.02B(10).
There is a wide variety of assisted living providers in Maryland.
They range from large, corporate-managed facilities where hundreds of people live in their own apartments to small, private homes in which the owners provide services to two residents who may share a bedroom.
What all of these providers have in common, however, is they all offer their residents some level of assistance with their daily activities, like dressing, bathing and eating.
Levels of Care Assisted living facilities in Maryland are licensed to provide up to three levels of care.
The levels correspond with how much assistance residents need.
Licensure at level one means the provider is authorized to take care of residents with low care needs.
A level two license means the provider can also take care of residents with moderate care needs, and a level three license allows a provider to care for residents with high-level care needs (as well as residents with low or moderate needs).
If a person is mentally sharp, only takes medication for arthritis pain, and only needs assistance with dressing and bathing he or she would be classified as needing a low level of care.
A person would need a high level of care if he or she is mentally confused by dementia, has a complicated list of powerful medicines that must be given at different times each day,
WAYS IN WHICH ASSISTED LIVING PROVIDERS DIFFER:
Facility size; Staff qualifications; Location; Fees, what is included in the monthly fee varies widely; Sponsorship: non-profit vs. for profit vs. religious affiliation; Free standing facility vs. a campus type setting; Experience and reputation of provider; Private room vs. semi-private room; Private bathroom vs. common bathroom; Provider participation in Medical Assistance; Ability to age in place: levels of care, potential for level of care waivers; Visiting hours; bedtimes; wake-up times; mealtimes.
8 - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know
and requires assistance with bathing, eating, walking, dressing, and toileting.
Such a person could only be accepted by a provider with a level three license.
Most providers are licensed at level three, which means they can accept residents with low, moderate, or high care needs.
If you have a progressive condition and do not want to have to move repeatedly, you should look for a provider with a level three license even if you only need a low level of care now.
Assessment and Service Plan Before you move into an assisted living facility, the assisted living manager must assess the level of care you require and whether you qualify for admission under the provider's license.
For example, if you need a moderate or high level of care and the provider is only licensed to provide a low level of care, the provider will not be able to admit you.
There are two parts to an assessment: the Resident Assessment and the Functional Assessment.
Resident Assessment A resident assessment is based on a physical examination made by a medical professional.
It records a lot of basic medical information.
Functional Assessment The assisted living manager must conduct a functional assessment.
A functional assessment measures and records various kinds of information, such as your ability to take care of your daily needs and how much help you need from others.
It also records current symptoms you have that would have to be monitored by an assisted living provider.
In addition to your physical needs, the functional assessment also looks at things like your ability and desire to participate in group activities.
Service Plan The manager must also develop a plan for your care based on the overall assessment.
This plan is called the "service plan."
A service plan must state what services you are to be provided, when they are to be provided, and who will provide them.
You are entitled to participate in the development of your service plan.
Moreover, a service plan must be updated every six months or more frequently, if there are changes in your needs.
Your service plan is very important because it specifies precisely what services you will get, when you will get them, and how.
Each assisted living manager must
Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 9
make sure that every resident is monitored daily to see that a resident's care is provided in accordance with the service plan.
Activities of Daily Living and Other Required Services Activities of Daily Living A large part of what assisted living providers do is provide assistance with "activities of daily living," which include: Eating; Grooming, bathing, oral hygiene,
Laundry and Housekeeping Housekeeping and laundry services are required services that must be offered by every provider.
Typically a certain amount of these services are covered by the basic monthly fee.
What that amount is varies greatly from provider to provider.
Facilitating Access to Healthcare and Social Services While a few assisted living providers may employ part time nurses, most providers do not supply the kind of medical care offered by licensed health care professionals.
However, every assisted living manager is "responsible for facilitating access to appropriate health care and social services," such as physicians, nurses, social workers, dentists, hospice care, etc.
"Facilitating access" is a flexible phrase so different providers implement this requirement in widely different ways.
Some providers only provide help with scheduling appointments, and you will have to arrange for your own transportation.
Others will arrange appointments and provide transportation, while some providers go so far as to arrange for services to be delivered at the facility.
You will want to ask providers how they facilitate access to health care and social services.
shaving, and combing hair; Walking or getting around, with or without assistive devices; Toileting; and Dressing in clean, weather-appropriate clothing.
Often this type of assistance is called "personal care" or "personal care service."
Other services that assisted living providers in Maryland are required to deliver include: Meals Meals must be served in a common dining area three times a day seven days a week.
Snacks also must be offered at intervals each day.
While every assisted living provider must try to accommodate special diets, a provider does not have to provide a special diet that is beyond its capabilities.
10 - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know
Social and Spiritual Activities The manager of each provider must provide or arrange opportunities for activities that will promote the physical and mental health of each resident.
This includes facilitating access to spiritual and religious activities.
Typically providers satisfy this requirement by conducting activities in the facility and by arranging transportation to activities outside the facility.
Card games, bingo, and sing-alongs are the kind of activities you will find in many facilities.
Typical activities outside a facility may include trips to the mall, grocery store, and local worship services.
Transportation charges may apply, and when they do, they can vary widely.
Medication Management During the initial assessment process the assisted living manager must determine if: (1) you can handle your own medications, (2) you need assistance with your medications or reminders to take them, or (3) need someone to administer your medications for you.
If you need assistance with your medications or need someone to administer them for you, the provider must have specially trained staff to supply that help to you.
Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know - 11
12 - Assisted Living in Maryland: What You Need to Know
