39 wetland type to another, or from upland to wetland.
Our assessment primarily centered on the foreseeable impacts that would result from flooding at increased pool depths.
With the exception of the forested wetlands on the interior of McCormicks Island, the hydrology of the remaining wetlands in the study area is directly influenced by river water levels, again at the typical growing season conditions for normal summer low flow discharges.
Any increases in water depth 1-foot or more given this baseline hydrologic regime (i.e., what are now considered the "normal circumstances") will adversely affect the wetland types that currently exist.
Our assessment did not attempt to incorporate a "trade-off analysis" for shifts in wetland types given the large uncertainty of what may actually occur within these island systems at various water level increases.
The only available data depicting elevations within the island systems in the study area is from the Harrisburg West U.S.G.S quadrangle which shows a contour elevation maximum of 300' AMSL for several of the islands.
We note that for areas shown as 300' AMSL on the quad sheet, these areas correspond very well to upland areas as depicted on the Acres 1991 Vegetative Cover Map.
To accurately assess the nature and degree of community shifts, detailed elevations (1-foot contours) would be needed for each island.
In addition, the elevations for specific wetland types at each island relative to the normal summer low flow conditions would be required, as the elevation at which they currently exist, or will potentially establish, will vary along the river continuum.
For example, the elevations of the upland portions of islands upriver of the project area gradually increase to 320' on Berrier Island to 360' on Clemson Island.
Similarly, the elevations of existing wetlands, or where they may potentially become established on different islands, will also increase as you proceed upriver.
Due to the varying nature of where the wetlands may establish (i.e., shift) for increased water levels at different increased dam height alternatives, at conducive elevations at different island, this determination cannot be made without specific and detailed information.
The only assessment that can be made concerning community shifts within the project area for increased dam height alternatives are these: 1.
The total area of islands, whether upland or wetland, will decrease.
2.
The overall diversity of these island systems, many containing a mix of community types (emergent wetland, scrub-shrub wetland, and flood plain forested wetlands and uplands), will decrease.
Any increased dam height alternative would require an assessment of potential cumulative impacts under NEPA.
The cumulative impacts assessment would require consideration of the cumulative adverse environmental effects of the proposed increased dam height alternatives in relationship to other existing dams on the Susquehanna River, as well as the effects of the wetland losses and all other aquatic and terrestrial environmental factors.
IV.
Summary of Alternatives' Analysis The Working Groups' charge was identifying possible alternatives that might be considered for the future of Dock Street Dam.
The seven alternatives below included no action, removing the dam, repair or replace the dam at the same height, replacing the dam with one of three higher inflatable dams.
A major focus of the Working Group was the analysis of effects of the alternatives on important attributes of the Susquehanna River near Harrisburg including boating, an array of environmental conditions, costs of construction, economic impacts, safety
40
considerations, regulatory issues, and nuisances.
A summary of the probable impacts of implementing each of the seven alternatives is discussed.
IV A.
No Action Environmental Impacts: Water quality: It is expected that water quality would be unchanged if no action occurs.
Birds: The status of the bird life on the river near Harrisburg is not expected to change if no action occurs.
Fish: The fish community in the river near Harrisburg would not be expected to change if no action occurs.
Wetlands: The no action alternate would not adversely affect wetland resources.
Existing wetland resources would be retained.
Note: Continued deterioration of the dam which would tend toward the "no-dam" conditions that are generally regarded as improvements for environmental components of the Susquehanna River near Harrisburg, with the notable exception of exposing the combined sewerage/stormwater overflows.
Fish Passage: There would be minimal change in fish passage; however, if additional breaches occur in the future, fish passage would improve.
Recreation: Fishing and boating activities would not be changed by taking no action; however, continued deterioration of the dam would, eventually, result in the inability to maintain the pool level under low flows and certain power boat activities would decrease.
Safety: Safety would not improve and continued deterioration of the dam would be viewed as an increasing safety hazard.
The Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Dam Safety, however, does have regulatory requirements with regard to maintenance of the dam and these might be exercised if continued deterioration of the dam were posing a significant threat to public safety.
No action could result in increased liability issues for the City.
Ease of Regulatory Process: There would be no regulatory requirements with regard to construction, encroachment, water quality or environmental impacts.
Nuisance Impacts:
41
Continued deterioration of the dam.
Eventual exposure of the combined sewerage and stormwater overflows.
Costs: Minimal Economic Impacts: Not Evaluated.
IV B. Remove Dam Environmental Impacts Water quality: The characteristics of dissolved oxygen, solids/sediment, turbidity and temperature would be optimum in a free flowing river that would result from the removal of the dam.
If not properly relocated, potential decreased water quality and, possibly, aesthetic problems could result from exposing combined sewerage/storm water overflows.
Wetlands: With this alternative, there is a high likelihood of a net increase in wetland resources within the presently impounded area of the Dock Street Dam.
The net increase in the various types of wetlands or wetland community size will be dependent on various conditions including water depth, velocity, and substrate.
Lower water levels would increase shallow water areas favoring the establishment of water willow beds, primarily in near shore areas from approximately 2,000 feet upriver of the Harvey Taylor Bridge downstream to the existing dam.
The amount of shallow water areas exposed would likely be greater than, and offset, the amount of existing emergent wetlands that would be lost around the fringe of City Island and behind bridge piers.
Presently, the hydrology maintaining these emergent wetland systems is a result of the existing pool level created by the dam.
No significant change would be expected in the community types within the scrub-shrub wetland and upland forested islands upstream of the Harvey Taylor bridge.
This area represents the furthest upstream extent of the existing pool level, and removal of the dam should decrease water levels one foot or less in this concentrated island area.
This alternative would be considered positive for increasing wetland resources.
Birds: Removal of the dam would be favorable for birds.
There should be significant increases in emergent aquatic vegetation and banks utilized by wading birds, shorebirds and waterfowl.
Reduced boating activity should reduce interference with or harassment of the birds.
Fish: With the dam removed, the fish species in the area of the river influenced by the impoundment would shift to a community adapted to riffle/run type habitat.
There should be higher levels of smallmouth bass spawning and nursery and possibly higher densities of adult smallmouth bass in the area now impounded by the dam.
42
Fish Passage: Removing the dam and returning the river to its free flowing condition would be the best possible condition for fish passage.
Migratory and resident fish could move unimpeded upstream past Harrisburg.
Recreation Boating on the river with the dam removed would change radically.
It is unlikely that the free flowing river would be suitable for pontoon boats.
The Pride of the Susquehanna could not operate.
The marinas as currently constructed would not be functional.
The anchorage created off the west shore would not be usable nor would the docks on the west shore be usable.
The number of watercraft that could use the river near Harrisburg would be limited by the number and quality of the access areas.
Power boats designed for river running operation would have access to the river from downstream areas; however, the Fish and Boat Commission's West Fairview boat access would have even less utility than it has now with more extensive shallows for longer distances.
Fishing boats, canoes and other non-power watercraft would dominate the boating scene.
Fishing would change significantly with removal of the dam.
The concentration of angling activity both on banks and in boats in the tail-water downstream of the dam would decrease without the dam.
Wade fishing would increase in shallow areas that were previously impounded.
The circumstance of boat fishing in the pool is uncertain since there will be a loss of boat mooring and marina capacity.
However, higher levels of boat fishing could result on the free flowing river, if there is adequate boat access and the habitat supported higher densities of bass.
Safety If the Dock Street Dam were removed, safety and liability issues associated with the physical dam would be eliminated.
There would no longer be a deteriorating dam in danger of collapsing, there would no longer be a dangerous hydraulic backwash; in addition, the pool and physical site of the dam would be removed.
Ease of Regulatory Process The Department of Environmental Protection, through a permit waiver, can authorize breaching and removing the dam as a stream restoration project.
The waiver requires review and approval of a breach plan and Environmental Assessment approval for a Water Quality Certification approval.
The Corps of Engineers would require an Individual Permit for the removal alternative including preparation of an Environmental Assessment.
Removal would likely require a public hearing.
Nuisance Impacts Exposure of the combined sewerage and storm-water overflows.
Cost $300,000
43
Economic Impacts Not Evaluated.
IV C. Repair at Same 292' Height Environmental Impacts Water quality: It is expected that water quality would be unchanged if the dam were repaired.
Birds: The status of the bird life on the river near Harrisburg is not expected to change due to repair to the existing dam.
Fish: The fish community in the river near Harrisburg would not be expected to change if the existing dam were to be repaired.
Wetlands: This alternative would not affect wetland resources positively or negatively.
Existing wetland resources would be retained; thus, we would consider this alternative to result in no effect on wetlands.
Fish Passage: The breaches and leakage of Dock Street Dam in its existing condition likely enhance fish passage to some degree by providing additional passageways for fish and by lowering the depth of the pool under low flow conditions.
Repairing or replacing the existing dam to eliminate breaches and stopping leakage would be expected to reduce fish passage somewhat at lower flows; but probably not greatly at higher flows.
If the existing dam were to be repaired, the Fish and Boat Commission would seek to have fish passage installed at the existing Dock Street Dam such as more notches, wider notches, open weirs or controlled weirs.
Recreation Boating and fishing would probably be sustained at current levels if the dam were repaired; however, providing more parking, launching and marina space might be expected to increase the boating use of the existing pool.
Safety If the Dock Street Dam were repaired as it was in the1960's, general site liability would still be an issue, as would the dangerous hydraulic backwash.
A repair would merely extend the life of the existing dam, and would not resolve the existing safety issues.
The only safety issue that would be mitigated would be the structural safety of the dam itself and its ability to perform with an adequate margin of safety.
Ease of Regulatory Process Repairing the existing dam at the same height will require review and approval of repair plans by the Department of Environmental Protection and would be approved with a
44
letter of authorization.
The Corps of Engineers would require an Individual Permit for the repairs including preparation of an Environmental Assessment.
The Environmental Assessment is also required to obtain a Water Quality Certification approval.
Nuisance Impacts There would be no change in nuisance situations by repairing the existing dam.
Cost A detailed engineering assessment of the condition of the dam structure would be necessary for a reasonable cost estimate to be determined.
Economic Impacts Repairing the existing dam would avoid the eventual difficulties, expense, and possible litigation that would come as the dam continues to deteriorate on its own.
While the risk of catastrophic collapse seems minimal, a section could fail and injure or kill someone.
Increased fishing from the successful restoration of American shad is expected to be a significant net economic gain.
The river near Harrisburg could become a focal point for shad fishing.
Repairing the dam at the same height would be a significant expense without realizing any economic net gain.
A detailed comparison of costs, features, and benefits would have to be done to analyze the economic impacts.
IV D. Replace at Same 292' Height with Inflatable Dam Environmental Impacts Water quality, birds, fish and wetland impacts would be the same as with repair at the current elevation.
Fish Passage: Replacing Dock Street Dam with an inflatable dam at the same 292' MSL offers the potential to improve fish passage.
First, operating the dam with bags down from April 1 through June 30 would be essentially as good as a free flowing river for passing migratory fish.
Second, if the bags were raised prior to the end of the migratory fish passage period, notches would be needed to simulate the present level of passage or, third, innovative fish passage designs would be needed to improve migratory fish passage over present conditions.
Recreation As with repair of the dam at elevation 292' msl,, if the dam were replaced at the same height, boating and fishing would probably be sustained at current levels; however, providing more parking, launching and marina space could increase the boating use of the existing pool.
45
Safety A dam replacement at elevation 292 msl would mitigate the structure safety issue and give the City the opportunity to mitigate the dangerous hydraulic conditions associated with the existing dam.
The design of a new inflatable dam could incorporate the results of theoretical and physical hydraulic modeling that would reduce or eliminate any hydraulic backwash effect at normal flows.
Also, in late winter and early spring when most dam tragedies occur, the dam could actually be deflated.
Ease of Regulatory Process Replacement of the dam at the same height will require a Dam Safety Permit from the Commonwealth in addition to the approvals listed under the repair alternative previously described.
In general, removal and repair or replacement of the dam with no increase in normal pool elevation requires a less rigorous review and approval process.
Federal approval would be provided with a Pennsylvania State Programmatic General Permit-1 (PASPGP_1) or an Individual Permit.
An Environmental Assessment approval would be required.
Nuisance Impacts Not evaluated Cost (See Appendix D for cost breakdown) Dam Cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost Economic Impacts: Not evaluated $9,413,000 0 $9,413,000
IV E 1.
Replace with Inflatable Dam at elevation 294' Environmental Impacts Water quality would probably undergo some minor degradation from decreased dissolved oxygen, increased temperature and turbidity and some minor sediment deposition.
Fish: The proposed operation of the inflatable dam would restore some of the dynamics of the Susquehanna River.
The ultimate effect of this dynamic in restoring the degraded substrate in the impounded area is unknown.
During the summer reproductive period for the warmwater fishes which inhabit the Susquehanna River, however, the dam would be inflated and the pool fully formed; this situation would favor fish species that prefer
46
shallow lake conditions.
Smallmouth bass and channel catfish spawning and nursery habitat would be reduced to some degree.
Wetlands: A total of 55.06 acres of wetlands would be impacted upriver to the point with a minimum one foot increase in water level elevation.
These impacts include: 1.90 acres forested 22.88 acres scrub-shrub 30.27 acres emergent Birds: There would be an adverse impact on birds.
More than 20% of all the wetlands would be impacted which would diminish the availability of feeding and lounging areas.
Island scrub-shrub habitat and shoreline lengths would decrease and reduce the areas for shore and bank birds.
Increased boat access to sensitive bird feeding areas would result in greater harassment.
Fish Passage: Replacing Dock Street Dam with a 294' msl inflatable dam will make improving fish passage a challenge.
If a 294' msl inflatable dam is not operated with bags down to simulate a free flowing river through the April 1 to June 30 spring fish migration period, more expensive innovative fish passageway designs will be required to improve fish passage over existing conditions at the Dock Street Dam.
It is unlikely that simple notches would be adequate over the full range of river flow conditions; and it is expected that fish passage facilities would be required.
Recreation Boating: At dam height of 294' msl, the usable boating pool is expected to increase by about 200 acres.
The larger pool could be expected to favor more powerful boats; which, theoretically, require more surface area per boat.
Even with an estimated doubling of the high powered boats, there would be an increase in the theoretical maximum boat capacity.
The existing level of boating use, however, is currently below the capacity with the current pool, thus it would appear that additional boat access either through marinas or launch areas would be needed to achieve more boating activity.
Fishing activity on a larger pool is expected to decrease in several respects.
Wade fishing will decrease in the pool area that would be too deep to wade.
Boat fishing rate is currently lower on the pooled area of the river and, making the pool larger, could be expected to reduce the amount of boat fishing on the enlarged pool.
Bank fishing rate is expected to be unchanged.
Safety A dam replacement at elevation 294 feet would mitigate the structure safety issue and give the City the opportunity to mitigate the dangerous hydraulic.
The design of a new inflatable dam could incorporate the results of theoretical and physical hydraulic modeling that would reduce or eliminate any hydraulic backwash effect at normal flows.
Also, in late winter and early spring when most tragedies at the dam occur, the dam could actually be deflated.
47
Ease of Regulatory Process A Dam Safety Permit would be required from DEP and Water Quality Certification approval from the Commonwealth.
An Individual Permit would be required from the Army Corp of Engineers.
It is expected that an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) would be required by the Army Corp.
A public hearing would be likely.
Nuisance Impacts Not evaluated Cost (See Appendix D for cost breakdown) Low sill dam Cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost High sill dam Cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost Economic Impacts Not evaluated $12,938,000 $ 6,542,000 $19,480,000 $11,293,000 $ 6,542,000 $17,835,000
IV E 2.
Replace with Inflatable Dam with elevation 296' Environmental Impacts Water quality: This alternative would be expected to result in incrementally more minor degradation from decreased dissolved oxygen, increased temperature and turbidity and minor sediment deposition than experienced with a dam at elevation 294'.
Wetlands: A total of 96.39 acres of wetlands would be impacted upriver to the point with a minimum one foot increase in water level elevation.
These impacts include: 8.93 acres forested 31.72 acres scrub-shrub 55.74 acres emergent Birds: There would be a more severe adverse impact on birds if the dam was raised to 296 ft msl.
More than one third of the wetlands in the area would be impacted which would diminish the availability of feeding areas.
Areas greatly impacted would be the shallow areas upstream of West Fairview including the lower end of Sheets Archipelago and Governor's Island.
Island shoreline lengths would decrease and reduce the areas for shore and bank birds.
Increased boat access to key shallow water bird feeding areas would increase harassment.
West Fairview boat ramp may become very active and
48
disturbance in the Sheets Island Archipelago will be more common.
Powered boats would have improved access to Pennsylvania endangered species rookeries.
Fish: The proposed operation of the inflatable dam would restore some of the dynamics of the Susquehanna River.
The ultimate effect of this dynamic in restoring the degraded substrate in the impounded area is unknown.
During the summer reproductive period for the warmwater fishes which inhabit the Susquehanna River, however, the dam would be inflated and the pool fully formed; this situation would favor fish species that prefer shallow lake conditions.
Smallmouth bass and channel catfish spawning and nursery habitat would be adversely affected.
Fish Passage: Replacing the Dock Street Dam with a 296' MSL inflatable dam that is not operated with bags down in the spring to simulate a free flowing river, will make the goal of improving migratory fish passage very difficult to achieve.
It is likely that bags would have to be down through the majority of the migratory fish passage period and more expensive innovative fish passageway designs will be needed when the bags are raised in order to improve fish passage over the existing conditions at Dock Street Dam.
Recreation Boating: At dam height of 296' amsl, the usable boating pool is expected to increase by about 700 acres.
The larger pool could be expected to favor more powerful boat such as jet skis; which, theoretically, require more surface area per boat.
Even with an estimated doubling of the high powered boats, there would be an increase in the theoretical maximum boat capacity.
The existing level of boating use, however, is below the capacity with the current pool with the dam at elevation 292' amsl; thus, it would appear that additional boat access either through marinas or launch areas would be needed to achieve more boating activity.
Fishing trips on a larger pool are expected to be no greater; but the type of fishing will change and the catch rate of bass can be expected to decrease.
Wade fishing will decrease in the pool area that is too deep to wade.
The boat fishing rate is currently lower on the pooled area of the river than the free flowing river; however, fishing boat access to the area between West Fairview boat launch and upper end of Sheets Island is poor.
Making the pool larger, could be expected to increase the number of boat fishing trips on the enlarged pool.
Bank fishing rate is expected to be unchanged.
Safety A dam replacement at elevation 296 msl would mitigate the structure safety issue and give the City the opportunity to mitigate the dangerous hydraulic.
The design of a new inflatable dam could incorporate the results of theoretical and physical hydraulic modeling that would reduce or eliminate any hydraulic backwash effect at normal flows.
Also, in late winter and early spring when most tragedies at the dam occur, the dam could actually be deflated.
Ease of Regulatory Process
49
A state Dam Safety Permit would be required from DEP and Water Quality Certification approval from the Commonwealth.
An Individual Permit would be required from the Army Corp of Engineers.
An Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) would be required by the Army Corp of Engineers.
A public hearing would be likely be held on this proposal.
Nuisance Impacts Not evaluated Cost (See Appendix D for cost breakdown) High sill dam cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost High sill dam Cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost Economic Impacts Not evaluated $15,954,000 $ 9,650,000 $25,604,000 $12,730,000 $ 9,650,000 $22,380,000
IV E 3.
Replace with Inflatable Dam at elevation 298' Environmental Impacts Water quality: This alternative would result in the greatest impact on water quality.
This elevation would result in the most temperature increase, turbidity increase, sediment deposition and dissolved oxygen decrease.
This alternative results in the greatest dissolved oxygen effects on the river from the Conodoguinet Creek nutrients.
This dam elevation might have adverse bacterial and sediment deposition consequences from the combined sewerage/stormwater overflows.
Fish: The proposed operation of the inflatable dam would restore some of the dynamics of the Susquehanna River.
The ultimate effect of this dynamic in restoring the degraded substrate in the impounded area is unknown.
During the summer reproductive period for the warmwater fishes which inhabit the Susquehanna River, however, the dam would be inflated and the pool fully formed; this situation would favor fish species favor shallow lake conditions.
Smallmouth bass and channel catfish spawning and nursery habitat would be adversely affected.
Wetlands: A total of 148.57 acres of wetlands would be impacted upriver to the point with a minimum of one foot increase in water level elevation.
These impacts include: 10.38 acres forested 53.18 acres scrub-shrub
50
85.01 acres emergent Birds: There would be a more severe adverse impact on birds from this alternative.
Two thirds of the emergent wetlands in the area would be impacted which would diminish the availability of feeding areas.
Losses would be greatest in the Sheets Archipelago and around Governor's island.
There would be direct impact on islands and shallows near the endangered species rookery on Wade Island.
Island shoreline lengths and scrub-shrub habitat especially in the island immediately upstream of Harvey Taylor Bridge would decrease and reduce the areas for shore and bank birds.
Wetlands upstream of West Fairview would be inundated during the summer boating season.
West Fairview boat ramp may become very active and disturbance in the Sheets Island Archipelago will be more common.
Increased boat access to sensitive bird feeding areas would increase harassment.
Fish Passage: Replacing Dock Street Dam with a 298' msl inflatable dam that is not operated to simulate a free flowing river during the migratory fish period, would make it difficult to improve fish passage over existing conditions.
Recreation Boating: At a dam height of 298' amsl, the usable boating pool is expected to increase by about 1450 acres.
The larger pool could be expected to favor many more powerful boats such as jet skis and inboard engines; which, theoretically, require more surface area per boat.
Even with an estimated tripling of the high powered boats over the current situation, there would still be an increase in the theoretical maximum boat capacity.
The existing level of boating use, however, is below capacity with the dam at elevation 292' amsl; thus, it would appear that additional boat access either through marinas or launch areas would be needed to achieve more boating activity.
Fishing trips on a larger pool are not expected to be increased by this alternative, but the type of fishing will change and the catch rate of bass can be expected to decrease.
Wade fishing will decrease in the pool area.
The boat fishing rate is currently lower on the pooled area of the river than the free flowing river; however, fishing boat access to the area between West Fairview boat launch and upper end of Sheets Island is poor.
Making the pool larger, could be expected to increase the number of boat fishing trips on the enlarged pool.
Bank fishing rate is expected to be unchanged.
Safety A dam replacement at elevation 298 feet would mitigate the structural safety issue and give the City the opportunity to mitigate the dangerous existing hydraulic.
The design of a new inflatable dam could incorporate the results of theoretical and physical hydraulic modeling that would reduce or eliminate any hydraulic backwash effect at normal flows.
Also, in late winter and early spring when most tragedies at the dam occur, the dam could actually be deflated.
51
Ease of Regulatory Process A state Dam Safety Permit and a 401 required from DEP.
An Individual Pe Engineers.
An Environmental Impact Corps of Engineers.
A public hearing Nuisance Impacts Not evaluated Cost (See Appendix D for cost breakdown) Dam Cost Infrastructure mitigation Total project cost Economic Impacts Not evaluated $18,272,000 $12,099,000 $30,371,000 Water Quality Certification approval would be rmit would be required from the Army Corp of Statement (EIS) would be required by the Army would likely be held for this proposal.
IV F Operational Considerations In any of the alternatives studied involving a replacement dam, the operation of the dam is an issue.
The existing Dock Street dam is a fixed crest dam, so the operation of the dam is entirely passive.
At all times, the flow of the river is passed over and through the dam, with no ability to control the upstream elevations.
In order to fulfill the purpose of the project and to address the City's goals and objectives, the flexibility of an adjustable crest dam is an advantage.
The advantages of an adjustable crest dam include: a) the ability to deflate the dam during flood or ice events potentially reducing damage to the dam itself and upstream property; b) the timing when the dam will be inflated and deflated can be controlled, allowing the operator to improve seasonal environmental conditions for fish passage, recreation, safety and water quality; c) the spillway of a replacement dam can be designed to reduce hazardous currents downstream; d) the height of the dam can be adjusted to create the desired level of water upstream to maximize recreation opportunities and protect environmental values.
Primarily for these reasons, the alternatives that included a replacement dam were assumed to be inflatable rubber dams similar to the dam at the Shikellamy State Park in Sunbury, PA.
There are an infinite number of modes of operation possible with an inflatable dam.
The examples below are some of those discussed by the group.
The selection of the mode of operation was beyond the scope of this group and more detailed studies will be necessary in the
52
future to refine the operational mode.
There is general agreement that the operation of the dam is a key factor in achieving the project purpose, and satisfying the City's goals and objectives.
Example A The dam may be operated as a seasonal structure to coincide with the recreational boating season.
This would entail inflation of the dam on or around May 15 and deflating the dam by October 15 or November 1.
Once inflated, the dam would remain fully inflated at the selected maximum crest elevation, unless the threat of flooding occurred during this period necessitating the deflation of the dam.
"Normal" variations of flow would simply pass over the inflatable sections, with a corresponding increase or decrease in the upstream elevation of the impoundment.
This mode of operation is similar to the operation of the dam at Sunbury.
The advantages of this mode of operation are: the early part of the shad migration could pass before the dam is inflated; it does not require a sophisticated control system or a great deal of attention by human operators; protection of the bags from flood or ice damage; and it maximizes benefits for recreational boating and boat fishing.
Example B As in Example A, The dam would be inflated on May 15 and deflated in the fall.
After the initial inflation, however, the dam would be controlled by a device capable of adjusting the level of inflation in the bags to maintain a precise upstream impoundment elevation, even while river flows are changing.
The potential advantages of a stable elevation in the upstream pool include; increased water level certainty and boating safety, the stable impoundment may reduce erosion, a stable pool elevation may benefit fish spawning in the impoundment, and the operators can precisely control the upstream elevation limiting the upstream distance influenced by the dam.
Such control can mitigate potential impacts to infrastructure and natural resources upstream of the dam.
Example C In combination with the operational modes described in Examples A or B, the dam could be operated to mimic existing conditions under which increases or decreases in flows produce changed conditions in water levels.
Under existing conditions, in late spring flows begin to decrease and seasonal wetland vegetation emerges.
Often, after emergence the vegetation is periodically inundated and exposed as river flows increase and decrease.
These wetlands are sometimes covered with water for extended periods, as they were during the spring and summer of 2000.
The inflatable dam could be operated so as to produce higher levels of water upstream when improved boating conditions were desired, and lowered periodically to benefit emergent type wetlands.
These fluctuations could be induced on a weekly basis, or at such frequencies as more detailed investigations would warrant.
Such a mode of operation could have the advantage of being more protective of natural resources by minimizing impacts to wetlands while maximizing available boating acreage during peak times.
As an example, it could conceptually be possible to operate a replacement dam in this fashion with a crest elevation of 294 or 296 feet and produce river environmental conditions that could support the emergent wetland acreage that currently exists at elevation 292.
53
Further investigation of how the operation of the dam could benefit fish passage in the spring and fall should also be conducted.
For example, the operation of the dam could influence the effectiveness of a fish passage facility by enhancing attraction flows.
Although the working group does not endorse or recommend any particular modes of operation at this time, there is general agreement that the flexibility of an inflatable dam offers advantages to achieving the project purpose.
Further studies are necessary to refine the operation to maximize project benefits.
If the dam is replaced, the operation of the dam should receive careful study to develop a mode of operation that best balances the benefits to recreation, environmental resources, fish passage, water quality, and dam safety.
IV G FUNDING The working group recognized that the funding of any alternative identified is critical to its implementation.
It is particularly critical in this situation, where the implementation of many of the alternatives have such a substantial cost.
The group also recognized the broader, regional nature of the project and believes that the funding should not be limited to City of Harrisburg sources.
The group believes that an existing or future regional authority or agency should assume the responsibility for development of the project.
However, the development of an actual financing plan was beyond the scope of the group.
Rather, the group developed a list of potential sources that should be explored to finance various aspects of the project, either alone or in combination.
Certain elements of the project may be eligible for funding under the various sources listed below, while other elements would not.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
City of Harrisburg capital funds Commonwealth of Pennsylvania capital budget line item.
Commonwealth Redevelopment Assistance Capital Project funds.
US Army Corps of Engineers, Water Resource Development Act funds US Capital budget line item.
US Fish and Wildlife Service, (fish passage) PA Department of Conservation and Natural Resources- Key 93 (Park Improvements).
Growing Greener funding US EPA, Chesapeake Bay Program funds Economic Development Administration Penn Vest Sport Fish Restoration (Boat Access) User Fees Private funds
V.
FINDINGS
These findings are a compilation of observations that were reached by the group consensus over the course of the study.
They are based on the information that was made available and the deliberations that ensued from this information as well as the collective experience of the group members.
All were considered important factors in the development of recommendations.
