TABLE OF CONTENTS Page PA GAME COMMISSION MANAGEMENT OF STATE GAME LANDS SYSTEM ... 2
CONCERNS/USE ISSUE
.........................................................................................
3
WHAT USE ACTIVITIES ARE CURRENTLY REGULATED? .....................................4
SPECIFIC USE CONCERNS AND COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS ................5
APPENDIX I -
STATE GAME LAND REGULATIONS AD HOC ADVISORS ..............10
APPENDIX II - LISTING OF STAKEHOLDERS .................................................................
11 APPENDIX III - FEDERAL AID IN WILDLIFE RESTORATION ..................................12 APPENDIX IV - TITLE 34, THE GAME and WILDLIFE CODE, SECTION 722 .................
15
APPENDIX V
- TITLE 58, SECTION 135.2 (EXISTING REGULATIONS) ........................
16 - TITLE 58, SECTION 135.41 (EXISTING REGULATIONS) ......................
18
PENNSYLVANIA GAME COMMISSION MANAGEMENT OF STATE GAME LAND SYSTEM MISSION Of all the state government agencies that oversee outdoor recreation, the Pennsylvania Game Commission is the one agency charged solely and specifically with: protecting, conserving and managing the diversity of wild birds and wild mammals and their habitats; provide wildlife-related education, services and recreational opportunities for both consumptive and non-consumptive uses of wildlife, and maintaining and promoting Pennsylvania's hunting and trapping heritage.
To accomplish this legislated responsibility, the Game Commission has purchased 1.4 million acres of land for the express purpose of better managing wildlife populations and to ensure hunters and trappers have ample opportunities to pursue their traditional recreation.
These lands were purchased by the Game Commission, which is funded primarily by hunting and trapping license fees.
Other Commission revenues used to purchase and enhance state game lands are received from the sale of timber, gas, oil and other minerals on state game lands, and certain federal monies known as PittmanRobertson funds, which are generated by an national excise tax on sporting arms and ammunition.
These lands are managed differently from those lands owned by the state Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR'S State Forests and State Parks), county and municipal park authorities and other public lands.
The Game Commission derives its ability and authority to establish and regulate acceptable usage of its 1.4 million acres of state game lands through Title 34 (the Pennsylvania Game and Wildlife Code).
2
CONCERNS/USE ISSUES Expanding populations and urban sprawl continue to put increasing pressure on State Game Lands from a multitude of factions.
State Game Lands, purchased with hunting license dollars, and assisted in some cases by land conservancies, are not considered multiple-use and are not intended to benefit a wide variety of users.
Continuing to allow unrestricted use has caused and will continue to cause serious habitat degradation, soil erosion and water pollution that are detrimental to wildlife.
It is also contrary to our legislative mandate (see GAME CODE Section 722, Appendix IV).
Dirt tracks are not a suitable replacement for insect producing vegetative ground cover maintained for wildlife.
In addition, many of our State Game Lands are or have been acquired, developed, and/or maintained with Federal Aid funds (See FEDERAL AID, Appendix III).
The Federal Aid program places restrictions on the use of those funds.
Many lands acquired, developed, or managed under the Federal Aid program, but particularly those lands near urban areas, are attractive to a multitude of outdoor recreational users.
Some of these activities are directly related (e.g., sport fish or wildlife dependent) to either consumptive or non-consumptive use of the sport fish and wildlife resources associated with the area (hunting, fishing, sport fish or wildlife viewing or photography, etc.) while other uses not directly related to fish and wildlife resources (bicycling, swimming, rock climbing, field trials, etc.) occur because these lands are convenient pieces of public property in a relatively natural condition.
The PGC may lose millions of dollars in funding if we allow unrestricted uses not directly related to fish and wildlife resources management and the public use of and benefit from these resources (see Federal Aid, Appendix III).
No matter how acquired, State Game Lands must be managed within legislative, funding and agency mission mandates.
3
WHAT LAND USE ACTIVITIES ARE CURRENTLY REGULATED?
Activities such as motorized and other vehicular traffic, riding of animals, property damage, damage to plants, and removal of materials are currently regulated to some degree.
In recent years overuse, and unregulated and under-regulated usage has caused habitat degradation and in some cases user conflicts.
Continued pressure from varied recreational interests necessitates revision of our regulations in order to better control impacts on our habitat resources and to manage within mandates of our legislated mission.
As state game lands are managed differently from those lands owned by DCNR (State Forests and State Parks), county and municipal park authorities, other public lands and private lands, some regulations may differ significantly from those encountered on these other lands.
4
# SPECIFIC USE CONCERNS COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS KEY: # identifies Specific Use Concerns.
Shaded language identifies the recommended regulation change.
Items with a strikethrough have been deleted from previous versions.
Items underlined are additions.
Animals, rocks, minerals, historical and archaeological artifacts found on game lands are the common property of all of the Commonwealth's citizens.
The PGC needs to ensure regulations are in place to prevent their unlawful removal by any person or persons.
Except with the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of the lands, it is unlawful to:" Remove or attempt to remove any man made or natural object, except wildlife and fish lawfully taken during the open season.
Objects which may not be removed include, but are not limited to, animals, rocks, minerals, sand and historical or archaeological artifacts.
#2 The remoteness of many State Game Lands access areas means that these areas are often used as focal points of parties and resultant vandalism.
Disorderly conduct is unlawful anywhere in the Commonwealth.
The PGC must have regulations to make certain WCO's and Deputy WCO's are empowered to enforce the law and prevent disorderly conduct on state game lands.
It is unlawful to: Participate in, become a part of, contribute to or engage in disorderly conduct as defined in Sections 5503 and 5505 of Title 18.
#1
#3
Alcohol, controlled substances, speed limits; These activities relate closely to disorderly conduct concerns.
The inability of our officers to hold alcohol and substance offenders until officers of jurisdiction arrive means that these people are free to drive away under the influence.
As before mentioned such activities are regulated anywhere in the Commonwealth and we need to have regulations to ensure our WCOs and Deputy WCOs are empowered to enforce these laws on game lands.
It is unlawful to: 5
If less than 21 years of age, consume, possess or transport any alcohol, liquor, beer, malt or brewed alcoholic beverage.
Use or possess any controlled substance as defined or classified under the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.
Operate a motor vehicle on roads open to vehicular traffic in willful and wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property or in excess of posted speed limits, or where no speed limit is posted, in excess of 25 miles per hour.
#4 The PGC has permitted the use of small fires for cooking or warming purposes when the fire index rating was acceptable.
Unattended or improperly extinguished fires pose a threat to wildlife and wildlife habitat as well as human health and safety.
It is necessary to develop regulations regarding attending and extinguishing fires.
It is unlawful to:" Kindle, use or maintain an open fire when the fire index rating used by the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources is high, very high or extreme.
A person causing a wildfire, in addition to possible criminal penalty, is liable for all damages, costs of extinguishing and fines.
When the DCNR fire index rating is low or moderate, small fires for cooking or warming purposes are permitted only at places where adequate precautions are taken to prevent the spread of fire which may damage adjacent areas and shall be attended at all times and completely extinguished before leaving the site of the fire.
#5 Unrestricted riding of vehicles and animals degrades habitat, disturbs nesting wildlife, leads to soil erosion, water pollution and conflicts with intended uses of game lands.
Current regulations allow riding with few restrictions.
Heavy use has created new trails or paths, and trails have been created by cutting or trimming trees or other plants or clearing soil, activities which are not permitted.
Except with the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of the lands, it is unlawful to:" Ride a non-motorized vehicle, conveyance, or animal except on roads normally open to public travel (except roads open to foot travel only) or designated routes as posted, or while lawfully engaged in hunting, trapping or fishing.
Ride a non-motorized vehicle, conveyance, or animal from September 15 to January 15 and April 15 through May 31 inclusive, except while lawfully engaged in hunting, trapping, or fishing.
Exception: a non-motorized vehicle, conveyance, 6
or animal may be used on roads normally open to public travel (except roads open to foot travel only) or on posted designated routes on Sundays from September 15 to January 15 and April 15 through May 31. Use boats propelled by a motor, except that battery powered electric motors may be used on waterways unless posted otherwise.
Snowmobiles, as defined in 75 Pa.C.S.
Sec. 7702 (relating to definitions), may be driven January 15 through April 1 only on designated areas, roads or trails marked with appropriate signs.
Provided snowmobiles comply with provisions set forth in 75 Pa.C.S.
Chapter 77.
#6 Not only is allowing the unrestricted use of game lands contrary to state law but it is an incompatible use and considered a diversion of funds under federal law.
This means the agency could potentially lose millions of federal dollars currently used for habitat acquisition and management.
Except with the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of the lands, it is unlawful to:" Use State Game Lands for any personal, organizational, or commercial purpose other than the intended use as defined in Section 722 of Title 34.
A commercial activity is any activity in which a person directly or indirectly accepts consideration of value as compensation for the provision of goods or services, including transportation.
Occupy, use, construct, place, or maintain structures or other tangible property, except that portable hunting blinds or stands may be used, provided no visible damage is caused to trees.
Graze or permit the grazing of livestock, place or maintain beehives or beekeeping apparatus.
Operate under the authority of a contract, lease, agreement, or permit with the Commission and fail to abide by the terms and conditions contained in the contract, lease, agreement, or permit.
#7 Numerous studies have indicated that artificial or supplemental feeding of most wildlife is detrimental to animals.
As the agency responsible for this Commonwealth's wildlife management we should not allow the artificial or supplemental feeding of wildlife on our game lands.
Except with the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of the lands, it is unlawful to:" Feed wildlife or lay or place any food, fruit, hay, grain, chemical, salt or other minerals.
7
#8
Releasing of could lead to Except with the lands, it
domestic and uncontrolled release of captive bred or raised wildlife spread of disease and additional stress on native wildlife.
the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of is unlawful to:"
Release domestic animals, captive bred or captive raised game or wildlife.
#9 Unrestricted target shooting poses a serious threat to human health and safety and damages wildlife habitat (food producing plants, shrubs and trees).
It is unlawful to: Target shoot with firearms, bows and arrows, or devices capable of launching projectiles in a manner that could cause injury to persons or property or on areas posted closed to such activities.
Discharge any firearm, bow and arrow, or device capable of launching projectiles on State Game Lands that is not a lawful device to hunt game and wildlife as described in Title 34 #10 In addition to the problems delineated for paragraph 4 and 5 unrestricted group and or commercial activities often interfere with hunters and other wildlife enthusiasts.
Expanding populations and urban sprawl continue to put increasing pressure on game lands from a multitude of factions.
The PGC would like the opportunity to control the number and types of group activities for the aforementioned reasons.
Except with the written permission of the Director or the person in charge of the lands, it is unlawful to:" Engage in an organized activity or event involving ten or more persons, except for hunting and trapping, without approval of the Pennsylvania Game Commission.
which may interfere with the intended purposes or intended uses as defined in Section 722 of Title 34, or may pose a potential environmental problem or a safety problem, unless a request for subject activity is reviewed and subsequently authorized by a special permit approved by the Director.
The sponsor of any such approved special activity shall have a copy of the permit in their possession during the activity or event, and upon request, display the permit to authorized Commission personnel.
Be present on State Game Lands from September 15 to January 15 and April 15 to May 31, except on ranges, while not engaged in lawful hunting or trapping and fail to wear a minimum of 250 square inches of daylight fluorescent orangecolored material on the back and front combined or, in lieu thereof, a hat of the same colored material.
The material shall be worn so it is visible in a 360-degree arc.
8
#11
The State Game Land Ad Hoc Advisory Committee recognizes that there is some confusion regarding the term "designated routes" for use of non-motorized vehicles, or animals (recommendation #5), and we offer the following clarification: It is not the intention of this committee or the Pennsylvania Game Commission to eliminate activities such as riding of horses or mountain bikes on game lands, but to limit such uses to maintained roads or routes specifically designated (positive signage) for these uses.
These routes will be designated according to the following considerations: 1 ­ Compatibility with management plans for the specific game lands.
All game lands are to be managed according to management plans that take into account the characteristics of the site, including habitat types, soils, flora and fauna specific to the location.
This approach will help guide decisions regarding recreational uses.
2 ­ Public Input There will be a public input process to gather input form interested stakeholders regarding establishment, changing or closing of designated routes.
This process will be facilitated by the land management personnel for the specific game lands being considered.
3 ­ Evaluation of Potential or Real Impacts.
Decisions regarding specific designated routes will be guided by criteria such as impacts on wildlife, impacts on habitat (forest fragmentation, erosion, sedimentation, etc.), and suitability of base for construction.
It is not intended that every state game land tract will contain such routes.
4 ­ Review and Approval All decisions regarding designated routes will be subject to review and approval at local, regional and state levels of the Game Commission.
9
APPENDIX I
STATE GAME LAND REGULATIONS AD HOC ADVISORS
Keystone Mountain Bike Association; Richard Martin Chesapeake Bay Foundation; Matt Ehrhart Governor's Sportsmen's Advisory Council; Andy Mazzanti Keystone Trails Association; John Stein PA State Snowmobile Association; Lowell Morton Audubon Council of PA; Ron Freed Department of Community and Economic Development; Rick Dunlap Hardwoods Development Council; Paul Lyscava PA Equine Council; Pete Johnson
10
APPENDIX II Stakeholders Mailing List Allegheny County Sportsmen's League, Inc.
Allegheny National Forest American Horse Council Appalachian Trail Association ATV Association Central Pennsylvania Conservancy Conservation Fund DCNR Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area DEP Department Of Agriculture Department Of Community 
PA Lands Trust Association PA Snowmobile Association PA Society for Ornithology PA State Police PA Trappers Association PA Wildlife Federation Pheasants Forever PGC Commissioners PGC Employees PGC Habitat Advisory Committee Quality Deer Management Association Rails-to-Trails Realtors Rocky Mountain Elk Foundation Ruffed Grouse Society Safari Club International Seda-Cog Hardwoods Initiative Sierra Club Sportsmen's Advocate Students Against Drunk Drivers Susquehanna River Wetlands Trust Sustainable Forestry Initiative of PA The Nature Conservancy The Wildlife Society Therapeutic Riding Program Trout Unlimited United Bowhunters of PA Unified Sportsmen of PA U.S. Army Corps Engineers Western Pennsylvania Conservancy Wildlife Habitat Unlimited Wildlands Conservancy, Inc
11
APPENDIX III
521 FW 1 Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration
FWM#: 059 (new) Date: December 17, 1992 Series: State Grant Programs Part 521: Federal Aid Program Eligibility Originating Office: Division of Federal Aid 1.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide eligibility standards for the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program.
1.2 Authority.
The Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program is authorized by the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act of 1937, as amended, (16 U.S.C. 669-669i) and is often referred to as the Pittman-Robertson or P-R Act.
The Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act (Act) authorizes the Secretary of the Interior "...to cooperate with the States, through their respective State fish and game departments, in wildlife-restoration projects as hereinafter set forth...".
The Secretary has delegated to the Director the responsibility for carrying out the purposes of the Act, except for the apportionment of funds to the States.
Regulations for execution of the Act are contained in Title 50 CFR Part 80.
1.3 Responsibility.
Regional Directors are responsible for administration of the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program within their Regions, to include the approval of proposals, monitoring performance of approved projects, and monitoring compliance with applicable Federal laws and regulations.
The Assistant Director-Fish and Wildlife Enhancement provides oversight for the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program.
1.4 Eligible Participants.
State fish and wildlife agencies are authorized to participate.
Also authorized to participate are the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
1.5 Prerequisite Requirements.
To be eligible to participate, States must have "...assented to the provisions of this Act and shall have passed laws for the conservation of wildlife which shall include a prohibition against the diversion of license fees paid by
12
hunters for any other purpose than the administration of said State fish and game department...".
1.6 Eligible Purposes.
The following are eligible purposes under the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program.
Additional information on eligible project purposes is in 522 FW. A.
The restoration, conservation, management, and enhancement of wild birds and wild mammals, and the provision for public use of and benefits from these resources.
B.
The education of hunters and archers in the skills, knowledge, and attitudes necessary to be responsible hunters or archers.
1.7 Ineligible Activities.
The Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act contains prohibitions on the use of Federal Aid funds for certain purposes.
In addition, the rules and policies specify certain other purposes or activities that are not consistent with the grant program purposes and are, therefore, ineligible.
The following is a summary of those activities that are ineligible under the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program.
A.
Public relations activities for the purpose of promoting organizations or agencies, including publication of agency magazines, displays, exhibits, etc.
This prohibition does not apply to educational or technical guidance activities specifically related to accomplishment of Federal Aid projects.
B. Activities for the purpose of producing revenue.
Includes all processes and procedures directly related to the sale of licenses, permits, etc., which are imposed by law or regulation.
It also includes the acquisition of real or personal property for the purpose of rental, lease, sale, or other commercial purposes.
The production of income that results from otherwise eligible activities, incidental to these activities, is not prohibited.
Examples are sale of surplus commodities, collection of user fees, etc.
C. Providing services or property of material value to individuals or groups for commercial purposes or to benefit such individuals or groups.
This does not prohibit providing technical assistance to a private landowner or operator.
D. Enforcement of game and fish laws and regulations.
This includes routine patrol, investigations, and law enforcement training.
This does not prohibit activities necessary to accomplish Federal Aid project purposes or to protect Federal Aid assets, such as control of public entry, and does not prohibit activities to ensure public health and safety on Federal Aid areas.
E. Establishment, publication, and dissemination of regulations issued by a State pertaining to the protection and utilization of fish and wildlife resources.
Includes laws, orders, seasonal regulations, bag limits, creel limits, license fees, etc.
This does not prohibit the scientific collection of information needed to support management recommendations.
13
F. Stocking of game animals for the purpose of providing hunting of the animals stocked without objectives for restoration or establishment of self-sustaining populations.
G. Furnishing public facilities, equipment, or services in excess of the minimum required to meet project purposes or health and safety standards.
1.8 Compliance.
Grantees are required to comply with all applicable Federal laws and regulations, as a condition of acceptance of Federal funds.
In addition to the laws and regulations specific to the grant program, there are numerous other compliance requirements to Federal grant programs.
Those generally applicable to all Federal grant programs are listed as Assurances, since grantees must provide assurance that they will comply with applicable provisions.
(See 523 FW 1 for a summary of the compliance requirements normally associated with Federal Aid programs.)
1.9 Guidance.
Guidance on general administrative requirements and on program standards for documentation and execution of the Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration program is contained in 522 FW. Though the guidance provided is intended to be thorough and current, grantees should not rely on it as a sole source.
Questions should be directed to the appropriate Regional Office.
14
APPENDIX IV
Title 34, THE GAME and WILDLIFE CODE
SECTION 722
Sec. 722.
Use of property.
(a) General rule.--Except as provided in section 723 (relating to exchange or sale), all or any part of the lands and waters to which title has been acquired for the use of the commission or which have been leased may be used only to create and maintain public hunting and furtaking, game or wildlife propagation areas, farms or facilities for the propagation of game or wildlife, special preserves as provided for in this title or other uses incidental to hunting, furtaking and game or wildlife resource management.
(b) Permits, licenses and leases.--Except as provided in subsection (c) the commission may issue permits and licenses and enter into leases for uses of its lands as it deems in the best interest of the commission at such charge as it deems reasonable.
The commission shall not issue any permits or licenses and shall not enter into any lease which would permit the use of commission-owned or leased land for the disposal of any hazardous or toxic or radioactive waste of any nature.
(c) Limitation of mining.--The commission shall not permit the mining of uranium or any other radioactive minerals from any of its lands.
15
APPENDIX V TITLE 58 PA CODE (We will be reviewing only those Regulations reflected in our list of Specific Use Concerns)
§ 135.2.
Unlawful actions.
In addition to the prohibitions in the act on lands, waters or buildings under Commission ownership, lease or jurisdiction, it is unlawful, except with the permission of the person in charge of the lands, to: (1) Camp or use camp sites.
(2) Contaminate, pollute or degrade springs or streams.
(3) Graze or permit the grazing of domestic livestock.
(4) Place private advertisements, signs or posters.
(5) Plant, gather, cut, dig, remove or otherwise injure plants or parts thereof, including trees, shrubs, vines, flowering plants, cultivated crops, mushrooms and fruits of berry-producing plants.
(6) Travel on lands by means of a vehicle or conveyance propelled by motorized power.
This prohibition does not include the travel by individuals permanently confined to a wheelchair propelled by electric power obtained from batteries.
Individuals desiring to hunt from an electric powered wheelchair shall have a disabled person permit under section 2923 of the code (relating to disabled person permits).
(7) Ride animals on fields, except during sanctioned field trials and then only in accordance with the permit.
(8) Drive motor vehicles with or without attachments having a gross weight in excess of 11,000 pounds.
(9) Use boats propelled by a motor.
16
(10) Fish from dam breasts posted against fishing.
(11) Swim in a dam, pond, lake or stream.
(12) Injure, destroy or cause damage to property--real, personal or mixed.
(13) Remove sand, clay, stone, minerals or other products.
(14) Participate in, become a part of or contribute to boisterous, immoral or indecent conduct.
(15) Kindle, use or maintain an open fire.
(16) Travel on roads open to vehicular travel with a vehicle or conveyance propelled by motorized power which is not licensed or authorized for operation on a public highway under 75 Pa.C.S. § § 101-- 9910 (relating to the Vehicle Code).
(17) Violate, fail or neglect to follow instructions posted on signs authorized by the Director.
(18) Travel by mechanical or motorized conveyance or ride animals on newly constructed, seeded or planted roads, or other areas, when posted against the travel.
17
TITLE 58 PA CODE (We will be reviewing only those Regulations reflected in our list of Specific Use Concerns)
§ 135.41.
State game lands.
(a) Restrictions limited.
The following exceptions to § 135.2 (relating to unlawful actions) pertain to lands and waters designated as State game lands: (1) Mushrooms and fruits of berry-producing plants may be picked.
(2) Open fires are permitted, except when the fire index rating used by the Bureau of Forestry, Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, is high, very high or extreme.
(3) Snowmobiles, as defined in 75 Pa.C.S. § 7702 (relating to definitions) may be driven January 15 through April 1 on designated areas, roads and trails marked with appropriate signs.
(b) Closure of game lands.
(1) When the threat of forest fires exists, the Director has emergency authority to restrict the use of smoking materials on State game lands or to close State game lands to hunting, trapping, fishing, recreational use and other activity which may be or become detrimental to those lands or the flora or fauna thereon until the Director removes the restrictions.
Emergency restrictions or closures will be announced to the news media.
(2) The Director has the authority to close State game lands or portions thereof, to recreational or other uses, when the specified uses may be or have become detrimental to those lands or the flora or fauna thereon, or where the uses conflict with legal hunting, furtaking or fishing activities or the Commission's management or administration of State game lands.
The closure may be seasonal or year-round and shall remain in effect until the Director removes the restrictions.
(3) It is unlawful to violate restrictions or closure placed on these lands by the Director.
18
