C:\Internet\Bill631.htm FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Mississippi Insurance Department George Dale, Commissioner of Insurance/ State Fire Marshal Jackson, Mississippi / March 21, 1997 For additional information, please contact Shep Montgomery (601) 359-3579 Dale salutes state Legislature for passage of bill stiffening penalties for church arson Mississippi Insurance Commissioner George Dale welcomed the state legislature's passage of a bill that would dramatically stiffen penalties for those convicted of both church arson and arson in general.
House Bill 631, which received final passage by both houses of the state Legislature this week and now awaits Gov. Kirk Fordice's signature, strengthens the penalties for first degree arson of any structure, makes the crime of the burning of a church, temple, synagogue, or other place of worship the same as first degree arson, and subjects those that have been convicted of arson, including church arson, to having their assets forfeited to the Mississippi General Fund.
Dale, who has spoken out passionately on the issue of church arson during this summer's rash of church fires, lauded the state Legislature's efforts to substantially stiffen the penalties for burning a church.
"I salute our state lawmakers for taking such a courageous stand on this important issue, and hope that these significantly strengthened penalties will go a very long way towards deterring the heinous crime of burning a church building as well as the dastardly crime of arson in general," Dale said.
Under the legislation, those convicted of first degree arson are subjected to a sentence at the state Penitentiary at Parchmanof not less than five (5) years or more than twenty (20) years, with church arson carrying a possible five (5) to thirty (30) year sentence.
Those convicted of any arson could be required to pay restitution well as triple the amount of damages caused by the incident.
The bill also stipulates that any personal property used in the commission of an act of arson could be subjected to asset forfeiture.
"That means the truck that the arsonists used to drive to the church and even the home that they planned the church burning in could be seized by the state and sold, with the proceeds going tothe Mississippi General Fund," Dale said.
In addition, the bill stipulates that any person witnessing an act of arson and who fails to report the incident to the general authorities will be sentenced, upon conviction, to the state Penitentiary at Parchman for not less than two (2) years nor more than ten (10) years and will be required to pay restitution for any damage caused.
Juveniles involved in a church arson incident would be required to serve at least six months in a state reform school until they would be eligible for probation.
House Bill 631 was introduced by Representative Edward Blackmon, Jr.
(D - Canton) and was co-signed by Reps. Jeffery C. (Jeff) Smith (Columbus), Thomas U. Reynolds (Water Valley), John O. Read (Gautier), Carmel Wells-Smith (Pascagoula), Ferr Smith (Carthage), Willie L. Bailey (Greenville), Willie J. Perkins, Sr. (Greenwood), Thomas E. Johnson (Benton), John L. Moore (Brandon), Jamie Franks, Jr.
(Mooreville), and Frances Fredericks (Gulfport).
Dale also said he was pleased over the state Legislature's passage of a bill that would provide insurance companies and agents with immunity in civil lawsuits for providing loss information to law enforcement officials investigating incendiary fires.
Meanwhile, Dale expressed disappointment that a bill that would have created a Fire Safety Education Division within the State Fire Marshal's Office (a division of the Mississippi Insurance Department) and would have assisted rural churches with a range of fire prevention and safety programs and would have increased funds available for a program that pays a reward for tips to law enforcement officers that lead to the arrest and conviction of arsonists from $1,000 to a maximum of $2,500.
-30-
Page 1
