Chapter I Introduction and Histor y The colorful history of Florida's intracoastal and inland waterway system dates as far back when Pedro Menendez de instructions from King Phillip II explore the land and to suitable route for crossing peninsula between the Gulf of Mexico as 1567 Under the provisions of the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1930, a shallow-draft channel dredged along the southern shore of Lake Okeechobee furnished material used to build a 31 foot high levee; the levee was designed to provide protection for Florida's inhabitants in the flood-prone areas around the lake's southern borders.
By 1937, a navigable channel with minimum dimensions of 6 by 80 feet connected the Gulf with the Atlantic Ocean.
Aviles received of Spain, to determine a
the
A beneficiary of the demand for and the Atlantic Ocean.
The saga of the long desired cross-Florida barge canal recounts a succession of unsatisfactory studies, political controversies, heated opposition from environmentalists and the railroad, two aborted attempts at construction and a perennial lack of funding.
Since that time three consistent objectives have been repeatedly cited to the U.S. Congress in support of constructing and maintaining a Florida navigable intracoastal/inland system.
The three objectives are to develop the land, to benefit commerce, and to enhance troop and supply movements during wartime.
In 1935, Congress authorized the first preliminary examination and survey for an intracoastal waterway from the Caloosahatchee River north to the Withlacoochee River.
Directly north to the relief from flooding, the Okeechobee Waterway provides a key link in the navigable system of Florida inland waterways.
Caloosahatchee River, a chain of inlets or passes between the barrier islands and coastline composes a continuous "inside" waterway extending 148 miles north of the Anclote River.
Above the Anclote River the waterway lay directly exposed to the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico; depth and acceptable wave
1-1
action allow small vessels to navigate safely in open waters under normal weather conditions.
The first Gulf Coast project in 1890 costing $5,000 consisted of dredging a 5 by 100 foot channel in Sarasota Bay, to run south from Tampa Bay to Sarasota; modifications made in 1896 extended the project to Casey's Pass (3 by 75 foot channel).
In 1907, this project was further extended to Venice.
By 1917, two-thirds of the 3,841 tons (brick, canned goods, groceries, cement, corn, feed, fertilizer, fish, flour, grain and hay, ice lumber, refined oils, shingles, and miscellaneous merchandise) transported on this waterway moved between Sarasota and Tampa.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers on behalf of a conservationist group, the Florida Defenders of the Environment.
Through alleged non-compliance with the National Environment Policy Act of 1969 and on recommendation of the U.S. Council on
Environmental Quality, President Richard M. Nixon delt the project a final blow.
After expenditure of $50 million dollars in federal funds and $12 million dollars in state funds, work on the project was halted on January 20, 1971, with about one-third of the proposed 107 mile waterway completed.
The Second World War delayed further funding for Florida's Gulf Intracoastal Waterway until 1945 when
In 1939, the Board of Engineers for Rivers and Harbors (State of Florida) recommended an intracoastal project, 9 feet deep and 100 feet wide, reaching from the Caloosahatchee River north to the Anclote River.
The Board was convinced that this segment would be a connecting link in the Boston to Corpus Christi intracoastal system and argued that it would foster the economical collection and distribution of freight for the deep water harbors on Florida's west coast.
Congress authorized the west coast system and included a provision that local interests must furnish all lands needed for the project.
The West Coast Inland Navigation District was created by the Florida Legislature in 1947 with power to levy taxes for land procurement.
Modifying federal legislation in 1948, 1950, 1954, 1957 and 1959 resolved terms of local compliance and in June 1960 dredging began and was completed in 1967 for the 151 mile western leg of the waterway.
Within two years of its completion, the Florida Gulf Intracoastal Waterway System carried
On July 23, 1942, the Cross Florida Canal was authorized to utilize the preferred routing following the St. Johns River to Palatka, the valley of the Oklawaha River to the divide, and the Withlacoochee River to the Gulf of Mexico.
However in 1969, the Environmental Defense Fund, filed suit against the
418, 268 tons of freight; more than twice the tonnage originally estimated by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to justify the project.
Commerce has risen steadily totaling 1,568,618 tons in 1978 to 2,000,000 + tons in 2002.
The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway channel between Carrabelle and St. Marks, authorized
1-2
in 1937 still has not been constructed; a channel 12 feet deep and 150 feet wide was authorized in 1968 from St. Marks to Tampa Bay but has never been constructed.
Because of environmental concerns, the State has to-date elected not to sponsor the remaining segment from Carrabelle to Tampa Bay.
Vessels continue, however, to ply the open waters of the Gulf south of St. Marks to Tampa.
Legislature declared that canals and waterways of the Company should not be less than 50 feet wide and not less than 5 feet deep at mean low water for the entire distance between the St. Johns River and Biscayne Bay.
Approximately 1 million acres of public land were granted by the State of Florida to the Company to aid in the completion of the east coast navigable segment.
The work was begun in 1883 and was finally completed in 1912.
The total cost of
Florida's Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway development is equally intriguing.
The Florida Coastline Canal from Jacksonville to Miami, had been a matter of concern not only to the people of the east coast of Florida, but also to the Executive and Legislative branches of state government for a very long time.
The canal that existed prior to the creation of the Florida Inland Navigation District in 1927 was constructed by the Florida Coast Line Canal and Transportation Company, which received Letters of Patent under the Laws of Florida on May 23, 1881.
The canal proposed was one connecting the Matanzas River with the Indian River.
By subsequent resolution filed by the Company in 1882, the scope of the project was expanded to connect the navigable waters of the St. Johns River at the mouth of Pablo Creek through the Matanzas and Indian Rivers through Lake Worth connecting with Biscayne Bay.
The charter was drafted to design a channel/canal allowing the passage of vessels drawing 3 feet of water or less.
the canal approximated $3,500,000.00 and the aggregate amount received from land sales approximated $1,400,000.00.
The remaining
$2,000,000.00 required to complete the project was provided by the Company.
Tolls were originally charged for use of the canal.
Although this was an achievement for the time, the completion of the canal did not solve the problem of inland water transportation from Jacksonville to Miami.
The cost of maintaining the canal to a minimum depth of 5 feet and a width of 50 feet proved most difficult.
Financial troubles for the Company caused bankruptcy and the canal fell into a state of disrepair.
Due to the explosive growth along Florida's east coast and the demand generated for freight transportation services by that growth, many attempts were made by various local and state public bodies to induce the federal government to provide a means for inland waterway transportation either by the coastal route, via the canal along the east coast,
Under Chapter 3995, Acts of Florida 1889, the
or by the St. Johns River route via Sanford then to
1-3
Titusville by coastal route on to Miami.
created the Florida Inland Navigation District in 1927 under Chapter 12026, Laws of Florida.
The Florida
After much political debate, a survey of the two alternatives was ordered by Congress through the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1920.
After a six year investigation, a report was prepared stating that an inland waterway 8 feet deep and 75 feet wide following the coastal route from Jacksonville to Miami was feasible and advisable at an estimated cost of $4,220,000.00 for construction and with $125,000.00 annually estimated for
Inland Navigation District consists of the eleven counties along the east coast of Florida from Duval to Dade, inclusive.
The Act authorized the District to purchase the existing Coast Line Canal for a price of not more than $800,000.00 and convey it free of cost to the United States of America and authorized it to issue bonds to enable it to perform the other conditions imposed upon local interests by Congress.
The District subsequently purchased the canal at a
maintenance.
The project was conditionally recommended subject to: 1) local interests acquiring the necessary rights-of-way; the privately owned waterway known as the Florida Coastline Canal being transferred free of cost to the United States, and 2) local interests furnishing suitable areas for deposit of dredged materials in connection with the work and subsequent maintenance.
price of $750,000.00 plus accrued interest to date of closing totaling $26,266.66.
Total cost of the canal purchase was $776,266.66.
The River and Harbors Act of 1927 authorized the establishment and maintenance of an inland waterway 75 feet wide and 8 feet deep at mean low water, following the coastal route from Jacksonville to Miami.
This channel/canal would be toll free provided the two previous conditions were met.
Between 1931 and 1939, Florida's Legislature gave the District the responsibility for setting conditions and standards to be imposed on local interests in meeting Congressional mandates associated with increasing the width of the waterway from 75 feet to 100 feet, authorized the District to spend state funds for publicizing the completion of the waterway and
To fulfill these conditions, the Florida Legislature
for advocacy of its use, and empowered the District
1-4
to collect, compile and furnish to the United States data, statistics and other appropriate information as to the advantages, benefits, desirability and usefulness of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway System.
During this time, the District was also empowered to acquire and convey to the United States, free of cost, any lands, easements, rights-ofway and spoil disposal areas as might be required for the future improvement of the waterway to a minimum depth of 12 feet.
Consideration by Congress of deepening the Intracoastal to a mean low water depth of 12 feet from Jacksonville to Miami was debated for years.
Finally, in 1944, the concept was authorized in the amount of $11,788,000 in the Rivers and Harbors Act that year to improve the waterway from Jacksonville to Miami, including an additional authorization of $1,830,000 to deepen the channel from Miami to Key West.
In 1965, Commissioners of the District were made appointees by the Governor as opposed to the
The Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway from Trenton, New Jersey to the St. Marys River is maintained to a mean low water depth of 12 feet and the United States desired to deepen it to the same depth from the St. Marys River to the St. Johns River.
The conditions that local interests should provide the necessary rights-of-way, spoil disposal areas free of charge were also imposed on this segment of waterway improvement.
However, because this location was north of the Duval County District jurisdictional boundary, there was no local agency authorized by law or willing to perform these functions to obtain the improvements.
So in 1941, Florida's Legislature empowered the District to assume these additional responsibilities.
To-date these responsibilities have been accomplished and the channel from the St. Marys River to the St. Johns River near Jacksonville has been improved and maintained to a depth of 12 feet and a width of 125 feet.
previous practice of electing them from their respective local jurisdictions.
Also during that year, the channel from Jacksonville to Ft. Pierce was completed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to a maximum authorized depth of 12 feet at mean low water and a maximum width of 125 feet.
From Ft. Pierce to Miami the depth has been dredged to a maximum 10 feet and the maximum 125 foot width.
An economic feasibility study was funded by Congress in 1977 to determine the benefits and costs of dredging the channel from 10 to 12 feet from Ft. Pierce to Miami.
Costs, at that time, were determined to exceed benefits for this leg of the waterway system.
Spoil and dredge disposal has always been an issue on Florida's east coast due to the extensive shoaling caused by close proximity to the Gulf Stream and also due to environmental sensitivity and lack of suitable disposal site availability near Florida's high
1-5
cost beach side real estate.
During the 1980s and early 1990s the District, jointly with the U.S. Corps of
Districts should be continued indefinitely.
Included in this legislation was a provision designating the Florida Inland Navigation District as the "local navigation sponsor" for the Okeechobee Waterway in Martin County.
The District is now responsible for providing dredged material management areas for this waterway channel that connects the east and west coast intracoastal waterways.
Engineers, and the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, formulated a consensus plan for a pilot study to determine the spoil disposal maintenance needs of
During the recent deliberations of Florida's Strategic Intermodal System Steering Committee and documented in that committee's Final Report (published in December 2002), Florida's 1,300+ mile coastline was recognized as an underutilized and little understood resource for future mitigation of commercial congestion on Florida's land side transportation system.
Because of Florida's sensitive and pristine environment, and the waterway and to provide a permanent infrastructure of sites to manage this material for reuse.
Forty-seven sites to manage 41.5 million cubic yards of dredged material from 282 miles of waterway channel over the next 50 years have been identified.
This includes 21.5 million cubic yards of material to be placed on six beach areas that will serve as feeder beaches on the Atlantic coast.
All studies have been completed and spoil site acquisition plans are well underway.
Potential limitations for future intracoastal and In 1995, the Florida Legislature reviewed the functions of Navigation Districts in Florida and found that the inland waterway system use do exist and will be further discussed throughout this report.
Shallow the State's historical tendency to preserve and protect its reputation as a vacation destination focused on its coastline recreational activities, commercial waterborne transportation in close proximity to public beaches, coastal residential communities, and urban areas has historically not been promoted nor utilized to its capacity within the state.
1-6
commercial use of the state's intracoastal and navigable waterways; to document the key waterside connection points of the shallow draft network with the land side transportation system; and to map the key features of Florida's intracoastal and inland waterway system.
A future Phase II effort will most likely focus on the feasibility of enhancing the existing system; identifying critical needs, suggesting strategies for draft and ocean going barge operations are slower modes of transport relative to truck and railroad and in most cases are not the appropriate means of transport for time-sensitive goods.
Longer transit and delivery times translate into higher commodity inventory costs to shippers.
Scheduled services, population and employment densities in close proximity to barge operation staging points, large volumes of containers or bulk commodities and the necessary infrastructure to handle them are all key factors that must be addressed to make short or longhaul barge operations economical.
The chapters that follow will highlight global market trends, existing and potential barge service operations from the user's perspective, strategies that will make the system work, and some future initiatives that might be undertaken to enhance the future use of Florida's navigable waterways for commercial purposes.
The purpose of this intitial Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Study is to document for the first time the importance of the navigable waterways and intracoastal system to the state's commercial activities; to inventory the operators and Note: Much of this introduction was extracted from "History of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway", United States Army Corps of Engineers, Water Resources Support Center-National Waterways Study, Institute for Water Resources, January 1983.
effecting improvements necessary to efficiently link the shallow draft system to land side transportation.
Emphasis also will be placed on land side congestion mitigation through the use of barge transportation where proven practical and economically feasible.
commodities currently utilizing the system; to identify primary commodities transported by the system; to highlight existing major impediments that restrict
1-7
