News for and about Illinois Corrections January 2001 Volume 24 Number 1 DOC's Helping Paws Service Dog Program reaches out to those with special needs The Department of Corrections' Helping Paws Service Dog Program at Dwight Correctional Center is the first service dog training program in the state involving inmates as trainers.
Through a unique partnership between DOC, the Clarence Foundation and Lake Land College, Helping Paws is providing service dogs to people of Illinois with special needs.
At Dwight Correctional Center, a group of employees, female inmates and other excited spectators gathered to pay tribute to the accomplishments of a distinguished friend during a special ceremony--the graduation of "Jake," the dog.
Jake, a golden retriever mix, graduated Aug. 4, 2000, and is one of the first dogs to be placed as a service dog
from the Department of Corrections' Helping Paws Service Dog Program.
Jake's new home is now at ManorCare Health Services in Hinsdale where he provides socialization and assistance to 200 patients.
The Helping Paws program at Dwight is unique because it's the first service dog training program in the state involving inmates.
Through a novel partnership between DOC, the Clarence Foundation and Lake Land College, Helping Paws is providing service dogs at no cost to people of Illinois with special needs.
DOC's Melissa "Missy" Stutler, deputy director of Paws ... continued on page 4
ON THE INSIDE · Director's message ............................2 · DOC SECA Campaign surpasses goal ...3 · Finalists named for new prison site ...3 · College tuition plans announced..........3 · DOC's Helping Paws program ........4-15 · ICA holds training, election ...............16
Helping Paws Service Dog Program is an innovative step to serving Illinois The Illinois Correctional Industries program continues to grow on an annual basis.
One of the newest programs to be added to the ICI arena is the Helping Paws Service Dog Program at Dwight Correctional Center.
Helping Paws is the first service dog training program in Illinois involving inmates as trainers.
Through a unique partnership between the Department of Corrections, the Clarence Foundation and Lake Land College, Helping Paws is providing service dogs at no cost to people of Illinois with special needs.
The partnership complements the Helping Paws program.
The Clarence Foundation, a non-profit organization, Donald N. Snyder Jr. locates dogs at shelters or veterinarian Director offices then transfers the animals to Dwight.
It also donates dog food and locates recipients for the dogs.
Lake Land College teaches the inmates to become dog groomers with 200 hours of instruction.
Inmates who pass the course become certified dog groomers.
Helping Paws is transforming lives--both human and canine.
Since May 10, 2000, Dwight inmates and instructors have been training dogs to perform a variety of services including opening cabinets, retrieving objects, switching lights on and off, and accompanying disabled people who use wheelchairs and walkers.
The dogs, who are rescued from shelters and abandonment, reside in the same housing unit as their inmate trainers.
The Dwight inmates selected to be service dog trainers are women who will one day be released back into society.
Many have children.
In accordance with Governor Ryan's focus on rehabilitation, these women will gain marketable skills while reinforcing a commitment to responsibility, the work ethic and compassion for others.
ICI continues to develop programs and instill a work ethic that will improve the ex-offender 's ability to acquire employment.
The average number of inmate workers remains constant at about 1,350, working at 50 various operations in 22 different facilities.
Three major divisions of ICI operations include agri-business, which encompass farm and food processing operations; manufacturing operations of clothing, furniture and personal care items; and other services such as providing licensed inmates for asbestos abatement and garment cleaning.
Perspectives is published monthly by the Illinois Department of Corrections George H. Ryan Governor Donald N. Snyder Jr.
Director Sergio Molina Chief of the Office of Communications and Public Service Nic Howell Chief Public Information Officer Brian Fairchild Public Information Officer IV Dede Short Editor/Art Director
Director 's message
Perspectives
encourages responses from its readers.
Letters or other submissions should be mailed to: Illinois Department of Corrections, 1301 Concordia Court, Springfield, IL 62794-9277.
The department reserves the right to edit all materials submitted.
Web site address
www.idoc.state.il.us Printed by authority of the State of Illinois 18,435 copies, January 2001
2
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
DOC 2000 SECA Campaign surpasses goal, raises more than $308,000 Employees' voluntary contributions to organizations help make a difference in the lives of others The Department of Corrections surpassed its SECA Campaign goal of $300,000, according to Marcy Nolan, coordinator of Volunteer Services, who served as DOC's SECA chairperson for 2000.
"Many of our facilities achieved 100 percent contribution," she said.
"And, many of them surpassed the requested 10 percent increase over 1999 by two to three times.
Total contributions amounted to more than $308,000."
Nolan praised employees and facility SECA coordinators for a job well done.
"This year 's campaign has been a big success due to the hard work of the department's SECA coordinators and the unselfish giving of DOC employees.
A big thank you goes out to all of you," Nolan said.
The SECA (State and University Employees Combined Appeal) Campaign is a once-a-year worksite fundraiser that allows employees to contribute to one or more of the participating charities through either payroll deduction or by giving a onetime donation.
For the last 14 years, SECA has received contributions from state employees.
Nearly $30 million has been raised with millions of Illinois citizens receiving much needed help.
SECA contributions go toward organizations that help children, provide treatments for life-threatening diseases, feed the hungry and preserve the environment.
Last year, DOC employees shared in the Gold Award, which recognizes agencies that are top fundraisers based on agency size and employee giving.
DOC was also presented an Outstanding Achievement Award, which honors agencies that raise their goal by 15 percent and surpass that figure.
College Illinois! offers a variety of benefits and payment plans
Three communities named as finalists for home of new adult male maximum-security prison Public hearings held in mid-January Hoopeston, Wenona and Grayville were announced as the three finalists for the siting of a new $140 million, 1,600bed maximum-security prison with a 200-bed minimumsecurity unit.
The facility will employ more than 760 people on an annual budget of more than $55 million.
As many as 350 area tradespeople will construct the facility over a 30-month period.
Public hearings were held in mid-January to provide citizens the opportunity to comment about the community becoming the home to a new prison.
The new adult male prison will be similar to Thomson Correctional Center, a state-ofthe-art facility which has tapered wings for greater visual perspective.
Thomson is projected to open in late 2001.
College Illinois!, the state's prepaid tuition plan, recently opened its third annual enrollment period.
College Illinois! offers a way to begin building a solid college funding plan for aspiring students.
The program allows the purchaser to prepay future college tuition and mandatory fees based on today's prices.
Purchasers can choose from a variety of benefits and payment plans and have the opportunity to make changes in those plans.
Benefits are good in both state and out-of-state public and private colleges and universities.
Annual enrollment will run through Feb. 28, 2001.
For more information, contact College Illinois! toll free at 877877-3724 or access its website at www.collegeillinois.com.
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
3
Rich Mautino (right) serves as the supervisor of the Helping Paws Service Dog Program at Dwight Correctional Center.
Also featured is Dawn Vendegna, who served as the program's first dog trainer.
Dog trainers in the program work with inmates throughout the week, teaching them skills needed to train the dogs to learn up to 80 service commands.
Mautino said DOC is pleased with the progress and positive results of Helping Paws and is striving to be equal to other established service dog programs.
Paws ... continued from page 1 Women and Family Services, and Ken Dobucki, chief executive officer of Correctional Industries, oversee and monitor the program for the department.
Rich Mautino, serves as the supervisor for Helping Paws at Dwight.
Who are the players? An important step in establishing Helping Paws involved interviewing inmates who applied for the position of service dog trainer.
A team from DOC, the Clarence Foundation and Lake Land College conducted the interviewing process and chose 10 inmates to serve as trainers for 10 dogs.
The inmates, along with their training instructors, have been diligently training the dogs since May 2000.
The dogs are trained to perform a variety of services such as opening cabinets, retrieving objects, switching lights and walking beside wheel chairs and walkers.
Jake is one of the first success stories in the Helping Paws program, a program that gives dogs, inmates and recipients a second chance.
Others have since followed.
The Clarence Foundation places the dogs from the Helping Paws program with Illinois recipients who need special assistance.
The Clarence Foundation, established in 1997, is a nonprofit organization that is operated by volunteers and supported through fundraising.
The foundation is named after Clarence, the guardian angel in the film classic "It's a Wonderful Life," who shows that no matter what your limitations--life is worth living.
The mission of the Clarence
Above is the cell unit at Dwight Correctional Center that houses the 10 inmates and 10 dogs of the Helping Paws Service Dog Program.
Next to the unit is a fenced area where the dogs learn commands using agility equipment.
Sandra Farnik, a director with the Clarence Foundation, has studied other service dog training prison programs in the U.S. and notes that Helping Paws is up and running and comparable to the success of like prison programs in other states.
4
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
Foundation is grounded in the simple belief that people and dogs are good for each other, emotionally and physically.
The foundation is dedicated to locating, training and providing service and or guide dogs free of charge to individuals who are physically challenged.
Sandra Farnik and Janet Tangorra, directors of the Clarence Foundation, created the corporation to help meet this critical need.
"The partnership between DOC, the Clarence Foundation and Lake Land College is transforming lives," said Stutler.
"The Helping Paws program rescues dogs from shelters and abandonment.
Their lives are ultimately saved from death in a shelter, or starvation on the streets, to a rewarding life of helping a person with special needs."
"In addition to this noble act, Correctional Industries recognizes the need for continuing growth and improvement in training programs that help reintegrate ex-offenders into society," added Dobucki.
"Helping Paws is fulfilling that need.
The inmates serving as trainers are learning new skills to assist them with future employment opportunities.
This program helps inmates develop the required patience in performing a job and increases their selfesteem.
These are all benefits that contribute to both rehabilitation and recidivism," Dobucki said.
"It's one of many Correctional Industries programs dedicated to helping inmates turn their lives around."
The idea of DOC inmates training dogs to become service dogs came to Farnik when she learned about the success of a dog service training program Paws ... continued on page 6
Jake, a golden retriever mix, is one of the first dogs to graduate from DOC's Helping Paws Service Dog Program.
The boundaries continue to expand regarding the extraordinary accomplishments of service dogs.
They can retrieve keys, canes, crutches, or just about anything a person drops or points to for the dog to notice.
Service dogs can bring the telephone in emergencies or on command.
They can aid partners who fall by helping them back to their feet and transporting medication, medical supplies and other essentials in backpacks.
Service dogs can prevent serious falls by helping an ambulatory partner rise and maintain balance while standing, walking and negotiating stairs.
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
5
Shown in the top photo, Jake, a golden retriever mix, demonstrates how he can assist a person who uses a wheelchair by heeding to various commands.
In addition to Jake, all of the dogs in the Helping Paws program have progressed rapidly at Dwight Correctional Center.
The other canines in the program are being trained to serve those with disabilities, including Down syndrome, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, seizures, a brittle bone disease and paraplegia.
Below, Juki shows how to assist a person who depends on the use of a walker.
Paws ... continued from page 5 operating in a Washington prison.
The Clarence Foundation discussed the idea with Rep. Jim Meyer of the 81st District, who helped put them in contact with DOC.
"The Clarence Foundation did its homework, regarding how a private nonprofit sector works with the State of Illinois," said Farnik.
"We began discussing the program with DOC in late 1999 and on May 15, 2000, volunteers dropped off 10 dogs at the Dwight Correctional Center.
If someone would have said `you'll be in prison reform' when the Clarence Foundation opened, we wouldn't have believed it.
Now we hope to continue this program with DOC for many years to come."
In addition to the Clarence Foundation, Lake Land College provides educational service and assistance to the female inmates.
6
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
The inmates are doing a terrific job, according to Sandra Farnik, a director with the Clarence Foundation, which is a non-profit organization dedicated to locating, training and providing service and guide dogs free of charge to individuals.
One success story regards Zeus, a boxer who was extremely sick when he came to Dwight Correctional Center.
The inmate trainer held him the entire weekend and used her own funds to buy rice from the commissary.
The other inmates prayed for Zeus during that crucial time.
A few weeks later, Zeus became strong, healthy and even experienced a growth spurt.
Zeus, as featured in the photo, is also trained to assist a person who uses a wheelchair and is capable of obeying numerous service commands.
Lake Land teaches the inmates to become dog groomers with 200hours of instruction in how to bathe dogs, cut their hair and trim their nails as well as proper health and sanitation procedures.
Helping Paws helps many lives.
"The progress of the program is very good," said Mautino.
"The tasks being taught are relayed to us through the Clarence Foundation who focuses on the recipients' needs."
Dawn Vendegna served as the program's first dog trainer.
Ann Galassi and Morgan Galik have later come on board as dog trainers.
The trainers teach the
inmates skills needed to train the dogs to learn up to 80 service commands.
Those involved with Helping Paws see first-hand the success of the program as well as the trials and tribulations.
As part of the program, inmates grow attached to the animals they are training with the thought of knowing that they will have to let them go.
After intense training of up to 18 months, the 10 inmates will have to face the agony of giving their animals to the recipients.
Despite this separation, the program offers remarkable rewards.
The impact of Helping Paws is extending way beyond the fences of Dwight Correctional Center.
The center 's 10 inmates are training the dogs to be the missing limb, to be the alarm prior to a seizure, and to be the loyal companion to love the recipient regardless of any disability he or she may suffer.
A number of recipients with special needs are scheduled to benefit from this program.
The canines in Helping Paws are being trained to serve those with disabilities, including Down syndrome, multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy, seizures, a brittle bone disease and paraplegia.
"The inmates are doing a terrific job," said Farnik, referring to Paws ... continued on page 9
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
7
Correctional Officer Pam Bowman, one of the many supportive staff of the program at Dwight, shakes hands with Leo in the top left photo.
In the top right photo, Juki shows off skills of descending a ladder.
In the bottom right photo, Skid receives praise and a treat for obeying a service command.
8
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
Leo is shown jumping through an opening in the agility area of the exercise training grounds at Dwight Correctional Center.
No commands are too big or small.
Positive feedback is the key to the success.
Paws ... continued from page 7 the success story of Zeus, a boxer who was extremely sick when he came to Dwight.
"Our inmate trainer held him the entire weekend.
She used her own funds to buy rice from the commissary.
The other inmates prayed for Zeus during that crucial time.
A few weeks later, Zeus was strong, healthy and even experienced a growth spurt."
The Clarence Foundation is driven by the commitment to fulfill the deluge of requests for service dogs from the overwhelming supply of canines at local animal shelters.
Unfortunately, far more persons are in need of a fourlegged guardian angel than there are dogs available with the tem-
perament suitable for service.
Currently, only a few schools in Illinois are licensed to provide service dogs.
Long waiting lists, sometimes up to two years, coupled with training costs that may run as much as $20,0000 are discouraging.
The Clarence Foundation adopts dogs from shelters and humane societies from mixes through purebreds.
Helping Paws receives dogs from a variety of locations and organizations, such as the Hinsdale Humane Society, Pets in Need in Ringwood (where Jake came from), the Anti-Cruelty Society in Chicago, David Lee Center, Coles County, the Livingston Humane Society and citizen rescues.
"We look at the temperament of a dog when choosing one for the program," said Farnik.
"The Hinsdale Humane Society has staff with degrees in animal behavior.
They know the characteristics we look for, such as calm--not rattled.
They are able to pick them out of the shelter environment of barking and wagging tales."
Of all the recent dogs brought into the program, one particular dog miraculously survived the odds of a doomed fate and was named appropriately.
Lucky, a yellow lab, was placed with the program by the Anti-Cruelty Society in Chicago.
When found, he was 25 pounds underweight.
"You could see his ribs protruding and his heart beating," Farnik said.
"Now, he's about 80 pounds and pure muscle."
As a symbol of the program's dedication to helping, caring and giving hope toward the quality of life, Lucky is represented on the Helping Paws logo.
Through the Paws ... continued on page 10
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
9
Paws ... continued from page 9 guidance of the animal behaviorist and Helping Paws, Lucky has what it takes to be a service dog.
He will soon be assisting a person who has multiple sclerosis.
To successfully train service dogs, time is an essential factor.
"It's a hard job finding foster families or individuals to become involved in the program of training service dogs," said Farnik.
"People lead busy lives, such as reporting to jobs and attending school events, and sometimes they do not have the time needed to train dogs.
"The Helping Paws program is a success with the inmates.
There's a big commitment with critters seven days a week.
It's a lot of hard work, but you get back unconditional love.
Sometimes it's difficult for inmates to give up the dogs.
The state has a social worker who helps them cope and adjust to departure--and the inmates help each other cope."
The Clarence Foundation also provides guest speakers who address the inmates about job opportunities, such as groomers, trainers and walkers.
Former foster volunteers also share with the inmates their own rewarding experiences and satisfaction of raising a service dog.
"The Helping Paws Service Dog Program is up and running and is comparable to the success of like prison programs in other states," Farnik noted.
Farnik has visited prisons in Fort Knox, Ky., Oneida, Wisc., and at Gig Harbour, Wash., to study and compare their service dog programs.
Stutler and Dobucki have researched the service dog programs at a number of prisons as well and have blue-
Synchronized jumping is another accomplishment achieved by Elliot (front) and Lucky as shown in the above photo.
Both dogs are able to jump together back and forth through the opening on command.
In the bottom photo, Gucchi opens a door.
Service dogs are trained to open doors to buildings, hotel rooms and around the house.
They also answer doorbells and let the person in, escort the person to its partner and return to shut the door.
10
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
prints to follow and monitor the progression of Helping Paws.
"The prison program is an ideal setting for training the dogs," said Farnik.
"Foster volunteers at home might sometimes break training rules by letting the dog lay on the couch like their other dogs in the house.
There are conflicting rules for service dogs and pets.
With inmates, the dogs are an extension of themselves."
Farnik noted that she has recently spoken to more than 700 people at civic organizations and churches regarding donations and fundraisers for the Clarence Foundation.
"The Clarence Foundation has taken a quantum leap because of DOC's participation," Farnik said.
"It's a phenomenal alliance."
The Clarence Foundation also donates dogs to minors who have disabilities.
Lucky and Zeus are scheduled to be given to children.
"We're hoping these kids will go to high school and college and become productive and independent," said Farnik.
The service dogs provided to recipients are free.
"The foundation doesn't charge one dime for the dog," Farnik pointed out.
"Some organizations request around $10,000 to $12,000.
We don't charge for application fees either."
The Clarence Foundation is looking for volunteers to participate in canine furloughs, said Farnik.
Volunteers are needed to take the dogs for a couple days to socialize them outside the prison.
Mautino escorted one of the dogs to a restaurant and no one knew the dog was there, Farnik noted.
The boundaries continue to expand regarding the extraordinary accomplishments of service
Rocket is shown jumping through a hoop, which is one of the many agility skills taught at Dwight.
The inmates serving as trainers also are learning new skills to assist them with future employment opportunities.
The program helps inmates develop the required patience in performing a job and increases their self-esteem.
These benefits contribute to both rehabilitation and recidivism.
Helping Paws is one of many Correctional Industries programs dedicated to helping inmates turn their lives around.
dogs.
They can retrieve keys, canes, crutches, or just about anything a person drops or points to for the dog to notice.
Service dogs can bring the telephone in emergencies or on command.
They can aid partners who fall by helping them back to their feet.
They can transport medication, medical supplies and other essentials in backpacks.
Service dogs can also prevent serious falls by helping an ambulatory partner
rise and maintain balance while standing, walking and negotiating stairs.
They can open doors to buildings, hotel rooms and around the house.
They also can carry in groceries and other packages.
And, they can answer doorbells and let the person in, escorting that person to its partner then returning to shut the door.
Paws ... continued on page 12
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
11
Paws ... continued from page 11 What do the inmate trainers think of Helping Paws? "No commands are too big or small.
Its almost limitless what the dogs can do," said one of the inmate trainers.
"They can help do laundry, bring items to the washing machine, take clothes out of the dryer and help carry baskets," she said, emphasizing that service dogs in helping their partners can cover almost the entire gamut.
Age and need of recipients are no barriers to service dogs.
Jake assists nursing home patients as a form of therapy by motivating them in their rehabilitation.
Leo is to be given to a two-year-old child who is autistic.
Positive feedback is the key to success.
"All of the training involves positive reinforcement," added an inmate.
"The program does not tolerate any violent training.
We take bad behavior and modify it to be good.
For example, if a dog barks at strangers, we say `hush.'
If a dog barks to provide a warning or message, it is rewarded."
The Helping Paws program lays the foundation for a second chance.
"This is all about second chances for the dog, the recipient and the inmate," another inmate added.
"Helping Paws saves the dog's life.
It gives us life skills.
And the recipient who receives the dog--this dog will give that person a second chance as well.
"The program is our chance to give something back to the community.
It gives us a whole new perspective on life.
I'm sitting in Paws ... continued on page 14
Jake waits patiently to attend the graduation ceremony in his honor.
The Helping Paws program is laying the foundation for second chances for those involved.
Helping Paws works diligently to rescue dogs from shelters and the streets.
The program, through Correctional Industries, is also providing life skills to inmates--skills that benefit rehabilitation and recidivism.
And the recipient who receives the dog is also being helped to lead a more independent life.
12
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
Above, Correctional Officer Bowman, inmate dog trainers and service dogs in training line both sides of the sidewalk as they wait to pay tribute to Jake, the first dog to graduate from the Helping Paws Service Dog Program at Dwight Correctional Center.
Below, Jake acknowledges those attending this special gathering as he and his inmate trainer march down the isle during his Aug. 4 graduation.
Later that day, Jake paraded for another group of DOC employees and inmates who also paid tribute to his achievements.
The Clarence Foundation will eventually place all of the dogs in the Helping Paws program at Dwight with Illinois recipients who need special assistance.
January 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
13
Paws ... continued from page 12 prison, but what about the guy sitting in a wheel chair? May be he thinks he's in prison.
This program gives him a new chance at life too.
It gives people in the free world another chance.
A lot of people with disabilities give up on things.
We can give them a dog to help them.
It gives them a reason for living."
The program can provide a new perspective on life as well as new skills.
"There was a girl (inmate) in here a long time," recalled an inmate.
"She use to walk with her head down all of the time.
When she saw the dogs and what the program could do, her whole demeanor changed.
And we're locked up.
Just think what it would do to someone on the outside? Helping Paws brought us a new outlook on life.
We're learning a new trade right here."
"Many times a person who is handicapped feels like a burden on others.
The dog doesn't care how that person looks or sounds," another inmate said.
"The service dog helps build that person's self esteem and gives that person a second chance of living a life.
It makes us feel better helping a person's life that way and giving back to the community.
We don't sell these dogs.
We are non-violent trainers and use a no-hands on approach.
Other programs use more aggression in training their dogs."
"Before we felt we were just here--we were existing," noted another inmate.
"Now we have a purpose.
We are giving back to the community.
We may not repay our debt, but we are giving 110 percent to the program.
We are serving our purpose."
It's amazing how a group of 10 dogs can be brought together
As part of the graduation ceremonial exercise shown above, Jake is handed over to Dawn Vendegna, who served as the program's first dog training instructor.
Below Vendegna congratulates Jake for a "job well done."
14
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
at the same time and become socialized.
"It took us only three days," an inmate said.
"Usually, a situation like this takes more than three months.
Everyday one of the dogs has completed a task that you thought could not be possible.
You watch the behavior of how a dog reads situations."
The 10 female inmates at Dwight Correctional Center are proud of their achievements as service dog trainers.
A good trainer, they say, is "consistent and patient."
"The inmate trainers are doing a fabulous job," said Stutler.
"They are determined to make the Helping Paws program a notable and continued success."
Since Jake's departure at Dwight, good reports have filtered in.
His friendly nature is a big hit at ManorCare in Hinsdale where he assists the nursing home's 200 patients.
Recently, the Hinsdale Reporter/Suburban Life newspaper featured how Jake is making the lives brighter for residents of ManorCare.
John Vrba, ManorCare's administrator, said in the article that Jake has become the home's "Patch Adams," a caregiver who can make people feel better through humor and genuine concern rather than through medication.
As a way of therapy to work their arm muscles, resident's will be able to play ball with Jake and brush his shiny coat.
Others who are recovering from hip and knee replacement will be able to walk with Jake, who rings a bell tied to a door when he needs to go outside.
Eventually, Jake will alert the staff when a resident is having trouble breathing.
Already, Jake has been trained to sense when a resident is losing his or her balance and break the resi-
Jake's friendly nature is a big hit at the ManorCare in Hinsdale where his presence has been compared to the humorous caregiver, "Patch Adams."
Three other dogs have followed Jake's footsteps by helping those with special needs.
dent's fall with his body, the artiherd Labrador retriever mix, was cle stated.
placed Dec. 15, 2000, with a "The ManorCare is interested Down syndrome recipient.
And in obtaining other Rambler, a male "Before we felt we were service dogs from spaniel mix, was Helping Paws," just here--we were existing.
placed Dec. 7, said Mautino.
2000, with the Now we have a purpose.
"We're pleased Sunrise Nursing We are giving back to the with the progress Home in Glen community.
We may not and positive results Ellyn. repay our debt, but we are of the program and Leo's tasks giving 110 percent to the are looking forward include advance to doing so much obedience, openprogram.
We are serving more," Mautino ing and closing our purpose."
said.
"Helping doors, retrieval Paws is striving to and socialization.
-- Inmate Dog Trainer be equal to other As service therestablished service Dwight Correctional Center apy dogs, the dog programs.
tasks of Rotary "Staff at Dwight is very supand Rambler include advanced portive of our efforts," he added.
obedience and socialization.
"The warden and assistant warAs dogs depart the Helping dens are helping us find the right Paws program, new ones arrive-people for the right job."
like Casey, Bear, Sherlock and Since Jake's graduation, three Sunny, who joined the team in others have followed in his footDecember.
The latest arrivals, steps by being placed as service McKenzie and Missy, jumped on dogs.
Rotary, a cocker spaniel board in mid-January.
These mix, was adopted Jan. 10 by the dogs, too, will be trained to help Brighton Gardens Alzheimer 's Illinois citizens with special and Memory Disorder Home in needs live a better life.
Wheaton.
Leo, a German shepJanuary 2001 · Illinois Department of Corrections ·
15
Illinois Correctional Association Fall Training Institute addresses managing corrections in the new millennium Governor George H. Ryan featured as keynote speaker The Illinois Correctional Association held its annual training institute recently in Arlington Heights.
Governor George H. Ryan served as the event's keynote speaker.
Ryan noted that the collective job performed by correctional employees is a difficult, but vital, task in ensuring that the public is protected from those who break the laws of society.
He also added that the Illinois Department of Corrections is one of the finest correctional systems in the nation.
Ryan attributed the department's success to the competent and courageous service provided by its employees who are shaping the future of the corrections industry.
The conference allowed those attending to become acquainted with some of the initiatives devised during the past 20 months at DOC.
The program included an overview of the new parole initiative and placement resource unit as well as educational programming, internal audit control and the performance-based management initiative.
The Illinois State Police Bomb Squad provided a demonstration and a session was also held on Internet crimes.
Director Donald N. Snyder Jr. said that in no time in history have correctional employees been more challenged to provide programs and services to those entrusted to them.
The variety of educational and networking opportunities offered through the ICA conference helps employees gain new skills and ideas that will make operations more efficient and effective in the new millennium.
Michael J. Mahoney, executive director of John Howard Association, and Tim Haslett, lieutenant at Danville, were named Sam Sublett Award winners.
Those serving as 2000 ICA board members were: Jerry Butler, president; George E. DeTella, past president; Diane Jockisch, vice president; Frank Shaw, treasurer; and Michelle Buscher, secretary.
ICA ELECTION RESUL TS President Elect Lamark Carter Deputy Director District 1 Illinois Department of Corrections Vice President Ernest Velasco Executive Director Cook County Department of Corrections
Treasurer Ron Matrisciano Deputy Commander of Field Operations Illinois Department of Corrections
Secretary Michelle Buscher Assistant SuperintendentOperations Illinois Youth CenterValley View Illinois Department of Corrections
ICA officers will be serving Jan. 1, 2001, through Jan. 1, 2003.
16
· Illinois Department of Corrections · January 2001
