Y I I STATE OF WISCONSIN BEFORE THE PHARMACY EXAMINING BOARD -.
IN THE MATTER OF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDTNGS AGAINST FRANKLIN LaDIEN, R.Ph., GARY P. MILLER, R.Ph. and ROGER L. ARONSON, R.Ph., RESPONDENTS.
FINAL DECISION AND ORDER LS9404071PHM LS9409094l ' HM
The parties to this proceeding for the purposes of sec. 227.53, Stats., are: Franklin LaDien W150 N7809 Hilltop Drive Menomonee Falls, WI 53051 Gary P. Miller, R.Ph. 8611 West Glendale Avenue Milwaukee, WI 53225 Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph. W61-N353 Washington Avenue Cedarburg, WI 53012 Pharmacy Examining Board 1400 East Washington Avenue P.O. Box 8935 Madison, WI 53708 Department of Regulation and Licensing Division of Enforcement 1400 East Washington Avenue P.O. Box 8935 Madison, WI ` 53708 This matter was commenced by the filing of a Complaint dated March 29, 1994, captioned In the Matter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Franklin LaDien, R.Ph., and Walgreens; and by Complaints dated August 31, 1994, captioned In the Matter of Disciplinary ProceedingsAgainst Gay P. Miller, R.Ph., and In the Matter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph.
The Walgreens matter was settled by stipulation, and the remaining actions were consolidated for the purposes of hearing.
The hearing was conducted on November 9, 1994, and January 12 and 13, 1995.
Complainant appeared by Attorney Arthur Thexton.
Respondent Franklin LaDien appeared by Attorney Edward S. Marion.
Respondents Miller and Aronson appeared by Attorney Gregory J. Meeker.
The hearing transcript was received on March 23,199s.
The administrative law judge filed his Proposed Decision on July 24, 1995.
Complainant ' attorney submitted objections to the Proposed Decision on August 11, s 1995.
Responses to the objections were submitted on behalf of Respondent LaDien on August 15,1995, and Respondents Miller and Aronson on August 21,199s.
The Pharmacy Examining Board considered the matter and based upon the entire record herein makes the following Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law, and Order.
FINDINGS OF FACT 1.
Franklin LaDien, R.Ph.
(Mr. LaDien), W150 N7809 Hilltop Drive, Menomonee Falls, WI 53051, was at all times material to this matter licensed as a pharmacist in the State of W isconsin by license #9295, issued on December 10,1977.
2.
Gary P. Miller, R.Ph.
(Mr. Miller), 8611 West Glendale Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53225 was at all times relevant to this matter licensed as a pharmacist in the State of W isconsin by license #8731, issued on January 9,1975.
3.
Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph.
(Mr. Aronson), W61 N353 Washington Avenue, Cedarburg, WI 53012, was at all times relevant hereto licensed as a pharmacist in the State of W isconsin by license #10098, issued on March 26,1982.
4.
At all times pharmacist, as defined at Pharmacy located at 7713 the State of W isconsin to 1979 (Walgreens #34). material to this matter, Mr. LaDien was the managing sec. Phar 1.02(6), Code, at Walgreens #34, a community West Capitol Drive, Milwaukee, WI 53222, and licensed by operate as a pharmacy by license #6064, issued on May 18,
5.
At all times material to thii matter, Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson were staff pharmacists at Walgreens #34.
6.
On September 14,1993, the Pharmacy Examining Board (board) issued its Final Decision and Order in a case captioned In the Mutter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Franklin J LaDien, R.Ph.
The decision, which was entered pursuant to a Stipulation executed by Mr. LaDien and Mr. Arthur Thexton, attorney with the Department of Regulation and Licensing Division of Enforcement (department), found that on four occasions in late 1992 and early 1993, department investigators had observed patients at Walgreens #34 receiving prescription medications being 2
transferred to the patients by a non-pharmacist and without any consultation by a pharmacist.
It was found further that those stipulated facts constituted a violation of sec.
I' har 7.01(l)(e), Code.
' Mr. LaDien, as managing pharmacist, was ordered reprimanded and to pay a $250 forfeiture.
7.
Both prescription drugs and nonprescription drugs dispensed from the pharmacy area at Walgreens #34 are delivered to customers packaged in white paper bags.
No more than five percent of drugs dispensed from the pharmacy area are nonprescription drugs.
8.
On November 11, 1993, at around 1230 p.m., department investigator Vint Quarnme (Mr. Quamme), observed consulting practices at Walgreens #34.
Mr. Quamme observed Mr. Aronson and Mr. Miller on duty at that time, and observed Mr. Aronson transfer at least two or three medication packages to customers without providing any apparent consultation.
Mr. Quamme did not observe Mr. Miller transfer any medication package to any customer.
Mr. Quamme observed a female wearing a nametag which read "Virginia R., Technician " transfer between 8 and 20 medication packages to customers without a pharmacist being present and without any consultation being provided to those customers at the time of transfer.
9.
On November 17, 1993, department investigator Steven Rohland (Mr. Rohland) observed consultation practices at Walgreens #34 for approximately 15 minutes.
Mr. Rohland reported that he witnessed three transactions in which medications were dispensed from the pickup window of the pharmacy area; that two of the transactions were handled by a pharmacy technician without any consultation, and that the third transaction was handled by a person of unknown qualifications without any apparent consultation.
Mr. Rohland does not recall seeing any of the respondents in this matter in attendance at the store on that date.
10.
On February 3,1994, Mr. Rohland returned to Walgreens #34 to observe consultation practices at that pharmacy.
At the time of the visit, the pharmacy was very busy, and there were two pharmacy technicians and one pharmacist at the prescription pickup window.
Mr. Rohland observed each of the pharmacy technicians complete two transactions and did not observe the pharmacy technicians provide any consultation.
In a fifth transaction handled by one of the pharmacy technicians, a prescription for Phar 7 01 Mimmum procedures compoundmg dispensmg.
(1) Except as provided in sub. (4), a for and pharmacistor phannacW-Intern compoundsor dqenses accordingto a prescriptionorder shall follow the who procedures describedm tbls rule and other applicableprocedures.The pharmacistor phamnclst-Internas directed by a phwmaclstshall: **** (e) Transferthe prescnptionto the patlentor agentof the patient and give the patient or agentappmpnate consultattonrelative to the prescnpttonexceptthat prescriptmns may be deliveredby an agentof the phumactst to a patient ' resrdence the debvery is accompanied appropriate s If by dlrecuonsand an mdicatmnthat consultation1s avadableby contactmgthe pharmacat.
I
3
.
Amoxicillin was dispensed, and the technician asked the patient whether she received that medication before and received an affirmative response.
Mr. Rohland witnessed two transactions completed by the pharmacist.
In both instances, pharmacist provided a proper consultation.
Mr. Rohland did not observe whether pharmacist present at the pickup window was one of the respondents in this matter.
had, also the the
Mr. Rohland returned to Walgreens #34 on February 10,1994, along with 11.
another investigator, Sherri Johnson (Ms. Johnson), to again observe their consultation practices.
During the time of this visit, a single pharmacy technician handled all transactions.
Mr. Rohland and Ms. Johnson observed approximately eight to ten transactions and did not observe that any consultations took place.
Mr. Rohland did not observe any of the respondents to be present in the pharmacy area.
12.
Both Mr. M iller and Mr. Aronson were on duty at the times the department investigators visited Walgreens #34, except that Mr. Aronson was not on duty on February 3,1994.
Mr. LaDien was not present on any of the occasions.
13.
The department investigators identified three of the patients receiving medication packages on February 3, 1994, and February 10, 1994, for whom consultations were not apparently provided.
In a telephone conversation on February 21, 1994, Mr. Rohland requested that Mr. LaDien provide patient profiles for the three patients.
Mr. LaDien ' response, as contained in his letter of March 4, 1994, states in s part as follows: Patients Schmidt and Schneider have been on these medications for approximately 3 years for chronic, prevailing conditions.
Mr. Brushafer was picking up a refill for a medication he ' been taking since January 1994.
d Our management and store staff have made significant efforts in changing our worMow and service to give our customers the best service they deserve.
This includes our willingness
department may wish to make in helping our practice.
and openness to accept any suggestions your
I, personally, was not on duty on those dates in question.
However, I will gladly cooperate with any continuing investigations concerning the matter.
The department never responded to Mr. LaDien ' letter.
s 14.
On April 7, 1993, Mr. Rohland spoke with Lance Bangen, a supervisor with the Walgreens Company and former member of the Pharmacy Examirdng Board, concerning the investigation of an unrelated matter.
The memo of his conversation with Mr. Bangen concludes in part as follows:
4
I then spoke to Mr. Bangen concerning pharmacist/customer consultations.
.
I advised h4r.
Bangen that the pharmacy board has been concerned for some time about pharmacist/customer consultanons, and the board encourages pharmacist consultations on all new and refill prescriptions.
Mr. Bangen replied he would note this back to all his area Walgreens.
15.
On June 9, 1993, Mr. Rohland spoke to Mr. LaDien by telephone.
In a memorandum to the investigative file dated June 11, 1993, Mr. Rohland states as follows: Mr. LaDien then related there recently was a meeting with all the Walgreens managers and h4r.
Bangen.
It was relayed to them that pharmacy/customer consultations are to be concentrated on and strongly encouraged.
Mr. LaDien related at his store they do stamp every new prescription, and that the clerk or pharmacy technician working knows to contact a pharmacist and a consultation is always given.
Mr. LaDien stated that he is trying very hard, on refills, to always offer consultations, and that he is trying to get this information through to all his pharmacists.
The June 9, 1993, memorandum indicates that Mr. Rohland did not respond to the information provided by Mr. LaDien except that Mr. Rohland "thanked Mr. LaDien for his information and for his cooperation.
" 16.
Under cover of a memorandum to Mr. Rohland dated June 18, 1993, Mr. LaDien provided a policy directive for Walgreens #34 establishing duties for pharmacists performing consulting duties.
The memo states: "Pursuant to our previous discussions, I have sent you a copy of changes we made at our 7713 W. Capitol location.
These changes in our practice should ensure compliance with PEB regulations with regards to pharmacist consultation.
. .
Please call or write if you have further requests.
" The attachment, captioned "Consulting Pharmacist Store #34, " states in part, "1.
Primary Responsibility - perform all consulting functions on all prescriptions in cashier area pursuant to Wisconsin PEB regulations.
" 17.
Also in June, 1993, #34 a copy of the "Consulting Schedule " listing the pharmacist day, and a copy of the board ' s schedule carries the notation, customers are present + present Mr. LaDien posted in the pharmacy area of Walgreens Pharmacist Procedure #34, " a "Consulting Pharmacist assigned to provide consultations each hour of each consulting rule.
The initial handwritten consulting "Consulting = never leaving cashier area unless no for everv nrescriution (new and refill). " consulting pharmacist procedure was the had had with Mr. Rohland, Mr. Thexton and Mr. in Mr. LaDien coming to largely understand for rule was being interpreted by the Pharmacy 5
18.
Establishment of the culmination of discussions Mr. LaDien Bangen; which discussions had resulted the first time that the consultation
Examining Board to require that a dispensing pharmacist provide a consultation for all prescriptions dispensed, including refills.
It was Mr. LaDien ' impression that the s posted "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34 " established the requirement that the consulting pharmacist provide a consultation for each prescription dispensed, including refills.
That posting states in part, "Primary responsibility - perform all consulting function on 
" 19.
At the Mr. LaDien spoke conversations with required to provide time of the posting of the "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34, " with staff pharmacists about the procedure.
The purpose of the the staff pharmacists was to communicate to them that they were a consultation for each prescription dispensed, including refills.
20.
At some time between November, 1993, and February, 1994, the consultation procedure was modified to require that the consulting pharmacist actually station himself or herself at the pickup window.
By letter dated March 18, 1994, Mr. LaDien submitted his resignation as managing pharmacist at Walgreens #34 effective on that date.
The following are excerpts from that letter: 21.
Despite the numerous efforts on my part to emphasize the importance of consulting practices to the entire pharmacy staff, those consulting challenges still prevail within our profession.
. .
Presently, a second investigation is on-going at Store #34 by the Dept. of question, but as pharmacy manager I will again be held accountable for other licensed pharmacists ' actions.
.
I do feel threatened by a technicality of Wisconsin law that holds me personally accountable for all other licensed pharmacists 'actions.
Therefore, it is with grave concern, I am submitting this request for transfer to function as a staff pharmacist at a mutually agreed upon location in the Milwaukee Metro area.
Regulation and Licensing.
Once again I was not on duty on the dates in
During a period including the period of the events herein, the Pharmacy Examining Board made various attempts to clarify its position on consultation requirements through articles in its Regulatory Digest, and through oral presentations made by board member Tom McGregor and by Mr. Thexton.
Examples include the following: 22.
6
(a) An article in the board ' s states in part:
Wisconsin
Regulatory
Digest for April
1990,
DISPENSING FUNCTIONS FOR PHARMACISTS ONLY for interns oractrc g under the suuervision of a uharmacist).
It is very important that Char 7.0l(l)?e used as a reference to be certain that several of the procedures involved in compounding and dispensing not be assiened to non-pharmacist RersonneL Of particular importance is sub.(e): "Transfer the prescription to the patient or agent of the patient and give the uatient or a-t appropriate consultation.
."
(Emphasis in original) An article in the board ' Wisconsin Regulatory Digest s 6-4 entitled Official Notice for Managing Pharmacists, states in part: for April 1992,
The managing pharmacist shall be responsible for the professional operations of the pharmacy.
Assurance that your pharmacy facilitates compliance with minimum practice procedures is essential.
Please refer to Phar 7.01(l)(e), appropriate consultation.
. .
Consumer complaints involving failure to provide consultation and/or brand/generic choice information may involve the managing pharmacist if procedures are not established for staff pharmacists to offer appropriate professional services.
(c) in part: OBRA 90 AND COMMHNITY PHARMACY.
Patient consultation standards have been established by the PEB for ALL patients.
I ' har 7.01 and Phar 7.07 clearly identify the pharmacist ' responsibilities.
. . .
The PEB expects s pharmacists to consider all of the above and then decide "appropriate consultation " as stated in Char 7.01(e) [ sic, 7.01(l)(e)].
HCFA says "document refusals to your offer to counsel.
" Phar 7.02 [sic, 7.011 does not offer any exceptions.
[Emphasis in original]. (d) In a speech delivered in 1993 by board member Tom McGregor at the annual Symposium sponsored by the University of Wisconsin School of Pharmacy, he explained the consultation rule as follows: Now I can tell you what the board ' interpretation of what appropriate s consultation is.
It is what you say it is.
It is what you decide is appropriate.
It is your patient.
It is your practice.
You know what communication needs to go on, the level of communication that needs to go on, the capacity of the patient or the agent of the patient to accept and receive and interpret and understand the medications, you understand the complexity of the medication.
. .
What needs to go on? The board does not have a cookbook, a checklist.
We don ' have any t intention of having a cookbook or a checklist.
We think that is a professional judgment.
. .
If appropriate consultation under your interpretation is provided, I An article in the board ' Wisconsin Regulatory s Digest for June 1993, states
I-
which means that consultation did occur, which means that the pharmacist was there and provided the communication, does not mean that you didn ' tell -- that t you told them everything there was to know about it? It means that you provided in your interpretation appropriate consultation and you the pharmacist were there to do it and nobody did it for you.
In a written handout provided to attendees at the same symposium, written by Arthur Thexton, the following comments were made: The content of the consultation is governed by professional standards of practice, and therefore varies with the patient, medication and time.
. .
[Blecause the content of the consultation is left to the professional judgment of the pharmacist, you will be judged on the basis of whether or not it met the standard of care which would be deemed appropriate for the patient, at that time.
. .
We recognize that 150 prescriptions per day does not leave a lot of time for extensive consultation, but with the effective use of auxiliary personnel the board feels that time can be made for appropriate consultations.
Recent [disciplinary] cases usually involve giving no con
. .
23.
In the December, 1994, issue of the Wisconsin Regulatory Digest, which contained an article entitled "Transfer of prescription to Patient and Give Appropriate Consultation.
" The body of the article states as follows: Many licensees have received an update from the Federal level pertaining to HCFA and 42CFE Ch. IV.
For reason of clarification, HCFA terminology is "offer to counsel.
" However, PEB rules are more stringent, and protect the consumer, by requiring the pharmacist to transfer the prescription to the patient and that consultation will be given (not offered) with every prescription dispensed by a registered pharmacist licensed in the State of Wisconsin.
Refer to PHAR 7.01(l)(e), Wis. Adm. Code.
24.
At the tune of the events Aronson and Miller was that while the whenever possible, personal professional whether a consultation must be provided herein, the understanding of respondents existing policy was to provide a consultation judgment could be utilized in determining when dispensing prescription refills.
LaDien, as to meet the
(4
25.
At all times material to the events herein, respondent managing pharmacist, had policies and procedures in place intended requirements of sec. Char 7.01(l)(e), Code, as he understood them.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW The Pharmacy Examining Board has jurisdiction in this matter pursuant to 1.
sec. 450.10, Stats.
Sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, providing that a licensed pharmacist transfer a 2.
prescription to a patient or agent of the patient and give the patient or agent "appropriate consultation relative to the prescription, " requires that a licensed pharmacist affirmatively provide consultation upon all prescriptions transferred to a patient or agent of the patient, and that the consultation provided shall be appropriate to the relevant circumstances in the minimally competent exercise of professional judgment by a licensed pharmacist.
There is sufficient evidence in this record to establish by a preponderance 3.
of the evidence that during the period from November, 1993, through February, 1994, respondent Aronson was on notice that the Pharmacy Examining Board ' interpretation s of sec. Char 7.01(l)(e), Code required that a pharmacist provide a consultation on every prescription dispensed, including refills, and that a pharmacist was therefore precluded from using personal professional judgment in determining whether a consultation was required when dispensing a refill, and respondent Aronson has therefore violated sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code.
4.
There is sufficient evidence in this record to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that during the period from November, 1993, through February, 1994, respondent Miller was on notice that the Pharmacy Examining Board ' interpretation of s sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, required that a pharmacist provide a consultation on every prescription dispensed, including refills, and that a pharmacist was therefore precluded from using personal professional judgment in determining whether a consultation was required when dispensing a refill, and respondent Miller has therefore violated sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code.
5.
Respondent LaDien ' actions as managing pharmacist in attempting to s communicate to staff pharmacists his understanding of consulting requirements under sec.
I' har 7.01(l)(e), Code, and in establishing a consulting policy consistent with that understanding, and in putting in place procedures designed to implement that policy, complied with his duty as managing pharmacist under sec. 450.09(1)(a), Stats., to be responsible for the professional operations of Walgreens #34, and respondent LaDien has therefore not violated sec. 450.10(1)(a)6., Stats., sec. Char 7.01(l)(e), Code, or Phar 10.03(2), Code.
9
ORDER NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that the disciplinary FRANKLIN LaDIEN, R.Ph., be, and hereby are, DISMISSED. proceedings against
lT IS FURTHER ORDERED that GARY I' MILLER, R.Ph., and ROGER L. ARONSON, .
R.Ph., each be, and hereby are REPRIMANDED. .
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that GARY I' MILLER, R.Ph., and ROGER L. ARONSON, R.Ph., shall FORFEIT $250 each, to be paid within 30 days of this Order.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that GARY I' MILLER, RPh., and ROGER L. ARONSON, .
RPh., shall pay the COSTS of these proceedings fairly attributable to each within 45 days of the mailings of the affidavits of costs submitted by the division of enforcement and office of board legal services.
EXPLANATION OF VARIANCE The Pharmacy Examining Board has adopted the provisions within the Proposed Decision supporting the recommendation that the disciplinary proceedings against Franklin LaDien be dismissed.
However, in considering the objections filed, it has varied from portions of that proposal and found that respondents, Gary P. Miller and Roger L. Aronson failed to follow the consultation requirement mandated under the administrative rules.
One of the consultation pharmacist, prescription whether the primary issues in the case is the extent to which the language within the rule of the board requires that patient consultation be provided by a both upon the initial dispensing of a prescription as well as to each of a order ' authorized refills.
Coextensively, another determining issue is s board ' interpretation of that rule is reasonable.
s Code, as relevant to these
Section Phar 7.01(l)(e), of the W isconsin Administrative proceedings, provides as follows:
I,. . .
The pharmacist . . . shall . . . (t)ransfer the prescription to the patient or agent of the patient and give the patient or agent appropriate consultation relative to the prescription.
. . ."
The clear and unambiguous language of the rule mandates that a pharmacist, not a an unlicensed clerk, shall both transfer and give appropriate consultation relating to prescriptions.
A "prescription " refers to the medication to be provided the patient.
See, sec. 450.01(19), Stats.
Thus, the rule requires that prescribed medications are to be provided to the patient by the pharmacist.
10
Coincidental with transfer by the pharmacist of the medication is the obligation for the pharmacist to "give . . . appropriate consultation ".
Contrary to the argument advanced by respondents, the rule does not state nor reasonably imply that the act of consultation, itself, is discretionary with the pharmacist.
If this were the case, the rule would read more along the lines of requiring "consultation, if appropriate.
" It does not say that.
The rule requires "consultation ".
The contents, or "appropriateness " of the consultation is within the sound professional judgment of the minimally competent pharmacist under the specific circumstances2 The professional judgment factor discussed at the hearing relates to the content of the consultntion; which is clearly the information communicated by both the board member and complainant ' attorney in s the statements quoted in the Findings of Fact.
Neither the language of the rule, nor the information provided by agents of the board state that professional judgment may be utilized to determine whether consultation is to occur at all.
In this specific case, Respondent LaDien testified and the ALJ found that the establishment of the consulting pharmacist procedure at Walgreens #34 in June, 1993, "was the culmination of discussions Mr. LaDien had with Mr. Rohland, Mr. Thexton and Mr. Bangen; which discussions had resulted in Mr. LaDien coming to largely understand for the first time that the consultation rule was being interpreted by the (board) to require that a dispensing pharmacist provide a consultation for all prescriptions dispensed, including refills.
" (Finding of Fact #18).
Accordingly, the extent to which it could be argued that somehow it is necessary that the board or its agents successfully communicate to its licensees that "appropriate consultation " means just that, "appropriate consultation ", on all medications transferred, as specifically stated in the rules, is irrelevant to the determination of this specific case.
By June, 1993, Mr. LaDien was aware of the board ' interpretation of the rule.
Whether s the respondents felt the workload at the pharmacy made compliance with the consultation requirement easily attainable in all instances due to an apparent lack of adequate pharmacist staffing is not relevant.
What is pertinent is that LaDien testified that he had informed both respondents Miller and Aronson that they were required to consult on every prescription, new and refill.
Mr. LaDien had written notices posted to that effect.
Mr. LaDien testified that he understood the board ' interpretation of the s rule, and communicated that interpretation to each of the staff pharmacists.
The notices posted were produced at hearing, and corroborate Mr. LaDien ' version of the events.
s
Respondentsargumentis not unhke contendingthat a law requinng a motonst to exerctse"appropriatecautmnat ' mtersecttons ", would grantdiscretionto the motorist to determutewhethercautmnis necessary the fust place.
m However, such language clearly conveysthe obligattonfor always exercisingcaution at intersecttons, wtth the degree of cautmnnecessary "appropriate """ be determinedby the wasting circumstances.
(or to
11
Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson were aware of the conduct required by virtue of the written notices.
They were to be at the counter to transfer the prescriptions to patients.
and provide consultation.
Even to the extent one may believe that Mr. LaDien ' oral s restatement of the consultation rule may have been less than crystal clear, the written notices clearly dictated the conduct to be undertaken by staff pharmacists.
The notices clearly provide that staff pharmacists must consult on all medications transfers, and even required that pharmacists physically station themselves at the pickup window when customers were present to ensure that the pharmacist transfer and consultation requirements were met.
These notices, posted at the pharmacy in June, 1993, contain the consultation policies prepared by Mr. LaDien, and included the specific statements: "1.
Primary Responsibility - perform all consulting functions on 
s the transfer of every prescription.
The board ' requirement for consultation upon the transfer of all prescriptions, as s transformed into a mandated procedure for staff pharmacists at Walgreens #34, was disregarded by Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson.
There is no indication that Mr. LaDien had any knowledge that Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson had acted in violation of the written procedure he had established.
There is, however, evidence that Mr. LaDien did confront another staff pharmacist when he learned that the consultation requirement had been violated.
Under such circumstances, the board is of the opinion that Mr. LaDien has met the reasonable requirements of a managing pharmacist under sec. 450.09(1)(a), Stats.
Accordingly, the proceedings against Mr. LaDien are dismissed.
W ith respect to Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson, the question becomes the appropriate discipline, if any, to be imposed.
In this regard, it is recognized that the interrelated purposes for applying disciplinary measures are: 1) to promote the rehabilitation of the licensee, 2) to protect the public, and 3) to deter other licensees from engaging in similar misconduct.
Sfute ZJ. Aldrich, 71 W is.
2d 206,209 (1976).
Punishment of the licensee is not an appropriate consideration.
State v. Mucfntyre, 41 W is.
2d 481,485 (1969).
In this case, the board accepts the recommendation of the complainant ' attorney that s Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson each be reprimanded, ordered to pay a forfeiture in the amount of $250 and pay their respective shares of the costs in this proceeding.
This sanction is sufficient to deter these specific licensees from engaging in similar conduct in the future, as well as to deter other licensees.
12
.
Dated this
12% day of October, 1995.
STATE OF W ISCONSIN PHARMACY EXAMINING BOARD
George F. /.Zhr
13
NOTICE OF APPEAL INFORMATION Notice Of Rights For Rehearing Or Judicial Review, The Times Allowed For Each.
And The Identification Of The Patty To Be Named As Respondent.
Serve Petition for Rehearing or Judicial Review on: THE STATE OF XISCONSIN PHARMACY EXAYINING BOARD
1400 East Wsshingm Avemte P.O. Box 8935 hladisw WI 53708.
The Date of Mailing this Decision is:
1.
REHEARING
Apetitionfar
JUDICIAL REVIEW.
prneqnisite for appeal or review.
Apetitioll~befiledwithin3Odaysaftersenriceofthisdecisionifthereisno pctitioo for tzheadng, or within 30 days after service of the order fitmlly disposing of a pctitim for nkzittg. or withiu 30 days after the fina disposidott by operation of law of my petition for tehearittg. lh 3a-day period for serving and filing a petition ammenasontbedayafter pasonalsuviaormailingofthedecisionbythc~~,orthedayafterthef~ disposition by opmtion of the law of any petidon for reheatjttg.
(% date of mailing this decision is shown above.)
STATE OF WISCONSIN BEFORE THE PHARMA CY EXAMINlNG BOARD ________________________________________-------------------------------------------------------------------------IN THE MATTER OF DISCIPLINARY NOTICE OF FILING PROCEEDINGS AGAINST PROPOSEDDECISION LS940407 1PHM FRANKLIN LaDIEN, R.Ph., LS9409094PHM GARY P. MILLER, R.Ph. and ROGER L. ARONSON, R.Ph., RESPONDENTS.
________________________________________-------------------------------------------------------------------------TO: Gregory J. Meeker, Attorney 306 East W ilson Street Madison, WI 53703 CertitiedP195982062 Edward S. Marion, Attorney 2 East Mifflin Street P.O. Box 2038 Madison, WI 53701-2038 Certified P 195 982 063 PLEASE TARE NOTICE that a ProposedDecision in the above-captionedmatter has been filed with the PharmacyExamining Board by the Administrative Law Judge,Wayne R. Austin.
A copy of the PrcposedDecision is attachedhereto.
If you have objections to the ProposedDecision, you may file your objections in writing, briefly stating the reasons,authorities, and supporting argumentsfor each objection.
If your objections or argumentrelate to evidence in the record, pleasecite the specific exhibit and page number in the record.
Your objections and argumentmust be received at the office.of the PharmacyExamining Board, Room 178,140OEast WashingtonAvenue, P.O. Box 8935, Madison, W isconsin 53708, on or before August 11,1995.
You must also provide a copy of your objections and argument to all other parties by the samedate.
You may also tile a written responseto any objections to the ProposedDecision.
Your responsemust be received at the office of the PharmacyExamining Board no later than seven(7) days after receipt of the objections.
You must also provide a copy of your responseto all other parties by the samedate.
Arthur Thexton, Attorney Departmentof Regulation and Licensing Division of Enforcement P.O. Box 8935 Madison, WI 53708
The attachedProposedDecision is the Administrative Law Judge 'recommendationin , s this case and the Order included in the ProposedDecision is not binding upon you.
After reviewing the ProposedDecision, the PharmacyExamining Board will issue a binding Final Decision and Order.
Dated at Madison, W isconsin this B!!i
day of _
STATE OF WISCONSIN BEFORE THE PHARMACY EXAMINING BOARD INTHEMATTEROF DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS AGAINST FRANKLIN LaDIEN, RPh., GARY I' MILLER, RPh. and .
ROGER L. ARONSON, R.Ph.
Respondents PROPOSED DECISION The parties to this matter for the purposes of sec. 227.53, Stats., are: Frankhn LaDien W150 N7809 Hilltop Drive Menomonee Falls.
WI 53051 Gary P. Miller, R.Ph. 8611 West Glendale Avenue Milwaukee, WI 53225 Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph. W61-N353 Washington Avenue Cedarburg, WI 53012 State of W isconsin Pharmacy Examining Board Division of Enforcement 1480 East Washington Avenue P.O. Box 8935 Madison, WI 53708 Department of Regulation 
P.O. Box 8935 Madison, WI 53708 LS9404071PHM LS9409094PHh4
1
` ,
7'
I
This matter was commenced by the filing of a Complaint dated March 29, 1994; captioned In the Mutter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Franklin LaDien, R.Ph. and Wulgreens; and by Complaints dated August 31, 1994, captioned In the Matter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Guy P. Miller, R.Ph., and In the Matter of Disciplinuy Proceedings Against Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph.
The Walgreens matter was settled by stipulation, and the remaining actions were consolidated for the purposes of hearing.
The hearing Complainant appeared by by Attorney was conducted on November 9, 1994, and January 12 
Respondent Franklin Attorney Edward S. Marion, Respondents Miller and Aronson Gregory J. Meeker.
The hearing transcript was received on March 13, 1995.
LaDien appeared 23,1995.
Based upon the entire record in this matter, the administrative law judge recommends that the Pharmacy Examining Board adopt as its final decision in the matter the following Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Law and Order.
FINDINGS OF FACT 1.
Franklin LaDien, RPh.
(Mr. LaDien), 150 N7809 Hilltop Drive, Menomenee Falls, WI 53051, was at all times material to this matter licensed as a pharmacist in the State of Wisconsin by license # 9295, issued on December 10,1977.
2.
Gary I".
Miller, R.Ph.
(Mr. Miller) 8611 West Glendale Avenue, Milwaukee, WI 53225 was at all times relevant to this matter licensed as a pharmacist in the State of Wisconsin by license #8731, issued on January 9,1975.
3.
Roger L. Aronson, R.Ph.
(Mr. Aronson), W61 N353 Washington Avenue, Cedarburg, WI 53012, at all times relevant hereto licensed as a pharmacist in the State of Wisconsin by license # 10098, issued on March 26,1982.
4.
At all times pharmacist, as defined at Pharmacy located at 7713 the State of Wisconsin to 1979 (Walgreens #34). material to this matter, Mr. LaDien was the sec. Phar 1.02(6), Code, at Walgreens # 34, a West Capitol Drive, Milwaukee, WI 53222, and operate as a pharmacy by license #6064, issued managing community licensed by on May 18;
5.
At all times material to this matter, Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson were staff pharmacists at Walgreens #34.
6.
On September 14,1993, the pharmacy Examining Board (board) issued ik Final Decision and Order in a case captioned In the Matter of Disciplinary Proceedings Against Franklin J. LaDien, R.Ph.
The decision, which was entered pursuant to a Stipulation executed by Mr. LaDien and Mr. Arthur Thexton, attorney with the Department of Regulation 
that on four occasions in late 1992 and early 1993, department investigators had observed patients at Walgreens #34 receiving prescription medications being.
transferred to the patients by a non-pharmacist and without any consultation by a pharmacist.
It was found further that those stipulated facts constituted a violation of sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code.1 Mr. LaDien, as managing pharmacist, was ordered reprimanded and to pay a $250 forfeiture.
7.
Both prescription drugs and nonprescription drugs dispensed from the pharmacy area at Walgreens #34 are delivered to customers packaged in white paper bags.
No more than five percent of drugs dispensed from the pharmacy area are nonprescription drugs.
8.
On November 11, 1993, at Vint Quamme (Mr. Quamme), observed Quamme observed Mr. Aronson and Mr. Aronson transfer at least two or three providing any apparent consultation.
Mr. any medication package to any customer.
around 12:30 p.m., department investigator consulting practices at Walgreens #34.
Mr. Miller on duty at that time, and observed Mr. medication packages to customers without Quamme did not observe Mr. Miller transfer
9.
On November 17, 1993, department investigator Steven Rohland (Mr. Rohland) observed consultation practices at Walgreens #34 for approximately 15 minutes.
Mr. Rohland reported that he witnessed three transactions in which medications were dispensed from the pickup window of the pharmacy area; that two of the transactions were handled by a pharmacy technician without any consultation, and that the third transaction was handled by a person of unknown qualifications without any apparent consultation.
Mr. Rohland does not recall seeing any of the respondents in this matter in attendance at the store on that date.
10.
On February 3, 1994, Mr. Rohland returned to Walgreens #34 to observe consultation practices at that pharmacy.
At the time of the visit, the pharmacy was very busy, and there were two pharmacy technicians and one pharmacist at the prescription pickup window.
Mr. Rohland observed each of the pharmacy technicians complete two transactions and did not observe the pharmacy technicians provide any consultation.
In a fifth transaction handled by one of the pharmacy technicians, a prescription for Amoxicilhn was dispensed, and the technician asked the patient whether she had received that medication before and received an affirmative response.
Mr. Rohland also t Phar 7.01 Mimmum procedures compoundingand dispensing.(1) Except as provtded m sub. (4), a for pharmacistor pharmaast-intern who compoundsor dqenses accordmgto a prescnptionorder shall follow the procedures described this rule and other appbcableprocedures.The phamnast or pharmacist-mtemas diiected m by a pharmaastshall.
**** (e) Transferthe pmscnptionto the patient or agentof the patientand give the patxnt or agentappropriate consultatmnrelative to tbe prescnptionexcept that prescnptmnsmay be deliveredby an agentof the pharmacistto a patlent ' residence the delivery is accompamed appropriate s if by directtonsand an indicatmn that consultationIS avrulableby contactmgthe pharmacnt.
3
witnessed two transactions completed by the pharmacist. ln both instances, the pharmacist provided a proper consultation.
Mr. Rohland did not observe whether the pharmacist present at the pickup window was one of the respondents in this matter.
11.
Mr. Rohland returned to Walgreens #34 on February 10,1994, along with another investigator, Sherri Johnson, to again observe their consultation practices.
During the time of this visit, a single pharmacy technician handled all transactions.
Rohland and Johnson observed approximately eight to ten transactions and did not observe that any consultations took place.
Mr. Rohland did not observe any of the respondents to be present in the pharmacy area.
12.
Both Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson were on duty at the times the department investigators visited Walgreens #34, except that Mr. Aronson was not on duty on February 3,1994.
Mr. LaDien was not present on any of the occasions.
13.
The department investigators identified three of the patients receiving medication packages on February 3, 1994, and February 10, 1994, for whom consultations were not apparently provided.
In a telephone conversation on February 21,1994, Mr. Rohland requested that Mr. LaDien provide patient profiles for the three patients.
Mr. LaDien ' response, as contained in his letter of March 4, 1994, states in s part as follows: Patients Schmidt and Schneider have been on these medications for approximately 3 years for chronic, prevailing conditions.
Mr. Brushafer was picking up a refill for a medication he ' been taking sinceJanuary 1994.
d Our management and store staff workflow and service to give our includes our willingness and department may wish to make in have made significant efforts in changing our customers the best service they deserve.
This openness to accept any suggestions your helping our practice.
I, personally, was not on duty on those dates in question.
However, I will gladly cooperatewith any continuing investigations concerningthe matter.
The department never responded to Mr. LaDien ' letter.
s 14.
On April 7, 1993, Mr. Rohland spoke with Lance Bangen, a supervisor with the Walgreens Company and former member of the Pharmacy Examining Board, concerning the investigation of an unrelated matter.
The memo of his conversation with Mr. Bangen concludes in part as follows: I then spoke to Mr. Bangenconcerning pharmacist/customer consultations.
.
I advised Mr. Bangenthat the pharmacy board has been concernedfor some time about pharmacist/customer consultations, and the board encourages
4
pharmacist consultations on all new and refill prescriptions.
Mr. Bangen replied he would note this back to all his area Walgreens.
On June 9, 1993, Mr. Rohland spoke to Mr. LaDien by telephone.
In a 15.
memorandum to the investigative file dated June 11, 1993, Mr. Rohland states as follows: Mr. LaDien then related there recently was a meeting with all the Walgreens managers and Mr. Bangen.
It was relayed to them that pharmacy/customer consultations are to be concentratedon and strongly encouraged.
Mr. LaDien related at his store they do stamp every new prescription, and that the clerk or pharmacy technician working knows to contact a pharmacist and a consultation is always given.
Mr. LaDien stated that he is trying very hard, on refills, to always offer consultations,and that he is trying to get this information through to all his pharmacists.
The June 9, 1993, memorandum indicates that Mr. Rohland did not respond to the information provided by Mr. LaDien except that Mr. Rohland "thanked Mr. LaDien for his information and for his cooperation.
" Under cover of a memorandum to Mr. Rohland dated June 18, 1993, Mr. 16.
LaDien provided a policy directive for Walgreens #34 establishing duties for pharmacists performing consulting duties.
The memo states: "Pursuant to our previous discussions, I have sent you a copy of changes we made at our 7713 W. Capitol location.
These changes in our practice should ensure compliance with PEB regulations with regards to pharmacist consultation.
. .
Please call or write if you have further requests.
" The attachment, captioned "Consulting Pharmacist Store #34, " states in part, "1.
Primary Responsibility - perform all consulting functions on all prescriptions in cashier area pursuant to W isconsin PEB regulations.
" 17.
Also in June, 1993, Mr. LaDien posted in the pharmacy area of Walgreens #34 a copy of the "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34, " a "Consulting Pharmacist Schedule " listing the pharmacist assigned to provide consultations each hour of each day, and a copy of the boards consulting rule.
The initial handwritten consulting schedule carries the notation, "Consulting = never leaving cashier area unless no customers are present + present for everv urescriution (new and refill).
" 18.
Establishment of the consulting pharmacist procedure was the culmination of discussions Mr. LaDien had had with Mr. Rohland, Mr. Thexton and Mr. Bangen; which discussions had resulted in Mr. LaDien coming to largely understand for the first time that the consultation rule was being interpreted by the Pharmacy Examining Board to require that a dispensing pharmacist provide a consultation for all prescriptions dispensed, including refills.
It was Mr. LaDien ' impression that that the s posted "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34 " established the requirement that the consulting pharmacist provide a consultation for each prescription dispensed, including 5
'.
refills.
That posting states in part, "Primary responsibility - perform all consultingfunctions on /J
" At the time of the posting of the "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34, " 19.
Mr. LaDien spoke with staff pharmacists about the procedure.
There is insufficient evidence to establish whether his conversations with staff pharmacists effectively communicated to them that they were required to provide a consultation for each prescription dispensed, including refills.
20.
At some time between November, 1993, and February, 1994, the consultation procedure was modified to require that the consulting pharmacist actually station himself or herself at the pickup window.
By letter dated March 18, 1994, Mr. LaDien submitted his resignation as 21.
managing pharmacist at Walgreens # 34 effective on that date.
The following are excerpts from that letter: Despite the numerous efforts on my part to emphasize the importance of consulting practices to the entire pharmacy staff, those consulting challenges still prevail within our profession.
.
Presently, a second investigation is on-going at Store #34 by the Dept. of Regulation and Licensing.
Once again I was not on duty on the dates in question, but as pharmacy manager I will again be held accountable for other licensed pharmacists 'actions.
I do feel threatened by a technicality of Wisconsin law that holds me personally accountable for all other licensed pharmacists 'actions.
Therefore, it is with grave concern, I am submitting this request for transfer to function as a staff pharmacist at a mutually agreed upon location in the Milwaukee Metro area.
22.
During a period including the period of the events herein, the Pharmacy Examining Board made various attempts to clarify its position on consultation requirements through articles in its Regulatory Digest, and through oral presentations made by board member Tom McGregor and by Mr. Thexton.
Examples include the following: An article in the board ' Wisconsin Regulatory Digest for April 1992, s (4 entitled Official Notice for Managing Pharmacists, states in part: The managing pharmacist shall be responsible for the professional operations of the pharmacy.
Assurance that your pharmacy facilitates compliance with minimum practice procedures is essential.
Please refer to Phar 7,01(l)(e), appropriate consultation.
.
Consumer complaints involving failure to provide consultation and/or brand/generic choice information may involve the
6
c
.
managing pharmacist if procedures are not established for staff pharmacists to offer appropriate professional services.
(b) In a speech delivered in 1993 by board member Tom McGregor at the annual Symposium sponsored by the University of Wisconsin - Milwaukee School of Pharmacy, he explained the consultation rule as follows: Now I can tell you what the board ' interpretation of what appropriate s consultation is.
It is what you say it is.
It is what you decide is appropriate.
It is your patient.
It is your practice.
You know what communication needs to go on, the level of communication that needs to go on, the capacity of the patient or the agent of the patient to accept and receive and interpret and understand the medications, you understand the complexity of the medication.
. . .
What needs t to go on? The board does not have a cookbook, a checklist.
We don ' have any intention of having a cookbook or a checklist.
We think that is a professional judgment.
. .
If appropriate consultation under your interpretation is provided, which means that consultation did occur, which means that the pharmacist was there and provided the communication, does not mean that you didn ' tell t that you told them everything there was to know about it? It means that you provided in your interpretation appropriate consultation and you the pharmacist were there to do it and nobody did it for you.
(c) In a speech delivered following comments were made: at the same symposium by Arthur Thexton, the
The content of the consultation is governed by professional standards of practice, and therefore varies with the patient, medication and time.
. . .
[Blecause the content of the consultation is left to the professional judgment of the pharmacist, you wilI be judged on the basis of whether or not it met the standard of care which would be deemed appropriate for that patient, at that time.
. . .
We recognize that 150 prescriptions per day does not leave a lot of time for extensive consultation, but with the effective use of auxiliary personnel the board feels that time can be made for appropriate consultations.
Recent [disciplinary] cases usually involve giving no consultation at all, usually accompanied by dispensing error.
. . .
23.
There is no evidence in this record to establish that prior to December, 1994, the Pharmacy Examining Board clearly enunciated its position that a consultation was required to be given by a pharmacist in every instance when a prescription drug, including a refill, was delivered to a customer.
The first arguably clear general notice of that position was included in the December, 1994, issue of the Wisconsin Regulatory Digest, which contained an article entitled "Transfer of prescription to Patient and Give Appropriate Consultation.
" The body of the article states as follows: Many licensees have received an update from the Federal level pertaining to HCFA and 4XFE Ch. IV.
For reason of clarification, HCFA terminology is I
"offer to counsel.
" However, PEB rules are more stringent, and protect the consumer, by requiring the pharmacist to transfer the prescription to the patient and that consultation will be given (not offered) with every prescription dispensed by a registered pharmacist licensed in the State of W isconsin.
Refer to PHAR 7.01(l)(e), W is.
Adm. Code.
24.
At the time of the events herein, the understanding Aronson and Miller was that while.the existing policy was to provide whenever possible, personal professional judgment could be utilized whether a consultation must be provided when dispensing prescription of respondents a consultation in determining refills.
At all times material to the events herein, respondent LaDien, as 25.
managing pharmacist, had policies and procedures in place intended to meet the requirements of sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, as he understood them.
CONCLUSIONS OF LAW 1.
The Pharmacy Examining Board has jurisdiction in this matter pursuant to sec. 450.10, Stats.
2.
Sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, prescription to a patient or agent of "appropriate consultation relative to the permit a pharmacist to exercise personal a consultation should be provided when requiring that a licensed pharmacist transfer a the patient and give the patient or agent prescription, " may reasonably be interpreted to professional judgment in determining whether dispensing a prescription refill.
3.
There is insufficient evidence in this record to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that during the period from November, 1993, through February, 1994, respondent Aronson was on notice that the Pharmacy Examining Board ' interpretation of sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code required that a pharmacist provide a s consultation on every prescription dispensed, including refills, and that a pharmacist was therefore precluded from using personal professional judgment in determining whether a consultation was required when dispensing a refill, and respondent Aronson has therefore not violated sec. Char 7.01(l)(e), Code.
4.
There is insufficient evidence in this record to establish by a preponderance of the evidence that during the period from November, 1993, through February, 1994, respondent Miller was on notice that the Pharmacy Examining Board ' s interpretation of sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, required that a pharmacist provide a consultation on every prescription dispensed, including refills, and that a pharmacist was therefore precluded from using personal professional judgment in determining whether a consultation was required when dispensing a refill, and respondent Miller has therefore not violated sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code.
8
-
5.
Respondent LaDien ' actions as managing pharmacist in attempting to.. s communicate to staff pharmacists his understanding of consulting requirements under sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, and in establishing a consulting policy consistent with that understanding, and in putting in place procedures designed to implement that policy, substantially complied with his duty as managing pharmacist under sec. 450.09(1)(a), Stats., to be responsible for the professional operations of Walgreens #34, and respondent LaDien has therefore not violated sec. 450JO(l)(a)6, Stats., sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, or Char 10.03(Z),Code.
ORDER NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED that disciplinary proceedings against Franklin LaDien, RPh., be, and hereby are, dismissed.
II IS FURTHER ORDERED that disciplinary proceedings against Gary I' Miller, R.Ph., . be, and hereby are, dismissed.
lT IS FURTHER ORDERED that disciplinary proceedings against Roger L. Aronson, RPh., be, and hereby are, dismissed.
OPINIOlq Mr. LaDien is charged with failing to fulfill his duties as managing pharmacist by failing to have procedures in place at Walgreens #34 which would ensure that staff pharmacists provide a consultation on every prescription dispensed, including refills.
Messrs. Aronson and Miller are each charged with failing to fulfill his duty to provide a consultation with every prescription dispensed, including refills.
While no one disputes the board ' authority to interpret its own rule, the problem is that there is a failure of s proof in this matter that the board had, at the time in question, provided clear notice to Walgreens #34, or to the Wisconsin pharmacy community generally, of its interpretation of the rule, and evidence in this record that Walgreens management was in fact misled in that regard.
Throughout the course of the hearing, reference was made to the "judgment rule " and the "flat rule " in terms of the manner in which sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code was to be interpreted.
To interpret that section as requiring that a consultation be provided by a pharmacist with each and every prescription dispensed is to interpret it as a "flat rule.
" To interpret the rule to provide a pharmacist to exercise professional discretion in determining whether a consultation is necessary is to interpret Phar 7.01(l)(e) as a "judgment rule.
" The prosecution took the position that Char 7.01(l)(e) may not be interpreted to permit no consultation because the rule requires that an appropriate consultation be given and failure to give any consultation at all cannot by definition be an appropriate consultation.
Respondent ' position was that if the rule permits a s
9
. , 1
'
pharmacist to exercise professional judgment, then inherent in that exercise of discretion is the right to determine when no consultation is necessary.
The first question thus becomes whether respondent ' interpretation is a reasonable s one, and it seems clear that it is.
There is satisfactory evidence in this record that W isconsin, if not unique in requiring pharmacist consultation in every instance of dispensing, is one of very few jurisdictions with such a requirement.
That evidence demonstrates that the usual and normal procedure within the industry is to trust pharmacists to exercise sound judgment in determining whether a direct consultation is necessary.
In demonstration of that fact, the federal Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA ` established new and more restrictive standards for pharmacist 90) consultation for Medicaid patients.
In an article appearing in the December 14, 1992, issue of Drug Store News for the Pharmacist (exh. 22) the requirements imposed are explained as follows: First, state regulations must "require pharmacists to offer to counsel " each * Medicaid patient or caregiver who presents a prescription.
. .
Although the actual counseling must be performed by the pharmacist personally, the required offer to discuss the patient ' medication may be made by ancillary s personnel.
(p.8) At page 147 of the same issue, the following appears: OBRA ` recognizesthe pharmacist ' professional judgment and requires only 90 s those items "the pharmacist deems significant " to be included in individual counseling.
It is possible a pharmacist could decide, in his or her professional judgment, not to counsel a particular patient.
The January, 1993, issue of the W isconsin Pharmacist (exh. X3), after citing sec. Phar 7.01(l)(e), Code, comments "W isconsin regulations are in compliance with OBRA 90.
Federal law requires that the pharmacist to provide direct oral (face-to-face) counseling to Medicaid patients or caregivers unless neither is available.
" Walgreens internal policy relating to patient counseling also recognizes that where professional judgment is permitted to be exercised by pharmacists, consultation need not necessarily be required for prescription refills. ln its policy bulletin dated October 15, 1993, that policy is stated as, "All patients with new prescriptions (and refills in some states)must be offered counseling.
" (exh. 7).
Accepting that the rule could be interpreted as permitting a pharmacist to exercise professional judgment in determining whether a consultation is necessary, at what point in time does the evidence establish that Mr. LaDien in fact became aware that the provision should be interpreted to require a consultation in every case? Mr. LaDien testified that by approximately June, 1993, he had come to the reluctant conclusion that consultations were always required.
10
(by Mr. Meeker) Now, you had a conversation with Mr. Thexton in June of 1993 that changed your understanding of what the consultation rule required, correct?
Q.
(by Mr. LaDien) I don ' remember dates.
I know I talked to Mr. t A. Thexton somewhere in that time frame.
*I** I refer you to Exhibit 42 [Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34].
Q.
And I take it that what you ' saying is that Exhibit 42 states the flat rule. re A.
If that ' the way you want to - Yes, sir. s
Okay.
And so you got that understanding of the flat rule at least Q. as early as of June, 1993, when this document was drafted up? A.
This is what I could draw out of my conversations with Mr. Thexton, Mr. Rohland, Mr. Bangen.
I tried to get as much information as I could to come to this conclusion.
Okay.
And you came to that conclusion that there was a flat rule by the time you drafted up Exhibit 42 here, correct?
Q.
A.
That ' what led to that, yes, sir. s
Okay, great.
Prior to coming to this new understanding, your old Q. understanding about the requirements was that you had to consult on all new prescriptions, correct? A. Yes, sir. (tr., pp. 164-165)
It is perhaps questionable whether Mr. LaDien was fully cognizant by June, 1993, that the flat rule was also a hard and fast rule.
Mr. Rohland ' memo to the file dated June s 11,1993, recounts the following telephone conversation with LaDien, whose comments do not reflect that he fully understood the board ' position: s Mr. LaDien then related there recently was a meeting with all the Walgreens managers and Mr. Bangen.
It was relayed to them that the pharmacist/customer consultations are to be concentrated on and strongly encouraged.
Mr. LaDien related at his store they do stamp every new prescription, and that the clerk or pharmacy technician working knows to contact the pharmacist and a consultation is then always given.
Mr. LaDien stated that he is trying very hard, on refills, to always offer consultations, and that he has tried to get this information through to all his pharmacists.
(Exh. 29) If Mr. LaDien was in fact aware of the board ' interpretation as early as June, that is s surprising, for the board was doing nothing if not sending mixed messages as to the
11
requirements under the rule.
As recounted in the Findings of Fact, In April, 1993, Steve Rohland spoke with Lance Bangen, a Walgreens supervisor, and told him that "the board encourages pharmacist consultations on all new and refill prescriptions.
" Mr. Bangen dutifully passed along to all Walgreens managers that the board "strongly encouraged " consultations.
On June 9, Rohland spoke to LaDien by telephone, at which time Mr. LaDien described a new system by which all new prescriptions were stamped "consult pharmacist " to ensure that a consultation was given on all new prescriptions.
Mr. LaDien also notified Mr. Rohland that he was "trying very hard, on refills, to always
Mr. Rohland merely thanked Mr. LaDien for his information and for his cooperation.
Nor were the board ' efforts during this period to communicate to its licensees its s interpretation of the rule effective in that regard.
An April, 1992, article in the board ' s Regulatory Digest stated merely "Consumer complaints involving failure to provide consultation and/or brand/generic choice information may involve the managing pharmacist if procedures are not established for staff pharmacists to offer appropriate professional services.
" The article does not describe what "appropriate professional services " means in terms of the consultation requirement except to cite to the rule.
A speech delivered by board member Tom McGregor at the 1993 Symposium sponsored by the U.W. - Milwaukee pharmacy school was similarly unenlightening.
The first three sentences of his explanation of the consultation rule are typical of his remarks: "Now I can tell you what the board ' interpretation of what appropriate s consultation is.
It is what you say it is.
It is what you decide is appropriate.
" Mr. Thexton, who also spoke at the symposium, stated in part "...[B]ecause the content of the consultation is left to the professional judgment of the pharmacist, you will be judged on the basis of whether or not it met the standard of care which would be deemed appropriate for that patient at that time.
" Margaret LeDoux, a Walgreens pharmacist who attended the symposium, credibly testified that she came away from the meeting believing that professional judgment could be exercised in terms of consulting on refills. (tr., p.307) But whether Mr. LaDien was or was not in fact fully aware by June, 1993, that the board ' interpretation required consultations in every case, the evidence is that he s worked diligently to establish procedures and policies implementing his understanding of the consultation requirements.
In June, he posted a written policy and procedure for consultation by staff pharmacists captioned "Consulting Pharmacist Procedure #34.
" The first three directives established by that posting were as follows: 1.
Primary responsibility - perform all consulting functions on m prescriptions in prescription area pursuant to W isconsin PEB regulation 7.01e [sic] (Seeposted copy).
2.
Adhere to posted consultant schedule and consulting responsibility and not to leave cashier areauntil consulting shift is over (Seeposted schedule).
12
3.
Lack of adherenceto schedule and consulting responsibility may lead to disciplinary action by the pharmacy manager.
(Exh. 42) Also posted was a "Consulting Schedule #34 " listing the pharmacist assigned to provide consultations each hour of each day.
About the time of establishing the consulting procedure, Mr. LaDien also orally notified staff pharmacists of his understanding of the consulting rule and of their responsibilities in that regard.
In his testimony, LaDien was asked whether he was sure that he had spoken to Mr. Miller and Mr. Aronson about the consulting policy at about the time in question: A.
I' sure I talked to them because I remember conversations.
I m had a very set script that I used.
I know - I took them around the back of the corner in our compounding area, or sometimes I took some people out into the waiting room area.
Q. (by Mr. Meeker) Tell me what the set script was that you used.
A.
For the most part, I would appeal to their professional help in this situation.
We have a big job ahead of us.
I know we have a very busy store.2 Consulting on all prescriptions will include refills.
It' going to be tough.
I s realize that.
We ' going to have to grow and work on this, I don ' know how re t we ' going to do it; I have no guidelines.
Let ' try and do the best we can.
(tr., re s p. 189) Sometime after November, 1993, Mr. LaDien modified the consultation procedure to require that the pharmacist assigned to provide consultations actually post himself or herself in the cashier area to ensure that the pharmacist was immediately available to provide consultations.
In the last analysis, it is difficult to determine with certainty from this record exactly when LaDien became fully aware that the board ' requirement was that consultations s were required with each prescription and without exception.
What is clear from the record is that in the face of extremely difficult circumstances, he utilized his best efforts to bring Walgreens #34 into compliance with the requirements of the Pharmacy Examining Board as he understood them.
That he was not entirely successful in that effort is regrettable, but is certainly not a basis for professional discipline.
In the best of all possible worlds, the Division of Enforcement would have no case backlog and this proposed decision would have been rendered in April.
One would hope, however, that the various circumstances contributing to failure to accomplish those goals would be
I
2The testnnony was that at the time m quanon, Walgreens #34 dispensed an average of approximately 700 to 800 prescnptions per day, and was during that penod the bustest Walgreens pharmacy m the counuy.
13
,
*
. .
2,.
.
considered by one in a position to de termine whe ther and where blame should be placed .
It would appear tha t this em inen tly ra ti onal approach was ignored in this ma tter .
Ins tead , complainan t argues tha t LaDien 's various a ttemp ts to encourage staff pharmacis ts to consult on all prescriptions did no t fulfill his responsibilities as managing pharmacis t because ,ipso fac to , those e ffor ts were no t su fficient to achieve the desired result.
It is no t necessaryto decide tha t sec. 450 .09(l), S ta ts., is too vague to no tify a reasonableperson o f wha t is required o f a managing pharmacis t to decide tha t a sincere and con ti nuing e ffor t to ensure tha t the pro fessional ac tivities o f staff pharmacis ts compor t with the board 's statute and rules is su fficient to mee t the managing pharmacis t's du ti es and responsibilities.
To so decide does no t excuse conduc t by staff pharmacis ts inconsistent with the pharmacy laws, bu t such inconsistent conduc t should no t and may no t be impu ted to the managing pharmacis t absen ta lack o f e ffor t on his or her par t to e ffec t corrective policies and procedures .
A ccep ti ng tha t M r. LaDien exer ted his bes t e ffor ts to convey to staff pharmacis ts his unders tanding o f the consultation rule does no t lead to the conclusion tha t M r.
A ronson and M r. M iller are guilty o f its violation.
No t, tha t is, unless it can be es tablishedtha t they were clearly no tifi ed o f the board 's interpretation.
The evidence in this record does no t es tablish tha t they were .
M r. LaDien tes tifi ed tha t the consultation policy pos ted by him in June , 1993 ,was intended to state the fl a t rule.
It doesn 't. Again , the relevan t por ti on o f tha t policy states as follows: 1.
P ri mary responsibility -- per form all consulting func ti ons on 
Adhere to pos ted consultantschedule and consultingresponsibilityand no t to leavecashierareaun til consulting shift is over (See tedschedule) . pos 3.
Lack o f adherenceo schedule consultingresponsibilitymay lead to t and disciplinary ac ti on by the pharmacy manager(Exh .
42) .
Nor does LaDien 's recollection o f his oral instructions to staff pharmacis ts clearly enuncia tethe fl a t rule: We havea big job aheado f us .
I know we have a very busy store.Consul ti ngon all prescriptions includere fills.
KS going to be tough .
I realizetha t.
We 're will going to have to grow and work on this, I don 't know how we 'regoing to do it; I haveno guidelines.
Le t'stry and do the bes twe can .
The tes ti mony o f M iller and A ronson would seem to con fir m tha t while M r. LaDien was earnes tly a ttemp ti ng to convey to them his unders tanding o f the consulting rule, and while he was undoub tedly a t some poin t a ttemp ti ng to convey his unders tanding tha t 14
the rule was to be interpreted as a flat rule, he probably was unsuccessful in that regard.
Excerpts from the testimony of those two respondents should perhaps suffice to demonstrate the point.
By Mr. Aronson: Q. (by Mr. Marion) So I take it your testimony is that you had one or more conversations with Rocky about consultation? A. (by Mr. Aronson) Correct.
****
Q. Rocky told you, did he not, that you should look at the regs and then follow what the regs tell you? I don ' remember those exact words, but that ' possible.
t s **** Having to consult the way Rocky wanted all of his pharmacists to Q. consult got to be quite difficult for you, didn ' it? t A.
I ' not quite sure how he wanted us, in hindsight, I ' not quite m m sure.
What I got from Rocky was consult to the best of your abilities, appropriate consultation, you know, look at the regs.
This is what they want us to do.
I didn ' feel we were lax in consulting, so. t A.
mantra?
Q.
Did you once describe Rocky ' talking about consultation as a s
A. Well, I think that - yes, I did, in my -- in this deposition, I said that a lot of times he would say -- which I understand where he was coming from, he just said we have to be there for the people, we have to be available.
St*** Is it possible, Mr. Aronson, that there was some point in time Q. when you worked at the store -- I ' not saying exactly when right now.
There m was some point in time when Rocky LaDien told you that consulting includes refills? A. flat rule? Each and every? Are you saying the flat rule, that he stated the
Just I want to ask you as best you can recall was there ever a time Q. when you guys worked together that Rocky told you consulting includes refills? Possible? A. Well consulting does -- that ' what I ' been doing.
I ' not s ve m saying that I didn ' consult on any refills.
But consulting does include refills, t even in the judgment rule. (tr., pp. 368-370)
15
By Mr. Miller: Q. (by Mr. Marion) Okay.
Now, it' accurate to say, is it not, that on one s of the first days that you worked at store #34 Rocky talked to you about consulting?3 a. A. (by Mr. Miller) Yes, he did.
And he said words to this effect: we ` all here to do a good job re Q. for the patient; is that correct? A. Yes.
Tell you to counsel to the best of your ability? That ' correct.
s He said we ' the busiest store and it' going to be hard? re s Yes.
But we have to do it? Right.
Q. A.
Q. A.
Q. A.
Looking at Exhibit 8, Mr. Miller, turn to the second page, if you Q. would, entitled Consulting Pharmacist Store #34, You ' seen that document ve before, have you not? A. Yes, I have
And this is something that Rocky gave you when you two talked Q. about consultation -- when you first arrived at the store? A.
I believe he did, yes.
I think it was the first meeting we had he m gave me a few sheets of paper and I ' pretty sure this is one of them.
Q. A.
Okay.
And he reviewed it with you? Yes.
You two talked about consultation a number of times.
It wasn ' t Q. just this once, am I right? A. Right.
We worked together and had our same concerns over it.
3 Mr. Miller started hn employment wth the Walgreens orgaruzation on October 1.1993
16
Okay.
And in fact you had conversations about consulting maybe Q. five, six times? I would say that ' pretty close.
We - I mean, like I say, we s A. worked together and after Rocky, you know, started to get more and more involved in this process,you know, he kind of let out to me some of his concerns and problems.
*lo* There came a time when Rocky said to you new and refills alike have to be t consulted, isn ' that right? The new and refill thing I think basically Rocky and I spoke to A. each other as equals.
And, you know, it was one of those things where we ' re going to do the best damn job we can.
You know.
prescriptions?
Q.
There came a time, though, when he said to you refills and new
A.
He may have said refills.
I couldn ' tell you what time that was.
t But he may have said that. (tr. pp. 408-411) It may seem somewhat disingenuous for Messrs. Aronson and Miller to deny that they were aware by late 1993 and early 1994 that the policy was to consult on every prescription.
But it is apparent that there continued through that period to be misunderstanding as to what the exact policy was.
Based on the evidence in this record, the Pharmacy Examining Board ' interpretation of its rule as requiring consultation in s every single instance was never during the period in question clearly enunciated by the board.
Instead, Mr. LaDien inferred from a number of conversations with representatives of the state that the expectation was that consultation was to occur on refills as well as new prescriptions.
The manner in which that was communicated to staff pharmacists, however, would appear to have been that consultation was to occur on refills to the extent possible.
While that is not the judgment rule, it is also not the flat rule, for it permits some small degree of discretion.
That is the approach that Mr. Aronson and Mr. Miller understood to be available to them, and that is the approach they took.
Pervasive in the record of this matter is the premise that it was simply not possible to consult on every prescription refill given the volume of prescriptions dispensed at Walgreens #34 and the staffing authorized by Walgreens at that time.
This was not presented as a defense to the allegations of the Complaint nor, probably, could it be.
One may well imagine, however, the perceived dilemma of these respondents, attempting on the one hand to consult on every prescription dispensed, while on the other hand attempting to provide service to 700 to 800 patients each day.
The credible testimony of each of the respondents was that they did their very best to comply with 17
E ,7 .I
their understanding of the board ' expectations on consulting.
To charge the m with s unprofessional conduct either because they (understandably) m isunderstood what those expectations were, or because they failed to m eet those expectations through no fault of their own, would serve no disciplinary objective.
Walgreens #34 had, at the tim e of hearing, authorized an additional full tim e phar m acist position and was consulting on every prescription.
That syste m is apparently not working well, but the board ' edict is now being co m plied with at that phar m acy.
That should be sufficient, s and the jives and careers of these three co m petent and obviously caring phar m acists should not be disrupted further.
Dated this 24th day of July, 1995 R$spectfully sub m itted,
