Chapter II Summar y of Findings The Navigable Waterway Systems The State of Florida's Intracoastal and Navigable Waterway Systems complex over year The a are and 122 1.
The Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Inshore System (365 nautical miles); 2.
The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway Inshore and Offshore System (300 nautical miles); 3.
The Apalachicola-Chattahoochee- Flint River System (290 nautical miles); 4.
The Okeechobee Waterway System (152 nautical miles); 5.
The Miami River (5.5 nautical miles); and, 6.
The Saint Johns River System (170 nautical miles); Total System Miles Total Florida Miles 1,282.5 1,082.5
have evolved history.
Atlantic
Intracoastal Waterway Entrance Channel to the St. Johns River, Mayport, Fl.
(AIWW)
from
Nassau County
to Dade County was first investigated by the Secretary of War in 1881.
The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (GIWW) was begun in earnest much later in the early 1930's.
All of the waterways and navigable river systems of the state were the primary transportation arteries for settlers and land speculators, concurrent with development of the railroads, that began the exploration and commercial exploitation of the Florida peninsula.
Florida has the longest coastline of all the states excepting Alaska; totalling about 1,350 miles, much of which is navigable to commercial water transportation.
Florida's navigable waterway system for commercial purposes is categorized by six major interdependent systems:
The Florida Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway or (AIWW), was originally constructed by a private company sanctioned by the State of Florida known as the Florida Coast Line Canal and Transportation Company.
From Nassau County to its terminus at the Biscayne Bay Canal, it traverses a distance of 365 nautical miles and supports over 70 Federal Navigation Projects, over 105,000,000 annual tons of
2-1
cargo, 800,000+ registered recreational vessels, over 124,000 commercially related jobs, and 6,500 recreational/marine related businesses.
Personal wages directly associated with waterway activities total over $2.6 billion dollars, annually.
The Florida Inland Navigation District, the State custodian and legislatively authorized public entity responsible for Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway issues, estimates that without system maintenance for commercial navigation, the economic impact of the waterway would be summarily reduced by 54% from the numbers cited.
Likewise, if maintenance dredging and disposal were funded to actual need ($7.8M annually), economic contribution of the waterway would increase approximately 18% from the figures previously cited.
phosphate, steel, construction/industrial materials and coal).
A man-made channel 12 feet deep and 150 feet wide has been authorized but never built from St. Marks to Tampa Bay due to environmental concerns although vessels continue to ply the open waters of the Gulf in this region.
The Apalachicola-Chattahoochee and Flint River System (ACF) consists of a channel 9 feet deep and 100 feet wide from the mouth of the Apalachicola River to the head of navigation at Columbus, Georgia (for the Chattahoochee River) and at Bainbridge, Georgia (for the Flint River ).
The river system was an artery of commerce as far back as the early 1800's.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers began improving navigation in the rivers as early as 1828.
The total
In 1935, Congress authorized the first examination and survey for an intracoastal waterway from the Caloosahatchee River north to Apalachicola Bay; the beginnings of the Florida Gulf Intracoastal Waterway System (GIWW).
The West Coast Inland Navigation District was created by the Legislature in 1947 with the power to levy taxes for land procurement and to act as custodian for the gulf west coast navigable system.
In June 1960, dredging began and was completed in 1967 of the 151 mile western portion of the waterway.
The entire gulf coast system is
navigable
waterway
distance is 290 miles
authorized by the federal government for some 300 miles and carries over 2,000,000 + tons of cargo annually by ship and barge (primarily, fuels, rock,
2-2
with a lift of 190 feet accomplished at three locks and dams just over Florida's border into Georgia.
The Apalachicola River, due to extreme drought over recent years and sluggish flow, has experience excessive shoaling in and around the Blountstown, Florida area, making the River difficult at times for navigation by commercial traffic at this location.
and costly hurricanes in 1926 and 1928, the Florida Legislature created the Okeechobee Flood Control District, the public entity then authorized to cooperate with the Federal Government for flood control mitigation and navigation purposes.
Today, this function is administered by the Florida Inland Navigational District.
Much controversy between commercial interests and public environmental agencies has been made recently regarding the water quality management of the region by the States of Georgia, Alabama, and Florida.
Federal legislation has recently been
The 5.5 mile Miami River is the oldest natural landmark in Southeast Florida.
Tequesta Indians used the area from what is now Northwest 27th Avenue (the headwaters of the original natural spring) to Biscayne Bay in the 1500's as a major trading area with the Spaniards and other explorers.
In the early 1900's as Miami grew, it was the major commercial corridor for the City and region.
From 1903 to 1933 it was lengthened and widened by the Federal Government and the once clear spring fed rapids ceased in 1909 when the Miami Canal flood control
proposed to de-authorize the Florida Apalachicola River (approximately 90 miles) which would negate any future commercial activity throughout this river system.
The status of this legislation is unknown at this time.
Of interest in South Florida is the Okeechobee Waterway System.
Lake Okeechobee is Florida's largest freshwater lake and the second largest freshwater lake in the United States (second to Lake Superior).
The waterway runs from the Gulf
project was built.
By the 1930's the river was in its present configuration.
The major current impediment to enhanced commercial use at this time, is the build up of contaminated sediments that damage the marine environment and impede the use of larger vessels due to shallow drafts; the river has not been dredged since 1933.
The River is the fourth largest port development area in the State of Florida, with an estimated $4 billion in trade, annually.
Intracoastal Waterway Inlet near Ft. Myers, Florida some 152 miles to the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway near Stuart, Florida.
It is primarily used by
recreational boaters due to restrictive clearance locations along the waterway.
Maximum controlling height clearance is 14.5 feet through the eastern St. Lucie Canal to the Atlantic.
After two devastating
In Florida's east central region, the Saint Johns River System is 285 miles long beginning north of Lake
2-3
Okeechobee and meandering north/northeast to Jacksonville and on to the Atlantic Ocean and Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
It is Florida's longest river and passes through eight lakes on its journey to the sea.
The River is authorized for navigation for 170 miles and is the subject of an extensive U.S. Army Corps of Engineers/Jaxport dredging project in proximity to the port over the next two years.
currently provide.
Success is due to flexibility, tight schedules, seamless interface with truck, and competitive rate structures due to the high cost of operating trucks in the European markets.
In the United States, the Columbia and Snake Rivers in Washington State and Idaho, the mid-Atlantic Coast, Texas, and the Mississippi River serve as primary arteries for container on barge, grain barge,
Trends and Findings Waterway transportation has changed significantly in the last 20 years.
Large mergers and consolidations have taken place in both conference and nonconference liner shipping.
Mega-companies have been formed and they move large numbers of containers in quantities enough to warrant dedicated ships, dedicated barges, dedicated berths, and even dedicated ports.
These economies of scale minimize total costs, help provide for competitive rates with other transportation modes, and maximize profit margins for the companies employed in the trade.
and petrochemical barge operations.
Unlike Europe, most domestic barge operations are focused on bulk transport, high volume/low value commodities.
This is because of the flexibility and transport speed truck offers from point of origin to point of delivery for higher value/low volume commodities such as containers and finished goods.
Translation, products moving by barge today in the United States are not time sensitive and do not require seamless interface with other modes of transportation (in most cases).
Historically, the generally accepted distance for
There are several locations world-wide where container on barge and break-bulk barge operations are successfully competing in this "new world" environment.
In Northern Europe, particularly the Netherlands and Germany along the Rhine River, extensive barge and short-sea shipping operations abound.
In Rotterdam, trucks carry less than 50% of the domestic boxes due to the efficiencies and flexibility barge operations
2-4
cost-effective use of barge over truck or rail is approximately 1,300 miles but this is changing.
Population densities, consumer markets, and improvements in technology and "fast barge/fast ferry operations" together with improved land side transfer are beginning to make container on barge a much more viable alternative and complement to trucking in the future.
In Florida, due to increasing land side congestion and ever growing truck volumes on Florida's Intrastate and Interstate Highway Systems, the use of barge transport of containers, both domestic and international, may be an option that will provide some relief to the State's land side transportation infrastructure.
the opportunity for lightering barge operations, shortsea shipping, and scheduled container on barge intermodal transfers.
There are many barge owner/operators, like independent truckers, providing services throughout Florida.
Seven (7) major owner/operators either have scheduled container services in Florida, or provide regular bulk movement of product within Florida domestic waters.
During the course of this study effort through discussions with stakeholders and some owner/operators, five (5) existing Florida deep water ports emerged as having future potential to become container on barge transfer points due to geographic location, availability of land for building
Large population and employment densities, smaller travel distances, high levels of land side congestion, high costs of competing modes (fuel and crew costs), and maturity of the intermodal container industry are beginning to be realized in Florida just like they have been in Europe.
These conditions foster
necessary infrastructure, or because they currently have the location and infrastructure in place to accommodate regularly scheduled barge operations.
Four (4) are on the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway and one (1) on the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
These facilities are described in further detail within their report.
As part of the Florida Intracoastal and Inland
Waterway System Study, surveys were created and mailed to over 390 current or prospective owner/
operators of the Florida
2-5
navigable waterway system.
The survey was
operations might handle long hauls of 300 miles or more with efficient transfers at either end built into the drayage and truck delivery function.
Coastal shipping will expand truck line intermodal options, especially in regions where railroad services are unavailable or track capacity is short.
designed to offer an operational overview of each operator while offering a forum to address specific deficiencies within the Florida navigable waterway system.
The following general characteristics cited by operators responding to the survey include.
· · · · Average Number of Employees per Operator (Florida) 62 Average Fleet Size (Tugs and Barges) 22 Average Annual Bulk Tons Transported 1,153,295 Annual Container Tons (One container operator responded) 40,000 Top Five Commodities Report Shipped (Most recent year) 1.
Petroleum 2.
Chemicals 3.
Steel 4.
Coal 5.
Nonmetallic Minerals Primary Deficiencies for GIWW and AIWW 1.
Dredging 2.
Channel Width 3.
Congestion Points
Current truck/intermodal services that utilize railroads are provided mostly on a daily basis or more frequently in some cases.
A major factor for the integration of coastwise barge operations with trucking service is also to have daily or higher service frequency.
While coastal service must be based on daily or higher levels of service to be economically competitive, projected near and mid-term land side congestion on Florida's road network, could make such a service very attractive.
·
·
The State of Florida can accept a role, should it desire to do so, to make this transportation resource a reality.
Strategic planning and infrastructure
development for future hub and spoke operations of a container on barge service could be one of the answers to an untapped trade corridor potential.
The potential market for coastal container shipping in Florida is the interregional and domestic box traffic currently moving by truck.
Only a coastwise
scheduled service with truck like responsiveness and flexibility in terms of trip time and frequency can successfully make such a service a reality.
The main beneficiaries of such a service would be the truck lines by having an alternative to all truck or truck/rail intermodal in delivering goods to market.
Fast barge
The Study Team would like to acknowledge and thank all the stakeholders and parties that actively participated in this study.
They have been individually named at the end of this document.
Without their contribution and encouragement, this report could not have been written.
2-6
