Professional-Technical Education 377 Technical Committee Report and Curriculum Guide for Teen Living FC 0101 Idaho Professional Technical Education This report was prepared by the Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Family and Consumer Sciences Education Boise, Idaho August 2001 Idaho State Board for Professional Technical Education Karen McGee, President Pocatello James Hammond, Secretary Post Falls Blake Hall, Vice President Idaho Falls Darrell Manning Boise Paul Agidius Moscow Roderic Lewis Boise Marilyn Howard State Superintendent of Public Instruction Boise Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Mike Rush, State Administrator Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education Nancy Walker, Program Manager Family and Consumer Sciences Education (208) 334-3216 The Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education is an equal opportunity employer.
Hiring is done without regard to race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age or disability.
Appropriate consideration shall be given to veterans in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
*Costs associated with this publication are available from the Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education in accordance with Section 60-202, Idaho Code.
1
INTRODUCTION The Teen Living curriculum framework was developed by a team comprised of Idaho Professional-Technical Education staff and Idaho State University personnel.
The curriculum team developed the Teen Living framework from the National Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences Education, the previous Idaho Teen Living guide, Idaho State recommended texts, other states' curricula, and a review of literature pertaining to curriculum content.
A committee of selected Idaho teachers participated in the review process.
This statewide curriculum reflects the knowledge and skills recommended for 9th and 10th grade students.
Students completing the Teen Living course are better prepared for the challenges of living and working in today's society.
The competency-based curriculum framework format provides a means for monitoring student progress and generating student profiles.
The student profile is a cumulative record of student progress and provides documentation of competence.
The Teen Living statewide curriculum framework is intended to be the fundamental guide to schools for program content.
Schools offering Family and Consumer Sciences education should use an advisory committee to consider local and community needs.
Curriculum Project Director John L.V. Bobell, Ed.D. Idaho State University Pocatello, Idaho Curriculum Project Coordinators Michelle D. Olsen Phil B. Padgett Kristine Rudd Idaho State University Pocatello, Idaho
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The Teen Living curriculum committee included Idaho State University, and the Idaho Division of ProfessionalTechnical Education and volunteer educators from Idaho junior/senior high schools.
The Division of ProfessionalTechnical Education reimbursed teachers for curriculum review workshop travel and meal expenses.
The Idaho Division of Professional-Technical Education sincerely appreciates the outstanding work of the committee members and their employers who supported their participation.
Rhea Blake South Fremont High School St. Anthony, Idaho Annette Bunce West Jefferson High School Terreton, Idaho Debra Ellis Alameda Junior High School Pocatello, Idaho Carolyn Goodworth Burley Junior High School Burley, Idaho Kristina Kunz Sand Creek Middle School Idaho Falls, Idaho Koni Lindley Caldwell Alternate High School Caldwell, Idaho Marilyn Wignall Robert Stuart Junior High School Twin Falls, Idaho Gary Nunn School Psychology Faculty Idaho State University Pocatello, Idaho Heidi Stirm Melba Junior-Senior High School Melba, Idaho Trisha Verdal Moscow Junior High School Moscow, Idaho
2
TEEN LIVING COURSE DESCRIPTION Teen Living addresses issues of adolescents and their relationships involving family, school, and community.
Middle adolescents in the 9th and 10th grade are engaged in a transition from childhood to adulthood and are building personal identity through life experiences.
The emphasis of this course is to build on skills in the areas of personal development, relationships, human and family development, clothing, resource management, personal living space, nutrition and wellness, career choices and leadership skills.
This course focuses on the student's role and responsibility as a teen participating in the family, school and community.
FCCLA (Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America) leadership activities are an integral part of this course.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION Delivery of the Teen Living Curriculum Full-class participation is emphasized with teamwork as well as individual projects and/or study.
The teacher is the facilitator and the manager of the classroom environment.
The focus is on problem-based instruction that is designed to enable and inspire students to plan and take actions for the well being of self and others in the home, workplace, community and world.
Teacher Qualifications The teacher of this course must be certified in Family and Consumer Sciences Education.
It is highly recommended that teachers have industry experience or a recent internship experience to gain knowledge about career opportunities in family and consumer sciences occupations.
Length and Level of this Course This course is a one or two semesters/trimester experience preferably at the 9th or 10th grade level.
Recommended Resources Teen Living Activity/Resource Guide, 2000 Materials from the current curriculum material list for Family and Consumer Sciences FCCLA state and national resource materials Career Pathways This course is recommended for all students because the course content helps students develop essential life and relationship skills necessary for living and working in a diverse, global society.
Occupational areas related to the Teen Living curriculum are included in the Human Resources Career Pathway.
Examples include education, child and family services, law, public administration, law enforcement, and community services.
3
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK PROGRAM AREA: Family and Consumer Sciences IDAHO DIVISION OF PROFESSIONAL-TECHNICAL EDUCATION EFFECTIVE DATE: August 2000 PROGRAM TITLE: Teen Living I and II (one or two semesters/trimesters) FC 0101 IDAHO CODE NUMBER: 377 ____________________________________________________________________________________ I MAJOR CONCEPTS/CONTENT: Teen Living addresses issues of adolescents and their relationships involving family, school, and community.
Middle adolescents in the 9th and 10th grade are directly involved in a transitional period between childhood and adulthood, and are engaged in seeking personal identity through managing life experiences.
In Teen Living, students are encouraged to evaluate their attitudes, consider adult issues, and then go beyond self to consider the impact of their decisions and actions on themselves, family, school, and community.
WORK-BASED LEARNING ACTIVITIES: It is recommended that students select a work environment for observation, volunteering or actual work experience depending on available opportunities.
II
III CONTENT STANDARDS: After successfully completing this program, the student will be able to: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
EXPLORE FACTORS THAT IMPACT HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT EXPLAIN THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FAMILY TO THE WELL BEING OF INDIVIDUALS AND SOCIETY DEMONSTRATE RESPECTFUL AND CARING RELATIONSHIPS PRACTICE MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN, ECONOMIC, AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES EXPLORE FASHION, TEXTILES, AND APPAREL EXPLORE HOMES AND PERSONAL SPACE EXPLORE CAREER AND LEADERSHIP SKILLS DEVELOP NUTRITION AND WELLNESS PRACTICES EXPLORE EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND CARE
4
SUGGESTED SCOPE AND SEQUENCE* Teen Living I and II *Suggested times are for semester schedules; please adjust for alternative schedules.
( 1.
( ( 3 ­ 4 weeks ( ( ( ( ( 2.
( 3 ­ 4 weeks ( ( ( ( ( 3.
( ( 3 ­ 4 weeks ( ( ( ( 4.
( 4 ­ 5 weeks ( ( ( ( ( 5.
( 4 ­ 5 weeks ( ( ( ( ( 6.
3 ­ 4 weeks ( ( ( ( 7.
( ( 4 ­ 5 weeks ( ( ( ( 8.
Personal development during adolescence A. Growth and development B. Emotional intelligence C. Influences on development and personality D. Learning styles and brain modality E. How personality develops F. Character and personal values Family and society A. Family as a basic unit B. Family roles and responsibilities C. Improving family relationships D. Personal living space E. Life events and experiences that impact the family Respectful caring relationships and friendships A. Qualities of friendships and relationships B. Exploring stress C. Communication skills D. Conflict and youth violence E. Developing cooperation, teamwork, and leadership skills Managing human, economic and environmental resources A. Understanding management B. Managing personal and material resources C. Managing money D. Consumer rights and responsibilities E. Impact of technology Fashion, textiles and apparel A. Fashion trends and influences B. Textile and fabric purpose and selection C. Equipment use and care D. Produce a textile product E. Clothing care and maintenance Homes and personal space A. Importance of housing B. Apply elements and principles of design C. Care and safety of home and personal space Career and leadership skills A. Balancing work and family responsibilities B. Career Pathways C. Planning for employment D. Teen employment possibilities E. Leadership skills Nutrition and wellness 5
( ( 4 ­ 5 weeks ( ( ( ( ( ( 9.
( 4 ­ 5 weeks ( ( (
A. B. C. D. E. F. G.
Wellness factors Nutrition and nutrients Food choices Weight management Food shopping Kitchen safety and sanitation Preparing simple meals and snacks
Child development and care A. Safe home environment B. Healthy pregnancy and prenatal development C. Early childhood development D. Caregiver responsibilities
6
CURRICULUM FRAMEWORK Teen Living 1.
CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLORE FACTORS THAT IMPACT HUMAN GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT 1.01 COMPETENCY: Explain growth and human development from adolescence to adulthood PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe physical, emotional, and intellectual changes that occur during adolescence.
2.
Describe sequential stages of development from adolescence to adulthood.
3.
Explain the importance of knowing the processes of human development 4.
Explore personal physical, emotional, and intellectual development.
1.02 COMPETENCY: Explore emotional intelligence.
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define emotional intelligence, self-esteem and self-concept 2.
Describe the significance of emotional intelligence on growth and development 3.
Compare emotional intelligence to cognitive ability.
4.
Compare characteristics of high and low emotional intelligence.
5.
Explore personal emotional intelligence, including self-concept and self-esteem.
6.
Explain ways to improve one's level of emotional intelligence 1.03 COMPETENCY: Explain internal and external influences on human development during adolescence PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the internal and external influences on human growth and development.
2.
Explain the effect of heredity and environment on human growth and development.
3.
Explain the effect of social, economic, and technological influences on human growth and development.
4.
Describe the significance of gender, ethnicity and culture on human growth and development.
1.04 COMPETENCY: Explore ways to accommodate learning style and brain modality PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain learning style and brain modality.
2.
Describe characteristics of various learning styles.
3.
Describe characteristics of brain modality.
4.
Distinguish characteristics of one's own learning style and brain modality.
5.
Explain learning situations, study habits, and communication skills that best accommodate one's learning style.
6.
Demonstrate the ability to adjust to various learning situations.
7
1.05
COMPETENCY: Explore personality in human development PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define personality 2.
Describe factors that define individual personality types 3.
Explain the importance of knowing one's personality type 4.
Describe learning situations, study habits, and communication skills that best accommodate personality type 5.
Demonstrate the ability to adjust to a variety of situations
1.06
COMPETENCY: Explain how character and personal values influence personal development PERFORMANCE INDICATORS; 1.
Define character and values 2.
Describe how personal values influence one character 3.
Describe how life is influenced by an individual's personal value system 4.
Describe ways one develops a system of personal values 5.
Explain how a value system can help to accomplish goals 6.
Describe personal responsibility as a citizen
8
2.
CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLAIN THE SIGNIFICANCE OF FAMILY TO THE WELL BEING OF INDIVIDUALS AND SOCIETY 2.01 COMPETENCY: Explain family as the basic unit of society PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the concept of family.
2.
Describe the changes in the family unit in American culture 3.
Describe why the family is considered to be the basic unit of society 2.02 COMPETENCY: Describe roles and responsibilities of the family across the lifespan PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the role of family in transmitting society's expectations.
2.
Explain the role of the family in teaching culture and traditions.
3.
Describe the role of family in providing the necessities of life.
4.
Explain the role of family in developing independence, interdependence, support, and commitment.
5.
Describe the role of family in developing intellectual skills.
6.
Describe the role of family in providing love and emotional support 2.03 COMPETENCY: Demonstrate ways to improve family relationships PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain economic, political, and cultural influences on the family unit 2.
Describe characteristics of a strong family 3.
Explore ways to best support the current family situation.
4.
Describe possibilities for encouraging family members to strengthen family relationships.
5.
Assess family strengths to carry into the next family generation.
6.
Explore changes that may be desirable for a future family.
2.04 COMPETENCY: Describe the importance of personal living space PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe personal living space 2.
Explain the significance of personal living space and its impact on the well being of individuals and the family 3.
Explain the role of family members in maintaining personal living space 4.
Explain the rights and responsibilities related to personal living space 5.
Explain ways that an individual family member can improve personal living space 2.05 COMPETENCY: Describe life events and experiences that impact the family PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify events and experiences that affect the family 2.
Explain the possible impact of change and transitions on the family 3.
Describe the influence of the various stages of the family life cycle on interpersonal relationships 4.
Explain the natural process of grief and loss 5.
Describe ways to manage the affects of change and transitions
9
3.
CONTENT STANDARD: DEMONSTRATE RESPECTFUL AND CARING RELATIONSHIPS AND FRIENDSHIPS 3.01 COMPETENCY: Describe factors present in healthy relationships and friendships PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define qualities of healthy relationships and friendships 2.
Explain factors that influence relationships 3.
Describe why healthy relationships are important for personal happiness and success 4.
Explain options for establishing healthy peer and dating relationships 5.
Explain strategies for handling sexual feelings 6.
Explain options for handling or ending unhealthy relationships 7.
Explore personal safety and sexual harassment issues 3.02 COMPETENCY: Explore stress and stress management PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define stress and identify causes of stress 2.
Describe the possible affects of stress on one's self and relationships 3.
Explore personal levels of stress 4.
Describe actions and activities to reduce unhealthy levels of stress 5.
Explore stress management in relationships 6.
Practice stress management techniques 3.03 COMPETENCY: Demonstrate communication skills that contribute to positive relationships PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe ways that people communicate 2.
Describe how technology can influence communication 3.
Explore personal levels of communication skills in family and community settings 4.
Identify barriers to communication 5.
Explain ethics of communications with family, friends, and work 6.
Explain how appropriate language can influence relationships in family, work, and community settings 7.
Demonstrate how active listening techniques can improve two-way communication 8.
Demonstrate verbal and nonverbal behaviors that contribute to effective communication 3.04 COMPETENCY: Explore ways to prevent or reduce conflict and youth violence PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe how attitudes and behaviors can cause conflict and youth violence 2.
Describe how diversity among individuals can create a conflict situation 3.
Recognize warning signs of potential youth violence 4.
Explain harassment and bullying 5.
Describe techniques to deal with harassment and bullying 6.
Develop a harassment policy for school, work, or community 7.
Explore community resources that can help individuals with conflict prevention and management 8.
Describe non-violent methods or strategies that can be used to reduce the level of anger in a conflict situation 9.
Describe how peer mediation can be used to positively influence conflict situations 10.
Develop a personal code of behavior to prevent or reduce youth violence 11.
Develop and implement local action projects to reduce the potential for violence 10
3.05
COMPETENCY: Demonstrate ways to improve cooperation, teamwork, and leadership in the family and community PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define the concepts of cooperation, teamwork, and leadership 2.
Describe different styles of leadership 3.
Describe how personal leadership and teamwork can improve relationships 4.
Explore individual actions and attitudes that can motivate and encourage team members 5.
Practice techniques for developing effective cooperation, team work, and leadership skills
11
4.
CONTENT STANDARD: PRACTICE MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN, ECONOMIC, AND ENVIORNMENTAL RESOURCES 4.01 COMPETENCY: Develop a personal understanding of management PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the difference between needs and wants 2.
Identify physical and psychological needs 3.
Define goals, values, and standards 4.
Describe the importance of having personal goals 5.
Describe the difference between short- and long-term goals 6.
Develop skills related to achieving goals 7.
Explain how values and goals affect standards 4.02 COMPETENCY: Develop resource management skills PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify personal and material resources 2.
Describe ways to use resources to reach goals 3.
Plan ways to use time wisely 4.
Explain factors that affect personal energy levels 5.
Apply the decision-making process in managing resources to reach goals 4.03 COMPETENCY: Explore effective money management skills PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain how individual and family goals depend upon the ability to manage resources 2.
Describe a personal money management system 3.
Explore techniques for living with a budget 4.
Explain comparative shopping 5.
Describe individual and family responsibilities for managing resources 6.
Practice personal money management skills 4.04 COMPETENCY: Explore consumer rights and responsibilities PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe current examples of consumer abuse and fraud 2.
Explore laws that protect the rights of consumers 3.
Identify resources that help protect consumers from abuse and fraud 4.
Explain personal responsibility regarding consumer protection 5.
Describe responsibilities for managing environmental resources 4.05 COMPETENCY: Explore the impact of technology on individual and family resources PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explore examples of technology that impact consumer activities 2.
Identify influences of technology on environmental concerns 3.
Describe current changes in consumer activities and purchasing as a result of technology 4.
5.
6.
Describe positive and negative effects of technology on individual and family resources Describe examples of technology that help consumers find and evaluate product and service information Conduct consumer purchase research using available technology
12
5.
CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLORE FASHION, TEXTILES, AND APPAREL 5.01 COMPETENCY: Explain fashion trends and peer influences on clothing PERFORMANCE INDICDATORS: 1.
Describe functions of clothing 2.
Explore factors that affect apparel and fashion 3.
Explore how values, attitudes, and personalities affect clothing selection 4.
Explore peer group influences on clothing selection 5.
Explore personal apparel and fashion decisions 6.
Explain and describe the elements and principles of design 7.
Apply the elements and principles of design to apparel 8.
Explain how to develop a wardrobe 5.02 COMPETENCY: Describe textile purpose and selection PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define fiber and fabric 2.
Describe the sources of various fabrics and fibers 3.
Describe the advantages and disadvantages of various fabrics for different purposes 4.
Select an appropriate textile fabric for a specific purpose 5.
Explain the care of a variety of textile products 5.03 COMPETENCY: Practice safe use of equipment to produce textile products PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the purposes of different types of equipment 2.
Describe safety rules and procedures for various types of equipment 3.
Demonstrate the safe use and care of equipment 5.04 COMPETENCY: Develop skills to produce a textile product PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Select a suitable project 2.
Select appropriate fabric and notions for a project 3.
Demonstrate how to follow directions for a project 4.
Demonstrate proper use of equipment 5.
Demonstrate skill to produce a product 5.05 COMPETENCY: Develop skills in clothing care and maintenance PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Demonstrate appropriate laundering, pressing, ironing and storage of clothing 2.
Demonstrate simple clothing repairs and alterations
13
6.0 CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLORE HOMES AND PERSONAL SPACE 6.01 COMPETENCY: Describe the importance of family housing PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain how homes fulfill physical, emotional and social needs 2.
Explain the importance of personal space 3.
Describe the main types of homes 4.
Explain factors to consider in selecting housing 6.02 COMPETENCY: Apply elements and principles of design to personal space PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Practice design and organization techniques to personal space 2. Use a floor plan to develop good furniture arrangement 6.03 COMPETENCY: Develop skills to keep home and personal space clean and safe PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Plan a cleaning schedule for home or personal space 2.
Select, organize and use appropriate cleaning materials and supplies 3.
Explain ways to make the home safe 4.
Practice conservation of resources
14
7.0 CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLORE CAREER AND LEADERSHIP SKILLS 7.01 COMPETENCY: Explore ways to balance the responsibilities of family, school, and work PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Identify reason people work 2.
Describe work ethic 3.
Explain the effects of personal life on work performance 4.
Describe individual responsibilities toward family, work, and school 5.
Describe how company policies can assist families 6.
Suggest ways to help balance family, school, and work demands 7.02 COMPETENCY: Explore career pathways PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define a career pathway 2.
Explain the relationship between training/education and expected wage 3.
Explain the importance of exploring career choices early in life 4.
Describe ways to select a career 5.
Analyze the impact of various careers on family life 6.
Explore a career path 7.03 COMPETENCY: Explore goal setting and personal planning techniques that support preparation for employment PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Define the planning process 2.
Describe steps that can be taken now to assist in achieving future career goals 3.
Outline the education and training required to achieve career goals 4.
Outline an employment sequence from entry level to the career goal 5.
Develop an action plan to achieve a selected career goal 7.04 COMPETENCY: Explore teen job possibilities that support a career goal PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
List qualities of a good employee 2.
Describe skills needed for employment 3.
Describe ways to find job openings that accommodate student interests and goals 4.
Describe why employers require resumes, applications, and interviews 5.
Describe the steps involved in applying for a job 6.
Describe the information that is required on a resume 7.
Develop a resume 8.
Explain information required for a job application 9.
Practice completing a job application 10.
Explain how to prepare for an interview 11.
Demonstrate the interview process 12.
Explain skills for keeping a job and advancing in a job
15
7.05
COMPETENCY: Develop leadership skills PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe characteristics of a good leader 2.
Describe opportunities for leadership 3.
Describe characteristics of effective group members 4.
Explain ways to reach group goals 5.
Explain good citizenship 6.
Practice parliamentary procedure for meeting management
16
8.
CONTENT STANDARD: DEVELOP NUTRITION AND WELLNESS PRACTICES 8.01 COMPETENCY: Explore factors related to health promotion PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the aspects of wellness 2.
Describe personal health habits that promote wellness 3.
Identify health risks and risky behaviors 4.
Explore sources for help with risky behaviors and habits 5.
Describe recommended treatments for minor injuries and common illnesses 6.
Describe basic health practices that contribute to overall good looks 7.
Develop body cleanliness and grooming habit 8.
Develop a wellness action plan 8.02 COMPETENCY: Explore the relationship of nutrition to good health PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the relationship of a healthy diet to wellness 2.
Explain conditions affected by poor nutrition 3.
Describe the essential nutrients, their functions and food sources 8.03 COMPETENCY: Plan food choices that meet wellness needs and preferences PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain factors and influences that affect food choices 2.
Describe health conditions that may require special food choices 3.
Describe the groups in the Food Guide Pyramid and list the recommended daily servings for each group 4.
Describe how having a daily food plan can help balance dietary needs 5.
Describe the main points to consider when planning nutritious, appealing meals and snacks 6.
Develop a plan for healthy meals and snacks 8.04 COMPETENCY: Explain the aspects of weight management PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain factors that affect body weight 2.
Describe the relationship of physical activity to wellness 3.
Explain dieting dangers during the teen years 4.
Describe signs and consequences of an eating disorder 5.
Explore resources to assist individuals with eating disorders 6.
Develop a plan for healthy weight management 8.05 COMPETENCY: Demonstrate food shopping for quality and value PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe guidelines for making grocery shopping decisions 2.
Explain how to shop for high quality foods at best prices 3.
Explain the information on food labels to make purchasing decisions 4.
List factors to consider when comparing prices of products 5.
Practice food shopping techniques for quality and value
17
8.06
COMPETENCY: Explore factors that affect kitchen safety and sanitation PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain safety practices to follow to help prevent accidents in the kitchen 2.
Describe procedures to follow in the event of kitchen accidents 3.
Describe the consequences of food spoilage, contamination and unsafe food handling 4.
Describe safe food storage, handling and preparation practices
8.07
COMPETENCY: Demonstrate ways to prepare a simple meal and snacks PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the importance of having a plan before preparing a meal and snacks 2.
Describe how to select and read a recipe 3.
Describe the purposes of basic kitchen equipment and tools 4.
Practice the safe use of kitchen equipment and tools 5.
Describe common cooking terms 6.
Practice accurate measuring 7.
Demonstrate ways to make meals and snacks appealing 8.
Compare the cost of convenience food products with the amount of preparation time and taste 9.
Practice preparing a healthy meal and snacks 10.
Demonstrate proper table setting 11.
Demonstrate proper mealtime etiquette for home and restaurant eating
18
9.0 CONTENT STANDARD: EXPLORE EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT AND CARE 9.01 COMPETENCY: Explain the importance of a safe home environment PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe common household injuries to small children 2.
Describe the concept of "first aid" 3.
Describe the contents of a household first aid kit 4.
Demonstrate basic first aid procedures 5.
Describe information to give the "911" operator in case of an emergency 6.
Explain ways to keep the home safe for children 7.
Describe situations and activities that constitute child abuse/neglect 8.
Describe actions to take if child abuse is suspected 9.02 COMPETENCY: Explain healthy pregnancy and prenatal development PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe conditions for a healthy pregnancy 2.
Explain normal prenatal development 3.
Describe care necessary during pregnancy 4.
Explore ways to minimize the potential for birth disorders 5.
Explain the health risks associated with teen pregnancy 9.03 COMPETENCY: Explore early childhood development PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Explain the rapid growth that occurs during the first year of life 2.
Describe how young children develop physically 3.
Describe how young children develop socially, emotionally, and mentally 4.
Explain the roles and responsibilities of parents and older siblings in nurturing and caring for young children 5.
Explain why teenagers are not ready for parenthood 9.04 COMPETENCY: Explore the responsibilities and duties of a successful caregiver PERFORMANCE INDICATORS: 1.
Describe the most important functions of a caregiver 2.
Explain the basic needs of children 3.
List the information that a caregiver should obtain from parents 4.
Describe the routine duties of a caregiver 5.
Describe the procedures for emergency situations 6.
Explain positive caregiving 7.
Explore alternatives for dealing with aggressive or misbehaving children in a positive manner 8.
Explore appropriate activities for children of different ages
19
