DE PA U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention
NT OF J ME US RT
CE TI
N BJ A C E I OF F
IJ J O F OJJ D P B RO J US T I C E P
Shay Bilchik, Administrator
October 1999
School and Community Interventions To Prevent Serious and Violent Offending Richard F. Catalano, Ph.D., Rolf Loeber, Ph.D., and Kay C. McKinney Recent research indicates that children exposed to certain risk factors in their families, at school, among their peers, and in their communities are at greater risk of becoming serious violent juvenile (SVJ) offenders.
Multiple rather than single factors place children at risk of becoming SVJ offenders.
Therefore, inter vention efforts directed toward any single source of influence (e.g., family, school, or peers) are unlikely to be successful.
Rather, to be effective, programs must target several risk factors in a variety of settings.
According to the Study Group on Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders--a group of 22 researchers convened by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) to study the population of SVJ offenders--implementing family, school, and community interventions is the best way to prevent children from developing into SVJ offenders.
Inter ventions include strategies that prevent problem behavior or that inter vene to reduce future problem behavior.
The Study Group also concluded that programs similar in philosophy to public health approaches (i.e., those that both address risk factors and introduce protective factors) are the most promising prevention and early intervention programs for SVJ offenders.
Many schools and communities have designed inter ventions to prevent or reduce risk factors for SVJ offending and drug abuse.
The Study Group reviewed a number of such programs that have shown promising results in preventing adolescent antisocial behavior.
Its findings, summarized in this Bulletin, are set for th in greater detail in the group's final report, Never Too Early, Never Too Late: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions for Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders (Loeber and Farrington, 1997).1 The chapter of the final report summarized in this Bulletin, which focuses on comprehensive school and community interventions to prevent serious and violent juvenile offending, was researched and written by Richard F. Catalano, Michael W. Ar thur, J. David Hawkins, Lisa Berglund, and Jef frey J. Olson.
While few of the inter ventions described in this Bulletin have been evaluated to measure their impact on SVJ offending, all address multiple risk factors in a variety of settings, an approach that may be one of the most effective at preventing problem behaviors from developing.
The Study Group examined five types of school interventions: structured playground activities, behavioral consultation, behavioral monitoring and reinforcement, 1
Fr om the Administrator Although youth who commit serious violent crimes are small in number, they account for a dispropor tionate amount of juvenile crime.
How then can we best inter vene with this difficult--even dangerous--population? A major study, funded by the O ffice of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention and conducted by its Study Group on Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders, sheds new light on promising strategies to prevent and control serious violent juvenile offending.
The study concludes that timely comprehensive school- and community-based inter ventions hold the greatest potential for preventing such delinquency and finds that programs involving a juvenile's family, school, and community are most effective in minimizing factors that contribute to serious violent juvenile offending and maximizing those that prevent delinquency.
A nu mber of such interventions are described in this Bulletin.
I hope that school administrators and community leaders will be able to use the infor mation that this Bulletin provides to help youth develop into law-abiding and productive citizens.
Only by focusing on programs and strategies that work will we be able to succeed in preventing serious violent juvenile offending and ensuring public safety.
Shay Bilchik Administrator
The conclusions of the Study Group were subsequently set forth in a book entitled Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions, edited by the Group's cochairs, Rolf Loeber and David P. Farrington, and published by Sage Publications, Inc., in 1998.
S G OVC RA MS
metal detectors, and schoolwide reorganization.
These inter ventions varied in effectiveness.
Programs that monitored student behavior and reinforced attendance and academic progress increased positive school behavior and academic achievement and decreased delinquency.
While metal detectors reduced the number of weapons brought into schools, they did not seem to decrease weapon carr ying or violence outside schools.
The Study Group also examined eight types of community inter ventions: citizen mobilization, situational prevention, comprehensive citizen inter vention, mentoring, afterschool recreation programs, policing strategies, policy changes, and mass media inter ventions.
Several of these inter ventions showed positive results in reducing risk and enhancing protective factors, and in studies with long-term followup, certain programs were effective in reducing juvenile crime and substance abuse.
recognition of positive behavior, and positive norms regarding behavior).
Structured Playground Activities A school playground program for boys and girls in kindergarten through second grade in Tallahassee, FL, significantly reduced aggressive behavior on the playground (Murphy, Hutchinson, and Bailey, 1983).
The program offered organized games, such as jump rope and races, to 344 children who arrived at the playground before school began.
Three aides super vised the activities and used a timeout procedure for students who were particularly unruly.
Most of the disruptive incidents involved aggression, and the program showed a 53-percent reduction in aggression as a result of the structured activities.
costs and disruptive behavior at the elementar y schools where the program was implemented decreased, and on-task classroom behavior increased following implementation of the program.
A similar multiyear behavioral consultation program for elementar y and junior high school students in Los Angeles County was found effective at reducing vandalism (Mayer et al.,1983).
Vandalism costs and disruptive behavior decreased significantly in participating schools, and the effects were maintained for several years following the project (Mayer et al., 1983).
Behavioral Monitoring Closely super vising student behavior and rewarding positive conduct also appear to be effective inter ventions, according to an evaluation of a behavioral inter vention program that focused on low-achieving, disruptive seventh-grade students who had trouble bonding with their families (Br y, 1982).
As part of the 2-year program, inter vention staff and teachers met weekly to discuss students' tardiness, class preparedness, performance, and behavior.
Staff also met with students in small group sessions and reviewed their school behavior.
Students earned points (later redeemed for a special trip) for positive ratings from the teacher inter views, good attendance, lack of disciplinar y referrals, and lack of inappropriate behavior during the weekly meetings.
As part of the program, staff also routinely informed parents of their children's progress and continued to inter view teachers and hold small "booster" review sessions for the students ever y 2 weeks for 1 year after the intervention.
Monitored students had significantly higher grades, better attendance, and far fewer problem behaviors at school than students in a nonintervention comparison group (Bry and George, 1980).
The behavior changes continued after the program ended.
One-and-a-half years later, students who had participated in the program were found to report less illegal drug use and criminal behavior than youth who did not receive the intervention.
The impact on delinquency was long-term: 5 years after the program ended, youth in the program were 66 percent less likely to have a juvenile record with the county probation office than youth who had not been in the program (Bry, 1982).
Behavioral Consultation Two comprehensive school inter vention programs designed to reduce school vandalism illustrated that changing student behavior is one way to prevent delinquent behavior.
In a 1-year program, graduate students trained in applied behavioral analysis and behavioral consultation helped Los Angeles County elementar y schools develop classroom and schoolwide antivandalism programs (Mayer and Butter worth, 1979).
Inter ventions included matching academic materials to students' skill levels, increasing positive reinforcement for appropriate classroom behavior and academic progress, reducing the use of punishment, applying learning and behavioral management principles, and educating school counselors and psychologists about behavioral consultation methods.
Vandalism
School Interventions Academic failure is often associated with the beginning of delinquency and the escalation of serious offending, and interventions that improve a child's academic performance have been shown to reduce delinquency (Maguin and Loeber, 1996).
To assess the effectiveness of schoolwide inter ventions, the Study Group examined five types of school interventions, which targeted a variety of risk factors (including academic failure, social alienation, low commitment to school, association with violent and delinquent peers, and aggressive behavior) and introduced a number of protective factors (such as bonding to school, social and cognitive competencies,
Metal Detectors in Schools Many schools use metal detectors to reduce violence by making firearms unavailable within school buildings.
One 2
sur vey of a representative sample of New York City high school students found that juveniles who attended schools with metal detectors were half as likely to carr y a gun, knife, or other weapon to or from school or inside a school building, as students who attended schools without metal detectors (Ginsberg and Loffredo, 1993).
Both groups of students, however, reported similar experiences in terms of being threatened or involved in fights at or away from school, and both were equally likely to report carr ying a gun, knife, or other weapon during the 30-day period prior to the sur vey.
Although these results imply that metal detector programs may have an impact on specific sites (especially with respect to the number of weapons brought to school), the Study Group cautions that metal detectors do not appear to reduce the number of weapons carried outside school.
Results of this program were encouraging.
Significantly fewer students-- almost 50 percent less--reported being victims of bullies when sur veyed 8 and 20 months after the program began.
Students also reported significant decreases in their own delinquent behavior (vandalism, theft, and truancy) 8 and 20 months after the program started.
Because bullying often involves repeated assaults on victimized students, this program appears to have directly reduced the risk factors of early and persistent antisocial behavior and violent, assaultive behavior.
x PATHE program.
A comprehensive school organization inter vention for secondar y school students in Charleston County, SC, the Positive Action Through Holistic Education (PATHE) program, similarly resulted in significant decreases in delinquent behavior (Gottfredson, 1986).
The PATHE program included six components: (1) teams of teachers, school staff, students, and community members who planned and implemented school improvement programs; (2) curriculum and discipline policies that were continually reviewed and revised, involved students, and provided ongoing inser vice teacher training in instructional and classroom management practices; (3) academic innovations, such as study skills programs and cooperative learning; (4) school climate innovations, such as expanded extracurricular activities and peer counseling; (5) career -oriented innovations, including job skills and career exploration programs; and (6) special academic and counseling services for lowachieving and disruptive students.
High school students in the PATHE program reported significant decreases in delinquency and drug involvement and fewer school suspensions and punishment than the control group.
Students in the program who received special academic and counseling ser vices reported significantly higher grades and were less likely to repeat a grade than students who did not receive these ser vices.
High school seniors who received these ser vices were also more likely to graduate than those who did not receive the ser vices.
For middle school students in the inter vention, there were declines in suspensions.
x Project CARE.
Project CARE, a school intervention program in Baltimore, MD, used classroom management
Schoolwide Reorganization School organization inter ventions (i.e., those that change or improve the way that schools operate) are noteworthy for their comprehensive and systematic prevention approach.
The Study Group's review of many such programs found that several appear to reduce risk factors-- including academic failure, dropping out of school, and rebelliousness--and increase protective factors--such as commitment to school and good attendance.
Cer tain school reorganization programs also have significantly reduced violence and delinquent behavior.
However, the fact that none of the programs reviewed by the Study Group used a true experimental design and that several evaluations did not completely analyze outcome data prevents a clear interpretation of evaluation results.
Individual programs are described below.
x School development program, New Haven, CT.
One inter vention program in New Haven, CT, which included parental involvement and a multidisciplinar y mental health team, helped students in two inner-city public elementar y schools improve academically (Cauce, Comer, and Schwartz, 1987; Comer, 1988).
Ninety-nine percent of the students receiving the inter vention were African American, and most came from low-income families.
The program included a social calendar that integrated arts and athletic programs into school activities; a parent program that supported academic and extracurricular activities; a multidisciplinar y mental health team that helped staff manage student behavior problems; and a team of school administrators, teachers, support staff, and parents who oversaw program implementation.
Students from the two schools receiving the inter vention performed significantly better in middle school than a comparison group of students from noninter vention elementar y schools.
Students receiving the inter vention had significantly higher grades, academic achievement test scores, and self-perceived social competence.
x Nor wegian inter vention targeting bullying.
A large-scale school inter vention program that targeted bullying in Norwegian schools appears to have prevented violence by reducing aggressive behavior and general delinquency (Olweus, 1991).
The program provided an information and advice packet about bullying and ways to combat it to all families in Norway with schoolage children.
In addition, it distributed a booklet for school personnel to all Nor wegian comprehensive schools (grades 1 through 9).
The booklet described bullying problems, provided suggestions on what teachers and schools could do to counteract and prevent bullying problems, and dispelled myths about the nature and causes of bullying.
The program also made a video about bullying available at a highly subsidized price.
3
techniques and cooperative learning to decrease delinquent behavior among junior high school students (Gottfredson, 1987).
The program, planned and implemented by a team of teachers, administrators, and other school staff, also included a parent volunteer component and a community support and advocacy program.
Over the course of the 2-year program, students' self-reports of delinquency decreased significantly.
Teachers also reported significant improvement in classroom orderliness.
x Charleston, SC, middle school pr ogram.
Two evaluations of a program to improve the classroom environment and student behavior in several middle schools with high levels of student misbehavior in Charleston County, SC, showed mixed results.
The intervention included a revised school discipline policy, a behavior tracking system, consistent classroom organization and management, and behavior modification techniques.
The first evaluation of this program found that students in participating schools perceived significant increases in classroom order, organization, and rule clarity (Gottfredson, Kar weit, and Gottfredson, 1989).
The second evaluation--which examined the program's impact on the classroom environment and student behavior--found that the program generally had a positive effect on student behavior only in schools where the inter vention had been fully implemented (Gottfredson, Gottfredson, and Hybl, 1993).
Rule clarity, however, improved in high- and medium-implementation schools.
Teachers in high-implementation schools reported that on-task behavior increased significantly and disruptive behavior decreased significantly.
Teachers in schools with medium and low implementation, on the other hand, noted little or negative change in students' on-task behavior.
x Multimodal School-Based Pr evention Demonstration pr ogram.
Another Charleston, SC, middle school intervention, the Multimodal School-Based Prevention Demonstration program, was designed to reduce problem behaviors by improving academic achievement, social competency, and social bonding (Gottfredson, Gottfredson, and Skroban, 1996).
Academic inter ventions included cooperative learning techniques, a career and
educational decision skills program, and one-on-one tutoring.
The program addressed social competency with a life skills training course for sixth graders, a cognitive self-management course for seventh graders, and a cognitive self-instruction course and a violence prevention curriculum for all students.
The program tried to increase social bonding through a mentoring program and through adult models who taught appropriate skills and behaviors.
It also included organizational development strategies designed to strengthen the quality of program implementation.
Evaluation results indicate that the program improved students' grade point averages and decreased their susceptibility to peer pressure to use drugs.
inter ventions are described below: citizen mobilization, situational prevention, comprehensive community inter ventions, mentoring, afterschool recreation programs, policing strategies, policy change inter ventions, and media inter ventions.
The eight types of communitywide inter ventions examined by the Study Group focused on several risk factors, including easy access to firearms and drugs, community disorganization, and community norms or attitudes favoring antisocial behavior.
The inter ventions also focused on such protective factors as social bonding and clear community norms against antisocial behavior.
According to the studies and evaluations of these inter ventions examined by the Study Group, prevention strategies that cross multiple domains and that are mutually reinforcing and maintained for several years produce the greatest impact.
Community Interventions Many recent community interventions-- particularly those that target risk factors and introduce protective factors to prevent antisocial behavior--have been heavily influenced by public health approaches (Hyndman et al., 1992; Perr y, Klepp, and Sillers, 1989).
While many of the programs reviewed by the Study Group did not specifically target SVJ offenders, they nonetheless suggest that comprehensive prevention strategies that involve more than one entity (e.g., police and neighborhoods), take place in a variety of settings (e.g., home and school), and are maintained for several years have the potential to positively affect that population.
This is especially true for communitywide programs targeting risk and protective factors for alcohol, tobacco, and drug use.
Examples of the following eight types of community
Citizen Mobilization Programs that mobilize citizens to prevent crime and violence have the potential to reduce serious juvenile crime because they often address risk factors and offer the protective factors necessar y to deter or inter vene with serious juvenile offenders.
The most common citizen mobilization programs are neighborhood block watch programs and citizen patrols.
Neighborhood block watch programs are based on the premise that residents are in the best position to monitor suspicious activities and individuals in their neighborhoods.
Evaluations of three such programs, however, found little evidence that the programs have a significant effect on neighborhood crime.
An evaluation of a citizen patrol program similarly found no significant effect on crime.
Specific community mobilization programs are described below.
x Seattle, WA, and Chicago, IL, neighbor hood watch pr ograms.
A neighborhood watch program in Seattle, initiated by professional community organizers affiliated with the city police depar tment, focused on neighborhood burglar y problems (Lindsay and McGillis, 1986).
Following recruitment, organizers of the program held planning meetings in which they discussed prevention techniques, distributed information about home security, inspected par ticipating residents' homes for security, and had residents select block watch
Pr otective Factors x Peer groups, schools, and communities that emphasize positive social norms.
x Warm, suppor tive relationships and bonding with adults.
x Oppor tunities to become involved in positive activities.
x Recognition and suppor t for participating in positive activities.
x Cognitive, social, and emotional competence.
4
captains and exchange phone numbers.
While the number of burglaries in the program area declined, the reductions were not statistically significant.
A similar neighborhood watch program in middle-class and lower middle-class neighborhoods in Chicago did not produce any consistent changes in residents' crime prevention activities or neighborhood social cohesion, according to evaluators (Rosenbaum, Lewis, and Grant, 1986).
Nor did the program have an effect on victimization or perceived disorder.
x Police-initiated pr ogram in Houston, TX. Evaluation findings were similar for a program in Houston that was initiated by police (Wycoff et al., 1985b).
Assisted by local police officers and an urban planner who organized community meetings, a neighborhood task force sponsored a drug information seminar, designated "safe houses" where children could go for assistance, organized a trash and junk cleanup effort, and promoted property marking and resident ride-alongs with police officers.
Although a sur vey found that residents in the program area perceived a decrease in crime and social disorder and an increase in police ser vice, actual victimization did not decrease and satisfaction among residents in the program area did not improve (Wycoff et al., 1985b). x Guar dian Angels.
Another popular community mobilization strategy uses citizens who are not sworn law enforcement officers to patrol neighborhoods.
One of the most well-known programs using this strategy is the Guardian Angels, a racially diverse group of unarmed individuals who patrol neighborhoods by foot.
The group, which operates in cities across the Nation, specifically seeks to prevent crimes involving force or personal injur y. Evaluators who compared two areas in San Diego, CA, one that was patrolled by Guardian Angels and one that was not, found that crime rates in the two areas did not differ (Pennell et al., 1989).
One such strategy, target hardening, reduces the opportunity for crime to occur by implementing physical barriers such as steering locks.
Studies in West Germany found that the country's rate of car thefts declined substantially after the locks were introduced there (Webb, 1994; Webb and Laycock, 1992).
Another situational prevention strategy, access control, uses sophisticated computer technology, such as electronic personal identification numbers (PIN's), to control and limit access to buildings or other areas.
Vandalism and thefts decreased significantly in a London public housing project when a combination of access controls, including entr y phones, strategic fencing, and electronic garage access, was introduced (Poyner and Webb, 1987).
Another effective situational prevention strategy attempts to deter offenders by channeling their behavior in socially appropriate directions, thereby minimizing the potential for violent behavior.
Examples of this technique include separating rival soccer fans into different enclosures in sports stadiums (Clarke, 1983) and controlling crowds in amusement parks through pavement markings, signs, physical barriers, or vocal directions from park staff (Shearing and Stenning, 1984).
Programs that screen or track individuals' entr y and exit from buildings are another type of situational prevention inter vention used to prevent crime.
Retail stores use numerous sur veillance techniques, such as merchandise tagging, that prevent shoppers from leaving without paying for merchandise (Hope, 1991).
Other screening techniques include formal sur veillance by police or security personnel, sur veillance by employees in specific business settings, and natural sur veillance in which an area is designed to have few isolated spots where crimes could be committed without detection by people going about their daily business (Meredith and Paquette, 1992).
Making crime targets less accessible is another effective situational prevention technique.
When locked safes, for example, were installed in Australian betting shops, the number of robberies dropped substantially (Clarke and McGrath, 1990).
The New York Transit Authority has found that its policy of immediately removing graffiti from subway cars is an effective prevention tool because it removes the
Risk Factors for Health and Behavior Pr oblems Community x Availability of drugs.
x Availability of firear ms. x Community laws and nor ms favorable toward drug use, firear ms, and crime.
x Media por trayals of violence.
x Transitions and mobility.
x Low neighborhood attachment and community disorganization.
x Extreme economic depr ivation.
Family x Family histor y of problem behavior.
x Family management problems.
x Family conflict.
x Favorable parental attitudes and involvement in the problem behavior.
School x Ear ly and persistent antisocial behavior.
x Academic failure beginning in late elementar y school.
x Lack of commitment to school.
Individual/Peer x Alienation and rebelliousness.
x Friends who engage in the problem behavior.
x Favorable attitudes toward the problem behavior.
x Ear ly initiation of the problem behavior.
x Constitutional factors.
Source: Catalano, R., and J.D. Hawkins.
1995.
Communities That Care: RiskFocused Prevention Using the Social Development Strategy.
Seattle, WA: Developmental Research and Programs, Inc., p. 10.
Reprinted with the per mission of the authors and of Developmental Research and Programs, Inc.
Situational Prevention Many police agencies and communities attempt to reduce antisocial and criminal behavior by making it more difficult for an offense to occur and easier for an offender to get caught.
Such situational prevention efforts, which may include a variety of different strategies, have been shown to be effective (Clarke, 1995; Farrington, 1995).
5
inducement for further illegal activity (Sloan-Howitt and Kelling, 1990).
While researchers found that some of these strategies work well in certain conditions, they still need to determine which measures work best, in which combination, against which kind of crime, and under what conditions.
Although altering features of the physical environment has been the major focus of situational prevention strategies, a number of researchers are emphasizing the need to focus on "resident dynamics" (i.e., individual characteristics and social interaction) as the key mediator of the environment-crime link.
Comprehensive Community Interventions Comprehensive community interventions hold promise for preventing SVJ offending because they address multiple risk factors in the community, schools, family, and the media by mounting a coordinated set of mutually reinforcing preventive inter ventions throughout the community.
Given the scarcity of evaluations completed in this area, the only comprehensive community programs summarized in the Study Group's report are ones that have focused on reducing alcohol and substance abuse, including smoking.
Three of them are described below.
x Midwester n Pr evention Project.
The Midwestern Prevention Project was a community inter vention program designed to prevent substance abuse in 42 public middle and junior high schools in the Kansas City area (in both Kansas and Missouri) (Pentz et al., 1989c).
The project included a media campaign, education curriculums, parent education, community organization, and changes in local health policy to support the goals of the inter vention.
These components were introduced sequentially into communities over a period of 4 years (Pentz et al., 1989a).
For evaluation purposes, researchers introduced both the media campaign and the school-based intervention in some schools the first year, and only the media inter vention in other schools that year.
Results indicate that the comprehensive approach was more effective than the media inter vention alone at preventing the onset of substance abuse among both high-risk and general population students (Pentz et al., 1989b; Johnson et al., 1990).
x Class of 1989 study.
A comprehensive community inter vention to prevent adolescent smoking and alcohol use in Minnesota also was successful (Perr y et al., 1992, 1993, 1996; Williams et al., in press).
The Class of 1989 study was part of the Minnesota Heart Health Program (MHHP), a research and demonstration project carried out between 1980 and 1993 that was designed to reduce cardiovascular disease in three communities.
A study examining this inter vention evaluated the combined impact of a classroom-based smoking prevention curriculum delivered to the students in the class of 1989 during sixth, seventh, and eighth grades and the communitywide heart health activities of MHHP (Luepker et al., 1994; Perr y et al., 1992).
At the end of the 7-year period, when the students were high school seniors, 14.6 percent of those in the inter vention program smoked, compared with 24.1 percent of the students in the reference community (who received neither the classroom-based nor the communitywide inter vention) (Perr y et al., 1992).
The finding suggests that the combined school and community inter ventions produced a significant reduction in smoking among middle and high school youth.
x Pr oject Nor thland.
Project Nor thland used a similar combination of community-based and classroom interventions, along with a parent inter vention component, to prevent alcohol use among adolescents in six northeastern Minnesota counties (Perr y et al., 1993).
The program, which began when students were in sixth grade, included a social-behavioral classroom-based curriculum, peer leadership, parent involvement, and communitywide task force activities.
After 3 years, students who received the inter vention scored lower on a tendency-touse-alcohol scale and showed a considerably lower rate of monthly and weekly alcohol use.
Significant differences in risk factors for drug use also were found.
Sur vey measures of peer influences to use alcohol, perceived norms regarding teen alcohol use, parents' communication of sanctions for alcohol use, and reasons for teens not to use alcohol also demonstrated a lower likelihood of using alcohol among Project Nor thland students.
These positive effects on alcohol-related attitudes and behaviors
are noteworthy given the prevalence of alcohol use among adolescents.
Mentoring Many communities have initiated mentoring programs in which adult mentors spend time with and act as role models for individual youth.
Mentoring inter ventions may address several risk factors (including alienation, academic failure, low commitment to school, and association with delinquent and violent peers), while introducing protective factors (including opportunities for prosocial involvement and development of skills for and recognition of prosocial involvement, bonds with adults, healthy beliefs, and clear standards for behavior).
Evidence from 10 evaluations of mentoring programs consistently indicates that noncontingent, supportive mentoring relationships have not had the desired effect on academic achievement, school attendance, decisions to drop out, various aspects of child behavior (including misconduct), and employment (Dicken, Br yson, and Kass, 1977; Goodman, 1972; Green, 1980; McPartland and Nettles, 1991; Poorkaj and Bockelman, 1973; Rowland, 1991; Slicker and Palmer, 1993; Stanwyck and Anson, 1989).
The outcome of these programs is the same, evaluations have found, regardless of whether mentors are paid or unpaid and regardless of whether mentors are college students, community volunteers, members of the business community, or school personnel.2 Notwithstanding these evaluations, one study found that when mentors used behavior management techniques, students' school attendance improved (Fo and O'Donnell, 1975).
The Buddy System mentoring program implemented in two Hawaiian cities, for example, assigned ethnically and socioeconomically diverse mentors from a different socioeconomic level to work with youth who had behavior management problems.
The mentors were paid to make weekly contact with youth, submit data about the youth's behavior, complete weekly assignments with the youth, submit weekly log sheets, and attend biweekly meetings.
Buddy System mentors received 18 hours of 2
OJJDP's 1998 Report to Congress: Juvenile Mentoring Program (JUMP) indicates that youth involved in mentoring programs are less likely to experiment with drugs, less likely to be physically aggressive, and less likely to skip school than those not involved in such programs (Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 1998).
6
training before the program began and biweekly training sessions on behavior management throughout the program.
The evaluation showed a reduction in truancy when mentoring relationships included several different types of reinforcement based on appropriate behavior, but no such reduction when mentoring relationships did not reward good behavior (Fo and O'Donnell, 1975).
Afterschool Recreation Programs Programs that provide super vised recreation after school address the SVJ risk factors of alienation and association with delinquent or violent peers and introduce several protective factors, including skills for leisure activities and opportunities to become involved with prosocial youth and adults.
An evaluation of an afterschool recreation program in Ottawa, Ontario, indicated that this type of program may be a promising inter vention for preventing delinquency and violence (Jones and Offord, 1989).
The program actively recruited children ages 5 to 15 from lowincome families who lived in an Ontario public housing project to participate in structured afterschool courses designed to improve students' skills in sports and in music, dance, scouting, and other nonathletic areas.
After the children reached a certain skill level, they were encouraged to participate in ongoing leagues or other competitive activities in the community.
The number of arrests for juveniles participating in the program was significantly lower than the number of arrests for the same number of juveniles 2 years before the inter vention and for the same number of juveniles in a different housing project.
The number of security reports on juveniles in the program also declined significantly after the inter vention began.
However, when the program was discontinued, these positive changes in neighborhood rates of crime diminished significantly, demonstrating that some prevention programs may require continuous operation to remain effective.
including healthy beliefs, clear behavior standards, and citizen involvement with police.
Evaluations of three policing strategies show mixed results.
One strategy, intensifying the use of marked police cars, appears to prevent certain types of serious crime in highcrime areas during high-crime periods (Kelling et al., 1974).
Some jurisdictions use another technique known as field interrogation in which police officers stop persons they believe to be suspicious based on "reasonable cause," question them about their activities, and sometimes search the individuals and their vehicles.
These tactics often are considered controversial because it is hard to define "reasonable cause" and sometimes have been challenged as unconstitutional (Skolnick and Bayley, 1988).
An evaluation of a program in San Diego, CA, however, indicates that field interrogation is a potentially promising crime prevention tactic, especially when carried out in a respectful manner (Boydstun, 1975).
The evaluation found that reported crime increased significantly when police discontinued field interrogation and decreased significantly when the tactic was reintroduced.
Evaluations of these two strategies suggest that increased police presence must be directed judiciously (in terms of times, areas, and people targeted) to deter crime.
Simply increasing the number of police is not likely to prevent crime (Wycoff, 1982).
Community policing is a third popular policing strategy.
In this approach, police departments, other government agencies, and members of the community work together to solve crime issues.
Three
studies of community policing have shown a reduction in physical and social disorder; two of these reported positive effects on resident satisfaction in areas using community policing (Pate et al., 1985; Skogan and Wycoff, 1986; Wycoff et al., 1985a).
Only one of the three studies, however, showed a reduction in victimization rates as a result of community policing.
In general, community policing programs result in a decrease in residents' perceptions of and fear of crime and, in many cases, result in more positive evaluations of police by residents.
Crime reductions reported in these studies are based on differences in all reported crime, and the portion of crime reductions that is due to juveniles is unknown.
Policy Chang e Inter ventions Many communities and States have changed policies and laws governing the sale and use of alcohol, cigarettes, and firearms.
Although certain policy changes have shown evidence of preventing antisocial behavior by juveniles, results have been uneven.
Policies governing the availability and legal use of tobacco and alcohol have had an impact on juveniles' use of these substances.
Prevalence of alcohol use, for example, appears to decline when States raise their minimum drinking age to 21 (O'Malley and Wagenaar, 1991).
Studies (Cook and Tauchen, 1982; Grossman, Coate, and Arluck, 1987; Levy and Sheflin, 1985) of taxes on alcohol and the licensing of establishments that sell alcohol (Holder and Blose, 1987; Wagenaar and Holder, 1991) also indicate that policies limiting the availability of alcohol reduce
Policing Strategies Police departments around the countr y are tr ying innovative new policies to reduce crime.
Many address the risk factors of community disorganization, low neighborhood attachment, and neighborhood tolerance of crime and violence.
Others introduce protective factors,
7
OJJDP Study Gr oup In 1995, the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) convened a Study Group on Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders, a distinguished panel brought together to build a research base for policymakers and practitioners who deal with juveniles who engage in serious and violent conduct.
The group, chaired by Drs. Rolf Loeber and David P. Farrington, included 22 leading juvenile justice and criminology scholars selected on the basis of their exper t knowledge of different aspects of serious and violent juvenile offenders.
The OJJDP Study Group documented existing infor mation about SVJ offenders, examined programs for SVJ offenders, evaluated the programs' perfor mance, and recommended fur ther research and evaluation effor ts needed to prevent and control SVJ offending.
The Study Group's final repor t, Never Too Early, Never Too Late: Risk Factors and Successful Inter ventions for Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders, was completed in 1997 under grant number 95­ JD­FX­0018.
The conclusions of the Study Group were subsequently set for th in a volume entitled Serious and Violent Juvenile Offenders: Risk Factors and Successful Inter ventions, edited by the Study Group's cochairs, Rolf Loeber and David P Farrington, and published by Sage .
Publications, Inc., in 1998.
Chapter 11 of the book, "Comprehensive Communityand School-Based Inter ventions to Prevent Antisocial Behavior" (by Richard F. Catalano, Michael W. Ar thur, J. David Hawkins, Lisa Berglund, and Jeffrey J. Olson), is the subject of this Bulletin.
in the number of reported burglaries, as a result of these laws.
A fourth study (Jung and Jason, 1988) found that firearm assaults decreased significantly in the days before new regulations went into effect but showed no change after the law became effective.
The results of that study were attributed to intensive media coverage of the new law prior to enactment.
Findings are similar for studies of laws governing where and in what manner firearms may be carried.
These mixed findings suggest that local community support and enforcement of laws influence their effectiveness (Brewer et al., 1995).
In contrast, mandatory sentencing laws for felonies involving firearms appear to prevent homicides involving firearms (McDowall, Loftin, and Wiersema, 1992; Loftin, McDowall, and Wiersema, 1993).
Such laws may also prevent other types of violent crime involving firearms, but evaluations on this issue are not yet available.
A study of the effects of New Jersey's 1981 Graves Act, which mandated a minimum prison sentence for anyone convicted of one of several serious crimes while using or carr ying a firearm, found that the propor tion of New Jersey homicides involving firearms decreased significantly between 1980 and 1986 (Fife and Abrams, 1989).
Another study examined the impact of sentencing laws on homicides, aggravated assaults, and robberies in six cities (Loftin, Heumann, and McDowall, 1983; Loftin and McDowall, 1984).
Gun homicides, the study found, decreased significantly in all six cities after mandator y sentencing laws were enacted.
Assaults and armed robberies decreased somewhat in cer tain cities.
Media inter ventions have been used primarily (either alone or in combination with other strategies) to prevent and reduce the use of cigarettes and alcohol.
Evaluations show that media interventions are especially effective when used in conjunction with school inter vention curriculums to prevent smoking or other substance abuse (Flynn et al., 1992; Flynn et al., 1995; Goodstadt, 1989; Pentz et al., 1989a; Perr y et al., 1992; Vartiainen et al., 1986, 1990).
Although few evaluations of media inter ventions targeting delinquency or violence have been conducted, such inter ventions provide a promising direction for future research related to changing community antiviolence norms and behaviors.
Summary The Study Group's review of schooland community-based interventions offers viable examples of the types of programs necessary to tackle the troubling issue of SVJ offending.
Results of many of the interventions are encouraging.
Programs adapted from the public health model-- one that has traditionally addressed risk factors while also enhancing protective factors--can make a difference.
According to the Study Group, the following inter ventions have shown positive effects in reducing risk and enhancing protection against adolescent antisocial behavior: x Behavioral consultation for schools.
x Schoolwide mentoring. x Behavioral modification and reinforcement of prosocial behavior, good attendance, and strong academic performance.
x School organization interventions.
x Situational crime prevention.
x Comprehensive community intervention that incorporates community mobilization, parent involvement and education, and classroom-based social and behavioral skills curriculums.
x Policing strategies including community policing and intensive police patrolling, especially in "hot spots."
x Policy and law changes that affect the availability and use of guns, tobacco, and alcoholic beverages.
x Mandator y sentencing laws for crimes involving firearms.
Media Inter ventions the consumption of alcohol and problems associated with alcohol use (George et al., 1989; O'Malley and Wagenaar, 1991).
None of these studies, however, has examined the impact of policy changes on SVJ offending.
Studies (Brewer et al., 1995) of laws regulating the purchase and sale of firearms have similarly revealed some positive results.
Two studies comparing rates of violent crime (Sloan et al., 1988; Loftin et al., 1991), for example, suggest that laws restricting the sale and purchase of handguns prevent gun-related crime.
Another study (McDowall, Lizotte, and Wiersema, 1991) reports no change in assault rates, but a significant decrease A final community-based prevention strategy that has shown positive effects is the use of media campaigns that attempt to change public attitudes and standards, educate community residents, or support other community inter ventions.
One of the best known media interventions is the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, a national advertising campaign against drugs.
One sur vey revealed the effectiveness of this campaign, showing that markets where the Partnership campaign was intensively waged saw significant increases in knowledge about the effects of marijuana and cocaine use, compared with other markets (Black, 1989).
8
Seattle Study Encouraging Recently released findings from the Seattle Social Development Project emphasize even fur ther that implementing school-based inter ventions when children are young can help reduce violent behavior during their adolescent years.
The project provided social competence training for children and taught teachers and parents how to encourage young children's interest in school and help them lear n to interact with others.
The inter ventions took place in elementar y schools (grades 1 to 6) in Seattle's most cr ime-r idden neighborhoods.
A study of the long-ter m effects of the project found improved academic achievement, greater commitment and attachment to school, and reduced school misbehavior among par ticipants 6 years after the inter ventions.
The project appeared par ticular ly effective with poor children.
Researchers also found that the inter ventions successfully reduced violent behavior, heavy dr inking, and sexual activity among adolescents who had par ticipated in the program (Hawkins et al., 1999).
with high-risk youth and to intervene aggressively with those who are already SVJ offenders, regardless of how old they are or how long they have been offending.
For Fur ther Information The following publications are available from the Juvenile Justice Clearinghouse (JJC).
For more information or to order a copy, contact JJC, 800­638­8736 (phone), 301­519­5212 (fax), puborder@ncjrs.org (e-mail), www.ojjdp.ncjrs.org (Internet). x Summar y of Study Gr oup's Final Repor t.
To help communities and practitioners learn more about serious and violent juvenile offenders, OJJDP released a Bulletin that summarizes the Study Group's final report.
The 8-page Bulletin, Serious and Violent Juvenile Of fenders (May 1998), is available (free of charge) from JJC. x Final Study Gr oup Repor t.
The Study Group's final report, Never Too Early, Never Too Late: Risk Factors and Successful Inter ventions for Serious and Violent Juvenile Of fenders (Loeber and Farrington, 1997), is also available (for a fee) from JJC.
Catalano, R.F., Ar thur, M.W., Hawkins, J.D., Berglund, L., and Olson, J.J. 1998.
Comprehensive community- and schoolbased inter ventions to prevent antisocial behavior.
In Serious and Violent Juvenile Of fenders: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions, edited by R. Loeber and D.P. Farrington.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Cauce, A.M., Comer, J.P., and Schwartz, D. 1987.
Long-term effects of a systems-oriented school prevention program.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatr y 57:127­131.
Clarke, R.V. 1983.
Situational crime prevention: Its theoretical basis and practical scope.
In Crime and Justice, vol. 4, edited by M. Tonr y and N. Morris.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 225­256.
Clarke, R.V. 1995.
Situational crime prevention: Building a safer society: Strategic approaches to crime prevention.
In Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 29, edited by M. Tonr y and N. Morris.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Clarke, R., and McGrath, G. 1990.
Cash reduction and robber y prevention in Australian betting shops.
Security Journal 1:160­163.
Comer, J.P. 1988.
Educating poor minority children.
Scientific American 259:42­48.
Cook, P.J., and Tauchen, G. 1982.
The effect of liquor taxes on heavy drinking.
Bell Journal of Economics 13:379­390.
Dicken, C., Br yson, R., and Kass, N. 1977.
Companionship therapy: A replication in experimental community psychology.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 45:637­646.
Farrington, D.P. 1995.
Key issues in the integration of motivational and opportunityreducing crime prevention strategies.
In Integrating Crime Prevention Strategies: Propensity and Opportunity, edited by P-O.H. Wikström, R.V. Clarke, and J. McCord.
Stockholm, Sweden: National Council for Crime Prevention, pp. 333­357.
Fife, D., and Abrams, W.R. 1989.
Firearms' decreased role in New Jersey homicides after a mandator y sentencing law.
Journal of Trauma 29:1548­1551.
Flynn, B.S., Worden, J.K., Secker-Walker, R.H., Badger, G.J., and Geller, B.M. 1995.
Cigarette smoking prevention effects of mass media and school inter ventions targeted to gender and age groups.
Journal of Health Education 26:S-45­S-51.
References x Media inter ventions to change public attitudes and enhance the effects of other community- and school-based prevention strategies.
However, in order to be more useful to communities, inter vention research needs to focus less on "what works" and more on determining "what works for whom" and "under what circumstances and in what settings."
As discussed above, multiple risk factors--rather than any single factor--place children at risk of becoming SVJ offenders.
Given the multitude of risk factors, the differential impacts of these factors at different developmental stages, and the widely var ying social contexts that children are exposed to, it is difficult to identify the specific effects of interventions.
Effects, in fact, are highly likely to be the result of interactions among a variety of factors and conditions--rather than a single isolated change.
It is now up to school and community leaders, policymakers, and concerned citizens to design and implement their own inter ventions targeting SVJ offending.
The most effective way to reduce SVJ offending is to begin prevention efforts as early as possible Black, G.S. 1989.
Changing Attitudes Toward Drug Use.
Rochester, NY: Gordon S. Black Corp.
Boydstun, J.E. 1975.
San Francisco Field Inter rogation Final Report.
Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Brewer, D.D., Hawkins, J.D., Catalano, R.F., and Neckerman, H. 1995.
Preventing serious, violent and chronic juvenile offending: A review of evaluations of selected strategies in childhood, adolescence, and the community.
In A Sourcebook: Serious, Violent, 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Br y, B.H. 1982.
Reducing the incidence of adolescent problems through preventive inter vention: One- and five-year followup.
American Jour nal of Community Psychology 10:265­276.
Br y, B.H., and George, F.E. 1980.
Evaluating and improving prevention programs: A strategy from drug abuse.
Evaluation and Program Planning 2:127­136.
9
Flynn, B.S., Worden, J.K., Secker-Walker, R.H., Badger, G.J., Geller, B.M., and Costanza, M.C. 1992.
Prevention of cigarette smoking through mass media intervention and school programs.
American Journal of Public Health 82(6):827­834.
Fo, W.S., and O'Donnell, C.R. 1975.
The Buddy System: Effect of community intervention on delinquent offenses.
Behavior Therapy 6:522­524.
George, W.H., Crowe, L.C., Abwender, D., and Skinner, J.B. 1989.
Effects of raising the drinking age to 21 years in New York State on self-reported consumption by college students.
Jour nal of Applied Social Psychology 19:623­635.
Ginsberg, C., and Loffredo, L. 1993.
Violence-related attitudes and behaviors of high school students--New York City 1992.
Jour nal of School Health 63:438­439.
Goodman, G. 1972.
Companionship Therapy: Studies in Structured Intimacy.
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Goodstadt, M.S. 1989.
Substance abuse curricula vs. school drug policies.
Journal of School Health 59:249­250.
Gottfredson, D.C. 1986.
An empirical test of school based environmental and individual inter ventions to reduce the risk of delinquent behavior.
Criminology 24:705­731.
Gottfredson, D.C. 1987.
An evaluation of an organization development approach to reducing school disorder.
Evaluation Review 11:739­763.
Gottfredson, D.C., Gottfredson, G.D., and Hybl, L.G. 1993.
Managing adolescent behavior: A multiyear, multischool study.
American Educational Research Journal 30:179­215.
Gottfredson, D.C., Gottfredson, G.D., and Skroban, S. 1996.
A multimodel school based prevention demonstration.
Journal of Adolescent Research 11:97­115.
Gottfredson, D.C., Kar weit, N.L., and Gottfredson, G.D. 1989.
Reducing Disor derly Behavior in Middle Schools.
Repor t No. 47.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University, Center for Research on Elementar y and Middle Schools.
Green, B.C. 1980.
An evaluation of a Big Brothers' program for father-absent boys: An eco-behavioral analysis.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
New York, NY: New York University.
Grossman, M., Coate, D., and Arluck, G.M. 1987.
Price sensitivity of alcoholic beverages in the United States: Youth
alcohol consumption.
Advances in Substance Abuse: Behavioral and Biological Research; Supplement 1.
Control Issues in Alcohol Abuse Prevention: Strategies For State and Communities.
Greenwick, CT: JAI Press.
Hawkins, J.D., Catalano, R.F., Kosterman, R., Abbott, R., and Hill, K.G. 1999.
Preventing adolescent health-risk behaviors by strengthening protection during childhood.
Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine 153:226­234.
Hingson, R., Herren, T., Howland, J., and Winter, M. 1983.
Reduced BAC limits for young people: Impact on night fatal crashes.
Alcohol, Drugs and Driving 7(2):117­127.
Holder, H.D., and Blose, J.O. 1987.
Impact of changes in distilled spirits availability on apparent consumption: A time series analysis of liquor-by-the-drink.
British Journal of Addiction 82:623­631.
Hope, T. 1991.
Crime information in retailing: Prevention through analysis.
Security Journal 2:240­245.
Hyndman, B., Giesbrecht, N., Bernardi, D.R., Coston, N., Douglas, R.R., Ferrence, R.G., Gliksman, L., Godstadt, M.S., Graham, D.G., and Loranger, P.D. 1992.
Preventing substance abuse through multicomponent community action research projects: Lessons from past experiences and challenges for future initiatives.
Contemporar y Drug Problems 19:133­164.
Johnson, C.A., Pentz, M.A., Weber, M.D., Dwyer, J.H., Baer, N.A., MacKinnon, D.P., Hansen, W.B., and Flay, B.R. 1990.
Relative effectiveness of comprehensive community programming for drug abuse prevention with high-risk and low-risk adolescents.
Jour nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 58:447­456.
Jones, M.B., and Offord, D.R. 1989.
Reduction of antisocial behavior in poor children by nonschool skill development.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatr y and Allied Disciplines 30:737­750.
Jung, R.S., and Jason, L.A. 1988.
Firearm violence and the effects of gun control legislation.
American Journal of Community Psychology 16:515­524.
Kelling, G.L., Pate, T., Dieckman, D., and Brown, C.E. 1974.
The Kansas City Prevention Patrol Experiment: A Summar y Report.
Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Levy, D., and Sheflin, N. 1985.
The demand for alcoholic beverages: An aggregate time-series analysis.
Jour nal of Public Policy and Marketing 4:47­54.
Lindsay, B., and McGillis, D. 1986.
Citywide community crime prevention: An assessment of the Seattle program.
In Community Crime Prevention: Does It Work? edited by D.P. Rosenbaum.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., pp. 46­67.
Loeber, R., and Farrington, D.P., eds. 1997.
Never Too Early, Never Too Late: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions for Serious and Violent Juvenile Of fenders.
Final Report.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Loeber, R., and Farrington, D.P., eds. 1998.
Serious and Violent Juvenile Of fenders: Risk Factors and Successful Interventions.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Loftin, C., Heumann, M., and McDowall, D. 1983.
Mandator y sentencing and firearms violence: Evaluating an alternative to gun control.
Law and Society Review 17:287­318.
Loftin, C., and McDowall, D. 1984.
The deterrent effects of the Florida Felony Firearm law.
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 75:250­259.
Loftin, C., McDowall, D., and Wiersema, B. 1993.
Evaluating effects of changes in gun laws.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 9 (Supplement): 39­43.
Loftin, C., McDowall, D., Wiersema, B., and Cottey, T.I. 1991.
Effects of restrictive licensing of handguns on homicide and suicide in the District of Columbia.
New England Journal of Medicine 325:1615­1620.
Luepker, R.V., Murray, D.M., Jacobs, D.R., Mittelmark, M.B., Bracht, N., Carlaw, R., Crow, R., Elmer, P., Finnegan, J., Folsom, A.R., Grimm, R., Hannan, P.J., Jeffrey, R., Lando, H., McGovern, P., Mullis, R., Perr y, C.L., Pechacek, T., Pirie, P., Sprafka, M., Weisbrod, R., and Blackburn, H. 1994.
Community education for cardiovascular disease prevention: Risk factor changes in the Minnesota Heart Health Program.
American Journal of Public Health 84:1383­1393.
Maguin, E., and Loeber, R. 1996.
Academic performance and delinquency.
In Crime and Justice: A Review of Research, vol. 20, edited by M. Tonr y. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 145­264.
Mayer, G.R., and Butter worth, T.W. 1979.
A preventive approach to school violence and vandalism: An experimental study.
Personnel and Guidance Journal 57:463­441.
10
Mayer, G.R., Butter worth, T.W., Nafpaktitis, M., and Sulzer-Azaroff, B. 1983.
Preventing school vandalism and improving discipline: A three-year study.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 16:355­369.
McDowall, D., Lizotte, A.J., and Wiersema, B. 1991.
General deterrence through civilian gun ownership: An evaluation of the quasi-experimental evidence.
Criminology 29:541­559.
McDowall, D., Loftin, C., and Wiersema, B. 1992.
A comparative study of the preventive effects of mandator y sentencing laws for gun crimes.
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 83:378­394.
McPartland, J.M., and Nettles, S.M. 1991.
Using community adults as advocates or mentors for at-risk middle school students: A two-year evaluation of Project RAISE.
American Journal of Education 99:568­586.
Meredith, C., and Paquette, C. 1992.
Crime prevention in high rise rental apartments: Findings of a demonstration project.
Security Journal 3:161­169.
Murphy, H.A., Hutchinson, J.M., and Bailey, J.S. 1983.
Behavioral school psychology goes outdoors: The effect of organized games on playground aggression.
Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis 16:29­35.
Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
1998.
1998 Report to Congress: Juvenile Mentoring Program (JUMP).
Program Report.
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention.
Olweus, D. 1991.
Bully/victim problems among schoolchildren: Basic facts and effects of a school based inter vention program.
In The Development and Treatment of Childhood Aggression, edited by D.J. Pepler and K.H. Rubin.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, pp. 411­448.
O'Malley, P.M., and Wagenaar, A.C. 1991.
Effects of minimum drinking age laws on alcohol use, related behaviors and traffic crash involvement among American youth: 1976­1987.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 52:478­491.
Pate, A.M., Skogan, W.G., Wycoff, M.A., and Sherman, L.W. (With Annan, S., and the Newark Police Department).
1985.
Reducing the Signs of Crime: The Network Experience, Executive Summar y. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Pennell, S., Curtis, C., Henderson, J., and Tayman, J. 1989.
Guardian Angels: A unique approach to crime prevention.
Crime 
Pentz, M.A., Brannon, B.R., Charlin, V.L., Barrett, E.J., MacKinnon, D.P., and Flay, B.R. 1989a.
The power of policy: The relationship of smoking policy to adolescent smoking.
American Journal of Public Health 79:857­862.
Pentz, M.A., Dwyer, J.H., MacKinnon, D.P., Flay, B.R., Hansen, W.B., Wang, E.Y.I., and Johnson, C.A. 1989b.
A multicommunity trial for primar y prevention of adolescent drug abuse: Effects on drug use prevalence.
Journal of the American Medical Association 261:3256­3266.
Pentz, M.A., MacKinnon, D.P., Flay, B.R., Hansen, W.B., Johnson, C.A., and Dwyer, J.H. 1989c.
Primar y prevention of chronic diseases in adolescence: Effects of the Midwestern Prevention Project on tobacco use.
American Journal of Epidemiology 130:713­724.
Perr y, C.L., Kelder, S.H., Murray, D.M., and Klepp, K.-I. 1992.
Communitywide smoking prevention: Long-term outcomes of the Minnesota Heart Health Program and Class of 1989 Study.
American Journal of Public Health 82:1210­1216.
Perr y, C.L., Klepp, K.-I., and Sillers, C. 1989.
Community-wide strategies for cardiovascular health: The Minnesota Heart Health Program youth program.
Health Education Research 4:87­101.
Perry, C.L., Williams, C.L., Forster, J.L., Wolfson, M., Wagenaar, A.C., Finnegan, J.R., McGovern, P.G., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Komro, K.A., and Anstine, P.S. 1993.
Background, conceptualization and design of a community-wide research program on adolescent alcohol use: Project Northland.
Health Education Research 8:125­136.
Perr y, C.L., Williams, C.L., VeblenMortenson, S., Tommey, T.L., Komro, K.A., Anstine, P.S., McGovern, P.G., Finnegan, J.R., Forster, J.L., Wagenaar, A.C., and Wolfson, M. 1996.
Outcomes of a community-wide alcohol use prevention program during early adolescence.
American Journal of Public Health 86:956­965.
Poorkaj, H., and Bockelman, C. 1973.
Impact of community volunteers and delinquency prevention.
Sociology and Sociological Research 57:335­341.
Poyner, B., and Webb, B. 1987.
Successful crime prevention: Case studies.
London, England: Tavistock Institute of Human Relations.
Rosenbaum, D., Lewis, D.A., and Grant, J.A. 1986.
Neighborhood-based crime prevention: Assessing the efficacy of community organizing in Chicago.
In Community Crime Prevention: Does It Work?, edited by D.P. Rosenbaum.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Rowland, R.N.G. 1991.
An evaluation of the effects of a mentoring program on atrisk students in selected elementary schools in the North East Independent school district.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation.
College Station, TX: Texas A
Saffer, H., and Grossman, M. 1987.
Beer taxes, the legal drinking age, and youth motor vehicle fatalities.
Jour nal of Legal Studies 16:351­374.
Shearing, C.D., and Stenning, P.C. 1984.
From the panoptican to Disney World: The development of discipline.
In Perspectives in Criminal Law: Essays in Honor of John L.J. Edwards, edited by A. Doob and E. Greenspen.
Aurora, Canada: Canada Law Book.
Skogan, W.G., and Wycoff, M.A. 1986.
Storefront police officers: The Houston field test.
In Community Crime Prevention: Does it Work? edited by D.P. Rosenbaum.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Skolnick, J.H., and Bayley, D.H. 1988.
Theme and variation in community policing.
In Crime and Justice, vol. 10, edited by M. Tonr y and N. Morris.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 1­37.
Slicker, E.K., and Palmer, D.J. 1993.
Mentoring at-risk high school students: Evaluation of a school-based program.
School Counselor 40:327­334.
Sloan, J.H., Kellerman, A.I., Reay, D.T., Ferris, J.A., Koepsell, T., Rivara, F.P., Rice, C., Gray, L., and LoGerfo, J. 1988.
Handgun regulations, crime, assaults, and homicide: A tale of two cities.
New England Journal of Medicine 319:1256­1262.
Sloan-Howitt, M., and Kelling, G. 1990.
Subway graffiti in New York City: `Gettin' Up' vs. `Meanin' It and Cleanin' It.'
Security Journal 1:131­136.
Stanwyck, D.J., and Anson, C.A. 1989.
The Adopt-A-Student Evaluation Project.
Final report submitted to the W.T. Grant Foundation.
Atlanta, GA: Georgia State University.
Vartiainen, E., Pallonen, U., McAlister, A., Koskela, K., and Puska, P. 1986.
Four-year follow-up results of the smoking prevention program in the North Karelia Youth Project.
Preventive Medicine 15:692­698.
Vartiainen, E., Pallonen, U., McAlister, A., and Puska, P. 1990.
Eight-year follow-up results of an adolescent smoking prevention
11
U.S. Department of Justice Office of Justice Programs Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Washington, DC 20531 Official Business Penalty for Private Use $300
PRESORTED STANDARD POSTAGE 
Bulletin program: The North Karelia Youth Project.
American Journal of Public Health 80:78­79.
Wagenaar, A.C., and Holder, H.D. 1991.
A change from public to private sale of wine: Results from natural experiments in Iowa and West Virginia.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 52:162­173.
Webb, B. 1994.
Steering column locks and motor vehicle theft: Evaluations from three countries.
In Crime Prevention Studies, vol. 2, edited by R.V. Clarke.
Monsey, NY: Criminal Justice Press.
Webb, B., and Laycock, G. 1992.
Tackling car crime: The nature and extent of the problem.
Crime Prevention Unit Paper 32.
London, England: Home Office.
Williams, C.L., Perr y, C.L., Dudovitz, B., Veblen-Mortenson, S., Anstine, P.S., Komro, K.A., and Toomey, T.L.
In press.
A home-based prevention program for sixth grade alcohol use: Results from Project Nor thland.
Journal of Primar y Prevention.
Williams, T.P., and Lillis, R.P. 1986.
Changes in alcohol consumption by 18year-olds following an increase in New York State's purchase age to 19.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol 47:290­296.
Wycoff, M.A. 1982.
Evaluating the crime-effectiveness of municipal police.
In
NCJ 177624
Acknowledgments This Bulletin was written by Richard F. Catalano, Ph.D., Rolf Loeber, Ph.D., and Kay C. McKinney.
Dr. Catalano is a Professor and the Associate Director of the Social Development Research Group at the University of Washington's School of Social Work in Seattle, WA.
His work focuses on discovering risk and protective factors for positive and problem behavior, and designing and evaluating programs to address these factors.
Dr. Loeber is a Professor in the Life Histor y Studies Program at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic.
His research interests concer n developmental psychopathology, antisocial and delinquent behavior from childhood to early adulthood, cr iminology, juvenile substance use and abuse, juvenile mental health problems, family and neighborhood risk processes, protective factors, and public health inter ventions.
Ms. McKinney is a Writer-Editor in OJJDP's Infor mation Dissemination Unit.
Photograph on page 2 © 1998 Corbis Cor poration; photographs on pages 3 and 7 © 1998 PhotoDisc, Inc.
Managing Police Work: Issues and Analysis, edited by J.R. Greene.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, Inc.
Wycoff, M.A., Skogan, W.G., Pate, A.M., and Sherman, L.W. (With Annan, S.).
1985a.
Citizen Contact Patrol: The Houston Field Test, Executive Summar y. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Wycoff, M.A., Skogan, W.G., Pate, A.M., and Sherman, L.W. (With Annan, S.).
1985b.
Police As Community Organizers: The Houston Field Test, Executive Summar y. Washington, DC: Police Foundation.
Points of view or opinions expressed in this document are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position or policies of OJJDP or the U.S. Department of Justice.
The Of fice of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention is a component of the Office of Justice Programs, which also includes the Bureau of Justice Assistance, the Bureau of Justice Statistics, the National Institute of Justice, and the Office for Victims of Crime.
