Gem Community Involvement Plan Draft 5/31/03 Page 1 A DRAFT P FOR LAN COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT AND COMMUNITY -BASED MONITORING IN THE GULF ECOSYSTEM MONITORING P Prepared by ROGRAM The Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies P.O. Box 2225 Homer, Alaska 99603 www.akcoastalstudies.org with Chugach Regional Resources Commission and The Prince William Sound Science Center for The Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring (GEM) Program
DRAFT : May 30, 2003
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 2
Table of Contents Introduction.........................................................................................................................
3 The Context .........................................................................................................................
6 Definitions and Starting Points .......................................................................................
6 Communities within the Scope of the Plan.................................................................
6 Community Involvement ............................................................................................
6 The Communities and Their Role in the GEM Program ................................................
8 Tribal Governments and their Role in the GEM Program ............................................
12 Community Partnerships...............................................................................................
14 Current GEM Activities ................................................................................................
15 Regional Capacity Survey Results ................................................................................
17 A Plan for a GEM Community Involvement .......................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Element I: Effective GEM Program Support for Community Involvement .......Error! Bookmark not defined.
Element II: Robust Community- Based Monitoring and Research ..
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Promote collaboratio n by: ............................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Element III: Effective Sharing of GEM Data and Information .
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Element IV: Application of GEM Information to Management and Stewardship ......................................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Element V: A Strong Community Role in GEM Decision- making and Program Development ................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Appendix 1 GEM Community Involve ment: an analysis of issues and approaches ..Error! Bookmark not defined.
Integration of Community Involvement into All Aspects of the GEM ProgramError! Bookmark not defined.
Spectrum o f Opportunities Appropriate to the Diverse Nature of Communities within the GEM Area ...................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Community Involvement in Advice and Decision- making .......
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Participating in Community- based Monitoring and Research...
Error! Bookmark not defined.
Partnerships ..................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Short- term and Long- term Objectives for Community Involvement .................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Education .....................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Capacity- building .........................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Applications of GEM Information...............................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Appendix 2 GEM Community Involvement Survey ...........Error! Bookmark not defined.
Objectives .....................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Methods ........................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Survey Effort................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Results ..........................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Conclusions ..................................................................Error! Bookmark not defined.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 3
Reference .....................................................................
Addendum A: Key Respondents Mailing List .................
Addendum B: Tribal Respondents Mailing List ..............
Addendum C: Agency Respondents Mailing List ...........
Addendum D: General Mailing List ................................
Addendum E: Survey Questions ......................................
Addendum F: Email Message Sent to Respondents ........
Appendix 3 Database Narrative ...........................................
Appendix 4 Case Histories ...................................................
Error! Error! Error! Error! Error! Error! Error! Error! Error!
Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark Bookmark
not not not not not not not not not
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
defined.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 4
Introduction The Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring (GEM) Program provides a long- term foundation for supporting and facilitating important marine research and monitoring in the greater Gulf of Alaska ocean system.
One of the many challenges in laying out the groundwork for conducting a truly long- term research and monitoring program is in how to meaningfully and effectively involve and collaborate with the many coastal communities in the region.
The mission of the Gulf Ecosystem Monitoring Program (GEM) is: To sustain a healthy and biologically diverse marine ecosystem in the northern Gulf of Alaska and the human use o f resources in that ecosystem through greater understanding of how its productivity is influenced by natural changes and human activities.
Fulfilling this mission requires many things, from monitoring and research to the application of acquired knowledge to truly sustain the ecosystem.
Fulfilling the mission also requires the involvement and cooperation of many groups, from academic researchers to resource managers to those who use, and thus most directly influence and depend upon, the Gulf ecosystem.
In reviewing the developing plans for GEM, a National Research Council committee identified community involvement as a priority, recommending that GEM "build meaningful community involvement at all stages of planning and implementation."
This draft report is a significant step in carrying out that recommendation.
It is the outcome of EVOS Project 03075 to develop a community involvement plan for GEM.
The partners in the project are: · · · The Center for Alaskan Coastal Studies, a community- based environmental education organization in Homer Prince William Sound Science Center, a research and community education organization located in Cordova with a significant history of EVOS- supported research, and The Chugach Regional Resource Commission, a tribal organization representing the seven tribes of the Chugach region, which has provided services to the EVOS Trustee Council since 1995 to facilitate the involvement of Native communities within the spill- affected area in EVOS activities
Representatives of the Chugachmiut Environmental Program and tribal governments of villages in both Prince William Sound and lower Cook Inlet were also invited to participate in the project.
Two social scientists, Henry Huntington and Joseph Spaeder, were contracted to participate.
This report provides a context for a GEM community involvement plan with a description of communities, tribes, and organizations that are interested in becoming or staying involved in the GEM project and a brief history of community involvement
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 5
activities that have been supported by EVOS.
It then presents the recommended elements of a plan followed by implementation steps.
An analysis of various approaches to community involvement in relation to issues relevant to the GEM program (Appendix 1) and a more detailed report on a regional capacity survey methods and results (Appendix 2) are appended.
The analysis of issues and recommended elements of a GEM community involvement plan draws upon information about a number of community monitoring and research programs relevant to the GEM Program, which has been compiled into a searchable database described in Appendix 3 and that will be available at www.akcoastalstudies.org at the completion of the project.
Selected case histories from the database are under development by the Project Team and will be available at the completion of the project.
The mission of community involvement in GEM is: To apply the knowledge and effort of the region's communities to the study of the Gulf ecosystem and to enable those communities to help apply the collective knowledge gained through GEM to sustaining the ecosystem and the human use of its resources.
This mission, like that of GEM, can potentially encompass a range of activities and levels of involvement.
Until the regional capacity survey was completed, however, it was unclear how communities, tribes, interest and stakeholder groups wished to be involved ­ with possibilities ranging from the desire for a "seat at the table" or a voice in the setting of priorities for GEM research and monitoring to ensure that specific community concerns related to the sustainability and health of the ecosystem to making use of information generated by GEM to becoming active participants in research and monitoring.
The survey elicited strong interest from 89 different community entities in a spectrum of opportunities for becoming involved.
The levels of interest in specific types of opportunities should inform and guide the evolution of GEM community involvement program.
One organizing principle of the plan would be to enable each community or stakeholder partner to choose its appropriate level of involvement and to make that involvement productive and worthwhile for both GEM and the partner.
The community involvement mission should be read broadly.
In the context of a centurylong monitoring program, the development and application of knowledge must take into account the need to inform and train those who will take part.
In a program covering a vast stretc h of coastline and a diverse set of communities, many different approaches will be needed to meet the particular needs, capacities, interests, and situations of the various community partners.
These approaches may evolve over time, reflecting changes in GEM and in the communities and other partners.
Whatever form the involvement of each partner takes, the collective community involvement component must be an integral part of GEM, and not merely a sideline or an afterthought.
The success of involving communities will largely depend on the degree to which they are true partners in achieving GEM's mission.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 6
With this in mind, the community involvement program has several specific goals to support its mission: 1.
Active, sustained participation by community members in GEM Program activities including contributions to all aspects of monitoring and research.
2.
The education of community members and stakeholders about the dynamics of the Gulf ecosystem and the management of its natural resources 3.
The sharing of GEM and related data and information among community partners, K- 12 students, scientists, natural resource managers, and the public in formats appropriate to their needs.
4.
The use of local and traditional knowledge together with scientific knowledge to create a collective understanding of the Gulf ecosystem.
5.
An increased capacity of communities and community members to apply their understanding of the Gulf ecosystem to stewardship of natural resources The key elements of a plan and implementation steps needed to reach these goals are described in more detail later in this report.
While this plan has been developed specifically for the GEM program, the elements of the recommended plan are also appropriate for the development of effective community involvement programs involving these coastal communities or other regional or ecosystem- scale monitoring and research programs in other areas of Alaska.
The searchable database of community- based research and monitoring programs and projects and case histories will serve as a resource for designing community involvement programs and projects and for networking to share information and approaches to citizen involvement in natural resource management and stewardship.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 7
The Context Definitions and Starting Points Communities within the Scope of the Plan The GEM geographic area includes 23 coastal communities and a number of other inland communities within watersheds within the GEM geographic area.
Both the geographic communities of the GEM program region and more broadly the people who live and work in that region are considered communities for the purpose of this report and plan.
Several groups that depend on or are focused on the health and productivity of the northern Gulf of Alaska ecosystem are considered identifiable communities: e.g., the fishing community, the Native/subsistence community, and the conservation/ environmental interest community.
Community Involvement The incorporation of community involvement is a major strategy for the development of the GEM program.
"C ommunities and stakeholders must be involved at all levels of the program.
The Trustee Council believes that encouraging local awareness and participation in research and monitoring enhances long- term stewardship of marine resources."(GEM Program Document).
A recent statement of the Trustee Council commitment to having community members actively involved in GEM (EVOSTC, March 4, 2002) described the following elements: - planning and developing the program - guiding the goals and topics of research projects - collecting data and participating in long- term monitoring efforts - providing Traditional Ecological Knowledge - interpreting results in a local context - educating other community members about ongoing research This broad commitment encompasses a potential "spectrum of opportunity" for development of the community involvement component of GEM.
Other examples of expectations of local residents are that they will provide ecological knowledge that can be incorporated into established scientific models, be a source of research questions which help ensure research that is relevant to both ecological and community needs, and be involved in community- based monitoring efforts that can efficiently collect essential data and build local stewardship as well as long- term support for the GEM program (GEM, Chapter 3) Community involvement has taken a variety of forms during the EVOS restoration program, including a 20- person Public Advisory Committee, support for community facilitators, facilitation of methods to incorporate and support for the incorporation of Traditional Ecological Knowledge in a number of restoration projects, funding and grant administration for community- based subsistence projects, support for youth involvement in the science behind restoration efforts and local restoration projects, and a variety of other efforts to incorporate meaningful public participation and community involvement into the restoration program (e.g., hiring local residents on residual oil spill clean- up projects, waste management projects, fisheries enhancement projects, archeological
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 8
repositories, displays, and exhibits; training for volunteer collection of tissues from abnormal animals harvested for subsistence).
Community involvement was the focus of one annual meeting in 1996 and support was provided for Youth/Elder workshops and community workshops to develop tribal natural resource management plans with the help of scientists and the sharing of information.
Public information and outreach documents were sent to a mailing list of over 3,000 (EVOSTC, March 4, 2002).
Based on this background of past and potential community involvement activities in GEM, the Regional Capacity Survey developed by the Project Team and conducted as part of this project requested expressions of interest in the following activities: 1.
Setting GEM program priorities 2.
Identifying and incorporating specific community issues and concerns 3.
Providing input to GEM advisory committees 4.
Participating in annual meetings to hear about GEM program results 5.
Organizing communit y forums about the GEM program 6.
Receiving and disseminating GEM synthesized information 7.
Providing educational programs based on GEM data and information 8.
Being on the GEM program email/mailing list for announcements 9.
Participating in community- based research or monitoring activities An "other" category was also provided for response.
Local and Traditional Ecological Knowledge ­ knowledge derived by experience with the environment and possessed by reliable non- scientists.
"Traditional" refers to knowledge that is inter- generational and within a context of aboriginal or indigenous peoples.
Citizen- based or Community- based Monitoring and Research - refers to activities that are a sub- set of the spectrum of opportunities for community involvement in GEM communit y. These activities are focused on the collection of data and direct participation in research and long- term monitoring efforts.
To be meaningful in the GEM geographic and social context, they would also encompass the provision and incorporation of traditional and local knowledge.
Monitoring ­ as defined for the purposes of the GEM program, is the action of repeatedly collecting long- time series observations.
Monitoring differs from research primarily in the length of time over which measurements are take n, and the nature of methods and devices employed.
Monitoring employs methods and devices that are "tried and true" to help assure the quality of the data.
Research ­ is defined under GEM as collecting relatively short time series of new observations to e valuate a testable hypothesis relating to the conceptual foundation or a specific aspect of the monitoring program.
Research may use experimental devices or novel methods to acquire data.
Data vs. Information ­ Data is transformed into information for user groups by using synthesis, modeling, data management, and information transfer.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 9
The Communities and Their Role in the GEM Program The residents of the communities in the area encompassed by the GEM Program are stakeholders in GEM for two major reasons: 1) they depend on the sustained productivity of the Gulf ecosystem for livelihoods, recreation, fish and wildlife harvests, and quality of life and 2) their activities and the activities taking place around their communities are a key part of the equation that results in change in the ecosystem.
The central hypothesis for the GEM Program in the draft Science Plan states: Natural forces and human activities working over global to local scales bring about short term and long lasting changes in the biological communities that support birds, fish, shellfish, and mammals.
Natural forces and human activities bring about change by altering relationships among defining characteristics of habitats and ecosystems such as heat and salt distribution, insolation, biological energy flow, freshwater flow, biogeochemical cycles, food web structure, fishery impacts, and pollutant levels.
In consonance with this hypothesis, "the GEM mission of sustaining a healthy ecosystem and its focus on long- term monitoring have been sha ped by the need for a long- term understanding of how human activity shapes the environment, and how human- and nonhuman- caused environmental change can be distinguished" (EVOS 2002).
The GEM Program document further notes that human impacts may, in fact, be increasing in importance as a driving force: "Trends since the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill suggest that the pace of change in human- caused effects may have accelerated.
The spill itself changed attitudes toward acceptable risks of human- caused disruptio n, while economic trends have brought about more intense use of some resources and diminishing use of others" (EVOS 2002).
Community residents often possess important and precise knowledge about specific areas and have the means and opportunity to gather information that would be too costly for scientists to travel over large geographic areas to collect.
The understanding of Gulf ecosystem dynamics gained by their participation in the GEM Program could provide them choices about their role in managing its natural resources and causing impacts to the ecosystem.
The GEM geographic area encompasses 23 coastal communities.
These communities range in size from several small villages with fewer than 100 year- round residents to Kodiak, with approximately 9,000 r esidents.
Human activities in and around the inland communities of Tyonek and Soldotna can also affect the nearshore and marine environments in Cook Inlet through downstream watershed effects.
The geographic proximity of the Anchorage/Mat- Su urban area also suggests that growth there will--as it has in the past--produce environmental impacts in the area directly affected by the oil spill.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 10
Valdez, Whittier, Seward, Soldotna, Kenai, and Homer are connected by road and have highway access to the state's main road system.
Whittier and Seward have Alaska Railroad passenger and freight service.
Cordova, Valdez, Whittier, Tatitlek, Chenega Bay, Seward, Homer, Seldovia, Kodiak, and Port Lions are served by the Alaska Marine Highway System as is Chignik on a seasonal basis.
The remainder of the communities are accessible only by plane or boats other than a state ferry.
The following table summarizes information about the population size of each GEM area community, the form of local government, and the economic dependence on natural resource- based activities (Alaska DCED 2002).
Community Cordova Population (2001 U.S. Census) 2454 Local Government Home Rule City Eyak Tribal Council Major economic activities Commercial Fishing Seafood Processing Tourism Government employment Oil Transportation Tourism 
Valdez
4336
Home Rule City
Seward
3430 (greater Seward)
Home Rule City
Whittier Chenega Bay Tatitlek Port Graham Nanwalek (four communities) Seldovia/Seldovia Village
182 86 107 177 171 286 / 144
2nd Class City Tribal Council Tribal Council Tribal Council/Borough Tribal Council/Borough 1rst Class City/Borough Tribal Council Borough
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 11
Homer/Kachemak City
3946 / 431
1st Class City Borough 2nd Class City Borough
Kenai
6942
Kodiak
8864 (includes Coast Guard base and road system)
Home Rule City Kenaitze Tribal Council Borough Home Rule City Borough Council?
Port Lions Ouzinkie
256 225
2nd Class City Tribal Council Borough 2nd Class City Native Village Inter- tribal Council Borough 2nd Class City Native Village Inter- tribal Council Borough Native Village Inter- tribal Council Borough 2nd Class City Native Village Inter- tribal Council Borough 2nd Class City Native Village Inter- tribal Council Borough 2nd Class City Tribal Council Borough
Commercial Fishing Sport Fishing Tourism 
Larsen Bay
115
Karluk Old Harbor
27 237
Akhiok
80
Chignik
79
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 12
Chignik Lagoon
103 +200 during fishing season 145 22 107
Tribal Council Borough Tribal Council Borough Tribal Council Borough Nat ive Village Borough
Chignik Lake Ivanof Bay Perryville
Regional salmon fishing center Fish processing Subsistence Subsistence Commercial Fishing Subsistence Commercial Fishing Subsistence Commercial Fishing
The approximately 71,000 full- time community residents in of the area affected by the spill (Prince William Sound, lower Cook Inlet, Kodiak Island, and the Alaska Peninsula) are not the only people who c reate pressure on the area through their use of natural resources and activities.
Anchorage and Wasilla are major population centers whose residents benefit from and affect the natural resources of the GEM geographic area through marine and coastal recreat ion and commercial activities.
The GEM document noted that: Two to three times that number use the area seasonally for work and recreation.
The spill area population, combined with that of the nearby population centers of Anchorage and Wasilla, totals more than 60 percent of the state's 627,000 permanent residents.
When the resident population is combined with the more than one million tourists who visit the state each year, it becomes clear that the natural resources of the GOA cannot be immune to the pressures associated with human uses and activities.
The GEM area has a number of stakeholder communities that are identifiable, if not geographically centered.
In addition to spill- affected communities, the Prince William Sound Regional Citizens' Advisory Council formed after the EVOS includes Alaska Natives, commercial fisherman, and aquaculture, tourism, recreational and environmental interest groups as stakeholders in the organization's mission of minimizing the environmental impacts of the trans - Alaska pipeline terminal and tanker fleet.
The Cook Inlet Regional Citizen Advisory Council recognizes these same stakeholders in the environment and resources at risk from oil production and transportation in the Cook Inlet region.
Some of these stakeholder groups are well- organized at the local level and loosely organized at the regional level so are often recognized as "communities."
· The commercial fishing community has been one of the most prominent throughout the EVOS spill and restoration program, beginning with the "mosquito fleet" that responded immediately to the spill to protect important areas and begin clean- up.
They have remained involved, particularly in Prince William Sound, where they have recently received EVOS funding to form a Fisheries Researc h Applications and Planning Group to provide public forums
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 13
· ·
·
for determining short- term and long- term fishery management issues and needs and a process to apply scientific information to fishery management.
Aquaculture organizations are identifiable.
All are locally- managed private non- profit entities that are closely tied with the small boat commercial fishing community.
Also identifiable is a "conservation community" of environmental interest groups with membership or involvement by area residents based in the GEM area.
These organizations support a range of environmental activities from education to "on­the - ground" projects to activism.
Their geographic scope and support base ranges from the national (National Audubon Society, National Wildlife Foundation) to the local (Kachemak Bay Conservation Society, Eyak Preservation Council).
Organizations based in spill- affected communities have been actively involved in EVOS restoration activities, including several that formed to watchdog issues related to oil and marine transportation safety, spill prevention, and response.
Tourism and recreation stakeholders are less identifiable as an organized community, but are represented by organizations such as the Alaska Wilderness and Recreation Tourism Association, by loca l Convention and Visitors Bureaus and Chambers of Commerce, and by other recreational user groups.
Other businesses and industries that are directly or indirectly dependent on the productivity and natural resources of the GOA ecosystem are also stakeholde rs in GEM.
They are not considered citizen or community stakeholders but may also have a role to play in partnering in GEM community- based monitoring and research, supporting education programs related to GEM, or in the use of GEM - derived information to reduce impacts on the environment.
Tribal Governments and their Role in the GEM Program There are 20 tribal governments in the GEM geographic area.
Two tribes, Valdez Native Tribe and Qutekcak Native Tribe, are pending federal recognition status.
Chenega IR A Council, Native Village of Eyak, Nanwalek IRA Council, Port Graham Village Council and Tatitlek IRA Council are located in the Chugach Region.
Kenaitze Indian Tribe, Seldovia Village Tribe and Native Village of Tyonek are found in the Cook Inlet Region.
The Kodiak tribes include Ahkiok Native Community, Native Village of Karluk, Native Village of Larsen Bay, Village of Old Harbor, Native Village of Ouzinkie, Native Village of Port Lions and Shoonaq' Tribe of Kodiak.
The Tribes in the Bristol Bay Region are the Native Village of Chignik Bay, Native Village of Chignik Lagoon, Chignik Lake Village, Ivanof Bay Village Council and Native Village of Perryville.
The Alaska Native peoples of Tyonek and the upper Cook Inlet region are Dena'ina Athabaskan.
Alaska Natives of Seldovia are mixed Dena'ina Indian and Sugpiaq (also known as Alutiiq).
Alutiiq people make up the bulk of the Alaska Native population found in the GEM area and are found from Prince William Sound to the Kenai Peninsula, the Alaska Peninsula, a nd Kodiak Island.
The Alutiiq population in this region was about 3,100 in 1990?? (2000).
The changing names reflect their history.
Before Western
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 14
contact, people called themselves Sugpiat, "the real people."
Russian fur traders introduced the name "Aleut" which was eventually adopted in Native communities.
The Sugpiaq term for Aleut is "Alutiiq."
All three names ­ Alutiiq, Aleut, and Sugpiaq ­ are used now.
The passage of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act in 1971 established regional corporations to manage community land and resources.
The corporations in the GEM region are Chugach Alaska Corporation for Prince William Sound and the lower Kenai Peninsula; the Bristol Bay Native Corporation which works with four Alutiiq villages on the Alaska Peninsula, Koniag, Inc., for the Kodiak Island area; and the Cook Inlet Region Inc. for Cook Inlet, including Seldovia.
Each of these geographical areas also has its own not- for- profit corporation providing health, social, and political- advocacy services to the people.
Those corporations are the Cook Inlet Tribal Council, the Kodiak Area Native Association; Chugachmiut and the Bristol Bay Native Association.
Further, Chugach Regional Resources Commission (CRRC) was created in 1984 by Tribes in the Chugach Region to collectively address natural resource issues in the Chugach Region.
Since the Exxon Valdez oil- spill, CRRC has taken the lead in coordinating with all the Tribes in the oil- spill/GEM geographic area on resource related planning and management.
The impor tance of tribal participation in the GEM program is compelling.
All the Native communities have important subsistence components to their local economies and all were affected by the oil spill.
Subsistence is an important natural resource component that was injured by the spill.
In the year after the spill, subsistence harvests declined.
A study conducted by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF
Any program designed to assess and monitor the health of the Gulf of Alaska should take into account the human populations that depend on the resource.
Several Tribes within the GEM geographic area have been developing Tribal Natural Resource Management Programs with the goal of ensuring the health of subsistence resources and the responsible management of lands in their traditional use areas.
As a first step, Tribes are writing Tribal Natural Resource Management Plans, which form the basis for development of Resource Management Programs.
The Plans outline overall interests and priorities of the communities, including economic development and trad itional use area management.
All tribal planning efforts will be helpful in planning for participation in GEM community- based monitoring programs.
Tribes are recognized as having a unique trust relationship with the United States government.
This relationship is most often called "government - to- government".
It has been clearly defined in Executive Order 13175 on Consultation and Cooperation with Tribal Governments, signed in November of 2000 by President Clinton and reaffirmed by the Bush administration in 2002; and Executive Order 13084 on Consultation and Coordination with Indian tribal Governments (May 1998).
It is through this relationship that federal agencies have a duty to consult with tribal governments.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 15
Consultation includes but is not limited to timely notification of proposed Federal actions which may impact tribes; solicitation of tribal comment, and/or recommendation on proposed action; full consideration by those officials responsible for final decision; and to be advised of rejection of tribal recommendations and basis for such rejections.
Consultation does not mean merely the right of tribal officials as members of the general public to be consulted or include the provision of tribal comments under the Administrative Procedures Act or other Federal law of general applicability.
In April 2001, Governor Tony Knowles and willing Alaska Tribal Leaders signed the Millennium Agreement.
The Millennium Agreement provides a framework for state agencies and tribes to work together on a government - to- government basis to improve the delivery of essential public services.
Administrative Order No. 186 makes clear for all state and federal agencies, the courts, the Tribes and the public that the State recognizes and respects the governmental status of the federally recognized tribes within Alaska.
The Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council was formed to oversee restoration of the injured ecosystem through the use of $900 Million settlement.
GEM is funded with $120 million endowment from the remaining Exxon Valdez oil spill settlement funds with an annual budget of approximately $5 million.
The Trustee Council consists of three State of Alaska and three federal trustees.
Although the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council is neither a State nor a Federal entity, the Trustees are state and federal heads of agencies bound to government- to- government principles specifically because of Executive Order No. 13175 and State Administrative Order No. 186.
These principles should ensure that the Tribes are consulted regarding GEM actions in a manner, which may be separate from that of the general public.
The development of a Memorandum of Agreement between CRRC and the Trustee Council, which incorporates government - to- government principles, is being explored.
An MOA would provide for mutually agreed upon protocols for timely communication, coordination, and collaboration to determine the impact on traditional and cultural lifestyles and natural resources consistent with a government - to- government relationship.
A protocol was developed with the Trustee Council for including indigenous knowledge in the Exxon Valdez oil spill restoration process.
This protocol formalized the relationship of Alaska Native communities with EVOS scientists.
Integration of Tribes, their Natura l Resource Programs, community research and monitoring, and GEM would ensure meaningful tribal community involvement in the GEM program.
Community Partnerships Community- based organizations, state and federal natural resource agencies, university programs , and local and tribal governments are often the focal points for partnerships to develop, support, and sustain community involvement.
A number of partnerships with a monitoring or natural resource management focus already exist within the GEM area and will be included in the searchable database and case histories that will be completed as
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 16
components of this project.
Additional information on these and other programs is available on a searchable database that will be accessible at www.akcoastalstudies.org.
A survey form was developed to assess the interest and capacity of 164 organizations within the GEM geographic region to participate in GEM community involvement and community- based monitoring and research activities.
The 89 responses that were received a re summarized in a subsequent section of this report and a more detailed report is appended (Appendix 2).
The survey form is appended (Appendix 2, Addendum E).
The survey form was used to target key respondents (Appendix 2, Addendum A), tribal organizations and Tribal Councils (Appendix 2, Addendum B), agency programs (Appendix 2, Addendum C), and a variety of other potential partners (Appendix 2, Addendum D).
Email and mail surveys supplemented with telephone and in- person interviews.
These results provide a resource for identifying potential GEM community partners and the partners that could potentially work together within specific communities.
Current GEM Activities In addition to this planning project, a number of GEM projects funded in FFY03 are eithe r community involvement projects or have significant community involvement aspects: EVOS/GEM Project Number 030607 030052 030210 030610 030636 030561 030647 030666 030684 Project Geographic Information Systems (GIS) Map of Water Quality Monitoring Sites Across the Gulf of Alaska Tribal Natural Resource Stewardship and Meaningful Tribal Involvement in GEM Youth Area Watch Kodiak Archipelago Youth Area Watch Management Applications: Commercial Fishing Evaluating the Feasibility of Developing a Community- Based Forage Fis h Sampling Project for GEM Investigating the Roles of natural and Shoreline Harvest in Altering the Kenai Peninsula's Rocky Intertidal Alaska Natural Geographic in Shore Areas: An Initial Field Project for the Census of Marine Life Toward Sustainable Management in the Kenai River Watershed: Linking Human 
The FFY04 GEM Invitation for Proposals includes several types of community involvement projects that could begin be fore this planning project is completed: · The Community Involvement section invites "targeted workshops, databases, maps, publications, and community science symposia that provide services to communities and stakeholders in the GEM region related to marine ecosystem health and sustainability"
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 17
·
·
·
·
The Data Management and Information Transfer section includes "resource dependent people and communities" and "other members of the public" as among the groups for whom GEM data needs to be converted into useful infor mation and for whom ready access is required.
The Watershed section includes "community- based sampling strategies for sampling marine - related indicators" and the "inclusion of marine- related variables in existing water quality monitoring programs" as e xamples of responses to the Invitation in this area of the GEM Program.
The Lingering Oil Effects section includes an example of a response to the invitation that would survey the status of subsistence uses in spill- affected communities.
This type of evaluation "should be a collaborative effort in which the study communities are partners in each phase of the study.
The Alaska Coastal Current section invites proposals to design and establish a Voluntary Ship Observing data acquisition system that would capitalize on existing community assets such as scientists and interested lay people as well as the U.S. Forest Service interpretive program onboard the Alaska Marine Highway System.
Community involvement in port areas in the collection of physical and biological observations is also expected for responses for programs on the Alaska Marine Highway System and other ships- ofopportunity.
Projects 030052, 030210, 030610, 030647, and 03066 are included in the list of projects with proposed multiple- year timeframes that will be reviewed for decisions about continued funding.
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 18
Regional Capacity Survey Results The online/mail survey of 164 potential GEM community partners (See Appendix 2 for a detailed report on the survey) received 89 responses of interest in partic ipating in ten types of community involvement activities.
Organize community forums to review GEM info Provide educational programs
Community forums about GEM Identify/incorporate community concerns Set GEM program priorities
Receive 
Annual meeting
Input to GEM committees Community-based monitoring or research GEM mail/email list 0 10 "Yes" responses (n=89) 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Gem Community Involvement Plan
Draft 5/31/03
Page 19
The respondents who answered "yes" to interest in participating in community- based monitoring or research were asked a further question about interest in eleven options for participating in various aspects of monitoring or research.
Fifty- one responses are summarized in the following chart.
Survey Response to Interest in Community-based Monitoring 
Providing financial support Managing a data/local knowledge archive Maintaining a mail list to disseminate findings Providing facilities 
"Yes" responses (n=51)
The survey asked about existing community- based research and monitoring which elicited information about 35 different programs within the GEM area.
These programs monitor water quality (28), habitat quality (17), fish and wildlife populations (15), land use change/human impact (15), contaminants (13), weather/climate (10), or they involve habitat mapping (11).
Watersheds are receiving the majority of effort (29 programs) followed by nearshore habitats (19 programs).
The responding organizations indicated considerable capacity in terms of paid staff (27) or a combination of paid staff and volunteers (49), ac tive citizen volunteers (37 reported 1- 25 volunteers, 9 reported 26- 50, two reported 51- 100, and four reported more than 100), and the involvement of K- 12 students or other youth (50).
The survey provided information about perceived issues and concerns in the region that the respondents thought the GEM Program should address.
Although the largest number of responses were grouped into general categories of "habitat", "human impact", "fisheries", and "fish and wildlife populations"; the individual responses encompassed a wide variety of specific issues.
