Winter 2003 Balance Helping you get more from work and life Valuing Diversity During the Holidays T he winter holidays offer a unique gift: the opportunity to celebrate our diversity.
At no other time do so many different religious and cultural holidays take place in such a short span.
While each of us honors our own practices, it's also important to respect others' traditions.
Our workplaces, schools and communities are rich with people from various religious, ethnic and cultural backgrounds.
You can use the following guidelines to help everyone feel included and respected during the holidays.
Be sensitive -- Learn about holiday practices different from your own.
Also be aware that some religions do not celebrate holidays, even birthdays.
In workplaces, schools and for community events, find ways to celebrate together.
For example, collect items for a local food pantry.
To throw a holiday party that can lead to discussions about different cultural practices, ask folks to bring a sample of their favorite holiday food to share with others.
Understand differences -- Many groups celebrate the same holiday but not in the same way.
Almost every culture and religion sets aside a special time to remember their beginnings.
But those holidays may be at different times of the year and vary in importance to the group that celebrates them.
Follow the U.S. Constitution's rules -- Religious symbols such as a cross, crescent, Star of David, nativity scene, the Buddha and Native American imagery, among others, should not be used as decorations at public events.
As a special gift to yourself, keep the spirit of the season with you all year.
Living Healthy Working Well
inside: P2 How to Avoid the Stepfamily Holiday Blues P3 Myths and Facts about Alcohol and Driving P4 Seven People Who Made It Big Despite a Rocky Start The quality of our relationships affects how we feel about life, especially during the holidays.
If you'd like help with a troubling relationship, please call your program's toll-free number.
T
he holiday season can be both joyous and difficult for stepfamilies.
It can be painful for children to remember the loss they felt when their biological family separated.
They also may relive the feelings that come with making a new family.
Parents face the logistical and sometimes emotional challenges of sharing their children during the holidays.
If parents come from homes where divorce and remarriage occurred, they, too, may be experiencing feelings similar to those of their children, in addition to figuring out how to schedule visits with several families.
These difficult feelings could cause the holiday blues.
However, it also can be a happy time when the joys of having so many family members can be celebrated.
Here are some ways stepfamilies can share holiday cheer and reduce potential stress for the entire family.
Change your expectations.
A stepfamily is different from a biological family.
A stepfamily is a blend of two families, each with its own ways of celebrating holidays.
So, create new, joyful traditions that are unique to the stepfamily.
Set aside a time when you know everyone will be able to participate -- even if it's before or after the specific day of a particular holiday.
Be sensitive to your children's needs.
Providing permission to move freely between homes and to enjoy all families and festivities is a true gift to your children.
Prepare for when you will not be with your children.
To keep one another close in heart, consider doing a couple things on this list.
· Tuck a note into your child's suitcase that says, "I love you.
Happy Holiday!" Try to make it colorful so that looking at it makes the child feel happy and positive.
· Give kids phone cards or encourage e-mailing or faxing.
Make it easy for your child to contact you.
· Record a holiday story for your child.
She will find it comforting to hear your voice.
You can also send
messages such as, "Have a great time, honey, and remember, I love you."
· Hide a surprise gift in your child's suitcase.
It might be something like a favorite food treat or a toy connected to one of his favorite characters.
· Pack a disposable camera in your child's suitcase so he can take pictures of his visit to his dad's/mom's home for the holidays.
Your child will appreciate the holiday memories, and it's a nice way to build good relationships between families.
My ths and Facts about Alcohol and Driving s the holiday party season approaches, it's a good time to examine what we think we know about how alcohol affects our bodies and judgment -- especially when driving.
Myths about alcohol and its effect on safe driving are widespread.
Here are the facts from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Knowing the facts could mean the difference between life and death this holiday season and all through the year.
A
Tips for Holiday Party Safety · The safest course of action is to choose alcohol-free drinks.
· If you choose to drink, take only one alcoholic drink (one 12-ounce beer, one 1.5-ounce shot of distilled spirits or one five-ounce glass of wine) per hour.
Drink plenty of water or other non-alcoholic liquids between alcoholic drinks.
· Avoid eating lots of salty, greasy or sweet foods -- they'll make you thirsty.
Choose foods rich in protein and starch.
They stay in the stomach longer and slow down the rate at which alcohol goes into the bloodstream.
· Stop drinking an hour or more before you plan to leave the party.
· If you didn't heed the above tips, get a ride with a non-drinking driver instead of driving your own car, or call a taxi.
Your safety and the safety of others on the road will be the best holiday present of all.
Myth: "Drinking coffee sobers me up."
Fact: Coffee cannot rid your system of alcohol.
It just makes you a nervous, wide-awake drunk.
Only time reverses alcohol's effect.
Myth: "I always stay away from the hard stuff."
Fact: Alcohol is alcohol.
One 12-ounce glass of beer has as much alcohol as a 1.5-ounce shot of whiskey or a five-ounce glass of wine.
Myth: "I am a big person so I can handle my liquor better than other people."
Fact: Size is only one factor in how much you can drink.
Metabolism, amount of rest and food eaten all play a part in how you handle liquor.
Your judgment and reflex time decrease with the first drink.
Myth: "Once I roll down my car window, I am OK to drive."
Fact: No amount of fresh, chilly air can reverse alcohol's effect.
Myth: "I just drive slower after drinking."
Fact: The truth is, drunk drivers are dangerous at any speed.
Myth: "All I have to do is splash my face with cold water."
Fact: Cold water or even a cold shower will not sober you up or make you a safer driver.
3
Seven People Who Made It Despite a Rocky Start 1.
Louisa May Alcott was told by an editor she'd never write anything popular.
More than a century later, Little Women is considered one of the best American children's books of the past 200 years.
2.
Walt Disney was fired by a newspaper editor because "he had no good ideas."
BIG
When you're having "one of those days" and need some inspiration, consider how these people met life's challenges -- and thrived.
need you.
You haven't gotten through college yet."
5.
Michael Jordan didn't make the varsity basketball team as a sophomore in high school.
6.
John F. Kennedy had to take the New York bar exam three times before he passed.
7.
Abraham Lincoln started out as a captain at the beginning of the Blackhawk War.
By the end of the war, he had been demoted to private.
Source: Perfectionism: What's Bad About Being Too Good? By Miriam Adderholdt, Ph.D., and Jan Goldberg
4
3.
Charles Goodyear was sent to debtor's prison before he discovered the process that revolutionized the rubber industry.
4.
Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, founders of Apple Computer, tried to sell the rights to their personal computer to a Hewlett Packard executive, who told them, "We don't
Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Human Resource Management Office of Health Benefits 101 N. 14th Street, 13th Floor Richmond, VA 23219 1-800-775-5138
The articles in this publication should not be considered specific medical, legal or financial advice, as individual circumstances may differ.
Entire publication ©2003 Magellan Behavioral Health.
MagellanAssist Trusted solutions to life's challenges.
Visit MagellanAssist at www.MagellanAssist.com Your thoughts about Balance are welcome! E-mail us at: Mythoughts@MagellanHealth.com.
Please call your toll-free program number for questions about coverage and services.
V23
