Additions are shown as underline Deletions are shown as strikethrough Chapter 2, Board Rules (General Practice) Section 4.
Definitions
(c) "Compounding" means the preparation, mixing, assembling, packaging or labeling of a drug or devise- (I) as the result of a practitioner's prescription drug order or initiative based on the practitioner/patient/pharmacist relationship in the course of professional practice, or (ii) for the purpose of research, teaching or chemical analysis or not for sale dispensing.
Compounding also includes the preparation of drugs or devices in anticipation of prescription drug orders based on routine, regularly observed prescribing patterns.
"Compounding" means and includes the preparation, mixing, or assembling of a drug or device, and the packaging and labeling incident thereto for sale or dispensing: (i) As the result of a practitioner's prescription drug order or initiative based on the practitioner/patient/pharmacist relationship in the course of their professional practice.
(ii) (iii) prescribing patterns.
For the purpose of research, teaching, or chemical analysis, or In anticipation of prescription drug orders based on routine, regularly observed
However, "compounding" does not include mixing, reconstituting, or other such acts that are performed in accordance with directions contained in approved labeling provided by the product's manufacturer and other manufacturer directions consistent with that labeling.
(h) "Digital Signature" means an electronic identifier that (i) (ii) a manual signature; (iii) (iv) (v) is applied for through the Board of Pharmacy; is intended by the party using it to have the same force and effects as is unique to the authorized signer; is capable of verification; is under the sole control of the authorized signer;
(vi) is linked to the prescription in such a manner that if the prescription information is changed, the signature is invalidated; (vii) regulations; and (viii) The use of which is contingent upon verification by the Board of Pharmacy of the signer's authority to prescribe.
conforms to Wyoming State Board of Pharmacy laws, rules and
page 1 of 13
(m) "Electronic transmission" means transmission of the digital representation of information from one computer to another which is authenticated by a digital signature.
Section 9.
Pharmacist-in-Charge.
Every licensed pharmacy must be in the continuous daily charge of a registered pharmacist.
A pharmacist shall be designated as the pharmacist-in-charge and shall have direct control of the pharmaceutical affairs of said pharmacy.
A pharmacist may not serve as the pharmacist-in-charge unless said pharmacist is physically present in the pharmacy a minimum of 32 hours per week, or 80 percent of the time the store is open if opened less than 40 hours per week.
A pharmacist may not serve as pharmacist-in-charge for more than one retail pharmacy at any one time.
The name of the pharmacist-in-charge shall be designated in the application of the pharmacy for license and in each renewal thereof.
(a) A corporation or other non-pharmacist owner must comply strictly with the above provisions and provide a pharmacist-in-charge who will have complete control over the pharmaceutical affairs of said pharmacy.
(b) Responsibility as the pharmacist-in-charge includes requiring that all federal and State pharmacy laws and regulations are complied with and enforced.
It shall be the duty of the pharmacist-in-charge to report all pharmacy violations within their facility to the Board.
(c) Additional responsibilities of the pharmacist-in-charge shall be to:
(i) Establish policies and procedures for the procurement, storage, compounding and dispensing of pharmaceuticals.
(ii) (iii) (iv) (v) Supervise the professional employees of the pharmacy.
Supervise the non-professional employees of the pharmacy.
Establish and supervise the record keeping for and security of all pharmaceuticals.
Report any loss or theft of drugs to the Board and other authorities.
(vi) Ensure that all staff: registered pharmacists, interns, pharmacy technicians-intraining and certified pharmacy technicians have valid licenses or registrations in good-standing and that all certificates are on display.
(vii) Ensure that all pharmacy licenses, including state and federal controlled substances registrations are valid and posted.
(viii) (ix) in it.
(x) Develop a written policy for delivery of prescription drugs during non-pharmacy hours which shall include but not be limited to: Develop and implement a procedure for drug recall.
Be in full and actual charge of such pharmacy and responsible for whatever goes on
page 2 of 13
(A) An arrangement made ahead of time with the customer that delivery will occur under these circumstances; (B) An arrangement which guarantees that the offer to counsel, and if accepted, counseling will occur on all new prescriptions; (C) An arrangement which guarantees the security of the drugs and the confidentiality for the customer.
(D) A plan which provides that such delivery is used only when required by the customer and not used in all instances for delivery after closing hours.
(d) Every pharmacy shall have at least one registered pharmacist on duty and physically present in the pharmacy area at all times that the prescription department is open for the transaction of business.
If only one pharmacist is on duty, this pharmacist may leave the pharmacy, but not the building, for a time period not to exceed thirty minutes, provided a pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training is on duty.
During periods when the pharmacist on duty is taking a break, a pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training, at the discretion of the pharmacist, may perform the following functions; (i) break is over; (ii) Receive and assemble prescriptions provided that a pharmacist must check any product and the order before it is presented to the patient, and (iii) Receive refill prescription request.
Assemble prescriptions to be checked by the pharmacist when the
If the pharmacist is absent from a licensed pharmacy, the prescription department must be locked and kept so until that pharmacists' return and a sign saying - "Prescription Department Closed - No Registered Pharmacist on Duty" shall be conspicuously posted.
(e) No pharmacy shall be permitted to operate without a pharmacist-in-charge.
The Board shall be notified in writing of any newly designated pharmacist-in-charge.
The Board shall record the PIC change and issue a corrected copy of the license.
Section 19.
(a) information: Prescriptions in General
To be valid the prescription as defined in §33-24-136(b) shall contain the following (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) ( v i) Name of patient; Name and strength of drug; Quantity to be dispensed; Directions for using the drug; Date of issuance by practitioner;
page 3 of 13
( v i i) Prescriptions for controlled substances shall include the DEA number and address of prescribing practitioner and address of the patient.
( v i i) Name of the Recognizable signature of the practitioner on the proper signature line to indicate whether or not generic substitution is to be permitted; (viii) In the case of an oral order the name of the authorized agent if conveyed by other than the prescribing practitioner.
(b) All oral orders shall be recorded on a written prescription memorandum and filed in accordance with W.S. §33-24-136(a). (c) telephone; or transmission.
conditions as electronically Prescriptions may be transmitted to the pharmacist in written form; orally, including by except for Schedule II Controlled Substances, by telephonic facsimile (FAX); and electronic Schedule II Controlled Substance prescriptions may be transmitted by FAX if they meet the outlined in Chapter 2, Section 20 (c).
Controlled substance prescriptions may be transmitted only to the extent allowed by federal law and Wyoming law.
Prescription Refill Information.
Section 21.
(a) Prescription refill permission may be obtained in written, FAX or electronic form, or by oral verification including telephone or FAX.
Section 27.
Fees (including Exam, Re-exam, License, License Renewal, Registration, Registration Renewal, and Late Fees); (a) The Board shall charge the following fees as indicated:
(v) Pharmacy technician exam or re-examination fee shall be one hundred twentyfive dollars ($125.00) licensure fee shall be thirty-five dollars ($35.00) (xi) ($100.00) per year.
Institutional pharmacy license and renewals shall be one hundred dollars
(b) The Board shall assess a late fee in addition to the license or registration renewal fee of licensees or registrants as follows: (vi) An institutional pharmacy whose license renewal application is postmarked or hand delivered to the Board's office after June 30 shall be assessed a late fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) in addition to the license renewal fee.
Section 31.
Electronic Prescription Transmission.
(a) All prescription drug orders communicated by way of electronic transmission shall fulfill these requirements to be valid: (i) Be transmitted to a licensed pharmacy of the patient's choice, exactly as transmitted by the prescribing practitioner or designated agent, with no intervening person or entity having access to the prescription; (ii) Identify the transmitter's phone number for verbal confirmation, the
page 4 of 13
time and date of transmission, and the identity of the pharmacy intended to receive the transmission, as well as any other information required by federal or state laws and regulations; (iii) Be transmitted by an authorized practitioner using a digital signature unique to the practitioner; (iv) The electronic transmission shall be deemed the original prescription drug order provided it is readily retrievable through the pharmacy computer system, and meets those requirements as outlined in W.S. 33-24-136.
The electronic transmission shall be maintained for two years from the date of last use.
(v) Contain all other information as required by state or federal law.
(b) The pharmacist shall exercise professional judgement regarding the accuracy, validity, and authenticity of the prescription communicated by electronic transmission, consistent with existing federal or state laws and regulations.
(c) All electronic equipment for receipt of prescriptions communicated by way of electronic transmission shall be maintained to prevent unauthorized access.
Chapter 9, Board Rules (Patient Counseling) Section 5.
Patient Counseling.
(a) Upon receipt of a new prescription and following a review of the patient's record, every a pharmacist or a pharmacy intern or their agent shall personally offer to discuss matters which will enhance or optimize drug therapy with each patient or caregiver of the patient.
Non-resident pharmacies/pharmacists are not exempt from this regulation.
However the discussion shall be performed by the pharmacist in person, whenever practicable, or by telephone, and shall include appropriate elements of patient counseling.
CHAPTER 10, Board's Rules, (Pharmacy Technician Regulations) Section 1.
Authority.
These regulations are promulgated as authorized by the Act.
Section 2.
Definitions.
(a) "Direct supervision" means that a licensed pharmacist shall be physically present within the facility and capable of overseeing the actions of a Technician; (b) "Institutional Pharmacy" means a pharmacy within a hospital, nursing home, extended care facility, Health Maintenance Organization (HMO) or any other pharmacy providing pharmaceutical services to patients in other than a retail pharmacy setting.
(c) "Technical functions" means those functions performed in a pharmacy department
page 5 of 13
which do not require the professional judgment of a licensed pharmacist; (d) "Technician" means a pharmacy technician who is an individual other than an intern, who has been licensed by the Board to assist a pharmacist in the practice of pharmacy, as defined in W.S. 33-24-124, under the direct supervision of a licensed pharmacist. (ea) "Pharmacy Technician-in-training" means an individual who is in on-the-job training preparing to be licensed as a Technician and has a permit under Section 8.
registered with the board to receive on-the-job training in preparation for licensure as a pharmacy technician.
This status may be held for no longer than two years.
Section 3.
Pharmacy Functions
The following are those pharmacy functions a licensed pharmacy technician or a registered pharmacy technician-in-training may perform under the direct supervision of a licensed pharmacist: (a) Retail Pharmacy
(i) Prescription preparation-- retrieving the product from stock, counting, pouring, reconstituting, placing product in prescription container, and affixing the label.
(ii) Prescription input--making computer entries for new or refill prescriptions, provided the pharmacist meets obligations as outlined in Chapter 9, section 4, "Prospective Drug Use Review". (iii) Prescription refill authorizations-- contacting the practitioner's office and obtaining refill authorizations for any prescription provided there are no changes in the prescription order.
(iv) Restocking emergency drug supply--restocking drugs for those sites where the pharmacy has an emergency drug permit.
(b) Institutional Pharmacy.
(i) Distributive functions-- stocking: automated drug dispensing units, floor stock, crash carts, after-hour drug cabinets, sterile solutions, and unit dose cart preparation.
(ii) Repackaging into unit dose and/or unit of issue packaging.
(iii) Inspections-- conducting inspections as described in Chapter 12, section 20, "Inspections".
Inspections conducted in the pharmacy are not considered a pharmacy function.
(iv) Input practitioner medical orders--entering information into a patient's profile or medication administration record provided those obligations of a pharmacist as described in Chapter 10, Section 4, "Prospective Drug Review" are met.
(c) A pharmacy technician, but not a pharmacy technician-in-training, may perform the following pharmacy functions in a retail or institutional pharmacy.
Compounding.
The prescription order shall first be reviewed by a pharmacist and the decision made to compound determined before assigning to a pharmacy technician.
The
page 6 of 13
pharmacist-in-charge (PIC) shall certify competency of the pharmacy technician prior to allowing a pharmacy technician to assist the pharmacist in compounding, and annually thereafter.
Documentation of the basis of the certification shall remain on file at the pharmacy and be available for inspection by the Board for each pharmacy technician, and shall include, but not limited to, documentation of the following skills or knowledge as required for a specific pharmacy practice.
(i) Practices (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viii) (ix) (x) (xi) S e c t i o n 34 .
Weights and measures Calculations Use of torsion balance or electronic scales Knowledge of various techniques utilized to compound products Labeling requirements Aseptic technique Use and maintenance of laminar and/or vertical flow air hood Knowledge in handling chemotherapeutic agents Dating requirements Record keeping requirements Responsibilities of the Pharmacist.
Knowledge and understanding of FDA's Good Manufacturing
Only a registered pharmacist shall The pharmacist, not the pharmacy technician, shall: (a) Receive a new prescription order verbally from a prescriber or other person authorized by law.
(b) Perform evaluations and interpretations of a prescription and obtain any needed clarifications prior to filling.
(c) Review and Interpret analyze any clinical data in a patient's medication record system as specified in Chapter 9, section 4, "Prospective Drug Review".
This may include, but is not limited to, drug usage, refill frequency and drug interactions.
(d) Perform professional consultation with any prescriber, nurse, other health care professional or any patient/customer.
(e) Make the offer to counsel any patient, minor's parent or guardian or the patient's agent receiving a new prescription.
(e)(f) Counsel the patient, minor's parent or guardian, or patient's agent.
a pharmacy intern under the supervision of a pharmacist may counsel the patient or patient's agent.
page 7 of 13
Section 4 5 .
Supervisory Responsibility of Pharmacist for Technician.
Pharmacy Technician or Pharmacy Technician-In-Training Duties When A Pharmacist Is Absent.
Where a Technician performs one or more functions in the dispensing process, a pharmacist shall be responsible for the filled prescription including, but not limited to, the following: (a) Verifying drug selection, strength, dosage form and labeling against the prescription and the contents of stock container.
If, due to the nature of the product dispensed, the pharmacist can not verify what the Technician has done, the task shall not be done by a Technician.
(b) Supervising the packaging of drugs and checking the completed procedure and product.
(c) Being responsible for all activities of Technicians to insure patient safety.
(d).
The supervising pharmacist may leave the pharmacy, but not the building, for a time period not to exceed thirty minutes.
During this absence, the pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training may continue to perform technical functions as allowed by the law, but may not sell, transfer, or deliver a prescription product to a consumer or his agent during the supervising pharmacist's absence.
(a) When no pharmacist is in the pharmacy, but at least one supervising pharmacist remains in the building, his pharmacy technician(s) or pharmacy technician(s)-in-training may perform pharmacy functions as outlined in Chapter 10, section 3, provided no prescription product leaves the pharmacy until the pharmacist returns and authorizes the release.
(b) When no supervising pharmacist is in the building:
(i) A retail pharmacy may not remain open.
A pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training may not remain in the pharmacy, and the pharmacy shall be closed as described in Chapter 2, Section 9 (d). (ii) An institutional pharmacy may not remain open.
A pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training may remain in the pharmacy, but may not perform pharmacy functions.
If a drug needs to be removed from the pharmacy, those procedures as outlined in Chapter 12, Section 12 shall be followed.
(c) Where there are two or more pharmacists working in a pharmacy, the pharmacy may remain open if a pharmacist leaves the building as long as at least one pharmacist remains in the pharmacy.
However, the number of pharmacy technicians or pharmacy technicians-in-training present in the pharmacy may not exceed the 2 to 1 ratio.
Section 56.
Pharmacist/Technician Employee Ratio.
A pharmacists is are permitted to be a direct supervisors of two (2) technicians who are performing pharmacy functions.
For the purpose of this rule technicians shall include registered pharmacy technicians and pharmacy technicians-in-training licensed or registered with the Board.
A pharmacy technician-in-training who is enrolled with the Casper College, Pharmacy Technician Training Program and who possesses a pharmacy technician-in-training permit issued by the Board shall not be included in this ratio.
page 8 of 13
Section 67.
Legal and Professional Responsibilities of Pharmacist.
(a) The pharmacist-in-charge is responsible, legally and professionally, for the control of all drugs issued or dispensed in a pharmacy, including conduct of all Technicians.
(b) The Board may contact the County Attorney of the county of occurring violations to initiate criminal proceedings against Technicians who perform tasks or functions that require the expertise and service of a pharmacist.
Such persons may be charged with practicing pharmacy without a license in violation of Section 33-24-142 of the Act.
(ca) A violation of the rules on Technicians by a pharmacist shall be considered unprofessional conduct and may be grounds for revocation or suspension of the pharmacist's license or pharmacy registration It shall be considered unprofessional conduct by the PIC or supervising pharmacist to allow a pharmacy technician or pharmacy technician-in-training to violate the Wyoming Pharmacy Act or the Wyoming Controlled Substance Act or their rules or regulations.
(d b ) The pharmacy director/manager shall assure the continuing competency of Technicians through education and training to supplement initial training.
Section 78.
Qualifications, Education, Training Registration Requirements and Identification of Pharmacy Technicians and Pharmacy Technicians-In-Training.
A Pharmacy Technician or Pharmacy Technician-In-Training shall: (a) Be at least 18 years of age.
(b) Have no felony or gross misdemeanor conviction relating to controlled substances within thirty-six (36) months of the date of application.
(c) (d) Have no history of drug abuse or provide satisfactory evidence of rehabilitation.
Hold a high school diploma or its equivalent.
(e) Have completed initial training and examination requirements for registration as determined by the Board.
(f) Wear a name badge with the appropriate designation "Pharmacy Technician" or a "Pharmacy Technician-In-Training" at all times when in or near the pharmacy area.
(g) Identify themselves as a "Pharmacy Technician" or a "Pharmacy Technician-InTraining" in all telephone conversations while on duty in the pharmacy.
Written procedures which describe the duties performed, training of the Technician, the methods of verification, documentation of work performed and training of Technicians in a pharmacy shall be prepared by the pharmacy director/manager and shall be filed with the Board.
These written procedures shall be kept on file in the pharmacy for inspection.
Any revisions in the written procedures shall be filed with the Board.
Educational/training programs, for Technicians in institutions, shall comply with the "ASHP (American Society of Hospital Pharmacists) Technical Assistance Bulletin on Outcome Competencies and Training Guidelines for Institutional Pharmacy Technician Training Programs".
Documentation of initial and continuing training of Technicians shall be kept on file in the pharmacy for inspection.
page 9 of 13
S e c t i o n 89 .
Pharmacy Technician-In-Training Registration; Length of Registration Period; Training; Place of Employment; Change of Employment.Technician Licensure; Technician Registration; Fees; Late Payment Fees; Expired License; Reinstatement.
(a) A pharmacy technician-in-training shall apply to the Board for a training permit on an application supplied by the Board and shall pay the fee required, within ten (10) calendar days of starting on-the-job training.
This permit shall be valid for two years from date of original issuance.
It may not be renewed.
The sponsoring pharmacy, as identified on the application, shall be printed on the Technician-intraining permit.
A change in sponsoring pharmacy will requires immediate submission of an updated application, and an updated corrected permit may will be issued to the Technician-in-training by the Board.
(b) Individuals shall apply for pharmacy technician licensure by completing an application supplied by the Board, providing evidence of current certification by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board, pay the required fee, and meet the requirements of Chapter 10, Section 7 (a)(b)(c)(d) of the Board's Rules.
The Board reserves the right to require an interview prior to a pharmacy technician license being issued.
(c) A Technician license shall be renewed annually, on or before December 31, upon submission of a renewal application provided by the Board; submission of copies of required continuing pharmacy education certificates, if practicing in Wyoming; and payment of the required renewal fee.
The Board shall assess a late payment fee of $35.00 for any renewal application postmarked after December 31.
A Technician license not renewed by March 31 shall be deemed expired.
A Technician may not practice in this state with an expired Technician license.
A Technician may petition the Board for reinstatement of an expired license.
A Technician license which is reinstated by the Board shall include payment of annual fees, including late payment fees, for those years in which the license was lapsed, and the technician shall provide proof of current certification by the Pharmacy Technician Board.
Proof of continuing pharmacy education for those years the license was expired, up to five years shall be required for reinstatement if the Technician will work in Wyoming.
(b) A pharmacy technician-in-training may perform pharmacy functions commensurate with his ability to perform those tasks as identified in Chapter 10, section 3, and then only to the extent allowed by the pharmacist-in-charge.
The pharmacy technician-in-training is considered a trainee and as such the PIC, pharmacists, and pharmacy technicians shall participate in the training of this individual.
The supervising pharmacist shall not allow the pharmacy technician-in-training to perform any pharmacy function for which the individual has not demonstrated competency.
(c) A pharmacy technician-in-training may perform pharmacy functions only at the pharmacy location specified on the permit.
Section 910.
Technician Licensed to Perform at Specific Sites Pharmacy Technician Registration; Renewals; Late Payment Fees; Expired License; Active/Inactive License; Reinstatement; Change of Employment; Change of Address.
A Technician shall notify the Board of specific locations where the Technician performs technical functions.
It shall be the responsibility of each supervising pharmacist to review approved guidelines with the Technician to determine that the Technician fully complies with approved guidelines at that site.
(a) Individuals shall apply for pharmacy technician licensure by completing an
page 10 of 13
application supplied by the Board, providing evidence of current certification by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board, paying the required fee, and meeting the requirements of Chapter 10, Section 7 (a)(b)(c)(d) of the Board's Rules.
The Board reserves the right to require an interview prior to a pharmacy technician license being issued.
(b) A pharmacy technician must apply, on a form supplied by the Board, to renew his license each year on or before December 31.
Along with the application, he must submit copies of required continuing pharmacy education certificates, and payment of the required renewal fee.
The Board shall assess a late payment fee for any renewal application postmarked or filed after December 31.
(c) A Pharmacy Technician's license not renewed by March 31 shall be deemed expired.
A Pharmacy Technician may not practice in this state with an expired Technician license.
(d) A Pharmacy Technician may petition the Board for reinstatement of an expired license.
To be considered for reinstatement, the pharmacy technician must submit the following: (i) (ii) license was expired.
(iii) (PTCB). (iv) to five years.
(e) A pharmacy technician who fails to submit the required number of continuing education credits with a renewal may be issued an "inactive" license.
A pharmacy technician may not practice in Wyoming with an "inactive" license.
An "inactive" license may be converted to "active" status by providing the necessary hours of continuing education credits for those years the license has been "inactive" to a maximum of five (5) years.
(f) If change of employment or mailing address location occurs, the Board shall be notified within 30 days of date of change by the pharmacy technician.
Section 10.
Issuance of Letter of Admonition, Revocation, or Suspension of a Technician License or Technician-In-Training Permit.
The Board may issue a letter of admonition, suspend or revoke a Technician's license or a Technician-In-Training permit for any: (a) Willful violation of any provision of these regulations, the Act or the Wyoming Controlled Substances Act of 1971.
(b) (c) Action which threatens the public health, safety or welfare; or Conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
Proof of continuing pharmacy education for those years the license was expired, up A letter requesting reinstatement.
Payment of annual fees, including late payment fees, for those years which the Evidence of current certification by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board
Section 11.
Pharmacy Technician Continuing Pharmacy Education Requirements, Certified Pharmacy Technicians.
page 11 of 13
(a) Every pharmacy technician seeking renewal of a pharmacy technician license shall complete and submit, during each calendar year, six (6) contact hours of approved, continuing pharmacy education programs to be applied to the upcoming renewal year.
(b) Excess continuing education hours may not be carried forward to subsequent years.
Each Pharmacy Technician licensed by the Board of Pharmacy, who practices in Wyoming, shall complete and submit, during each calendar year, a minimum of six (6) contact hours of approved, continuing pharmacy education programs to be used for the upcoming renewal year.
Approved continuing pharmacy education shall be by one of the following methods: (a) Provided by Pharmacist supervisor at place of employment, utilizing a format for documentation developed by the Board of Pharmacy Staff; (b) Continuing education hours approved by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board (P.T.C.B.); (c) Continuing education hours approved by The American Pharmaceutical Association (A.Ph.A.); (d) Continuing education hours approved by the American Council on Pharmaceutical Education (A.C.P.E.); (e) (W.Ph.A.)
Section 12.
Continuing education hours presented by the Wyoming Pharmacists Association Pharmacy Technician Approved Continuing Education Providers.
The following are acceptable providers of continuing education for pharmacy technicians and may be submitted to the Board for proof of meeting the continuing education requirement as specified in Chapter 10, Section 12: (a) Pharmacist supervisor at place of employment, utilizing a format for documentation developed by the Board of Pharmacy Staff; (b) Continuing education hours approved by the Pharmacy Technician Certification Board (P.T.C.B.); (c) Continuing education hours approved by The American Pharmaceutical
Association (A.Ph.A.); (d) Continuing education hours approved by the American Council on Pharmaceutical Education (A.C.P.E.); (e) (W.Ph.A.)
Continuing education hours presented by the Wyoming Pharmacists Association
page 12 of 13
Chapter 12, Board Rules (Institutional Pharmacy) Section 5.
Licensing
(c) The fee established in Chapter 2, section 29 27 (a)(xi) will be charged for issuance of a new license and renewal.
The late fee established in Chapter 2, section 29 27 (b)(vi) will be charged, in addition to the renewal fee, for any license renewal application which is postmarked after June 30 or is hand delivered to the Board's office after June 30.
Chapter 6, CSA Rules/Regulations Section 4.
Manner of Issuance of Prescriptions.
(a) Where an oral order is not permitted, prescriptions shall be written with ink or indelible pencil or typewriter or computer generated and shall be manually signed by the practitioner or if electronically transmitted must have a digital signature of the practitioner.
Electronic transmission of schedule II prescriptions is allowed only to the extent authorized by federal law.
Section 21.
Requirement of Prescription for Schedule III,and IV, and V Substances.
(a) A pharmacist may dispense a controlled substance listed in Schedules III, IV or IV V, which is a prescription drug as determined under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act or state law, only pursuant to either a written prescription signed by a prescribing practitioner or an oral prescription made by a prescribing practitioner and promptly reduced to writing by the pharmacist containing all information required in Section 4, except for the signature of the prescribing practitioner, or an electronically transmitted prescription provided it meets all requirements in Chapter 2, Section 31 of the Board's Rules, or a FAXed prescription provided it meets all requirements in Chapter 2, Section 20 of the Board's Rules.
Section 22.
Refilling of Prescriptions - Schedules III and IV.
No prescription for a controlled substance listed in Schedule III or IV shall be filled or refilled more than six (6) months after the date on which such prescription was issued.
No such prescription authorized to be refilled may by be refilled more than five (5) times.
page 13 of 13
