MONTANA ANCIENT TEACHINGS Glossary for Teachers (compiled by Mark Baumler, State Archaeologist) A absolute dating Determination of age on a specific time scale, as in years Before Present (B.P.)or according to a fixed calendrical system (e.g.A.D. 1543).
Contrast with relative dating.
[Lessons1C, 4D] adapt/adaptable The ability to adjust to your surroundings or environment and to changes that may through occur in them over time and space.
Humans adapt to the natural environment their culture.
[Lesson 5C] agriculturalist A farmer; one who is skilled in the planting, growing, and harvesting of domesticated plants.
[Lesson 4A] amino acid dating A method of absolute dating to determine how old a bone is by measuring the amount of decay of protein molecules in the bone.
A newer and less accepted method than radiocarbon dating.
[Lessons 3F, 4D] amphibian Animals that can live either in water or on land, for example, frogs.
[Lesson 2A] analyze To study something critically and objectively in order to identify its parts and understand their relationships to one another; scientific method; logical thinking.
[Lesson 1C] A family member from the distant past, usually several or many generations ago; forefather or foremother.
[Lesson tAl ancient Veryold; of the distantpast.
[Lesson lA] animal skin pouch A wrapping of a
[Lesson 4C] Antiquities Act of 1906 The first national law passed in the United States to protect archaeological sites on public land.
Made it illegal to disturb archaeological sites on federal land without a special "antiquities" researchpenn it. [lesson IOj A-8 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society ancestor anthropology The study of humankind, living and extinct, from a holistic biological, behavioral, and cultural perspective.
Anthropology is divided into four sub-fields: physical anthropology, cultural anthropology, linguistics, and archaeology.
[Lesson 2C] archaeological research team A group of scientists and other specialists working together on an archaeological project or site, often including archaeologists, geologists, botanists, zoologists, Native American traditionalists, and others.
[Lesson 3F] archaeologist A person who studies the human past through archaeology.
[Lesson lA] archaeology The scientific study of the human past.
Archaeology involves the analysis of the sites and material remains (artifacts) of prehistoric and historic cultures to determine cultural chronology, past lifeways, and the processes that underlie human behavior.
Archaeology is a sub-field of the discipline of anthropology.
[Lesson 1A] or Middle Prehistoric Period (6000 B.C.-A.D. SOO) term used by Montana archaeologists to refer to the period of A time in Montana prehistory from about 8,000 to I ,SOO years ago.
During this period, prehistoric people hunted a wide range of large and small animals with the atlatl and also gathered many different kinds of wild plants for food and medicine.
Most archaeologists believe that Archaic peoples lived a less-specialized hunting and gathering life than those before and after.
[Lessons lA, 2D] artifact Any objectmade or used by people or showing humanworkmanship.
Also known as "material culture."
Most prehistoric artifacts in Montana were crafted from natural materials such as stone, bone, wood, and clay.
Historic artifactsinclude glassand metal.
[LessonI AI astronomy Thescienceof the materialuniverse beyondour atmosphere-or"outerspace."
Astronomers, scientists astronomy, of havetheoriesfor how the earthand our galaxy were formedbillionsof yearsago.
[Lesson 2A] An Aztec tenn meaning "spear-thrower."
The atlatl is a sophisticated compound hunting weapon system consisting of a wooden throwing stick or launcher used to propel a long dart tipped by a stone point.
The throwing stick functions like an extension of the ann, providing more thrusting leverage.
[Lessons 20, 3A, 48] A hand-held drilling tool often used by archaeologists to bore small holes in the ground of an archaeological site to determine the presence of buried artifacts and evaluate the potential of excavating the site.
[Lesson 1 q Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-9 Archaic awl A bone (or stone) tool tapered to a point.
Used to pierce holes or make decorations.
[Lesson 3B] B balsamroot (Balsamorhizasp.)
A native plant of recorded use by Montana historic tribes for food, medicine, and ritual.
Found in prehistoric sites as well.
Different parts of the plant (root, flower stem, leaves, seeds)were used for different purposes and at different times of the year.
[Lesson 3C] bands In anthropological terms, "bands" refers to generallysmall, cooperating, kin-based groups (family grouPS)of perhaps 50 or fewer individuals.
Thought to be the typical size group of nomadic prehistoric hunters and gatherers.
Related bands may have met annually in larger tribal gatherings and communal hunts.
[Lesson 20] basalt An igneous (volcanic) rock of a dark, often black color.
Fine-grained basalt was often used for the making of stone tools by prehistoric "flintknappeffi."
[Lesson 3A] baskets A container made of interwoven (i.e. by weaving) plant fibers and other materials.
Basketswere used to store and carry foods and could be made waterproof to also transport water.
Baskets,although probably common among prehistoric Montana hunter and gatherer groups, do not preserve well over time and rarely are found by archaeologists outside of special sites, such as dry caves.
[Lesson 3B] Berlngia/Berlng Land Bridge A wide, low strip of land that connected the Old World (Russian Siberia) with the New World (Alaska) during glacial periods of the Ice Age when sea levels were lower.
A possible route of first human entry into the New World, Beringia is now covered by the shallow Bering Sea.
[Lesson2q Big Bang Theoryheld by mostastronomers a giant explosion that createdthe universe over 18 billion yearsago.
[Lesson 2A] biographical style A style of rock art common between A.D. 1750 and 1900 (Protohistoric/Historic period) during which scenes depicting actual events in the life of an individual or group were drawn, such as a major battle, horse stealing, or a significant ceremony.
This kind of rock art may be "read" like a picture-story.
[Lesson 3E] bison a large homed animal that lives in herdsand grazes,resemblingan ox but largerandmore powerful.
Bisonwere a regular food source for many Montana peoplefrom the earliesttimes to the historic period when the buffalo were hunted almostto extinction.
[Lesson4B] A-IO Ancient Teachings Historical Society Montana Buffalo; bitterroot (LewisiarooMva)Montana's state flower and a native plant of major use by some Montana tribes, particularly in the west, as a food and medicine source (roots).
[Lessons3C, 4A] blade and core A sophisticated stone tool manufacturing technology involving the regular production of long, narrow flakes (blades) from a prepared piece of lithic raw material (core).
The blades could be used as is for cutting tools or as blanks for the manufacture of other types of stone tools.
[Lesson 3A] blood residue If preserved, dried blood on the edges of prehistoric stone tools can be analyzed to determine what animal the tool was used to kill, butcher, or eat.
[Lesson3F] botanists Scientists who study plants.
Botanists can identify the species of a plant from its seeds --and other parts that might be preserved in an archaeological site.
[Lessons3F, 40] bow and arrow In prehistory, a hunting and weapon missile system involving the propulsion of a feathered, stone-tipped wooden shaft (arrow) from a high-tension stringed, curved piece of wood (bow).
Although wooden pieces of prehistoric bows and arrows have been found in some caves, the primary preserved artifact of the bow and arrow is the small, chipped stone projectile point ("arrowhead") that once tipped the arrow.
Small points become common after about 2,000years ago (Late Prehistoric period), suggesting that this is when the bow and arrow was used in Montana.
[Lessons20, 3A, 48] Bronze Age A period of time in Old World prehistory referring to the early widespread adoption and use of bronze metallurgy, involving the smelting of copper and tin.
In Europe, refers to the period between about 2500 B.C.- 1000 B.C.
[Lesson 2q buffalo drives and jumps A method of hunting bison involving the controlled movement of the buffalo herd to a place where the animals could be stampeded over a cliff and killed (see below, IIpishkin").
In Montana, became common after A.D. 200 in the Late Prehistoric period.
Represented in the archaeological record by lines of stone piles (see below, IIdrive line) leading to a cliff edge, at the base of which can be found the bones of many butchered bison (bone bed).
[Lessons 2D, 48] knives In prehistory, stone tools used to butcher and prepare meat for cooking and eating.
A stone butchering knife may be a hafted bifacially-worked (chipped on both faces) tool or a simple flake with a sharp edge.
[Lesson 3A] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-II butchering c cairns Rock piles or stacked piles of rocks.
A common archaeological feature in Montana that may be a result of various different activities: a land marker for trails; a place to store meat or other valuable items (i.e. a "cache"); part of a buffalo jump (see below, "drive line"); or a memorial or burial place.
[Lesson2q calories Energy obtained by eating food; the unit of heat or energy produced by any food substance.
A person's age, body size, and activity level creates the need for different amounts of calories to survive.
[Lesson 4A] camas (O1mG$ia quamash)An important wild plant food for prehistoric and modern tribes, particularly those in western Montana (Salish-Kutenai people) where the plant is abundant.
The root or bulb is edible and harvested with a "digging stick" (see below) in the spring and early summer.
[Lessons 3C, 4A] carbohydrates A substance (such as sugar,starch, or cellulose) found in plants and composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
Important in human diet.
Rootsof wild plants such as camas, bitterroot, biscuitroot, and Indian breadroot provided carbohydrates for prehistoric people.
[Lesson 4A] 4 Unstable radioactive isotope of carbon (see:radioactive element) found in small amounts in all living things.
At death, carbon-14 is no longer absorbed by living things.
The decay of radioactive carbon-14 to stable nitrogen-14 occurs at a constant rate (see: half-life) and is used to determine the age of organic materials, or how long ago they died (see: radiocarbon dating).
[Lesson3F] carbonized Burnt or turned to charcoal and ash.
Seedsand other plant materials that have been carbonized in a fire may survive for a long time and be found in archaeological sites.
Carbonized remains may be radiocarbon dated, or they can be studied to identify the species of plants used by prehistoric people.
[Lesson 40] Cartesian coordinate system Two- or three- dimensional graph (x, y, z) based on intersecting perpendicular lines or planes.
Used by archaeologists to establish grids for the excavation of archaeological sites to keep track of the location ("provenience") of discovered artifacts and features.
[leSSon I C) A chamber hollowed out of rock horizontally by natural or human processes.
Natural caves provided ready-made shelter for prehistoric people but probably were not their primary places of habitation.
[Lesson 5B] A-12 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society caves carbon-l chemical composition The make-up or parts of an object.
In archaeology, the chemical composition of artifacts such as obsidian stone tools can be determined and used to identify where the material comes from (see: obsidian sourcing).
[Lesson3F] chert A hard glassytype of rock often sought by flintknappers to use for making stone tools.
Sometimes referred to as "flint."
Chalcedony,jasper, and agate are also kinds of chert.
[Lesson 3A] chronology/chronological Time-line; an arrangement of events in the order in which they occurred.
(Lessons lA, 3A, 3F] clan symbol A motif or other design that identifies a group of people, such as a flag or badge.
Some archaeologists believe that rock art may have served in part as a clan symbol for prehistoric groups.
[Lesson 3E] coiling To wind in rings to make a spiral shape.
Ancient hand-made pottery was made by coiling strings of moistened clay together.
[Lesson 3D] composition The make-upor partsof a whole.
Archaeologists speakof the composition a groupof of peopleas beingif and how manymen,women,and childrenthereare.The composition of an archaeological consists whatkinds and how manyartifactsand site of featuresthereare at thesite.
Usedto compare and contrastsimilarand differentsites.
[Lesson SC] conical Having the shape of a cone.
Tipis are conical shelters.
[Lesson SA] context Setting; looking at something in relation to the things around it; the relationship among artifacts and other remains of human activity found at a site, as well as their place in the larger patterns of history or prehistory.
It is important to the interpretation of an artifact or a site that its context remain undisturbed.
[Lesson IC; Lesson 10] continental crust The outer layer of the earth's surface on land or continents.
[Lesson 2A] Continental Divide The placeon the continentwherewater flows on one sideto the east,and on the other sideto thewest.
The RockyMountainsin Montanafonn part of the NorthAmerican Continental Divide.
[Lesson 4B] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-13 continental drift The geological scientific theory that the earth's surface is made up of major and minor crustal plates that are constantly moving laterally over time.
Where two plates join, there are often mountain ranges built and sometimes earthquakes occur (see:plate tectonics; Pangaea).
[Lesson 2A] cordage String, rope, or yam (cord)produced by twisting or braiding several strands of plant fiber together.
Cordage and other non-carbonized organic materials are rarely preserved in most archaeological sites, but are sometimes found in cave sediments.
[Lessons 3B, 4A] Cordilleran Term used to identify the montane glacial ice sheet that covered the northern Rocky Mountains during the Ice Age.
[Lesson 2B] core Center or source.
In geology, the core of the earth is thought to consist of hot molten rock [Lesson2A].
In stone tool making technology, a core refers to a piece of stone from which smaller pieces of stone ("flakes")are struck off to form a tool; sometimes the flakes themselves are used as tools.
[Lesson 3A] corridor Passagewayor path.
Based on the study of geological sediments, many archaeologists believe there was an ice-free corridor between the Cordilleran and Laurentide ice sheets on the eastern front of the Rocky Mountains at some periods during the Ice Ages.
This passagewaywould have allowed the earliest prehistoric people to migrate south from Alaska, through Canada,and into Montana (see:Beringia; Cordilleran; Laurentide; Rocky Mountain Front).
[Lesson2C]. counting coup The act of successfullystriking one's enemy and getting away, not so much as to hurt them, but to embarrass them and gain honor for bravery.
From the French"coup": to strike a blow.
Common among Plains Indian tribes observed by historic travelers and thought to be depicted in some prehistoric and historic rock art.
[Lesson 3E] covering Anything that covers or wraps over something.
Buffalo hides were used as coverings for tipi shelters.
[Lesson SA] cribbed log stmcture Lodge made of logs and poles laid horizontally and stacked three or four feet high.
Probably used hides or brush for a roof.
Often five-sided (see: pentagonal).
[Lesson 5B] A-14 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society culture The shared, learned way of life of a group of people expressed by their common beliefs, values, and behavior.
Archaeologists-who cannot observe people directly-often use the term "culture" to refer to patterns of traits in artifacts, features, and sites that suggest a shared way of life in a particular place during a time period- known as an "archaeological culture."
[Lesson 1 B] D data sheet Forms for the recording and organizing of "data" (information from observations) about an artifact, feature, or site.
The kind of data recorded on a data sheet might include, for example, the location and depth of an artifact excavated from an archaeological site, or the written description and measurementsof an artifact analyzed in the laboratory.
Serves as the basis for study, interpretation, and discussion.
[Lesson 1C] dendrochronology (dendro = tree; chrono = time; oJogy= study of.)
Also known as "tree ring dating": determining the age of a tree by counting its annual growth rings.
[Lessons3F, 5C] digging stick(s) Special digging tools made of wood and/or antler used to uproot wild plants to harvest their roots and bulbs.
[Lessons 3C, 4A] "Dog Days" Tenn used by some Montana Native Americans to refer to the time before the use of thl horse (pre-A.D. 1750), when dogs were used to pull the travois.
[Lessons 20, SA] drive line A line of rock piles ("rock alignment") leading to a buffalo jump.
Often found in pairs to create a converging funnel towards a cliff, i.e., "drive line."
The piles may once have held sticks and hides to scare the buffalo, or been covered with the smell of predators, or been given magic by shamans, or simply been used by hunters in determining where to steer the buffalo herd towards the jump.
(See: buffalo drives and jumps.)
[Lesson 4B] drying rack A framework of wood used to dry strips of raw meat in the sun to preserve it for later use, like" beef jerky."
[Lesson 4C] E Early Prehistoric Period see:Paleoindian/Early Prehistoric Period. ecofact(s) The non-artifactual, natural remains found at archaeological sites such as seeds, animal bones, and plant parts.
Along with artifacts, ecofacts help archaeologists to reconstruct the way of life of prehistoric people and the environmental conditions of the past.
[Lessons lA, 40] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-IS An image or representationof a figure, whether it is human or another animal.
[Lesson38] A period of time, generally hundreds, thousands, or millions of years, known for some characteristic or event; for example,prehistoric era: the time before written history.
[Lesson 2C] Positive values or moral principles to live by.
[Lesson 1 q ethnobotany The knowledge and study of traditional plant use, or how people from different cultures learn about and use plants today.
[Lesson 4A] ethnographer/ethnography An anthropologist who makes a written description of a culture based on firsthand observations of and interaction with living people; part of cultural anthropology.
[Lessons I C, SA] ethnographic analogy Inferring or reconstructing the use or meaning of an ancient site or artifact based on information from ethnographic sources.
[Lesson I q evolution The slow transformation of living organisms over time.
Some anthropologists liken human culture to a living organism and also speak of "cultural evolution."
[Lesson 2A] excavate/excavation To dig; in archaeology, to dig systematically and carefully by removing layers of earth to expose, record, and recover buried artifacts and features.
[Lesson lC] excavated pit Pit created by excavating the soil (i.e. digging).
Used in a variety of ways by prehistoric people, including cooking, storage, and disposal.
Excavated pits were commonly used as ovens in Montana prehistory.
[Lesson 4C] exoskeleton Hard outer shell; external hard supporting structure such as scalesand nails.
[Lesson2A] experimentally replicated A means of aiding the study of archaeological artifacts and features by attempting to duplicate or recreate the artifact or feature today in an experiment; for example, modern flintknappers.
[Lesson 1C) extinct No longer existing or active; died out or ended.
[Lesson 2A] A-16 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society era F fauna A collective tenn for the animals of any geographical region or geologicalera.
[Lesson 2A] faunal analysis The study of animal remains from an archaeological site to understand past hunting and dietary practices, as well as the environmental occupation.
(See: zoologist.)
[Lesson 40] conditions at the time of the site feature A non-portable, built-in part of a site; for example, a living floor, a roasting pit, a tipi ring, or a post hole.
[Lesson 1A] figure content Method of dating rock art by comparing designs within a given cross dating area, assuming that similar designs were made during the same period of time.
[Lesson3F] iJre drill In archaeology, a fire drill is a wooden stick for making fire by rapidly spinning it in a wooden block with a hollow; the hollow holds tinder that will ignite from friction.
[Lesson 4C] lIre hearth An open fire, sometimes surrounded by rocks, for cooking and providing warmth.
Can be recognized at an archaeological site by burnt earth, charcoal, ash, and/or firecracked rock.
[Lesson 4C] flexible Bendable; able to adjust and change as necessary.
(See: adapt/adaptable.)
[Lesson 5C] flintknapper One who is capable of flintknapping.
[Lesson 3A] flintknapping The art and skill of making chipped stone tools.
Sometimes simply referred to as "mapping" to emphasize that stones besides flint could be used to create chipped stone tools (e.g. obsidian, basalt, quartzite, etc.).
[Lesson 3A] flora Plants native to a particular geographical area or geological era.
[Lesson 2A] floral analysis The analysis preserved of plantremains(especially carbonized seeds and stems) from an archaeological to understand plantcollectingand cookingbehaviorof site the prehistoricpeople, well as the environmental as conditionsat the time the site was occupied.
Sometimes referredto as "paleoethnobotany."
[Lesson 40] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-I7 flotation The use of fluid suspension to recover tiny plant and bone fragments that float to the top when samples of archaeological sediments are put in water.
[Lesson 40] A group of wild plants, predominantly herbs, but not grasses.
Many forbs were used as food and medicine, or in rituals by prehistoric people of Montana.
[Lesson 4B] The remains or imprints of plant or animal life from a previous geological period, preserved in rock formations.
Paleontologists study fossils, for example, dinosaur bones.
Archaeologists study artifacts and ecofacts, most of which in Montana are not old enough to have become fossils.
[Lesson 2A] G generations A step in a family history (genealogy) that includes individuals born about the same time (siblings and cousins).
The average time of a generation for humans is about 25 years.
Assuming people first came to Montana 12,000 years ago, there have been about 480 generations of people living here to the present.
[Lesson 20] geographers Scientists who studythe earth'sform and its physical divisionsinto seas,rivers,mountains,plains,etc.
[Lesson 3F] geologic time scale The chronology or order of events in the geologic history of the earth, represented by the strata (layers)of rock.
The geologic time scale is very long (over 2 billion years) compared to the archaeological time scale for humans, which goes back to a few million years ago.
[Lesson2A] geologist A scientist who studies geology.
[Lessons 3F, 40] geology The science that deals with the origins and history of the earth and its life as recorded in rock layers.
[Lesson 2A] glaclals The times in the earth's history of lower annual temperatures and increased ice formation when many glaciers formed in the mountains and on land.
Geologistsestimate that there have been at least 17 glacial periods in the last million and a half years.
Humans are thought to have arrived in the New World from the Old World at the end of the last glacial, about 12,000years ago.
(See: interglacial.)
[Lesson26] A-IS Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society glacier A largemassor sheetof ice formedfrom snowthat accumulates doesnot melt. and Glaciers moveslowly downslopesand valleysfrom mountainsor spreadoutwardon land surfaces during glacialperiods.[Lesson 2B]
EncompassesNevada, eastern California, southeastern Oregon, southern Idaho, and western Utah.
The Great Basin is thought to represent a culture area and homeland of Shoshoneangroups.
[Lesson 3D] grid A network of uniformly spaced horizontal and perpendicular lines like graph paper (xaxis, y-axis) used to keep track of artifact locations across space.
Archaeological site excavations often use a metric grid oriented to the Cartesiancoordinate system, i.e. north-south and east-west.
[Lesson lq H habitation Home; a dwelling or residence place.
[Lesson 5C] hafted Joinedor attached anotherobject,as a stoneknife to a bonehandleor a stone to projectilepointto anarrow.
[Lesson 3A] half-life The period of time required for one-half of the quantity of a radioactive isotope to decay and form a stable element, as in the decay of carbon-14 to nitrogen-14.
A statistical constant (approximately 5,700 years) that provides the measurement scale for radiocarbon (carbon-14)dating.
[Lesson3F] hammerstone Any stone (generally an unmodified cobble) used to strike off flakes from a core to make stone tools.
(See: flintknapping.)
[Lesson 3A] hand-axe A large chipped stone tool, biracially flaked (flaked and shaped on both surfaces), generally with a rounded butt -end (held in the hand) and a pointed working end.
Typical tool type of the Paleolithic period in the Old World after 500,000 B.P. [Lesson 3A] hearth See: fire hearth.
heat treatment A technique of heating stone in a pit or hearth to make it easier to be flaked by a flintknapper in making stone tools.
Chert was commonly heat treated before it was used to make projectile poin!:S.[Lesson 3A] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-I 9 hematite A reddish, iron-ore mineral (Fe203)found in nature as a crystal or in a red earthy form ("ocher") that was commonly used as pigment for body paint and in making pictographs.
[Lesson 3E] heritage Legacy, tradition, or birthright; the past; something that is handed down from generation to generation.
The right to free speech is part of the American heritage.
[Lesson 10] hide containers Bags or pots made of cured animal skins (hides) for use in cooking.
(See: stone-boiling.)
[Lessons 3-D, 4C] hieroglyphics Picture-writing; a system of writing using pictures or symbols to represent words, syllables, or sounds; used by the ancient Egyptians and translated by archaeologists.
[Lesson 3E] Historic Sites Act A federal law passed in 1935 to provide a policy for the preservation of archaeological sites as well as historic buildings and objects "for the inspiration and benefit of the people of the United States."
[Lesson 10j history The study of the past through written records.
In Montana, history follows "prehistory" as the time when Europeans first came and wrote about the people and events here, i.e. 1805 with Lewis and Clark.
[Lesson 1B] Holocene Epoch The period of time on the geologic time scale from the end of the last glacial or Ice Age (see: Pleistocene) about 10,000 years ago through today; also known as the Recent.
Almost all of the known archaeology of Montana belongsto the HoloceneEpoch.
[Lesson2B] Homo sapiens The scientific genus and species names of modem humans.
(Homo = "man"; "sapiens" wise.)
[Lesson 2C] household Those who live or dwell under the same roof; a family; of or pertaining to home life, i.e. domestic.
[Lesson 5C] hunters and gatherers Peoplewho depend on wild animals and plants for food to survive.
Archaeologists believe that the early ancestors of all humans lived as hunters and gatherers.
The people of Montana remained hunters and gatherers throughout prehistory.
There are very few hunting and gathering societies left today.
[Lessons 2C, 20, 4A] Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society A-20 hydration rind A thin band of water absorption that occurs around a stone tool or flake edge.
As the band grows wider over time, it is theoretically possible to determine the age of a stone artifact by measuring the width of the band.
Applied especially to obsidian artifacts.
(See: obsidian hydration dating.)
[Lesson 3F] I Ice Age(s) The period of time when glaciers repeatedly expanded (see: glacials) and contracted (see: interglacials) across the earth's northern continents.
There were probably several Ice Ages in Earth's long history.
The most recent Ice Age began about 1.5 million years ago and ended 10,000years ago (see: Pleistocene Epoch).
[Lesson 2C] igneous formed bythe extrusion magmaand activityof volcanoes. of Oneof three majorrocktypesstudiedby geologists (see: sedimentary; metamorphic).
Basalt and obsidian two igneousrocksthatwere oftenusedby prehistoric are peoplefor making chippedstonetools.
[Lesson 2A] immigrate Moveinto and makea newhome;to cometo a countryor newland of whichone is not a nativeand establish permanent residency.
[Lesson 2C]. incised Cut into; engraved; lines carved on an object with a sharp, strong edge.
[Lesson 3B] inhabited Uved in; having inhabitants or people who occupy a place on a regular basis.
[Lesson 10] inorganic No
[Lessons 3A] 18, interglacials Warm periods between glacial periods.
Interglacials cause the ice sheetsand glaciers to melt and become smaller.
Some geologists and paleoclimatologists believe that the Holocene or Recent Epoch is, in fact, an interglacial period and that the Ice Ages have not ended.
Generally, glacials lasted longer than interglacials.
[Lesson2B] invertebrate An animal that lacks a spinal column, for example, an insect.
[Lesson 2A] Age 1\period of time in Old World prehistory referring to the early widespread adoption anduse of iron metallurgy; in Europe between about 1000 B.C.-300 B.C.
[Lesson 2C] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-21 Iron Volcanic; J K knapping See:flintknapping.
L Late Prehistoric Period The period of prehistory in Montana from about A.D. 500 to the beginning of the protohistoric period about A.D. 1750.During this period, Montana prehistoric hunters and gatherers used the bow and arrow and many groups specialized in buffalo hunting.
Horses were not yet in use during this period.
[Lessons 1A, 2D] Laurentide Name given to the continental ice sheet during the Ice Ages that spread over northeastern Canada and the northern United States from the Atlantic coast west to Alberta.
In the last gladation, the laurentide ice sheet pushed the Missouri River south to its current course through Montana.
[Lesson 2B] laws Rules passedby local,state,and federal government.
Thereare severalnationallaws concerning protection archaeological the of resources federallandsand the Montana on StateAntiquitiesActdealswith archaeology Montanastateland.
[Lesson10] on lean-to A shelter with a single sloping roof, often made out of wood poles leaning against a rock outcrop.
Probably represent temporary shelters.
[Lesson 58] legacy Bequest;something passed down and received from ancestors or predecessorsof the past.
(See: heritage.)
[Lesson lOj A story about the past passed on in writing or through story-telling (oral history) from generation to generation.
Legends often cannot be verified and tell of both historical events and beliefs of a people.
[Lesson 20] lichen A slow-growing type of plant made up of an algae and a fungus growing together on asolid surface, such as a rock.
Uchen on some rock features like tipi rings and cairns suggests that they are old, but exactly how old is difficult to determine.
[Lessonsq lifeway Ufe; how a groupof peoplein a societyor a culturelives-including their subsistence, shelter,art, beliefs, etc.
[Lesson SA] A-22 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society legends Of, relating to, or made of stone.
(From the GreeK,lithos.)
[Lesson 3A] looting Robbing or taking illegally.
In archaeology: excavating without a permit or permission, usually for private gain.
(See:pothunter.)
[Lesson lOj lump-modeled In pottery-making technology, refers to the simple hand-shaping of a pot or other vessel from a single lump of clay (contrast with: coiling).
[Lesson 3D] M magma Very hot, molten rock in the earth's core that sometimes reaches the surface through fissures and then cools to become igneous rock; lava.
[Lesson 2A] mammal Class of higher vertebrate animals that includes humans (classMammalia).
Characterized by mothers who nourish their young with milk from mammary glands and by skin that is usually covered, in whole or in part, with hair.
[Lesson 2A] (Spanish mana = hand) Grinding stone, specifically the hand-held smooth stone used to grind dried plants (like com or wild plants) into flour on a grinding slab or "metate."
[Lessons 3C, 4A] mantle Coveror cloak; in geology,it is the fluid layerof unconsolidatedrock material that lies below the continentaland oceanic crustand above the hot, molten core of the earth.
[Lesson2A] mastodon A general term given to various forms of elephant-like animals (order Proboscidea)that lived primarily between 30 and 10 million years ago.
Gave rise to the elephants, including mammoths.
The last direct descendant of the mastodons (genusMammut)-a leaves-and-twigs browser sometimes hunted by Paleoindians- became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene epoch along with mammoths (genus Mammuthus)and other Ice Age megafauna.
[Lesson 2B] medicines A substance or preparation used in treating illness or disease.
Wild plants provided much of the medicine used by prehistoric people.
[Lesson 4A]
megafauna Large animals.
weight, extinct Among Ice Age mammals, refers to those larger than 90 pounds in body about the size of a wolf.
Much of the megafauna mammoths, in North America mastodons, became wooly to a at the end of the Ice Age, including horses, and camels.
2B] Other giant sloths, rhinoceros, smaller size. megafauna, like bison, survived but evolved
[Lesson Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-23 Mesolithic Middle Stone Age; a period of time recognized in Old World prehistory as the transition from the Paleolithic (Old Stone Age) to the Neolithic (New Stone Age).
In Europe and the Near East, the Mesolithic occurs between about 10,000B.C. to 5000 B.C. in most places.
The period marks the transition from hunting megafauna to cultivating plants and animals (see:agriculture).
Similar to the Archaic Period in the New World.
[lesson 2C]. metamorphic In geology, of three majortypesof rocks(see: one igneousand sedimentary).
Metamorphic rockswereonceigneousor sedimentary rockswhosemineralstructureis changedoverlong periodsof time bypressure heat.Quartziteis a metamorphic and rockderivedfromsandstone.
[Lesson 2A] (Spanish)Grinding slab or basin, usually with a flat or slightly concave surface.
Used in conjunction with a "mano" to grind dried plants (e.g. com) into flour for cooking.
[Lessons 3C, 4A] Middle Prehistoric Period see Archaic or Middle Prehistoric Period.
microscope A scientific instrument used for seeing very small objects that cannot be seen by the eye alone.
Useslenses to make enlarged images.
Archaeologists sometimes use microscopes to examine the edges of stone tools and to identify small plant remains and pollen.
[Lesson 40] microscopic Very small; an object that can only be clearly seen under a microscope.
[Lesson3F] midden Trash area; in archaeology, middens are deposits of discarded artifacts and ecofacts such as food remains (bones, plants, shells) and broken stone tools.
Uke modem garbage dumps, middens are rich sources of archaeological objects.
[Lesson 1A] migration A move out or away from one home to another, generally over a long distance.
(See: immigration.)
[Lesson 2C] mobility The capability and extent to which something moves; in archaeology, mobility refers to how often, when, and where prehistoric groups moved their homes.
Archaeologists believe that most hunters and gatherers had "high" mobility, i.e. that they moved often (see:nomadic).
[Lesson 1B] A-24 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society metate N natural trap A naturalplaceon the land where hunterscouldtrap and surroundanimalsand kill them; for examplea dead-endcanyon, bog,a snowdrift, or sanddunes.[Lesson a 4B]
Stone tools were still used as in the preceding Mesolithic and Paleolithic.The Neolithic begins as early as 8000 B.C. in the Near East, but later in Europeas agriculture spread across the continent.
In North America, many Indian groups beganusing agriculture to grow food in the Late Prehistoric Period (after A.D. 500)and can be considered"neolithic"; however, in Montana, groups remained hunters and gatherersthroughout prehistory.
[Lessonzq net An open mesh of fabric or cordage twisted, knotted, or woven at regular intervals; thought to have been used by prehistoric people of Montana (especiallywestern Montana) to catch fish.
Piecesof nets are rarely preserved; however, sometimes Montana archaeologists find "net weights"-grooved stones used to hold down the nets in water.
[Lesson 3B] New World Land in the Western Hemisphere: North, Central, and South America and the neighboring islands.
A term first used by Europeansfollowing the exploration by Christopher Columbus in the 16th century A.D. (See:Old World.)
(Lesson2A] nomadic Describes a group that moves regularly from place to place within a defined territory in order to obtain natural resources such as food, water, and stone.
Hunters and gatherers are typically nomadic or semi-nomadic.
(See: mobility.)
[Lessons lA, 20, 4A] non-perishable Something that will not spoil or decay over time; generally inorganic.
Stone is a nonperishable material that is often preserved at Montana archaeological sites.
[Lesson 1 B] non-renewable Doesnot recreateitself or comebackonce it is gone.Archaeological are considsites erednon-renewable resources because once theyareexcavated archaeologists by or looted by pothunters, theyare goneforever.All that remains the artifactsand what are informationwas recorded duringexcavation.[LessonIDj 0 obsidian A glassy volcanic (see: igneous) rock formed from cooling lava under special condi-tions.
Occurs naturally in limited areas, like Obsidian Cliff in Yellowstone National Park.
Usually black and very shiny, obsidian was a prized stone for making sharp tools.
[Lesson 3A] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-25 obsidian hydration dating The technique of dating how old obsidian artifacts are by measuring how much water has been absorbed along the fresh edges.
(See:hydration rind.)
[Lesson 3F] occupation Residentialplace; inhabitation; a place occupied or lived in by people (see habitation, inhabited).
[Lesson IC] occupied Uved in (see:inhabited).
[Lesson 10] oceanic crust Theouter layerof the earth'ssurfaceunderthe oceans.[Lesson 2A]
Described in some tribe's oral history stories.
Remnants of old trails can still be seen along the Rocky Mountain Front, some of which may be part of the Old North Trail.
[Lesson 2C] Old World land in the Eastern Hemisphere; includes the continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa.
The archaeological record of the Old World is much more ancient than that of the New World.
Stone tools in Africa have been found that are over 2 million years old.
Most archaeologists believe that the first humans traveled from the Old World to the New World along the Bering land Bridge between ]5,000 and ]
(See: New World; Beringia).
[Lesson 2A] organic Of or relating to living organisms (plants and animals).
Organic artifacts include those made of wood, fibers, bone, horn, hide, etc.
(See: inorganic.)
[Lessons 1B, 3B] origins First beginnings; source; ancestry.
[Lesson 2AJ p paddle and anvil technique Manufacturing technique for hand-made pottery to thin, shape, and smooth the walls of the pot by paddling the outside of the wall with a wooden paddle while holding your hand inside the pot to serve as an anvil or striking platform.
[Lesson 3D] Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society A-26 Paleoindian/Early Prehistoric Period (10,000 B.C.-6,OOO B.C.)
The initial and oldest period of prehistoric people in Montana and the rest of the New World.
Begins with the end of the Ice Ages (see: Pleistocene) during which paleoindians hunted now-extinct megafauna like mammoth.
Sometimes referred to as the period of "Big Game Hunters," followed by the Middle Prehistoric Period (see: Archaic), when people ate a more varied diet of smaller animals and plants.
Some authors also use the term "paleoindians" to refer to all Indian people and ancestors before the time of history.
[Lessons lA, 20] Paleolithic Old Stone Age.
Term used to describe the earliest and longest period of hunters and gatherers in the Old World, beginning with the oldest known stone tools (see: pebble tools) over 2 million years old to the end of the Ice Age about 12,000 years ago.
The paleoindians who migrated to the New World were late Paleolithic hunters and gatherers from the Old World.
[Lesson 2C, 3A] paleontology The scientific study of the earth's history of all living organisms as revealed in fossils, including dinosaurs.
Often confused with archaeology, the study of the human past as revealed by artifacts.
[Lesson 2A] palynologists Scientists of palynology, the study of plant pollen.
In some environments (lake sediments, bogs, caves), microscopic plant pollen can be preserved for hundreds of thousands of years.
Different plant species can be identified by their unique shape and size of pollen.
By determining what plants were growing at different times, palynologists can help archaeologists understand ancient environments and climates and how these changed over time during the Ice Ages.
[Lesson 4D] (Greek: "all land") The ancient"supercontinent' that existedover 200 million yeatSago in Earth'shistory beforethe continentalplates moved apart,forming separatecontinentsand oceans.
[Le
[Lesson 2A] tray A woven basket, typically flat, used for drying seeds and other plant materials for use as food or medicine or in ceremonies.
[Lesson 3D] parfleche (CanadianFrench: ']
Used to transport food, clothing, and personal items.
[Lesson 3B] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-27 parching Pangaea pebble tools The oldest known Paleolithic stone tools, between 500,000 and over 2 million years old.
Very simply made by striking one or two "flakes" from a "core" and using the flakes and/or the core as an all-purpose cutting, chopping, and scraping tool.
Sometimes referred to as the "Oldowan Industry" from the first discoveries by the Leakeys at Olduvai Gorge in Africa.
pemmican (Cree: pimikan) A mixture of dried lean meat pounded fine and mixed with fat and usually wild berries or other fruit.
A traveling ration and one means of storing food over the winter months.
Uke dried beef jerky.
[Lessons 3C, 4A] pentagonal Five-sided; a geometric Conn(polygon) with five angles and five sides.
(See:cribbed log structure.)
[Lesson 58] percussion flaking A method of flintknapping ("knapping") involving the striking of a core with a stone, antler, or wooden percussor (i.e., "striker"; see: hammerstone) at the right place to remove or detach flakes.
Most early stages of stone tool manufacture involved percus- sion flaking to roughly size and shape the tool.
(See: pressure flaking.)
[Lesson 3A] periods A time frame; a broad unit of time.
Montana prehistory is divided up into three periods: Paleoindian/EariyPrehistoricPeriod (10,000 B.C.-6000 B.C.),Archaic/Middle Prehistoric Period (6000B.C.-A.D. 500), and Late PrehistoricPeriod (A.D. 500-A.D. 1800).
Some major changes in prehistoric lifeways (technology, subsistence,and settlement) are thought to have occurred for each period.
However, mostly these periods are simple divisions of time to help archaeologists order events and sites in time.
(See: chronology.)
[Lesson 2D] 1.
perishable Does not preserve; liable to decay or rot over time.
Many artifacts and ecofacts originally made of organic materials (wood, bone, plant fibers, etc.) are perishable and will not preserve at most archaeological sites for very long.
(See: non-perishable.)
1B, 3B, 5B, 5C] [Lessons petroglyph Rock art that is chiseled, pecked, or carved (see: incised)onto the stone.
(See:pictograph.)
[Lesson 3E] photosynthesis Chemical process by which plants are able to produce carbohydrates in chlorophyllcontaining tissues exposed to sunlight.
Oxygen (OV, needed by animal life, is a byproduct.
[Lesson 2A] A-28 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society pictograph Rock art that is painted onto the stone, usually without use of a brush.
(See:petroglyph.)
[Lesson 3E] pigment A coloring substance, generally rendered to powder and mixed with a fluid or paste to form a paint.
Used in making pictographs, face paint, and decorations.
Common natural materials used as pigments include ochre for red (see: hematite) and charcoal or manganese for black.
Animal fat often served as the binding paste.
[Lesson 3E] pithouse A home built partly underground by ancient peoples.
Usually round or oval with a floor dug two to three feet below the surface.
The walls were made of sticks and posts; the roof was probably made with branches, sod, or hides.
[Lesson58] pishkin (Blackfeet: pis'kins; also 'pishkunj.
See: buffalo jump.
The Blackfeet word for buffalo jump, "pis'kin" has been translated as "kettle ofblood"-perhaps referring to the many buffalo butchered at the base of the cliff following a successfulhunt.
[Lesson 4B] tectonics The scientific model of the earth's surface that holds that the crust is made up of major and minor plates that move independently.
Usually, the movement is gradual, as in an area of mountain building where two plates collide.
Sometimes it is sudden, as in the shifting along geological faults that results in a zone of earthquakes.
(See: continental drift.)
[Lesson 2A] Pleistocene Epoch The Ice Age(s); more specifically, the most recent Ice Age on Earth beginning about one and a half million years ago and ending 10,000years ago.
Characterized by many cycles of glacial advance and retreat.
Human evolution and development occurred primarily in this time and within this environmental setting.
[Lesson 28] porcelanite A fine-grained, gray or reddish metamorphic rock created from the baking of claystone by naturally burning coal seams.
Sometimes known as "clinker" because of the ringing sound it makes when struck.
Used extensively by prehistoric knappers in southeastern Montana where this rock type is abundant.
[Lesson 3A] pothunters Term used broadly to refer to looters who dig illegally to remove artifacts from archaeological sites, destroying the context, scientific importance, and value of the site.
Derives from the practice of looters looking for whole pots in burials at prehistoric pueblos of the southwestern United States, sometimes using bulldozers.
[Lesson 5C] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-29 plate pottery Earthenware claywarepots,dishes, vasesmadefrom fired clay.Sometimes or or referredto generally "ceramics"byarchaeologists.
as [Lesson 3D] poultice A soft, moist substance applied as medicine for burns,sores, and cuts.
[Lesson 4A] prehistory The time before written records in an area, which varies from place to place.
Most archaeological work in the United States is at prehistoric sites; however, more recently archaeologists also have been excavating historic sites ("historic archaeology").
In Montana, prehistory is from about 12,000years ago to 250 years ago.
[Lesson 1B] pressure flaking The technique of chipped stone tool making that involves using an antler tine (or tip of wood or bone) to apply pressure to the edge of a piece to remove very small, very thin flakes.
Often used when finishing a knife or projectile point to create a sharp and regular edge.
(See: percussion flaking.)
[Lesson 3A] prickly pear cactus (Opuntia sp.)
Any of a large number of cacti with yellow flowers and flat paddle-shaped segments with spines.
Producesa small, dark-red or purplish, pear-shaped fruit that is edible.
Charred prickly pear seeds have been recovered from prehistoric archaeological sites in Montana.
[Lesson3q primary documents First-hand written documents; for example, a diary or a journal.
[Lesson 2C] probability Chance; likelihood.
[Lesson 1C] processed Prepared; made ready for use.
[Lesson 4A] professional Onewho works in an activity,suchas archaeology, a careeror full-time job (notas a as hobby), usingthe principlesand ethicalstandards the practiceachievedthrough of formaltrainingand experience.
[Lesson10j projectile points An artifact (usually chipped stone) used to tip an arrow, dart (see: atlatl), or throwing spear.
Sometimes referred to as "arrowheads," although only projectile points less than 2,000 years old were used in Montana to tip arrows (see: bow and arrow).
Projectile points may be un-notched or notched with indentations at the base to facilitate hafting.
Archaeologists use the size and shape of projectile points as an indication of their age.
In general, projectile points become smaller over time.
[Lesson 3A] A-30 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society protein/protein molecules Basic part of all living cells and important part of the diet of animals; 
Consistsof naturally occurring, complex combinations of amino acids that contain carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and sometimes other elements.
[Lessons 4A, 40] Protohistoric Period of transition from prehistory to history.
In Montana, about A.D.
I 750-A.D. 1800.
This is when native groups first began to get European technology and goods (for example: horses, guns, metal knives, etc.).
Often this happened before they ever saw a European person because they obtained these items by trade or stealing from other Indian groups who had them.
[Lesson I A] public land Land that belongs logical to a local, state, or federal government.
States apply only to public Most laws to protect lands.
archaeolOJ sites in the United (and not private) [Lesson Q quarry Place where people obtained raw materials, particularly stone for use in making stone tools (i.e.,"lithic quarry").
[Lesson 3A] Quaternary Period Time period on the geologic time scale that includes both the Pleistoceneand Holocene epochs, or about the last one and one half million years.
[Lesson 28] R radioactive elements Unstable elements (suchas uranium) that decay over time as the nuclei of their atoms disintegrates, releasing alpha, beta, and sometimes gamma rays.
This decay occurs at a regular rate (see: half-life) and can be used,as is the case with radioactive carbon-14, to determine how old something is (see:carbon-14; radiocarbon dating).
[Lesson3F] radiocarbon dating Absolute dating method of determining how many years old an organic artifact or ecofact is by measuring the decay of "radiocarbon" (see: carbon-14) in it.
The older the material, the less radiation is left to be released and measured by scientific instruments.
Useful for dating objects up to 100,000years old.
Also known as "carbon-14 dating."
[Lessons3F, 40, 5C] recent Modem; not very ancient.
[Lesson 1AI relative dating Orderingof eventsin relationto eachother butnot to a specifictime or numberof ~ffi ago.
Tellswhethersomethingis prnger or older thansomethingelse,but not how old it is or how manyyears separate two things.(See: the absolute dating; superimpositioning.) [lessons] c; 40]
For example,snakes, lizards, alligators, crocodiles, and turtles.
[Lesson 2A] research design Plan for doing research.
A strategy for gathering information ("data") about a subject and determining the meaning of the results, as in a scientific experiment.
Manyarchaeological research designs include the following steps: 1) formulation of questions ("hypotheses"); 2) implementation of questions ("test implications"); 3) data acquisition (fieldwork); 4)data processing (cataloging and coding); 5) analysis (study of data patterns); 6) interpretation (explanation of data according to questions); and 7) publication (writing of methods and conclusions).
[Lesson 1C] rock art Ancient images painted (see: pictograph) or carved (see: petroglyph) on a stone surface, often a cliff, cave, or rockshelter wall.
[Lesson 3E] rockshelters A wide, but shallow cave; a protected area created by a rock overhang.
Provided a natural shelter for prehistoric camps.
[Lesson 58] Rocky Mountain Front The land along the eastern edge of the Rocky Mountains; where the plains meet the mountains.
[Lesson 2C] S scrapers Tools used to scrape something.
Used, for example, to remove fat from the underside of an animal skin, bark from a piece of wood, or in working leather.
Usually made of stone, sometimes bone.
Stone scrapers are characterized by a steep, blunt working edge formed by "unifacial" (single-sided) knapping.
Different types of scrapers are often described in terms of the shape and/or position of the cutting edge, i.e. side-scraper, end-scraper, snub-nosed scraper, thumbnail scraper, etc.
Stone scrapers may have been attached to wooden, bone, or antler handles that were replaced as needed (see: hafted).
[Lesson 3A] sedimentary One of three major types of rocks (see: igneous; metamorphic) formed by sand, silt, or clay settling in layers in water and hardening to rock after tens of thousands of years.
[Lesson 2A] shaman A "medicine man" or "seer" who uses his knowledge of nature and the supernatural and his ritual powers to cure illness or to interpret strange phenomena.
Rarely,these powers were also used to causeharm.
Shamans probably were responsible for creating much of the symbolic prehistoric rock art we see today.
[Lessons3E, 58] A-32 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical society shelter Home; a place to live protected from the sun, wind, rain, and snow.
[Lesson I A; see: Theme 5] sherds (also "shards") Broken pieces of pottery.
[Lesson 3D] short grass plains The dry country, as in eastern Montana, characterized by low grassesand other plants [see: forbs]
Excellent grazing for buffalo.
[Lesson 48] shovel testing Digging a series of small holes with a shovel at an archaeological site to determine if and where buried artifacts are present.
[Lesson lC] Siberia Northeastern province of Russia.Connected to Alaska during glacial periods of the Ice Ages when sea levels were lower (see: Beringia/Bering Land Bridge).
Most archaeologists believe that the first people of the New World migrated from the area of Siberia into Alaska during the last glacial period.
[Lessonzq sinew Animal tendon that was used as a cord or thread for sewing and tying things together, as in attaching a projectile point to a shaft (see:hafted).
[Lessons 3A, 3B] site A term used extensively by archaeologists to refer to places where prehistoric or historic people used to live or work and at which they left behind artifacts.
Sites may be very big, like a Maya temple, or very small, like a few stone tools left at a butcheringcamp.
[Lessons I A, I q site director Supervisor of archaeological excavations at an archaeological site.
Responsible for preparing plans (see: research design) and overseeingwork.
Generally a professional archaeologist with many years of education, training, and experience.
(~sson I C) site form A brief report that initially describes an archaeological site.
Included is information about the site location, its elevation, its size, what kinds of artifacts were seen or collected, what the environment is like, who owns the land, a sketch map, and any other important data.
Site forms are written when a site is first discovered and, in Montana, are filed with the Site RecordsOffice at the University of Montana, which issues each site a unique number.
[Lesson 1C] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-33 size Physicaldimensions or bulk of an object; number or quantity.
Size is a common attribute used by archaeologists in analyzing and interpreting artifacts, ecofacts, and features.
[Lessonsq society Community of people having common traditions and institutions who regularly live and work together to survive.
Humans are very social animals.
[Lesson 1 B] A hunting weaponconsisting of a long shaftof wood with a shalptip.
Could be thrust or thrown.
Often spear pointsof stone were hafted to the end to make the shalp tip. [Lesson46] spear points A sharp tip-in prehistory, usually made of chipped stone-that was attached to a thrusting or throwing spear (see:projectile point; hafted).
The earliest projectile points made by paleoindians in Montana (10,000B.C.-6000 B.C.)are thought to have been used on spears because of their large size.
[Lesson 3A] statistical data analysis Mathematical study of quantified information ("data"; see: analysis).
In archaeology, often involves the comparison of new data with existing information to reveal patterns of similarities and differences in artifacts or features that may relate to human culture and behavior.
[Lesson I C] steatite A variety of talc, a grayish-green or brown soft stone, that could be carved to make pots and other items.
Also known as "soapstone."
Found in southwestern Montana.
[Lesson 3D] sterile Empty.
In archaeological site excavation, refers to layers of earth (see: strata) that contain no evidence of human activity (artifacts, ecofacts, or features).
[Lesson 1C] steward Caretaker; manager.
In some places, volunteer site stewards visit archaeological sites regularly to help protect them from vandalism and looting.
[Lesson 10j stone Rock; a hardened inorganic material that forms much of the earth's crust.
Stone provided the raw material for much of prehistoric technology, and stone tools are among the best preserved artifacts of prehistoric people.
[Lesson 3A] A-34 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society spear Stone Age The long period of human prehistory when stone was the major raw material used for making tools; before the development of metal technology ("metallurgy").
The Stone Age begins with the earliest stone tools over 2 million years ago and continues to about 3000 B.C. in some parts of the Old World, or much later elsewhere.
In the Old World, it is divided chronologically into the Paleolithic (Old Stone Age), Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age), and Neolithic (NewStone Age).
[Lesson 2q stone axes Axesmadeof stone.
Largestonetools for chopping wood and breakingbone,as well as servingothercuttingand scrapingfunctions, needed.
as Grooved groundstoneaxes (stones shapedbypeckingand grindingas opposed chipping) to appearin the Late Prehistoric Periodand were probably haftedto woodenhandles.[Lesson 3C] stone-boiling Prehistoric cooking method that was done by heating cobblestones and placing them in a container with the liquid or substance to be cooked.
This was done for containers that could not be placed directly in or over a fire (see:hide containers).
[Lessons 3D, 4C] stone drill A chipped stone tool for making holes in wood or bone.
Typically a drill is a small, narrow shaft of chipped stone with a round cross-section that looks like a modem drill bit.
May have been hand-held or attached to a handle (see:hafted).
[Lesson 3A] stone knives A chipped stone tool for cutting.
Looks like a large projectile point (especiallya spear point) but is typically wider, thicker, and less pointed at the tip.
Hand-held or attached to a wooden or bone handle (see:hafted).
Sometimes called a "blade."
[Lesson 3C] stone tool manufacture The making of stone tools, either by chipping (see: flintknapping) or grinding a piece of natural stone into a desired shape and size.
[Lesson3F] stone tool technology A technology based on stone tools.
Includes the getting of raw materials, the manufacture of the tool, and the use and the maintenance of the tool until it is lost or thrown away.
[Lesson 3A] stratum/strata (singular:stratum; plural: strata) In geology and archaeology, these are layers of earth or rock, distinguishable by color, texture ("feel"), and composition (contents).
Archaeological sites often have buried strata that contain artifacts.
[Lessons 1C, 4D] stratification The accumulation of materials (earth, artifacts, ecofacts, features, etc.) in layers or strata, usually horizontally stacked with the oldest material at the bottom and the youngest at the top (see:superimpositioning).
[Lesson 40] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-35 stratigraphic layers levels of earth or archaeological deposits (see: strata) that are in undisturbed order, with the oldest at the bottom and the youngest at the top (see: superimpositioning). [lessons 1C, 5B]
[Lesson 1A; see: Theme 4] subsistence Existence and the means to survive, especially the need for food.
[Lessons 20, 4A; see: Theme 4J superimpositioning (also: superpositioning) To place on, over, or above something; to stack in layers.
There is a geological and archaeological rule known as the "Law ofSuperposition" which states: "In any pile of sedimentary deposits which have not been disturbed by folding or overturning, the strata on the bottom were deposited first."
This principle is also applied to rock art where one design is drawn on top of another, the lower design being the older of the two (see:relative dating).
[Lesson 3E] supernatural Extraordinary; unusualor abnormal to defythe laws of nature;attributedto an so as invisible,unseeable force or individual(see: shaman).[Lesson 3E]
Often this is the first fieldwork step in an archaeological investigation of a region.
Sometimes known as an "inventory."
[Lesson lC] survey strategy The plan for how to surveyor look for archaeological sites in an area.
A survey strategy is based on what you already know and what you want to learn (see: research design).
[Lesson 1C] symbolic SOmething that uses "symbols": signs or pictures that stand for or represent something else.
For example: a stop sign, a cross, a baseball team logo.
Many rock art designs ("motifs") are thought to be symbolic.
[Lesson 3E] T taiga A swampy, sub-arctic coniferous (evergreen) forest area that beginsto the south of where tundra ends.
Made up mostly of fir and spruce trees.Found in Alaska and Canadatoday, but was much farther south and widespreadduring the Ice Ages.
Generallynot thought to be a productive area of plants and animals for huntersand gatherers.(See:tundra.)
[Lesson2B] A-36 Ancient Teachings Montana Historical Society technology The manufacture and use of material objects (tools) to cope with daily life.
By providing for food, shelter, safety, and expression, human technology and culture are what separate us from the other animals.
[Lessons 1A, 3A; see: Theme 3] theory An idea of how and why something is or works.
A theory cannot be proven, but can be supported by facts and evidence.
[lesson 1 AI thermoluminescence (thermo = heat; luminescence= light) Ught energy (phosphorescence) given off by an object that was made by heat by gradually reheating the object to a high temperature in a laboratory setting.
Can be used to determine approximately how old an object is: older baked objects give off more light energy.
Usually applied as a relative, rather than absolute, dating technique.
[Lesson3F] tipi (also, tepee; Dakota Sioux: ti: to dwell, pi: to use for) A Plains Indian conical tent made of skin coverings on a pole framework.
[Lesson SA] tipi rings A ring or circle of rocks thought to have been used to hold down the covering or the liner of a prehistoric tipi.
Tipi rings are a common archaeological Montana on the "Hi-line", site in northern but they also exist elsewhere in Canada, southern Montana, and other Plains states.
Also known as a "stone circle."
[Lesson SA] toolstone Rock that could be used for making stone tools.
Chert, basalt, obsidian, porcelanite, and quartzite were stones useful for making chipped stone tools.
Granite and sandstone were often used in making ground stone tools.
[Lesson 3A] tooth eruption schedules The timetable for which different teeth ("baby' or permanent) appear in an animal's mouth.
This may vary with individuals, but on average can be used to determine how old a young animal is and sometimes at what time of the year it died, based on the birth of most animals (like buffalo) in the springtime of the year.
[Lesson 40] topographic map A map that shows the elevations of the land surfaces in an area, usually along with other features like streams, lakes, springs, roads, and buildings.
On most maps, lines called "contour lines" show elevation.
On some maps, topography may be shown threedimensionally.
[Lesson 1q territory area in whicha groupmakesits living, oftenkeepingothersfrom usingthe same areawithout permission.[Lesson 3E] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-37 The Buying, selling, exchanging, or bartering goods between different groups.
Archaeologists know that trading went on among ancient people because they find artifacts that must have been made in faraway places.
Trade items in Montana prehistory include ocean shells and obsidian.
[Lesson 3B] traditions Cultural continuity through time.
The passing down of ways of life from generation to generation, including beliefs, settlement and subsistence behaviors, and technology.
Traditions are the past kept alive in the present.
[Lesson 20] transects Unes or strips.
In archaeological surveys, archaeologists often walk in parallel lines or paths about 100 feet apart looking for artifacts on the ground surface.
[Lesson 1C] transit A highly accurate field telescope with a compass for making a map and establishing an excavation grid at an archaeological site (see:grid).
[Lesson I C] travois (Canadian French) A carrying device used by Plains Indians consisting of two long trailing poles bearing a platfonn or net for holding the load.
Dragged behind on the ground by people or dogs, and later (after about A.D. 1750)by horses.
The two poles could be tipi poles.
[Lessons 2C, 2D, 4A] tundra The treeless plain within the Arctic Circle that is marshy in the summer and frozen in the winter.
The subsoil is permanently frozen ("permafrost"), but the surface soil supports mosses, forbs, and lichens.
Common environment in the Ice Ages near the edges of glaciers.
[Lesson 26] u V vandalize/vandalism To willfully and maliciously destroy or deface something that does not belong to you.
Illegal activity punishable as a crime.
[Lesson 10j vertebrate Animal that has a spinal column ("backbone"), including mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish.
[Lesson 2A] W weir A fence, net, or other enclosure set in a stream to catch fish.
[Lesson 38] A-38 Ancient Teachings Historical Society Montana wickiup (Fox: wikiyap = dwelling) A domed or conical-shaped shelter made of stacked wood poles, bark, brush, or reed mats.
Sometimes looks like a tipi without the hide covering.
[Lesson 58] Wisconsinan Glaciation Name given by researchers in North America to the period of the most recent glacial advance in the last Ice Age, beginning about 100,000years ago and ending 10,000years ago.
In Europe, the same period is called the "Wurm."
[Lesson 2B] wooden corrals Fencedenclosures or pens made with wooden poles and brush and used by hunters to trap animals.
[Lesson 48] woolly mammoth (Mammuthus primigenius) Speciesof mammoth that evolved in Eurasiasome time between 500,000and 300,000years ago and spread widely across the northern hemisphere until its extinction about 10,000years ago.
Principalspeciesof mammoth hunted by paleoindians who, some researchersbelieve,contributed to the greatbeasts' extinction.
Mammoths are characterized by a high domed skull and long, twisted tusks that curve inward.
The average adult mammoth weighed between four and six tons and stood nine to eleven feet tall.
[Lessons2B, 4B] x y yearly subsistence round The regular and repeated movement of people to different places at certain times of the year in order to hunt different animals and gather different plants as they become available.
Common among nomadic or semi-nomadic groups who often move camps in different seasonsof the year in a "seasonalround." [lesson 4A] Z zoologists Scientistswho study animal biology and behavior-in the wild, and not only in zoos.
(See faunal analysis.)
[Lessons 3F, 40] Montana Historical Society Ancient Teachings A-39
