Oregon PopulationBased Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus Measuring Quality of Care in Health Systems 2002 Oregon Diabetes Program Measuring Quality of Care in Health Systems Oregon Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus Revised: February 2002 Health Promotion 
Support for development of these guidelines was provided by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control.
This document is in the public domain and may be used and reprinted.
The Oregon Department of Human Services appreciates citation and notification of use.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus Table of Contents
Summary of 2002 Changes Introduction Acknowledgements At A Glance
Individual Guidelines Ace Inhib itors Beginning at Age 55 Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) Monitoring Patient Education Eye Examination Foot Screening Early Nephropathy Detection Blood Pressure Screening Lipid Screening Tobacco Use Assessment Aspirin Prophylaxis Oral/Dental Screening Immunizations Preconception Counseling References Specific Recommendations General Bibliography Appendices Carville Foot Screen and Risk Assessment Veterans Administration (VA) Foot Assessment Tool Expanded Nephropathy and Hypertension Treatme nt Recommendations
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Summary of 2002 Changes
The Advisory Group reviewed these guidelines in January, 2002, and adopted the following changes: A new guideline recommends that an ACE inhibitor be initiated for all people with diabetes who are 
HbA1c risk categorization has been changed to: Low risk 
Blood pressure treatment with ACE inhibitor is recommended when the diastolic is 
Procedures for testing for nephropathy have been simplified and utilization of the albumin to creatinine ratio is recommended.
LDL risk categorization has been changed to: Low risk 
Treatment to 
Pharmacologic treatment is recommended if 
Aspirin prophylaxis is recommended for everyone at age 40 AND for younger persons with coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease or with vascular risk factors.
Angiotensin- receptor antagonist blockers are recommended for treatment of high blood pressure, microalbuminuria and overt nephropathy when ACE inhibitors are not tolerated.
Footnotes and references have been updated for the eye examination guidelines and tobacco use assessment.
The definition of blindness has been corrected.
References have been updated.
Flowcharts have been eliminated.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Introduction Purpose of the Guidelines These guidelines have been developed to define appropriate measures for monitoring the quality of medical care provided to a population of people with diabetes.
Diabetes is an expensive condition, costing over $1.2 billion dollars in Oregon in 1997 for direct and indirect expenses.
An estimated 216,000 Oregonians may be at risk of suffering from the complications of diabetes including blindness, end - stage renal disease, heart disease, stroke and lower extremity amputations.
Many of the adverse outcomes associated with diabetes are preventable, or at least can be delayed.
Good diabetes medical care is an essential component of a strategy to reduce the onset and severity of complications and improve the quality of life for people with diabetes.
Many medical systems and providers are committed to improved quality of care for their patients with diabetes.
These guidelines have been created to define a common means to measure the success of the effort.
The guidelines do not address all the care a patient with diabetes may need; they are not therapeutic treatment guidelines.
Rather these guidelines are a set of important procedures that are measurable for defined populations and appropriate for systematic monitoring.
These guidelines augment clinical practice guidelines such as those of the American Diabetes Association.
The evidence for these population- based guidelines is strongest for people aged 18 to 75.
The very young and very old may need care which is different from that described here.
Progress in Better Diabetes Care The quality of care provided to people with diabetes in Oregon, as measured in these guidelines, has improved.
According to statewide surveys of people with diabetes, the nine guidelines addressed show improvements.
Data fro m Medicare and from managed care plans also show improvements.
Distribution of the Receipt of Preventive Services in the General Oregon Population, 1997 and 2000 100 80
1997
2000
Percent (%)
60 40 20 0 Exam Exam Shot Education Check Vaccine if Smoke Screen Test HbA1c
Eye
Cholesterol
Foot
BP
Flu
How to Use the Diabetes Guidelines Though these guidelines will find many purposes, they have been specifically designed to be used by health systems that provide care to defined populations.
By combining recommended procedures with population- based measures of success in delivering those procedures, the stage is set for continuous monitoring and improvement of specific processes of care.
Quality improvement programs are urged to use this document to identify improvement projects and to assess their success.
Health Systems that have a continuous process to (a) identify the population of members who have diabetes (b) track their current status regarding procedures, (c) trigger and support provider actions in response to that information in a timely way, and (d) give aggregate information to the providers of care will be most successful in improving the quality of care described in the guidelines.
How the Guidelines Were Developed The guidelines were developed through a collaborative effort of clinicians, educators, health plan administrators, epidemiologists, and people with diabetes.
They are largely based on the results of clinical trials which have demonstrated an effect on the development or progression of specific diabetes complications.
This 2002 edition is the third revision of the guidelines, which were first released in provisional form in October 1995.
Comments, literature reviews and review by an expanded advisory group have resulted in some content and format revisions and the addition of one guideline since the 1999 edition.
Pneumonia
Asked
The Diabetes Guidelines Format Each of the 13 guidelines has two parts: (1) Clinical Recommendations These define the relevant population to receive specific procedures on a certain delivery schedule .
These recommended procedures are useful to a wide variety of audiences and have been summarized in "At A Gla nce: Recommended Procedures."
(2) Quality Measures.
These define the clinical documentation and the short, intermediate and long- term population measures which are appropriate to monitor the quality of care within a health system and the outcomes affected by that care.
These are useful to organizations and providers developing systems for continuous quality improvement and are summarized in "At A Glance: Population Based Measures."
Diagnostic Criteria The International Expert Committee, sponsored by the American Diabetes Association has defined and described diabetes.
See Report of The Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes Mellitus: 25:(Supplement 1), Jan 2002, S140147.
1.
Symptoms of diabetes plus casual plasma glucose concentration 
Casual is defined as any time of day without regard to time since last meal.
The classic symptoms of diabetes include polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight loss.
or 2.
FPG 
Fasting is de fined as no caloric intake for at least 8 h. or 3.
2- h PG 
The test should be performed as described by WHO*, using a glucose load containing the equivalent of 75- g anhydrous glucose dissolved in water.
In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia with acute metabolic decompensation, these criteria should be confirmed by repeat testing on a different day.
The third measure (OGTT) is not recommended for routine clinical use.
*World Health Organization: Diabetes Mellitus: Report of a WHO Study Group.
Geneva, World Health Org., 1985 (Tech.
Rep. Ser., no 727)
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
At a Glance Recommended Procedures Initial visit 
Each routine visit
Quarterly to Semiannually Semiannually Semiannually to Annually Annually
Annually 
ACE inhibitor therapy
Lipid treatment
Population-based Measures Short-term Percent of population with newly diagnosed diabetes who have Percent of diabetes population who have Initial diabetes educat ion HbA1c test in past year (6 months for Type 1) Microalbuminuria screen in past year LDL risk categorization in past 2 years Dilated eye exam in past year Visual foot inspection at each routine visit Complete foot exam in past year Blood pressure screening in past 6 months Oral screening in past year Tobacco use assessment Influenza vaccine in past year Pneumococcal vaccine Diabetes education in past five years Self- management plan Tobacco cessation counseling at each clinic visit Ophthalmological referral within a week of finding
Percent of diabetes population using tobacco who receive Percent of diabetes population with new positive findings on dilated eye exam who have Percent of diabetes population with micro albuminuria who have Percent of diabetes population with hypertension who have Percent of diabetes population over age 55 Percent of diabetes population 
ACE inhibitor prescribed ACE inhibitor prescribed ACE inhibitor prescribed Low dose aspirin prophylaxis prescribed
Treatment according to NCEP guidelines Preconception counseling Not taking ACE inhibitor in the first trimester Not taking oral diabetes therapy Not exceeding target HbA1c at conception Under prenatal care before 8 weeks gestatio n Educational assessment
Percent of diabetes pop. who have a preventable acute episode, new complication, or new cardiovascular risk factor who receive Percent of diabetes population starting a new therapy who have
Education regarding the new therapy
Intermediate-term Incidence within the diabetes population of Proliferative retinopathy Overt nephropathy Oral infections Low risk levels of HbA1c (
Incidence in pregnancies complicated by diabetes of
Long-term Incidence within the diabetes population of Cardiovascular disease Myocardial infarction Cerebrovascular accidents Other smoking- related diseases Ketoacidosis Severe hypoglycemia End- stage renal disease Blindness Lower extremity amputations Osteomyelitis Infected lower extremity ulcers Decayed, missing or filled teeth Influenza Pneumococcal pneumonia High rates of satisfaction and quality of life
Percent of the diabetes population indicating
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
ACKNOWL EDGEMENTS The author of these guidelines, the Diabetes Guidelines Advisory Group, consists of volunteers dedicated to improving care for people with diabetes.
The Department of Human Services staff are grateful for their many hours of hard work, for their expertise in tackling complicated issues and for their consistent willingness to achieve consensus.
The following individuals contributed to either the original guidelines or the 1999 or 2002 revisions.
Andrew Ahmann, MD, Chair Oregon Health Sciences University Don Austin, MD, MPH Oregon Health Sciences University Bruce Bayley, PhD Center for Outcomes Research 
Russ Glasgo w, PhD Oregon Research Institute Harry Glauber, MD Kaiser Sunnyside Medical Center Garth Gulick, MD Stayton, OR Diana Hayes, RN, CDE American Diabetes Association Katrina Hedberg, MD Oregon Department of Human Services Martha Hirsch, MS, RD, CDE Merid ian Park Hospital Peter Houck, MD HCFA, Region X Linda Humphrey, MD, MPH Portland VA Medical Center Allen Johnson, MD HMO Oregon Greg Kautz, OD Hillsboro, OR Sonya Kauffman- Smith Providence Health Systems
Richard Parker, MD Northwest Renal Clinic John Santa, MD Blue Cross/Blue Shield Ray Shields, MD Portland Area Indian Health Service Paige Sipes- Metzler, DPA Regence Blue Cross/Blue Shield Renee Skeeters, RN Blue Cross/Blue Shield Allison Summers, OD Tigard Vision Center Adam Tallinger, RPh Salem Hospital Wesley Vorpahl, OD Salem, OR Shirley Welch, PhD Kaiser Permanente Regional Laboratory Alex White, DDS, DrPH Kaiser Permanente Center for Health Research Barbara Young, LPC Portland, OR
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Ace Inhibitor at age 55
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient Recommended Procedure Schedule
Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes, age 55 or older.
Start ACE inhibitor unless contraindicated.
At age 55.
Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Populatio n- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of population with diabetes who are over age 55 and who are taking an ACE inhibitor (unless contraindicated).
Long- term: a successful program will contribute to a decrease in the incidence of myocardial infarction (MI).
·
Initiation or continuation of ACE inhibitor, or of contraindication to its use is documented in the chart.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) Mo nitoring
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
HbA1c (%) determination* and risk categorization of result: Lower risk: 
(see Patient Category B.) Test results and significance shared with patient.
B Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with higher risk HbA1c (
1.
Assessment of behavioral and physiological reasons for unsatisfa ctory control (e.g., undiagnosed infection, nonadherence, need for medication change, knowledge deficit).
2.
Specific management plan based on assessment, including a specific HbA1c (or alternative) target, and a specific monitoring schedule.
According to the specific management plan (see #2 under Recommended Procedure).
Type 1: Every 3- 6 months.
Type 2: Every 6- 12 months.
Recommended Procedure Schedule
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) Monitoring Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures
Patient Categories A 
HbA1c measured in the past year (or 6 months for Type 1).
Patient Category B A specific management plan with Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the target HbA1c must be documented in percentage of the population with diabetes who know the chart.
their HbA1c test results and the significance.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with lower risk levels of HbA1c (
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of nearly all the complications of diabetes, especially 1.
blindness, 2.
end-stage renal disease, 3.
lower extremity amputations, and 4.
cardiovascular events.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Patient Education Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
Initial eduction program* for diabetes, taught by qualified health professional with training in diabetes education.
Type 1: Within 1 week of diagnosis.
Type 2: Within 6 weeks of diagnosis.
Recommended Procedure Schedule
B Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes who have been diagnosed and gone through the initial education program.
Self-management behavioral Individ ualized; at least goals developed by patient, annually.
physician, and educator.
General diabetes continuing education and counseling.
Individualized; at least every 5 years, starting no later than 6 months after diagnosis.
C Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with the following: ·
·
· ·
Admission for DKA, hypoglycemia, or uncontrolled diabetes New episode of a specific diabetes complication (e.g., foot problem, nephropathy; retinopathy) Cardiovascular disease or acute cardiovascular event New additional risk factor for cardiovascular disease (e.g., hyperlipidemia, hypertension, tobacco use).
Educational assessment, resulting in recommendation regarding need for focused education or other intervention.*.
Within one week from hospital discharge or onset of new complication.
D Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with a major change in therapy.
(For example, initiation of intensive therapy, or change in medication.)
Education regarding new therapy.
At time of initiation of new therapy.
*For specifics of curriculum content and assessment guidelines, refer to National Standards for Diabetes Self -Management Education, Diabetes Care 25:(Supplement 1), Jan 2002, S140 - 147.
Suggestions for Implementation: · · · Education is an ongoing process, occurring continuously throughout care and takes place in both the medical office during regular office visits and in comprehensive education settings.
Use certified diabetes educators when available.
A health system will have to specify criteria for determining which diabetes education programs are acceptable.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Patient Education Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have participated in the initial education program.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have documented selfmanagement goals.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have had general diabetes education in t he past five years.
·
Attendance at initial education session is documented in the chart.
Self- management goals are documented in the chart.
These should reflect behavioral goals, have evid ence of collaborative development (i.e. patient and provider/educator), and have a follow- up plan documented.
Follow- up is documented for the above goals.
This might include: o a. behavior change consistent with the goal(s) o b. impact on patient quality of life, functioning, or patient satisfaction
·
·
·
·
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who received an educational assessment after developing a preventable acute Educational assessment is documented in episode, new onset complication, or new cardiovascular risk factor.
the chart following development of a preventable acute episode, new onset complication, or new cardiovascular risk Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with factor.
diabetes starting a new therapy who have received education regarding that therapy.
Education regarding new therapy is documented in t he chart following the Long- term: a successful program will show a initiation of that therapy.
decrease in all complications of diabetes, especially a decrease in the incidence of 1.
ketoacidosis and 2.
severe hypoglycemia.
Long- term: a successful program will show an increase in patient satisfaction and quality of life measures.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Eye Examination Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes without previously identified retinal pathology.
B Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with positive findings on routine exam; see "Referral Criteria for Patient Category B," below.
Recommended Procedure Schedule Dilated eye exam or Type 1: Start 5 years after equivalent,* by an diagnosis, then annually.
ophthalmologist or optometrist** Type 2: Annually.*** Examination by ophthalmologist who is knowledgeable and experienced in the management of diabetic retinopathy.
Exam and/or consult within 1 week after new positive findings of referral criteria by examiner.
Follow up appointments to be determined by the designated ophthalmologist.
*Any other method of retinal screening must be as sensitive as the dilated eye exam in detecting diabetic retinopathy.
**May be performed by a primary care physician who is specially trained in dilated eye exams.
***Organizations with comprehensive dat a systems may determine that biannual exams are sufficient for Type 2 patients who have had diabetes for less than 10 years, who are not on insulin, who have well controlled HbA1c, and whose most recent exam was normal.
Referral Criteria for Patient Category B: 1.
A positive history of sudden, unilateral, uncorrectable vision change.
2.
Any evidence of retinopathy associated with unexplained and uncorrectable vision change.
3.
Dilated eye exam showing any of the following: o a. new or abnormal blood vessels on the optic nerve or elsewhere on the retina o b. any significant abnormality in or near the macula (e.g., hard exudates, hemorrhages beyond dot hemorrhages, or retinal edema) o c. any other abnormality of concern to the examiner.
4.
Inability to adequately visualize retina.
Suggestions for Implementation: · · · Designate which providers in your system are fully trained and competent in examining the interior of the eye, for performing the routine dilated eye exam.
Designate which ophthalmologists in your system are knowledgeable and experienced in the management and treatment of diabetic retinopathy.
Your system will need an operational definition of blindness for measurement purposes.
The legal definition of blindness is corrected vision of 20/200 or worse in the better eye or a visual field of 20 degrees or less in the better eye.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Eye Examiniation Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Patient Category A · ·
Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have had a dilated eye exam in the past year.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the referrals to ophthalmologists among the population who had positive findings on a dilated eye exam. Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of proliferative retinopathy.
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of blindness.
·
A dilated eye exam, or equivalent* must be documented in the chart.
If the exam was positive for referral criteria, these findings must be documented in the chart.
For those with referral criteria, a referral to a designated ophthalmologist must be documented in the chart.
Patient Category B ·
·
The results of the referral exam or consultation must be documented in the chart.
A revised management plan must be documented in the chart for patients who will no longer be followed with a routine annual dilated eye exam.
Populatio n-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Foot Screening
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient Persons with Type 1 (after 5 years) or Type 2 diabetes.
Recommended Procedure Visual foot inspection with shoes and socks off performed b y physician, nurse, or other skilled personnel.
1.
Complete foot exam, assessment, and risk categorization using a specific assessment tool such as the Carville, Veterans Administration (VA), or similar system done by physician, pod iatrist, or other specially trained staff.
2.
Education/reeducation for patient self- care of feet.
3.
Reassess metabolic control.
Subsequent foot care management schedule according to Carville, VA, or similar system risk category (see Appendix).
Suggestions for Implementation: · · · Consider adopting the following policy for diabetes clinic visits: When ready to be examined, the patient will have shoes and socks off.
Consider training other clinic staff to perform visual foot inspections.
Adopt a specific risk assessment and categorization tool.
Two examples, the Carville system and the VA system, are included in the Appendix.
Ascertain which providers in your system are fully trained and competent to perform the risk assessment and categorization.
Schedule
Each routine visit.
Annua lly, or when a new abnormality is noted on visual foot inspection.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Foot Screening Quality Measures Clinical Documentation ·
Population- based Measures
·
Results of the visual foot inspection Short- term: a successful program will show a n increase must be documented in the chart.
in the percentage of the population with diabetes who received a visual foot inspection at each routine clinic visit in the past year.
An alternative measure is the percentage of all diabetes patient visits which included a visual foot inspectio n.
An annual risk categorization (including monofilament test, Short- term: a successful program will show an increase perfusion assessment and inspection for bony deformities) in the percentage of the population with diabetes who with appropriate screening received a complete foot exam and risk categorization frequency, must be documented in in the past year.
the chart.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of emergency room visits and hospital admissions for lower extremity infections.
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of 1.
lower extremity amputations and 2.
osteomyelitis.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Early Nephropathy Detection Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes and no known microalbuminuria or overt nephropathy Test for microalbuminuria using Type 1: start 5 years after the albumin to creatinine ratio.
diagnosis.
If positive for microalbuminuria, quantitative albuminuria measurement.
If positive for overt nephropathy (
B Persons with microalbuminuria* (30- 300 mg/24/hr) and no hypertension (BP 
C Persons with microalbuminuria* (30- 300 mg/24/hr) and hypertension (controlled or uncontrolled).
Type 1 and Type 2: Add or substitute ACE inhibitor** (unless contraindicated) while maintaining blood pressure control.
At onset of microalbuminaria and hypertension.
Type 1 and Type 2: Start ACE inhibitor** (unless contraindicated).
At onset of microalbuminuria.
Type 2: annually including after onset of nephropathy for monitoring of progression.
Recommended Procedure Schedule
Also, see "Expanded nephropathy and Hypertension Treatment Recommendations" in the Appendix.
*Microalbuminaria is defined as three positive 24 hour urine tests for microalbuminuria over a six- month period.
**ARBs are a suitable alternative in case of ACE intole rance.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Early Nephropathy Detection Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have been screened for urinary protein in the past year and categorized as to whether microalbuminuria or overt nephropathy exists .
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in ACE inhibitor use among the population who have microalbuminuria.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of overt nephropathy.
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of end-stage renal disease.
·
Screening for microalbuminuria is documented in the chart for those without existing nephropat hy. ACE Inhibitor use or contraindication to its use is documented in the chart among those patients with microalbuminuria.
·
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Blood Pressure Screening Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Blood Pressure Reading (mmHg).
Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
B Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 who have documented blood pressure of 
Type 1 and Type 2: If nonpharmacologic therapy is not achieving goal within 3 months start ACE inhibitor* (unless contraindicated) and add other anti- hypertensive as needed to achieve blood pressure control.
(Also, see "Expanded Nephropathy and Hypertension Treatment Recommendations" in the Appendix.
*ARBs are a suitable alternative in cases of ACE intolerance.
Recommended Procedure
Schedule Minimum semiannually.
At onset of high blood pressure.
Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Patient Categories A 
Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have had a blood pressure reading in the past six months.
Short- term: a successful progr am will show an increase in ACE inhibitor use among the population who have high blood pressure.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population who have blood pressure 
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of 1.
end-stage renal disease, 2.
cerebrovascular accidents (CVA), and 3.
cardiovascular disease.
The blood pressure reading must be documented in the chart.
Patient Category B ·
If the blood pressure is 
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Lipid Screening
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A LDL risk categorization:* Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes, age 18 or older.
Low risk: 
Treatment to 
Treat pharmacologicially if
Refer to ADA and NCEP** algorithms for risk categorization/treatment approaches.
·
Recommended Procedure
Schedule
·
Annually.
If low risk, may decrease frequency to every 1- 2 years.
If 
B Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with CAD.
·
If higher risk (
*Clinical situation will dictate whether the test is fasting or not and whether triglyceride levels make it necessary to obtain a direct LDL measurement.
**Summary of the Second Report of the Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of American Diabetes Association Position Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 22 (Supplement National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on High Blood Cholesterol in Adults ( JAMA .
1993;269:3015-3023).
Statement (1999).
Management of Dyslipidemia in Adults with 1), S56-S59.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Lipid Screening Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will sho w an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have had a fasting lipid profile in the past two years.
·
Lab results must be documented in the chart or in a lab database.
·
For LDL higher- risk categories, a Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the treatment of high cholesterol among the population lipid management plan must be documented in the chart.
who are in high risk categories of lipid levels.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population who are in low risk categories for fasting lipid profile.
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of myocardial infarction (MI).
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Tobacco Use Assessment Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
Assessment of current tobacco use (defined as any use, including smokeless, in past 30 days).
Categorization as a user/nonuser. .
·
Recommended Procedure
Schedule
At every visit if: ·
under 25 years old or past user.
Otherwise, every 5 years.
B Persons with diabetes who 1.
Counsel on tobacco cessation, in accordance with Each visit.
are tobacco users.
USPHS guidelines.* 2.
If patient is willing to make a quit attempt at this time, provide assistance in accordance with USPHS guidelines.* *A Clinical Practice Guideline for Treating Tobacco Us e and Dependence: A U.S.
Public Helath Service Report.
(JAMA. 2000 Jun 28; 283(24):3244 -54).
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Tobacco Use Assessment Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Patient Catego ries A 
Population- based Measures Short- term: a success ful program will show an increase in the percentage of population with diabetes who have been categorized as tobacco users or nonusers.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of tobacco users counseled to quit.
Tobacco use status (user/nonuser) must be documented in the chart.
Patient Category B ·
·
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the percentage of the population with The type of tobacco use must be documented in the diabetes who use tobacco.
chart.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show an Evidence of cessation counseling/referral must be increase in the percentage of former smokers within the non-smoking population with diabetes.
documented in the chart.
Long- term: a successful program will contribute to a decrease in the incidence of 1.
myocardial infarction (MI), cerebrovascular accidents (CVA), and other vascular diseases and 2.
other smoking - related diseases.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Aspirin Prophylaxis Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons over age 40 with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes Start low-dose aspirin (ASA) prophylaxis (unless contraindicated).
(ASA low- dose prophylaxis ranges from 75 mg daily to 325 mg every other day.)
B Persons age 40 or younger with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes with coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease or vascular risk factors including hypertension, cigarette smoking, obesity (
Start low-dose aspirin (ASA) prophylaxis (unless contraindicated).
(ASA low- dose prophylaxis ranges from 75 mg daily to 325 mg every other day.)
At onset of coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease, or risk factors.
At age 40.
Recommended Procedure Schedule
Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures
·
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the Initiation or continuation of percentage of population with diabetes who are over age 40 ASA prophylaxis, or of who receive ASA (unless contraindicated). contraindication to its use is documented in the chart.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of population with diabetes who are under age 40 and have either vascular disease or risk factors for vascular disease who receive ASA (unless contraindicated).
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of 1.
myocardial infarction (MI) and 2.
cerebrovascular accidents (CVA)
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Oral/Dental Screening
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient Persons with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
Recommended Procedure Perform oral screening of teeth and soft tissue.
If problems are noted,* refer to dentist immediately.
Determine if patient has a regular dentist/source of dental care.
Recommend the patient visit a dentist at least annually.
*Problems that warrant immediate referral to a dental professional: · · · · · extensive caries (cavities) marked xerostomia extensive periodontal disease (heavy calculus and debris, mobile teeth due to marked alveolar bone loss) poorly fitting fu ll or partial dentures observable oral lesions
Schedule Annually.
Suggestions for Implementation: ·
Identify dental professionals - inside or outside your system - to whom you can refer patients.
Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have had an oral screening in the past year.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of oral infections.
Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of decayed, missing, or filled (DMF) teeth.
·
Oral screening and recommendation or referral to dentist is documented in the chart.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Immunizations
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient A Persons with Type 1 or Type Influenza 2 diabetes.
vaccine..
B Persons over 2 years old with Type 1 or Type 2 diabetes.
1.
Pneumococcal vaccine.
Once.
Revaccinate if (1) at highest risk for illness and not vaccinated in the past 5 years or (2) at age 65 and not vaccinated in the past 5 years.* Annually.
Recommended Procedure Schedule
*Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1997).
Prevention of Pneumococcal Disease: Recommendatio ns of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR (in press).
Quality Measures Defining Adequacy Patient Category A Population- based Measures
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of the population with diabetes who · Administration of influenza vaccine have received an influenza vaccine in the past year.
is documented in the chart.
Short- term: a suc cessful program will show an increase Patient Category B in the percentage of the population with diabetes who have received a pneumococcal vaccine.
· History of, or pneumococcal vaccine administration is documented in the Long- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of chart.
1.
influenza and 2.
pneumococcal pneumonia.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Preconception Counseling
Clinical Recommendations Category of Patient Recommended Procedure Schedule Minimum at initial visit or upon reaching childbearing age.
Additionally when patient indicates change in pregnancy probability or when annual assessment identifies need.
Women with Type 1 Preconception counseling to include : or Type 2 diabetes of childbearing potential.
· potential risks to mother and fetus · family planning method · education re: importance of meeting target blood glucose control prior to pregnancy · need to change from oral diabetes therapy to insulin · need to replace any use of ACE inhibitors · importance of obtaining management early in pregnancy
Annually.
Assess understanding and need for additional conception counseling and reminders.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus Preconception Counseling Quality Measures Clinical Documentation Population- based Measures Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of female patients of childbearing age with diabetes who have had preconception counseling.
Short- term: a successful program will show an increase in the percentage of pregnant patients with diabetes who 1.
are not taking ACE inhibitors in the first trimester, 2.
are not taking oral diabetes therapy, 3.
are not exceeding target HbA1c at conception, and 4.
are under prenatal care before 8 weeks gestation.
Intermediate- term: a successful program will show a decrease in the incidence of 1.
major congenital malformations, 2.
macrosomia (
stillbirth and spontaneous abortion.
·
Preconception counseling is documented in the chart.
Documentation in the chart of either: effective family planning method or achievement of target HbA1c or equivalent.
·
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
References for Specific Recommendations ACE Inhibitor at Age 55 Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators.
(2000) Effects of ramipril on cardiovascular and microvascular outcomes in people with diabetes mellitus: results of the HOPE study and MICRO - HOPE substudy.
Lancet 35 5(9200), 253- 9.
Kennedy J, Mogensen CE, Ball SG, Castaigne AD, Commerford PJ, Distiller L, et. al. (2001) What is the re levance of the HOPE study in general practice? Int J Clin Pract.
55 (7) 449- 57.
Review.
Dagenais GR, Yusuf S, Bourassa MG, Yi Q, Bosch J, Lonn EM, et. al. (2001) Effects of ramipril on coronary events in high- risk persons: results of the Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study.
Circulation 104 (5), 522- 6.
Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA1c) Monitoring American Diabetes Association Position Statement (1995).
Standards of medical care for patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 17(6), 616- 623.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement (2002).
Tests of Glycemia in Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S97- S99.
Davidson M. (1994).
Why the DCCT applies to NIDDM patients.
Clinical Diabetes 12 (6), 141144.
Gerard D. (1994).
To the Editor.
NEJM 330(9), 642.
Goldstein D, Little R, Wiedmeyer H, England J, McKenzie E. (1989).
Getting the most out of glycosylated hemoglobin determinations: Inservice training and continuing education.
American Association of Clinical Chemistry 7 (10), 7- 16.
Krolewski A, Laffel L, Krolewski M, Quinn M, Warram J. (1995).
Glycosylated hemoglobin and the risk of microalbuminuria in patients with insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus.
NEJM 332(19), 1251- 1255.
Rubin R, Peyrot M. (1994).
Implications of the DCCT: Looking be yond tight control.
Diabetes Care 17(3), 235- 236.
Strowig S, Raskin P. (1995).
Glycemic control and the complications of diabetes.
Diabetes Reviews 3 (2), 237- 257.
Warram J, Manson J, Krolewski A. (1995).
Glycosylated hemoglobin and the risk of retinopat hy in insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus.
NEJM 332(19), 1305- 1306.
Patient Education Abourizk N, O' Connor P, Crabtree B, Schnatz D. (1994).
An outpatient model of integrated diabetes treatment and education: functional, metabolic, and knowledge outcome s. Diabetes Educator 20(5), 416- 421.
American Diabetes Association.
(2002).
National standards for diabetes self- management education.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S141- S147.
American Diabetes Association.
(1995).
Practical Approaches in Diabetes Care.
Monograph.
Diabetes education goals.
Alexandria, VA.
Anderson R, Hiss R, Stepien C, Fitzgerald J, Funnel M. (1995).
The diabetes education experience of randomly selected patients under the care of community physicians.
Diabetes Educator 20(5),399- 405.
Barnard R, Jung T, Inkeles S. (1994).
Diet and exercise in the treatment of NIDDM: The need for early emphasis.
Diabetes Care 17 (12), 1469- 1472.
Clement S. (1995).
Diabetes self- management education.
Diabetes Care 18(8), 1204- 1214.
Funnell M, Haas L. (1995).
National standards for diabetes self- management education programs.
Diabetes Care 18(1), 100- 116.
Glasgow R. (1991).
Compliance to diabetes regimens: Conceptualization, complexity, and determinants.
In J. Cramer and B. Spilker (Eds.), Patient compliance in medical practice and clinical trials (pp. 209- 224).
New York: Raven Press, Ltd.
Glasgow, R. (1995).
A practical model of diabetes management and education.
Diabetes Care 18(1), 117- 126.
Eye Examination American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1999).
Diabetic Retinopathy.
Diabetes Care 22(Supplement 1),S70- S73.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1995).
Screening for diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetes Care 18 (Supplement 1), 21- 23.
American Optometric Association.
(1994).
Optometric clinical practice guideline: Care of the patient with diabetes mellitus.
St. Louis: American Optometric Association.
Murphy R. (1995).
Management of diabetic retinopathy.
American Family Physician 51(4), 785796.
Warram J, Manson J, Krolewski A. (1995).
Glycosylated hemoglobin and the risk of retinopathy
in insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus.
NEJM 332(19), 1305- 1306.
Foot Screening American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1995).
Foot care in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 18(Supplement 1), 26- 27.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1999).
Preventive foot care in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 22 (Supplement 1), S54- S55.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1999).
Preventive foot care in patients with diabets mellitus.
Diabetes Care 25(Supplement 1), S69- S70.
Caputo G, Cavanagh P, Ulbrecht J, Gibbons G, Karchmer A. (1994).
Assessment and management of foot disease in patients with diabetes.
NEJM 331(13), 854- 860.
Feldman E, Stevens M, Thomas P, et al. (1994).
A practical two - step quantitative clinical and electrophysiological assessment for the diagnosis and staging of diabetic neuropathy.
Diabetes Care 17, (11), 1281- 1289.
In Patient Care February 15, 1995:37-38.
G.W. Long Hansen's Disease Center.
(1994).
Foot Screen.
Rehabilitation Program., Carville, Louisiana.
Larsen K, Sandahl J, Ebskov B. (1982).
Prevention and treatment of ulceration of the foot in unilaterally amputated diabetic patients.
Acta Orthop Scand.
53, 481- 485.
Litzelman D, Slemenda C, Langefeld C, Hays L, Welch M, Bild D, Ford E, Vinicor F. (1993).
Reduction of lower extremity clinical abnormalities in patients with non- insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus: A randomized, controlled trail.
Annals of Internal Medicine 119 (1), 36- 41.
Plummer E, Albert S. (1995).
Foot care assessment in patients with diabetes: A screening algorithm for patient education and referral.
Diabetes Educator 21(1), 47- 51.
Rith- Najarian S, Stolusky T, Gohdes D. (1992).
Identifying diabetic patients at high risk for lower- extremity amputation in a primary care setting.
Diabetes Care 15(10),1386- 1389.
Early Nephropathy Detection American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1994).
Consensus development conference on the diagnosis a nd management of nephropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care 17(11), 1357- 1361.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(2002).
Diabetic Nephropathy.
Diabetes Care 25(Supplement 1), S85- S89.
Bennett P, Haffner S, Kasiske B, Keane W, Mogensen C, Parving H, Steffes M, Striker G. (1995).
Screening and management of microalbuminuria in patients with diabetes mellitus: Recommendations to the scientific advisory board of the National Kidney Foundation from an ad hoc committee of the Council on Diabetes Mellitus of the National Kidney Foundation.
American Journal of Kidney Diseases 25(1), 107- 112.
Brenner B, Cooper M, Zeeuw D, Keane W, Mitch W, Parving H. (2001).
Effects of Losarton on renal and cardiovascular outcomes in patients wit h type 2 diabetes and nephropathy.
NEJM 345 (12), 861- 869.
Breyer J. (1995).
Medical management of nephropathy in Type I diabetes mellitus: current recommendations.
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 6(6), 1523- 1529.
Gansevoort R, Sluiter W, Hemmelder M, Zeeuw D, de Jong P. 1995.
Antiproteinuric effect of blood- pressure- lowering agents: a meta- analysis of comparative trials.
European Dialysis and Transplant Association- European Renal Association 10(11), 1963- 1974.
Johnsen K, Wenzel H, Viberti G, Mogensen C. (1993).
Is screening and intervention for microalbuminuria worthwhile in patients with insulin dependent diabetes? BMJ 306, 1722- 1725.
Kasiske B, Kalil R, Ma J, Liao M, Keane W. 1993.
Effect of antihypertensive therapy on the kidney in patients with diabetes: a meta- regression analysis.
Annals of Internal Medicine 118(2), 129- 138.
Klahr S, Levey A, Beck G, Caggiula A, Hunsicker L, Kuser J, Striker G. (1994 ).
The effects of dietary protein restriction and blood- pressure control on the progression of chronic renal disease.
NEJM 330(13),877- 884.
Lewis E, Hunsicker L, Bain R, Rohde R. (1993).
The effect of angiotensin- converting- enzyme inhibition in diabetic nephropathy.
NEJM 329 (20), 1456- 1462.
Lewis E, Hunsicker L, Clarke W, Berl T, Pohl M, Lewis J, et. al. (2001).
Renoprotective effect of the angiotensin- receptor antagonist irbesartan in patients with nephropathy due to type 2 Diabetes.
NEJM 345(12), 851- 860.
Mogensen C. (1995).
Management of early nephropathy in diabetic patients.
Annual Review of Medicine 46, 79- 94.
Ritz E, Stefanski A. (1996).
Diabetic nephropathy in Type II diabetes.
American Journal of Kidney Diseases 27(2), 167- 194.
Weidmann P, Schneider M, Bohlen L. 1995.
Therapeutic efficacy of different antihypertensive drugs in human diabetic nephropathy: an updated meta- analysis.
European Dialysis and Transplant Association- European Renal Association 10(Supplement 9), 39- 45.
Blood Pressure Screening American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(2002).
Treatment of hypertension in adults with diabetes.
Diabetes Care 25(Supplement 1), S71- S73.
Bennett P, Haffner S, Kasiske B, Keane W, Mogensen C, Parving H, Steffes M, Striker G. (1995).
Screening and management of microalbuminuria in patients with diabetes mellitus: Recommendations to the scientific advisory board of the National Kidney Foundation from an ad
hoc committee of the Council on Diabetes Mellitus of the National Kidney Foundation.
American Journal of Kidney Diseases 25(1), 107- 112.
Consensus Statement.
(1993).
Tre atment of hypertension in diabetes.
Diabetes Care 16(10), 1394- 1401.
Johnsen K, Wenzel H, Viberti G, Mogensen C. (1993).
Is screening and intervention for microalbuminuria worthwhile in patients with insulin dependent diabetes? BMJ 306, 1722- 1725.
Lewis E, Hunsicker L, Bain R, Rohde R. (1993).
The effect of angiotensin- converting- enzyme inhibition in diabetic nephropathy.
NEJM 329 (20), 1456- 1462.
Lipid Screening American Diabetes Association Consensus Statement .
(1995).
Detection and management of lipid disorders in diabetes.
Diabetes Care 18 (Supplement 1), 86- 93.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement .
(2002).
Management of Dyslipidemia in Adults with Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S74- S77.
Expert panel on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults.
(2001).
Executive summary of the third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) expert panel on Detection, Evaluation and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III).
JAMA 285(19), 2486- 2497.
National Cholesterol Education Program Expert Panel.
(1993).
Second report of the expert panel on detection, evaluation, treatment of high blood cholesterol in adults: Executive summary.
National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
Paterson J, Pettigrew A, Small A. (1991).
Screening for hyperlipidemia in diabetes mellitus: Relationship to glycaemic control.
Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 28(4), 354- 358.
Sobenin I, Tertov V, Koschinsky T, Bunting C, Slavina E, Dedov I, Orekov.
(1993).
Modified low density lipoprotein from diabetic patients causes cholesterol accumulation in human intimal aortic cells.
Atherosclerosis 100 (1), 41- 54.
Shepherd J, Cobbe S, Ford I, Isles C, Lorimer A, Macfarlane P, McKillup J, et al. (1995).
Prevention of coronary heart disease with Prevastatin in men with hypercholesterolemia.
NEJM 333(2), 1301- 1307.
Tobacco Use Assessment American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(2002).
Smoking and diabetes.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S80- S81.
Facchini F, Hollenbeck C, Jeppesen J, Chen Y, Reaven G. (1992).
Insulin resistance and cigarette smoking.
Lancet 339 (8802),1128- 1129.
Glasgow R. (1990).
Smoking and diabetes (commentary).
Diabetes Spectrum 3 (2), 86- 87.
Haire- Joshu D. (1991).
Smoking, cessation, and the diabetic health team.
Diabetes Educator 17(1), 54- 64.
U.S.
Public Health Service.
(2000).
A clinical practice guideline for treating tobacco use and dependence.
U.S.
Public Health Service Report.
JAMA 283(24) 3244- 54.
Aspirin Prophylaxis American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(2002).
Aspirin Therapy in Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S78- S79.
Antiplatelet Trialist' Collaboration.
(1994).
Collaborative overview of randomised trials of antiplatelet therapy I: Prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and stroke by prolonged antiplatelet therapy in various categories of patients.
BMJ 308, 81- 106.
Biller J, Love B. (1993).
Diabetes and stroke.
Medical Clinics of North America 77(1), 95- 110.
Early Treatment Diabetes Retinopathy Study Investigators.
(1992).
Aspirin effects on mortality and morbidity in patients with diabetes mellitus: Early treatment diabetes retinopathy study report 14.
JAMA 268(10), 1292- 1300.
Hansson L, Zanche tti A. (1994).
The Hypertension Optimal Treatment (HOT) Study: Patient characteristics: randomization, risk profiles, and early blood pressure results.
Blood Pressure 3(5), 322- 327.
Hennekens C, Buring J. (1994).
Aspirin in the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Cardiology Clinics 12 (3), 443- 450.
Kelly R. (1993).
Selections from current literature: Using aspirin for primary or secondary prevention.
Family Practice 10 (1), 88- 92.
Steering Committee of the Physicians' Health Study Research Group.
(1989).
Final report on the aspirin component of the ongoing physicians' health study.
NEJM 321(3), 129- 135.
Oral/Dental Screening Katz P, Wirthlin Jr.
M, Szunar S, Selby J, Sepe S, Showstack J. (1991).
Epidemiology and Prevention of Periodontal Disease in Individuals with Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 14 (5), 375- 385.
Loe H. (1993).
Periodontal Disease, The Sixth Complication of Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 16(Supplement 1), 329- 334.
Oliver R, Tervonen T. (1993).
Periodontitis and Tooth Loss: Comparing Diabetics with the General Population.
JADA 124, 71- 76.
Seppala B, Seppala M, Ainamo J. (1993).
A Longitudinal Study on Insulin- Dependent Diabetes
Mellitus and Periodontal Disease.
J Clin Periodontal 20, 161- 165.
Immunizations Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1989).
Recommendations of the Immunization Practices Advisory Committee: Pneumococcal Polysaccharide Vaccine.
MMWR 38 (5), 64- 68, 73- 76.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1996).
Prevention and Control of Influenza: Recommendatio ns of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR 45(No. RR- 5).
Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1997).
Prevention of Pneumococcal Disease: Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR (in press).
Pre -conception Counseling American Diabetes Association Position Statement (2002).
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 25 (Supplement 1), S82- S84.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement (1997).
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 20 (Supplement 1), 44- 45.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement (1997).
Preconception care of women with diabetes.
Diabetes Care 20(Supplement 1), 40- 43.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement.
(1999).
Preconception Care of Women with Diabetes.
Diabetes Care 22 (Supplement 1), S62- S65.
Jovanovic- Peterson L, Abrams R, Coustan D, Cowett R, Jomsay D, Miller E, Papatheodorou N, Patterson A. (1993).
Pregnancy counseling and management of women with pre- existing diabetes or previous gestational diabetes.
Medical Management of Pregnancy Complicated by Diabetes, American Diabetes Association, 3- 12.
Kitzmiller J, Buchanan T, Kjos S, Combs C, Ratner R. (1996).
Pre- conception Care of Diabetes, Congenital Malformations, and spontaneous abortions.
Diabetes Care 19 (5), 514- 541.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
General Bibliography Ahroni J, Boyko E, Davignon D, Pecoraro R. (1994) The health and functional status of veterans with diabetes.
Diabetes Care 17(4), 318- 321.
American Academy of Ophthalmology.
Quality Assurance Committee, Retinal Panel.
Diabetic retinopathy: preferred practice pattern.
San Francisco, 1989.
American Diabetes Association Position Statement (2002).
Standards of Medical Care for Patients with Diabetes Mellitus.
Diabetes Care 25(Supplement 1), S33- S49.
Bourgeois P. (1995).
Diabetic foot care: financial implications and practice guidelines.
Summary and Commentary of article by G. Reiber (1992) in Diabetes Care 15(1), 29- 31.
Diabetes Spectrum 8 (4),216- 218.
Brown J, Shye D, McFarland, B. (1995).
The paradox of guideline implementation: How AHCPR's depression guideline was adapted at Kaiser Permanente Northwest Region.
Journal of Quality Improvement 21 (1), 5- 21.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevent ion. (1991) The prevention and treatment of complications of diabetes mellitus: A guide for primary care practitioners.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1994).
Diabetes in the United States: A strategy for prevention.
Atlanta: US Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention.
(1993).
Surveillance for Diabetes Mellitus -- United States, 1980- 1989.
MMWR 42(SS- 2), 1- 20.
Clark C, Lee D. (1995).
Prevention and treatment of the complications of diabetes mellitus.
NEJM 332(18),1210- 1217.
Chew E, Mills J, Metzger B, Remaley N, Jovanovic- Peterson L, KnoppR, Conley M, et al. (1995).
Metabolic control and progression of retinopathy.
Diabetes Care 18 (5), 631- 637.
Diabetes in America.
2nd Edition.
(1995).
Harris M. Director, National Diabetes Data Group.
National Institutes of Health.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
NIH Publication No. 95- 1468.
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group.
(1993).
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long- term complications in insulindependent diabetes mellitus.
NEJM 329(14), 977- 986.
Ferrannini F, Stern M, Galvan A, Mitchell B, Haffner S. (1992).
Impact of associated conditions on glycemic control of NIDDM patients.
Diabetes Care 15(4), 508- 514.
Ford E, Newman, J. (1991).
Smoking and diabetes mellitus: Findings from 1988 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillanc e System.
Diabetes Care 14 (10), 871- 874.
Gohdes D, Rith- Najarian S. (1995).
To the editor.
Foot disease in diabetes.
Criteria for predicting plantar ulceration in diabetic patients.
NEJM 332 (4), 269- 270.
Greenfield S, Kaplan S, Sillman R, Sullivan L, Manning W, D'Agostino R, Singer D, Nathan D. (1994).
The uses of outcomes research for medical effectiveness, quality of care, and reimbursement in type II diabetes.
Diabetes Care 17 (Supplement 1), 32- 38.
Guidelines for good practice in the diagnosis and treatment of non- insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus.
(1993).
Report of a joint working party of the British Diabetes Association, The Research Unit of the Royal College of Physicians, and The Royal College of General Practitioners.
Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of London 27(3), 259- 266.
Haas L. Editor.
(1995).
Lower extremity amputations: Strategies for prevention.
Diabetes Spectrum 8 (4), 205- 232.
Hammond G, Aoki T. (1992).
Measurement of health status in diabetic patients.
Diabetes Care 15(4), 469- 477.
Handley M, Stuart M. (1994).
An evidence- based approach to evaluating and improving clinical practice: Guideline development.
HMO Practice 8(1), 10- 19.
Harris M, Klein R, Welborn T, Knuiman M. (1992).
Onset of NIDDM occurs at least 4- 7 years before clinical diagnosis.
Diabetes Care 15(7), 815- 819.
Health Plan Employer Data and Information Set (HEDIS).
Nielson D, Chairman.
Diabetes Retinal Exam.
National Committee for Quality Assurance.
Washington, DC.
Users Manual v. 2.0.
1993:37- 39.
Herman W. (1996).
Commentary on: Siegel J, et al., (1992) Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 3(S111- 19).
Cost- effectiveness of screening and early treatment of nephropathy in patients with insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Spectrum 9 (3), 184- 185.
Hillman A, Goldfarb N. (1994).
Exemplary quality assurance in HMO's.
Leonard Davis Institute of Health Economics.
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine and Wharton School.
HCFA Grant No. 99- C- 99169/5- 04.
8/16/94:1 - 18.
Javitt J, Canner J, Sommer A. (1989).
Cost- effectiveness of current approaches to the control of retinopathy in type I diabetics.
Ophthalmology 96(2), 255- 264.
Jones R, Hedley A. (1987).
Prevalence of smoking in a diabetic population: The need for action.
Diabetic Medicine 4, 233- 236.
Kerr, C. (1995).
Improving outcomes in diabetes: A review of the outpatient care of NIDDM patients.
Journal Family Practice 40(1), 63- 75.
Klein C, Oboler SK, Prochazka A, Oboler S, Frank M, Glugla M, Winters S. (1993).
Home glucose monitoring: effectiveness in a general population of patients who have non- insulindependent diabetes mellitus.
Journal of General Internal Medicine 8 (11), 597- 601.
Klein R, Klein B, Moss S. (1993).
Prevalence of microalbuminuria in older- onset diabetes.
Diabetes Care 16 (10), 1325- 1330.
Lasker R. (1993).
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial: Implications for policy and practice.
NEJM 329 (14), 1034- 1035.
Martin T, Selby J, Zhang D. (1995).
Physician and patient prevention practices in NIDDM in a large urban managed- care organization.
Diabetes Care 18 (8),1124- 1132.
Mazze R. (1994).
A systems approach to diabetes care.
Diabetes Care 17(Supplement 1), 5- 11.
Nerenz D, Rapasky D, Whitehouse F, Kahkonen D. (1992).
Ongoing assessment of health status in patients with diabetes mellitus.
Medical Care 30 (5), Supplement MS112- 124.
Ohkubo Y, Kishikawa H, Araki E, Miyata T, Isami S, Motoyosyi S, Kojima Y, Furuyoshi N, Shichiri M. (1995).
Intensive therapy prevents the progression of diabetic microvascular complications in Japanese patients with non- insulin- dependent diabetes mellitus: a randomized prospective 6- year study.
Diabetes Research and Clinical Practice 28, 103- 117.
Orchard T, Strandness D. (1993).
Assessment of peripheral vascular disease in diabetes.
Report and recommendations of an international workshop.
Sponsored by the American Diabetes Association and the American Heart Association.
September 18- 20, 1992.
Circulation 88 (2),819828.
Peters A, Davidson M, Ossorio R. (1995).
Management of patients with diabetes by nurses with support of subspecialists.
HMO Practice 9 (1), 8- 13.
Peters A, McCulloch D, Hayward R, Deraco M, Morrison A. (1994).
Case one: Too little too late - delayed diagnosis of NIDDM.
Journal of Clinical Outcomes Management 1(2), 9- 26.
Reiber G. (1992).
Diabetic foot care.
Financial implications and practical guidelines.
Diabetes Care 15(Supplement 1), 29- 31.
Rubin R, Altman W, Mendelson D. (1994).
Health care expenditures for people with diabetes mellitus, 1992.
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 76 (4), 809A- 809F.
Szopa T, Titchner P, Portwood N, Taylor K. (1993).
Diabetes mellitus due to viruses - some recent developments.
Diabetologia 36, 687- 695.
Wagner E. (1995).
Population- based management of diabetes care.
Patient Education and Counseling 26, 225- 230.
Vinicor, F. (1994).
Barriers to the translation of the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial.
Diabetes Reviews 2(4), 371- 383.
Weinberger M, Kirkman M, Smasa G, Cowper P, Shortlife E, Smiel D, Reussner J. (1994).
The relationship between glycemic control and health- related quality of life in patients with noninsulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
Medical Care 32 (12), 1173- 1181.
Weiner J, Parente S, Garnick D, Fowles J, Lawthers A, Palmer R. (1995).
Variation in officebased quality.
JAMA 273(19), 1503- 1508.
Wierenga M. (1994).
Life- style modification for weight control to improve diabetes health status.
Patient Education and Counseling 23, 33- 40.
Woolf S. (1992).
Practice guidelines: A new reality in medicine.
Archives of Internal Medicine 152, May, 946- 952.
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus
Carville Foot Screen Fill in the following blanks with a "Y" or "N" to indicate findings on the right or left foot.
Is there a foot ulcer now or history of a foot ulcer? Is there elevated skin temperature? Is there swelling or an abnormal shape in the foot? Are the toenails thick or ingrown? Is there callus build- up? Is there muscle weakness? Is there high pressure on the Harris mat test? Are the pulses absent? - Dorsalis Pedis / Posterior Tibialis Can the patient see the bottom of their feet? Is the patient wearing improperly fitting footwear? Note the level of sensation in circles: + = Can feel 5.07 filament - = Can't feel 5.07 filament / /
R
L
Draw in: and label:
Callus
Pre- ulcer/ulcer
(Note width/depth in cm.)
Skin condition with R- redness, D- discoloration, M- maceration, Y- dryness
Risk Category: 0 No loss of protective sensation.
1 Loss of protective sensation.
2 Loss of protective sensation with high pressure (callus/deformity), or poor circulation.
3 History of plantar ulceration or neuropathic fracture (Charcot foot.)
Developed by Rehabilitation Program Gillis W. Long Hansen's Disease Center Carville, LA 70721
Carville Foot Risk Assessment Risk Categories Risk Category 0 Has a disease that leads to insensitivity Has protective sensation Has not had a pla ntar ulcer Risk Category 1 Does not have sensation Has not had a Does not have Risk Category protective Management Categories Management Category 0 Examine feet at each visit or at least 4 times/year Foot clinic once a year Patient education Management Category 1
Examine feet at each visit or at least 4 times/year Foot clinic visit every 6 months plantar ulcer Soft insoles - Plastazote, PPT, etc. a foot deformity Patient education 2 Management Category 2 Examine feet at each visit or at least 4 times/year Foot clinic visit every 3- 4 months Custom molded insoles Prescription footwear Patient education Management Category 3 Examine feet at each visit or at least 4 times/year Foot clinic visit every 1- 2 months Custom molded insoles Prescription footwear Patient education
Does not have protective sensation Has not had a plantar ulcer Does have a foot deformity Risk Category 3 Does not have protective sensation Has a history of plantar ulcer
Population-Based Guidelines for Diabetes Mellitus Expanded Nephropathy and Hypertension Treatment Recommendations Category of Patient Overt Nephropathy Hypertension (macroalbuminuria) (BP 
Yes, under control Recommendations Microalbuminuria (albumin 
Control BP if elevated 2.
Start or continue ACE inhibitor (unless contraindicated) Yes
Type 2 1.
2.
(unless
Diabetes Control BP if elevated Start or continue ACE inhibitor contraindicated)
No
No
Yes, not under treatment
Yes
No
Yes, under treatment, not under control Yes, not under treatment
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Note: these recommendations assume appropriate attention
Add or substitute ACE inhibitor Consider adding or substituting ACE (unless contraindicated) while inhibitor (unless contraindicated) while maintaining BP control maintaining BP control Start with ACE inhibitor (unless Start with ACE inhibitor (unless contraindicated), add other contraindicated), add other antihypertensives as needed to antihypertensives as needed to achieve achieve BP control BP control If currently taking other If currently taking other antihypertensives, add ACE antihypertensives, add ACE inhibitor (unless contraindicated) inhibitor (unless contraindicated) Start with ACE inhibitor (unless Start with ACE inhibitor (unless contraindicated), add other contraindicated), add other antihypertensives as needed to antihypertensives as needed to achieve achieve BP control BP control Start ACE inhibitor Start ACE inhibitor (unless (unless contraindicated) contraind icated) to glucose control, CVD risk factors and patient education.
