color reduction removal S E M I N A R JUNE 17, 1998 
175 copies of this public document were printed at a cost of $235.71, or $1.35 each.
Printed on recycled paper.
...........
Table of Contents color reduction removal S E M I N A R 
New Technologies for Color Reduction and Removal The Role of Real Time Dyeing Technology and other P2 Techniques for Reducing Color in the Eff luent Smith/Jasper Presentation 1998 Color Reduction and Removal Seminar June 17, 1998 Adams Mark Hotel - Charlotte, North Carolina AGENDA Morning Session, 8:45 - 12:15 Registration / Coffee Introduction John Burke, North Carolina Division of Pollution Prevention and Environmental Assistance States Perspective on Color Reduction North Carolinas Department of Environment and Natural Resources Division of Water Quality Color Reduction at a Facility Dyeing Cotton with Reactive and
Wet processes used at these facilities include slashing, sulfur dyeing, indigo dyeing, and finishing.
The dying ranges include two long ranges, as well as a beam and package dye house.
Tom Mullis, Flynt Fabrics and Finishing, Inc.; Mike Ellis, Clariant Corporation, and Bob Cundiff, DyStar Color Reduction at a Facility
Dyeing Nylon with Acid Reactive Dyes An indirect discharger using Dissolved Air Flotation for color removal.
Jeff Golliher, Americal, and Leonard Stogner, Environmental Group.
Break Color Reduction at Facilities
Dyeing Cotton with Sulfur and Indigo Dyes A direct discharger using ultrafiltration technology to recover the dye and phys/chem systems combined with aqua disk filter for color reduction.
Arthur Toompas and Jeff Wells, Cone Mills Corporation Color Reduction at a Municipal Waste Water Treatment Plant Color removal by a municipality using phys/chem technologies and fee system for textile dischargers.
Charles Van Zandt, City of Eden Roundtable Discussion 12:15 - 1:30 Lunch L.P.
Afternoon Session, 1:30 - 3:30 Emerging Technologies for Color Removal Dr. Mike Bahorsky, Environmental Resource Management, Inc.
Use of Real Time Dyeing Technology and Other P2 Techniques for Reducing Color in the Effluent Dr. Warren Jasper and Dr. Brent Smith, North Carolina State University College of Textiles Discussion and Closing Remarks Seminar Announced - Reducing/Removing Color from Wastewater RALEIGH -- A one-day seminar on reducing or removing color from wastewater is scheduled for June 17 at the Adam's Mark Hotel in Charlotte.
Topics include North Carolina state government's perspective on wastewater color reduction, current color removal practices by North Carolina textile operations and municipalities, future trends in color removal technologies, and in-plant techniques for color reduction.
Textile companies discussing their efforts in color reduction include Cone Mills Corp., Flynt Fabrics 
The seminar is being sponsored by the North Carolina Division of Pollution Prevention and Environmental Assistance, the North Carolina Division of Water Quality, Duke Power Company, the South Carolina Center for Waste Minimization, and the Georgia Pollution Prevention Assistance Division.
Registration is $40 before June 10 or $70 at the registration desk.
Please contact John Burke at (336) 249-1480 for more information.
### Date Posted: May 21, 1998 Return to Press Release Page.
.............
Introduction J OHN B URKE NORTH CAROLINA D I V I S I O N OF P O L L U T I O N P R E V E N T I O N A N D E N V I R O N M E N T A L A S S I S T A N C E Color is widely considered solely an aesthetic pollutant although there are studies currently evaluating aquatic toxicity, photo toxicity, and metal bioavailability for specific dye classes.
As a result, there has been little regulation of this pollutant.
Although its environmental impact may be considered lower than many other pollutants, color is much more readily identifiable by the average citizen.
This issue puts many in the textile dyeing industr y and dyestuff manufacturing industr y in a somewhat awkward situation.
The industr y is not mandated to reduce color in the eff luent, and doing so typically means significant capital investment in non-process oriented equipment and chemicals.
By doing nothing, the industr y leaves the potential for bad publicity for reducing the quality of one of North Carolinas greatest assets.
lematic depends on the perception of the observer.
Furthermore, the environment of the stream effects that perception.
For instance, a reddish colored eff luent entering a fast-moving clear stream surrounded by forest in the western part of the state will be perceived differently from that same eff luent entering a slow-moving murky river in the heart of an industrial park in the eastern part of the state.
While the future of color regulation at the state and national level is undetermined, the issue currently is being addressed at a local level.
There are a number of industries in North Carolina and other states that are reducing color in the eff luent due to local public pressure as well as a desire to do the right thing.
In light of the above example, handling the problem at a local level makes sense.
The amount of color a discharger will need to reduce to eliminate its impact on the aesthetics of the receiving It is the aesthetic issue that makes this pollut- waters depends on the background color of the reant so difficult to regulate.
Unlike many other pol- ceiving water, the size of the receiving water, and lutants that have water quality action levels based other characteristics.
on testing data, the amount of color that is probSee back of page.
The following case studies represent textile companies and municipal wastewater treatment works in North Carolina that currently are reducing eff luent color with various technologies.
These case studies discuss various pressures for reducing color, costs, and benefits of color reduction and removal, and various technologies successful in color removal.
Additionally, there is a paper and presentation slides of new technologies and pollution prevention techniques for reducing eff luent color.
The purpose of the Color Reduction and Removal Seminar is to increase the awareness of the color issue and increase the sharing of information concerning color reduction technology.
It is important for industry representatives to stay abreast of the new technological advances that can reduce environmental impacts as well as potentially improve operating efficiency.
Many technologies currently in development provide the potential for a win-win situation, where the textile industry can be seen as a environmental steward while also improving the bottom line.
To continue the sharing of information on color reduction successes and failures as well as other environmental issues concerning the textile industry, textile industry representatives are encouraged to become members of the P2-tex listserver managed by the North Carolina State Universitys College of Textiles.
Representatives interested in joining this listser ver should e-mail a subscription request to brent_smith@ncsu.edu.
By using this medium for technology and information transfer, industr y representatives are more apt to select technologies most appropriate for their situation and eliminate unnecessary expenditures.
.............
Speaker Information .............
Speaker Biographies J OHN B URKE Mr. Burke is an environmental engineer with the North Carolina Division of Pollution Prevention and Environmental Assistance, where he has worked since 1992 providing technical assistance and technology transfer to North Carolina business and industry.
Mr. Burke has provided on-site process and wastewater technical assistance to more than 50 textile industries in the state.
Mr. Burke is Co-chairperson of North Carolina American Water Works Associations Industrial Wastewater Committee.
Mr. Burke has co-authored a paper with Donald Brown of Sara Lee Knit Products, Color Removal and Brine Reuse from Reactive Dyebath Wastewaters, for the 1996 North Carolina AWWA/WEA Conference.
He is a member of the WEF and AATCC.
He received a bachelor of science in biology from the University of North Carolina - Wilmington in 1990 and a master of environmental engineering degree from North Carolina State University in 1995.
T OM M ULLIS Mr. Mullis currently is Director of Facilities Engineering for Flynt Fabrics 
He also is working on a project to reuse water from a batch dyeing plant.
Prior to joining Flynt Fabrics 
He ser ves as a consultant with the Mill Point Consulting Firm.
His areas of expertise include environmental compliance, source reduction, decoloring waste water, and water reuse.
M ICHAEL E .
E LLIS Mr. Ellix currently is Business Manager of Textile Chemicals for Clariant Corporation.
He has been working in the chemical manufacturing industr y since 1977.
He has published more than 12 articles dealing with industrial chemical use and operations.
Mr. Ellis is a member of the AATCC, TAPPI, and the AIC.
He ser ves as chairperson of the TAPPI High Yield Brightening Subcommittee and member of the TAPPI Chemical Methods Committee.
He was a recipient of the RW Barton Award for Excellence in Service to the Pulp and Paper Industry and an American Cancer Society Research Grant.
B OB C UNDIFF Mr. Cundiff has more than 25 years in the environmental field.
He worked eight years for an environmental engineering firm in the midwest before joining Hoechst in 1979.
From 1979 to 1994, Mr. Cundiff was responsible for the environmental, safety, and health areas at the production facility in Mount Holly, North Carolina.
This facility manufactures 300 products including dyes, resins, textile auxiliaries, and other specialty chemicals.
In his current position as Environmental Specialist with Dystar L.P., Mr. Cundiff provides environmental support to Dystars customers.
With his background in chemical engineering, Bobs efforts are focused on minimizing environmental problems through source reduction, product substitution, and cost effective treatment alternatives.
J EFF G OLLIHER Mr. Golliher has 14 years experience in textile dyeing and finishing.
Mr. Golliher currently works as Superintendent of Dyeing 
L EONARD S TOGNER Mr. Stogner is President of Environmental Wastewater Services and Vice President of Rayco Utilities Inc. both in Concord, North Carolina.
Mr. Stogner formerly worked with Bisanco International in Columbia, South Carolina.
Mr. Stogner has designed and installed industrial pretreatment and treatment systems in Canada, New Jersey, New York, Virgina, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
He has developed and received a patent for a method of removing color while reducing toxicity in textile eff luent.
Mr. Stogner has several certifications including NC Grade IV, SC grade B, and Hazardous Materials Technician.
He has an undergraduate degree from Clemson and an engineering graduate degree from Duke University.
A RTHUR T OOMPAS With Cone Mills Corporation since 1969, Mr. Toompas presently serves as the Corporate Environmental Engineer.
Mr. Toompas ser ved as past chairman of the North Carolina Textile Manufactures Associations Environmental Committee and Preser vation Committee, past president of North Carolinas Air Pollution Control Association, and past chairman of the Institute of Textile Technologys Environmental Committee.
Mr. Toompas serves as honors chairman for the American Association of Textile Chemist and Colorists Environmental Committee.
He is a member of the ATMI, WEF, AICE, and AWMA.
He has a bachelor of science degree in chemical engineering from North Carolina State University.
J EFF W ELLS Mr. Wells has published several articles including Color Removal in Textile Mills Eff luent Using Cloth Media Filtration Technology, WEASC and A Case Study Regarding Dye Recover y in a Textile Plant, AATCC.
Mr. Wells is a member of the NSPE, ASCE, WEF, Tau Beta Pi, Chi Epsilon, and Phi Kappa Phi.
He has a bachelor of science degree in Civil Engineering from North Carolina State University in 1993.
He graduated Magna Cum Laude of his class.
He also has a master of science degree in Civil Engineering from the University of North Carolina - Charlotte in 1998.
C HARLES V AN Z ANDT Mr. Van Zandt is Assistant Water Reclamation Division Superintendent and Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator for the City of Eden.
He has been involved in color concerns since the late 1980s.
Mr. Van Zandt has certifications in NC Grade IV, NC Class I, and Land Application/Residuals Officer.
He has presented papers on color removal at the North Carolina Pretreatment Coordinators Workshop and for the Association of American Textile Chemist and Colorist Conference.
M IKE B AHORSKY Mike Bahorsky, ERM, has a strong commitment to researching and applying cost-effective solutions to complex textile water quality problems.
His experience spans more than 30 years and includes field participation in the development of eff luent guidelines for the Environmental Protection Agency, developing pollution prevention strategies for the industr y, developing and applying improved treatment appproaches such as natural treatment methods, SBRs, and anaerobic methods of color removal.
He has worked on and provided engineering solutions to a number of toxicity related problems, and conducted numerous E/H/S compliance evaluations.
He has degrees in environmental science, chemistr y, and a masters degree in health science.
D R. W ARREN J ASPER Dr. Warren Jasper is an Associate Professor in Textile Engineering at North Carolina State University.
He received his bachelor of science and master of science degreess from MIT and his doctorate in aeronautics and astronautics from Stanford University.
Since joining the faculty in 1991, Dr. Jaspers main interests have been in applying real-time network-based control theory to textiles.
Some of his applications include real-time batch dyeing control, neural-network color recipe formulation, and fabric defect detection in woven fabrics.
He currently works with ATMI in designing and implementing a communications protocol/database standard for spinning.
D R. B RENT S MITH Dr. Brent Smith is a Professor in Textile Chemistr y at North Carolina State University.
He received his bachelor of science degree in chemistry at North Carolina State University and his doctorate in Chemical Physics from the University of Florida.
Recognized as aninternational expert in pollution prevention, Dr. Smith has worked in more than 75 major industrial on-site projects throughout the world.
He is author of the book Best Management Practices for Pollution Prevention in the Textile Industry, published by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
In addition to pollution prevention, Dr. Smith is knowledgeable in wet processing practices, as well as dry side science and technology.
.............
Case Studies COLOR REDUCTION 
Americal Corporation Cone Mills City of Eden Wastewater Treatment Plant .............
Flynt Fabrics Finishers, Inc.
&
The textile company has six facilities state-wide employing 450 people.
Flynt Fabrics established a dye operation facility in Hillsborough, North Carolina, in 1987, which manufactures approximately 200,000 pounds per week of polyester and cotton circular knit and open width goods.
The facility currently bleaches 40% and dyes 60% of incoming fabrics.
These fabrics are wet processed in two or more of the following baths: scour, bleach, dye, and finish.
The facility operates a pad bleaching and countercurrent rinsing station and Scholl Bleachstar system for fabric bleaching, and fully automated low liquor ratio jet dyeing machines.
Finishing agents can be added in jet machines or padded on before drying.
The Hillsborough facility discharges approximately 500,000 gallons of process wastewater per day to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), which subsequently is discharged into the Eno River.
The textile processor contributes approximately 50% of the influent load to the POTW.
The presence of dyes caused the true color in the facilitys effluent to average 3,000 ADMI.
The facility faced public pressure to reduce color in its effluent soon after start-up.
Flynt has responded by looking at several options for color reduction and has developed the capacity to greatly reduce its wastewater color properties.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal The majority of the process wastewater from Flynts Hillsborough facility is dilute bleach and rinse waters, constituting up to 75% of the f low.
Conversely, the problematic color arises from a relatively small volume of dyebath discharges.
The discharge from dyebaths ranged in true color from 5,000 to 20,000 ADMI.
The most problematic class of dyes used by Flynt are reactive dyes.
The reactive dyes are supplied by Dystar L.P., formerly a unit of Hoechst Celanese Corporation.
Some of the workhorse reactive dyes have a fixation percent as low as 65%.
Thus, 35% of the dye is entering the sewer.
Flynt historically has treated its wastewater in a 250,000 gallon aeration basin using a 40 hp surface aerator.
(See Figure 1, Section B.)
The facility pH adjusts the eff luent before entering the system, and after about 12 hours of retention time the wastewater is discharged to the sewer.
Soon after the City of Hillsborough approached Flynt with the color problem, the facility began researching technologies and techniques to eliminate color in the eff luent.
While investing in end-of-pipe treatment technologies, Flynt implemented in-plant techniques and technologies to reduce color in the eff luent and improve treatability.
These include: 1.
2.
3.
4.
Substituting lower fixation reactive dyes with higher fixation dyes.
Modified dye formulations to improve fixation.
Investing in fully automated dye equipment to improve shade repeatability and optimize dye usage.
Investing in countercurrent rinse and pad bleach machinery to reduce hydraulic load on future treatment system.
After reducing color from the source, Flynt evaluated a number of technologies and chemistries to reduce color in its eff luent.
Flynt worked closely with the Dyes 
The Specialty and Paper Chemicals Group was purchased by Clariant Corporation in July 1997.
The patented technology being disussed here, a new color reduction system, marketed as COLOR-ACT�, resides in the Textile Chemicals Group of Clariant.
COLOR-ACT 5319F is a product containing a reducing agent, sodium hydrosulfite.
This product effectively breaks the double bonds in the dye structure that refelect color for many dyestuffs.
Flynt selected this product because of its low aquatic toxicity.
Through a series of pilot studies and on-site evaluations, Flynt and the chemical suppliers developed an efficient color removal system (see Figure 1, Section A).
The system consists of a dissolving unit, which puts the COLOR-ACT 5319F into aqueous solution.
The dosage of COLOR-ACT 5319F is automatically ratio controlled based on on-line input from a spectrophotometer.
The spectrophotometer analyzes color in the mill eff luent before discharge into the aeration basin.
The ability to dose the decoloring product based on the level of color discharged helps control chemical costs.
The optimum operating parameters for the reducing o o agent are a pH from 9-12 and temperature from 100 to 120 F. Flynt regularly maintains a true color level in the eff luent leaving the aeration basin of 100 ADMI.
JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Figure 1: Flynt Fabric' Process Flow Diagram of Wastewater Treatment s Color Reduction and Removal - Economics (treating 500,000 gallons per day) $112,000 Total Estimated Capital Costs (Includes: Dissolver, online spectrophotometer, and control unit = $15,000) $112,50O/yr Total Estimated Operating Costs (Includes: COLOR-ACT 5319F @ 500 lbs./day 300 days/year) Wastewater Reuse While there is no payback solely on this type of color treatment scenario, Flynt realized that after color was eliminated there was very little reason not to extend treatment and facilitate wastewater reuse.
With this new perspective, the facility invested in a physical-chemical system to remove the remaining solids and supply the dyehouse with recycled water (see Figure 1 Section C).
A vertical coagulant and flocculant three-stage stir tank (lamella) holding basin and bag filter capable of processing 1,000 gallons per minute (gpm) was installed to treat the portion of the decolorized wastewater.
The treated water is held in an on-site water tower, which is plumbed into the tap water line coming into the dyehouse.
The facility uses a flocculation promoter, COLOR-ACT 5313 and a coagulant, COLOR-ACT 5314, both sup plied by Clariant.
The coagulant is dosed in the range of 150 parts per million (ppm) and the flocculant in the range of 5 ppm. Flynt expects the treatment to enable the facility to recover 60% of its wastewater for reuse.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 Wastewater Reuse Economics (treating 
Sludge is handled by the city.)
Total Estimated Operating Savings $270,000/yr (Savings from water reuse: At $3.00/1,000 gallons (water/sewer)) company contact Tom Mullis, Director, Facilities Engineering, Flynt Fabrics 
Americal Corporation CASE STUDY company profile and history Americal Corp. manufactures and markets knit nylon hosiery.
The textile company has four facilities that employs 1,300 people and grosses an estimated $75 million in sales annually.
Americal established a dye operation facility at Henderson in 1968, which manufactures approximately 150,000 dozen pair of nylon and blended nylon hosiery per week.
The facility currently dyes all hosiery that is processed.
These fabrics are wet processed in two or more scour, dye, or finish baths.
The facility operates paddle batch and pressure dyeing equipment.
The Henderson facility discharges an average of 150,000 gallons per day of process wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), which subsequently is discharged to the Nut Bush Creek.
The textile processor contributes approximately 6% of the influent load to the POTW.
Due to an ongoing aquatic toxicity problem with the POTWs effluent, Americal installed an advanced wastewater treatment system to significantly reduce pollutant loading to the POTW.
Soon after the start-up of the system, the local POTW began reducing pollutant limits and requesting color reduction in the facilities effluent.
The presence of dyes caused the textile facilitys effluent to average 500 via platinum cobalt colorimeter.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal Although color reduction was not an existing goal when Americal purchased the wastewater treatment equipment, the facility found it could significantly reduce color in the eff luent with the same chemistr y used to remove other regulated pollutants.
Historically, Americal has treated its wastewater in a 300,000 gallon aeration basin using two 40 hp surface aerators.
(See Figure 1, Section A.) Roughly 140,000 gallons of process wastewater enter the lagoon daily.
To reduce pollutant loading, the facility invested in a number of technologies and equipment.
Figure 1, Section B depicts the treatment system installed by Americal.
This system is not a package unit but a composite of new and used equipment.
Wastewater leaving the lagoon enters a collection tank, which also collects recirculated eff luent from the dissolved air f lotation system and filter press.
Approximately 30,000 gallons per day is recirculated.
The mixed eff luent is pumped to the head of a four-stage mixing tank.
Each stage holds 5,000 gallons and is equiped with four coarse bubble diffusers.
In the first stage, the oxidation reduction potential (ORP) is monitored and potassium permanganate is added to maintain an ORP of about 1,200.
Dosage ranges between 150-200 ppm of 20% potassium permanganate.
Eff luent is gravity fed to next stage where ORP is monitored and maintained about 750.
In the second stage, the pH is adjusted to 2.5 using a blend of ferrous sulfate and sulfuric acid, dosage is roughly 20 gallons/hr.
A coagulating agent, blended aluminum chlorohydrate, and polyamine also is added at approximately 200 ppm (400 ppm during dark shade season).
Eff luent is gravity fed to the third stage where the pH is monitored and adjusted to 9.5 using a blend of lime and caustic slurr y. Approximately 4.5 gallons per hour of this blend is added.
The eff luent enters a final aeration stage and is then gravity fed to the head of the DAF system.
The inf luent to the DAF is supersaturated with air using a venturi tube and 1 hp compressor and approximately nine gallons per hour of a 0.5% anionic polymer is added.
The dissolved air filtration (DAF) system is rated at approximately 120,000 gallons per day, but is running at higher rates.
Treated eff luent is discharged to the sewer.
Sludge exits the DAF and enters one of two 13,000 gallon aerated cement block pits.
Approximately 12,000 gallons of 3% sludge is generated weekly from these pits and pumped to a filter press.
The filter press is equipped with a sludge thickening station where thickening agents are added daily.
The press typically generates a sludge with 18% solids and is disposed of at a local landfill.
About 80 tons of sludge is disposed of monthly.
JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Figure 1: Flow Diagram of Americal' Wastewater Treatment System s Economics: (Based on 150,000 gallons per day, 300 days per year) Total Estimated Capital Costs $285,000 (Includes: Chemical dosing chambers, DAF, piping = $175,000, Building Structures (Press, Chemical) = $50,000, Filterpress = $60,000) Total Estimated Operating Costs $101,250 to $135,000 (Includes: Chemicals = $1.50 - 2.00/1,000 gallons, Maintenance, Sludge, Electricity, Water, Etc. = $0.75 - l.00/l000 gallons) The final effluent is near colorless with an estimated ADMI of less than 50.
At this level and being only 6% of the POTWs influent, there is little color problem at the POTW generated by Americal.
The facility currently is installing a second DAF system to increase the system' capacity.
s Jeff Golliher, superintendent of dyeing and wastewater management, (919) 431-3063 NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 notes .............
Cone Mills CASE STUDY company profile and history Cone Mills manufactures and markets denim fabrics.
The textile company employees 6,200 people at its 10 facilities company-wide and grosses an estimated $750 million in sales annually.
Cone Mills established a vertical denim processing operation in Greensboro in the early 1900s that manufactures approximately one million yards of denim per week.
It also has several facilities in Cliffside that also manufacture about one million yards of denim per week.
The Greensboro facility dyes 100% of denim fabrics.
Woven fabrics are processed in a number of continuous wet processes that may include scouring, desizing, mercerizing, sulfur dyeing, indigo dyeing, and finishing.
This facility operates a number of dyeing ranges including five long ranges, a raw stock range, and an over dye range
.
These processes generate approximately 1,250,000 gallons per day of wastewater that subsequently is discharged into Buffalo Creek following treatment.
Dyeing operations at the Cliffside facilities also dye 100% of denim fabrics.
Wet processes used at these facilities include slashing, sulfur dyeing, indigo dyeing, and finishing.
The dying ranges include two long ranges, as well as a beam and package dye house.
These facilities directly discharge approximately 900,000 gallons per day of wastewater into the Second Broad River after treatment.Two decades ago, Cone Mills started taking the initiative to reduce the color in its effluent from both of its plants.
Since then it has developed very effective systems of color removal.
It approaches effluent color reduction by investing in both dye recovery and dye removal technologies.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal CASE 1: GREENSBORO The Greensboro facilitys wastewater discharge averages 3,000 ADMI before treatment due to the presence of indigo and sulfur dyes.
Because indigo and sulfur dyes form much larger compounds than other dyestuffs, a portion of these dyes can be recovered with the use of ultrafiltration equipment.
In 1976, the Greensboro facility invested in an ultrafiltration system capable of processing 100 gpm of wastewater and filtering to particle sizes of 50,000 molecular weight.
The system is capable of recovering an average of 100,000 pounds of dyestuff annually.
The system utilizes a number of shaker screen systems to remove suspended solids, 400 mesh size and larger.
As opposed to end-of-pipe color treatment technologies, the system provides a payback by reducing the amount of dyestuffs purchased.
The approximate cost of a system capable of processing 100 gpm in todays dollars is $1.5 million.
Despite using ultrafiltration, the Greensboro facility still had significant amounts of dyestuff entering an activated sludge treatment system that was not designed to remove color.
(Section A of Figure 1 provides a schematic of the treatment system before color removal technologies were introduced.)
Only an estimated 50% of the color was being removed by the activated sludge basin and subsequent clarifiers.
Cone Mills then decided to add a physical/chemical treatment system using coagulants and f locculants to remove the remaining color, shown in Section B of Figure 1.
Basically, the coagulant, a polyamine, is introduced at the beginning of the mixing basin averaging 30 parts per million (ppm).
The f locculant, an anionic powder, is added in the second portion of the basin, averaging 4 ppm.
After the polymer addition, the f locculated material enters one of three 250,000 gallon upf low clarifiers.
Approximately 30,000 gallons of biosolid sludge at 1.5% is generated daily.
This sludge is mixed with other wasted sludge and stored in an aerobic digesting pond for land application.
The overf low from the clarifier runs through a weir basin for color sampling before entering a polishing pond.
The Greensboro facility now averages less than 100 ADMI with eff luent discharged to the Buffalo Creek.
Economics (treating 1,250,000 gpd): Total Estimated Capital Costs $895,000 (Includes: chemical mixing and feed systems = $20,000, mixing basin = $75,000, 3 clarifiers = $800,000) Total Estimated Operating Costs $250,000/year (Includes: chemicals = $200,000/year, labor = $30,000/year, maintenance and energy = $20,000/year) (Does not include: byproduct land application, which is mixed with aeration basin solids, $30/1,000 gallons) The Cone Mills, Greensboro, facility currently is investigating the use of anaerobic or anoxic organisms for the efficient and cost-effective removal of color from its wastewater.
JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Section A Section B Figure 1: Cone Mills (Greensboro) Wastewater Treatment Facilities CASE 2: Cliffside, Dye Recovery and Color Removal Cone Mills invested in dye recovery also at the Cliffside facility starting in the mid 1970s.
Ultrafiltration was used to recover indigo dyes from the rinse water of the dye ranges.
The ultrafiltration system initially installed was capable of processing 50 gallons per minute (gpm) of rinse water and filtering it down to 10-6 microns.
Two years ago Cone Mills installed an improved ultrafiltration unit, capable of filtering 80-100 gpm, with efficiency characterized by 40% COD removal and 99% indigo dye recovery.
Cone Mills also constructed a WWTP at the Cliffside facility in the mid 1970s for the treatment of the final effluent before discharge.
The system first constructed consisted simply of aeration and clarification, along with disinfection/dechlorination, resulting in an effluent with a color averaging 1,500 ADMI.
Cone Mills wanted to achieve a greater color reduction in its effluent and added a physical/chemical color removal system in 1995, shown in Figure 2.
In this system, a poly quad polymer, is added at 30-35 ppm to achieve coagulation and flocculation of the particulate matter in the wastewater, including the dye molecules responsible for the color.
The stream is then passed through one of the three six-disk AquaDisk filters, which separate the solids fraction from the liquid to concentrate the color into the solids.
The solids, in the form of color sludge, then are pumped to a biosolids holding tank to be land applied or are pumped back to the aeration basin for further treatment.
Approximately 150,000 gallons of 1% sludge is generated daily by the color removal system.
The final effluent has an average color of less than 100 ADMI by the time it is discharged.
JUNE 1998 notes .............
City of Eden CASE STUDY company profile and history Wastewater Treatment Plant The city of Eden, located on the Virginia and North Carolina border, lies along the confluence of Smith and Dan Rivers.
The Mebane Bridge wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) discharges into Dan River, which flows back into Virginia after passing through Eden.
The WWTP treats a 13.5 million gallons per day (MGD) flow consisting of 60% industrial and 40% domestic wastewater.
During the years there have been several large textile industries in the area, both in Eden and upstream of the city, that have contributed colored wastewater to the river.
In the late 1980s, residents of towns downstream of Eden started to complain about the color in the river coming from Edens WWTP.
Thus, the Mebane Bridge WWTP was required to monitor for color at the influent, effluent, upstream on the Smith River, and upstream and downstream on Dan River.
The city of Eden was given numerical limits of 300 ADMI units as part of its NPDES permit for wastewater discharge into Dan River.
Because Eden is currently the home of four large textile manufacturers (two fleecewear mills, a blanket finishing mill and a carpet manufacturer, all which discharge colored wastewater to the WWTP), the city required all these color producing industries to conduct studies for removal options.
Finally, a decision was made that the most cost-effective solution would be for the city to incorporate color removal at the plant.
This decision was made because the city was preparing for a plant expansion and thus could include this into the total costs and also because the plants biomass could remove up to 25% of the color.
The city could then charge back the cost for color removal to the industries.
Eden thus started exploring different options in removal to tackle the combined colored waste stream at the WWTP.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal City officials looked into several technologies for color removal, as well as other similar cases that would be useful for comparison.
The city of Martinsville, Virginia, had undergone a similar color requirement a decade earlier and had looked into several technologies such as carbon absorption, ozonation, chlorination, and chemical precipitation (polymers).
It found the estimated capital cost for removal by carbon adsorption would be about $6 million, oxidation by ozonation $5 million, removal by chlorination $1 million, and removal by chemical precipitation $100,000.
Because the citys WW TP is very similar in operation and characteristics to the one in Martinsville, Edens city engineers decided to use chemical precipitation (polymers) because of the low capital costs, as well as the lower operating costs when compared to other technologies.
The color of the wastewater inf luent ranges from 500 to 10,000 ADMI units, with an average value of 2,000.
Color removal by chemical precipitation begins with polymer addition at the outf low of the aeration basins.
This takes advantage of the fact that 25-30% of the color is already removed by the activated sludge biomass in the two 7.0 MG aeration chambers.
A f locculant polymer, a cationic polyamine, is stored on-site and continuously is injected directly into the aerated wastestream at 30 ppm 24 hours a day.
The precipitate then is collected by clarifiers along with the other suspended matter.
This colored sludge then is pumped to a sludge-holding and digestion tank.
The sludge is stored in two 2MG holding lagoons for land application.
It is estimated that 1,000,000 pounds of polymer is used each year for the removal of color in Edens wastestream.
The color of the eff luent after treatment at the WW TP is less than 100 ADMI units.
The arrangement the city of Eden has with the industrial dischargers is the costs of purchasing polymers and the operations (one operator, maintenance of feed equipment, etc.) of the removal process are incurred by industrial users that discharge colored wastewater.
Each industry monitors the color in its own waste stream, and is billed a percentage of the total monthly cost of color removal at the WW TP.
This percentage is based on the amount of excess color units over the surcharge limit times their total monthly f low.
Color units are based on ADMI color discharged above 300 and the volume of water used.
The total monthly costs for color removal range from $40,000 to $60,000 per facility.
Currently, there are currently three industries discharging color wastewater to the Mebane Bridge WW TP.
They have been working together with the WW TP under this arrangement for the past decade in a concerted effort to reduce the amount of color pollution received by Dan River.
JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Figure 1: Process Flow Diagram of Mebane Bridge Wastewater Treatment Plant Economics (treating 13,500,000 gallons per day (gpd)): Total Estimated Capital Costs (Includes: Polymer addition system = $100,000) $ 100,000 Total Estimated Operating Costs $ 651,000/year (Includes: polymer = $650,000/year maintenance = $ l,000/year) (Does not include sludge handling costs.
Solids are mixed with aeration basin solids.)
Charles Van Zandt, assistant water reclamation division superintendent and industrial pretreatment coordinator, (910) 379-6226 NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 notes .............
Additional Case Studies COLOR REDUCTION 
Sara Lee Knit Products .............
Sara Lee Knit Products CASE STUDY company profile and history Sara Lee Knit Products (SKLP) manufactures and markets knit fabrics for a variety of apparel markets.
SLKP is owned by Sara Lee Corporation, which employees 141,000 people worldwide and gross an estimated $20 billion in sales annually.
The products manufactured by SKLP are wet processed at its textile plants by either a dyeing or bleaching operation.
SLKP engineering wanted to conduct production scaled processes to investigate color removal options to reduce color discharges.
A facility was chosen that was easily suited for the installation and operation of the new process and representative of the production and design of the majority of other facilities.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal The majority of the process wastewater from Sara Lees textile facilities are dilute rinse waters, constituting up to 90% of the f low.
Conversely, the problematic color arises from a relatively small volume of dyebath discharges.
The discharge from dyebaths ranged in true color from 70,000 to 5,000 ADMI.
Sara Lee uses mainly reactive dyes for dyeing cotton.
The most problematic dyes are the darker shade reactive dyes.
Sara Lee identified that those discharges with the strongest color also contained the majority of sodium chloride, another problematic pollutant.
The company selected ultrafiltration/ nanofiltration as a technology that could remove the color and other suspended solids and leave the sodium chloride and water for reuse in the dyeing process.
The treatment system is shown in Figure 1.
Sara Lee installed an ultrafiltration/nanofiltration system capable of handling 7.5 gpm of the 350 gpm wastewater generated from wet processing operations at this location (economic summar y is based on an 80 gpm system).
This small system is effective in reducing total color of the eff luent by treating those discharges with the most color and salt.
Like other Sara Lee facilities, this location has a dual eff luent piping system that allows selected dyebath discharges to be collected separately from the majority of dilute wastewater.
The soleniod valves splitting these discharges are controlled by the dyebath computer.
The facility has programmed the computers to discharge selected high color and salt discharges to a separate holding tank for treatment.
The collected wastewater is pumped to a 2,600 gallon tank that circulates wastewater through the tubular ultrafiltration membrane.
The permeate is pumped to a 2,600 gallon nanofiltration holding tank, and the filtrate returns to the ultrafiltration holding tank.
The ultrafilter removes suspended solids, leaving dissolved solids and color in the permeate.
The permeate is pumped from the nanofiltration holding tank to the nanofilter.
The permeate from the nanofilter, a clean eff luent with sodium chloride, is pumped to a holding tank for reuse in the dyeing process.
Approximately 95% of the inf luent is returned as clean brine water for dyeing reuse.
The filtrate is pumped back to the holding tank.
Solids collected in the holding tanks are pumped to a phys/chem treatment system for removal.
Approximately 5% of incoming wastewater is pumped to this system.
Ferrous sulfate and cationic polymer are added to precipitate solids and a small amount of anionic polymer subsequently is added to enhance f locing.
The f loc settles in a clarification/sludge thickening tank.
Solids are collected from the tank and pumped through a plate and frame filter press.
Clean water is decanted from the settling tank and discharged to the sewer.
Economics (Based on treatment of 120,000 gallons per day (gpd) with facility using low salt reactive dyes.
A facility using high salt reactive dyes could see increased savings from brine recover y. See Figure 1.)
Total Estimated Capital Costs $ 580,000 (Include: Ultra/nanofiltration system = $ 500,000, phys/chem system = $ 80,000, and ancillar y equip.)
(Does not include: dual eff luent piping system) Total Estimated Operating Costs $139,000 / year (Includes: Maintenance $15,000 / year, Labor = $70,000, Energy = $15,000, Sludge = $4,725) Total Estimated Operating Savings $ 350,000 / year (Includes: Brine recover y = $245,000 / year, water recover y = $ 100,000 / year) Additional savings of $500,000 / year are applicable for a facility removing color from total eff luent with polymer treatment or paying the local POT W to remove color.
By installing an 80 gallons per minute (gpm) system for a facility discharging around 0.5 MGD, Sara Lee JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Figure 1: Process Flow Diagram $ 580,000 Total Estimated Capital Costs (Include: Ultr a/ nanofiltration system = $ 500,000, phys/chem system = $ 80,000, and ancillary equip.)
(Does not include: dual effluent piping system) $139,000 / year Total Estimated Operating Costs (Includes: Maintenance $15,000 / year, Labor = $70,000, Energy = $15,000, Sludge = $4,725) $350,000 / year Total Estimated Operating Savings (Includes: Brine recovery = $245,000 / year, water recovery = $ 100,000 / year) Additional savings of $500,000 / year are applicable for a facility removing color from total effluent with polymer treatment or paying the local POTW to remove color.
By installing an 80 gallons per minute (gpm) system for a facility discharging around 0.5 MGD, Sara Lee estimates that effluent discharges can be reduced to below 200-300 ADMI.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 .............
Belmont Dyers, Inc.
CASE STUDY company profile and history Belmont Dyers is a package dyeing plant located in Belmont, N.C.
The facility was purchased by Meridian Industries, which grosses approximately $320 million in sales annually.
Belmont employees 160 people and processes approximately 280,000 lbs. per week of cotton yarns in custom colors for end products such as blankets.
The facility currently bleaches 5% and dyes 95% of incoming yarn.
Belmonts facility discharges between 350,000 and 400,000 gallons per day (gpd) of process wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW), which subsequently is discharged into the Catawba River.
The facility is approximately 10% of the influent load to the POTW.
Belmont recently expected an increase in production, which would have caused its water demands to rise between 650,000 and 750,00 gpd.
This created some challenges for the company with regards to the availability of water as well as the disposal of the wastewater.
After discussions with city officials, a decision was made that a limit of 300,000 gpd would be set for the availability of water supplied to the company, as well as the limit for the amount of wastewater allowed for discharge to the POTW.
In order to provide process water for the expected increase in production, Belmont decided to recycle their effluent using state-of-the-art treatment.
NC DPPEA JUNE 1998 color reduction and removal To recycle the eff luent, Belmont needed a treatment system to remove a majority of pollutant in the wastewater.
It was determined that the color concentration in process wastewater average 2900 ADMI units.
The major dyetypes used in the facility are reactive and direct.
The level of color and levels of TSS, BOD, metals, and pH all would need to be treated significantly to allow for water reuse.
The POT W itself had a requirement for the color of the eff luent to be only 200 ADMI units.
Several test studies were conducted, and it was determined that electrochemical precipitation would be the preferred method for treatment of the eff luent, see Figure 1.
Prior to treatment, a 200,000 gallon inf luent tank collects wastewater to equalize the f low to the electrochemical treatment.
This inf luent tank requires agitation to prevent the dyes from stratifying inside the tank.
The electrochemical treatment consists of six F size electrochemical cells containing iron plates that generate ferrous iron ions when amperage is applied to the cells.
Five cells are on-line simultaneously, while the sixth is a standby.
The ferrous ions, which dissolve from the anode, combine with hydroxide ions generated at the cathode to produce an iron hydroxide precipitate.
The iron hydroxide reacts with the dye particles to form a coprecipitated hydroxide matrix.
Because there is iron hydroxide sludge buildup on the individual electrodes, an acid wash of 15% sulfuric acid is performed daily on each cell for approximately 30 minutes.
The iron plates themselves are recycled for scrap iron once they are spent.
After electrochemical treatment, the pH is adjusted to 9.5.
The iron hydroxide becomes insoluble, then the absorbed substances are removed f locculation and precipitation.
At the time of this study, the separation process was also facilitated by the addition of 20 parts per million (ppm) of coagulant and 7 ppm f loculant from BETZ Chemical, W22, and W14 respectfully.
The eff luent f lows through a lamella to clarify the solids from the liquid.
The solids are collected at the bottom and pumped to a holding tank, then into a filter press system.
This 50-cubic-foot plate and frame filter produces a sludge with 30% solids.
The filtrate from this press runs into the inf luent tank.
The supernatant from the lamella is held in a wastewater tank for recycling.
The recycled water is polished through a two-stage multi-media filter system and a reverse osmosis unit designed to handle 175 gpm.
The whole system is controlled automatically by programmable logic controller (PLC) and a touch screen user interface.
Operators are able to monitor and maintain the system for the treatment to run at optimal conditions.
Belmont started reusing wastewater without reverse osmosis treatment.
While this was successful, the facility invested in reverse osmosis to assure a continuous supply of quality water for all wet processing.
JUNE 1998 NC DPPEA Figure 1: Process Flow Diagram Belmont has been able to achieve a 99% color reduction in their effluent down to less than 25 ADMI.
Additionally, the facility is able to recover up to 70% of its wastewater for reuse in its process.
Economics (treating 500,000 gpd): $ 4.5 million Total Estimated Capital Costs (Includes: Electrochemical/Phys/Chem/Dewatering/Multimedia filters/RO/Ancillary Equipment) $ 1.2 million/year Total Estimated Operating Costs (Costs are estimated at $7.5/1000 gallons and 325 operating days) (Savings from water recycle not included: recovering 70% at $3/1,000 gallons (water/sewer fees) equals $ 350,000/year savings) Because of the relatively high operating costs, Belmont currently is investigating alternative treatment technologies that may reduce the costs of the current system.
This research includes the use of an inorganic polymer that may eliminate the use of the electrochemical technology.
Bob Setliss,
