News [newspapr.jpg] from Congressman Jack Murtha Murtha Announces $261,925 for Iron Works Landmark WASHINGTON, October 31, 2003 - Congressman John Murtha today announced the approval of a $261,925 grant from the National Park Service for stabilization of the historic Blacksmith Shop in the Cambria Iron Works National Historic Landmark.
"Cambria Iron Works is the only steel mill site in America that's recognized as a National Historic Landmark, so this is an exciting project that will continue our economic rebuilding efforts," Murtha said.
The grant was approved by the Save America's Treasures program from the 2003 appropriation for the Historic Preservation Fund and is a key step toward attracting working blacksmiths who could be observed by site visitors, Murtha said.
Restoration of the Blacksmith Shop, built in 1864, is a partnership effort headed by the Johnstown Redevelopment Authority.
Key partners include Johnstown Area Heritage Association, Southwestern Pennsylvania Heritage Preservation Commission and the National Park Service, which are developing a detailed re-use plan that includes interpretation and the design of improvements to enable visitors into the site.
JAHA has been talking to a blacksmith who has indicated an interest in establishing a business in the Blacksmith Shop, which houses several historically significant industrial hammers.
"It's a great honor to have the Blacksmith Shop and the Johnstown steel legacy recognized as an American Treasure," said Ronald Repak, Executive Director of the Redevelopment Authority.
"The award will enable us to continue our revitalization efforts at the Cambria Iron Works."
Richard Burkert, Executive Director of JAHA, said, "Receiving such a highly competitive grant is about as high a recognition as you can get for an historic structure.
This recognizes the significance of Cambria Iron Works and in particular the Blacksmith Shop.
The funds are critically needed to stabilize the building while we continue to plan its re-use."
A total of more than $3 million has previously been granted to projects involving the Cambria Iron Works properties, including the Machine Shop dating from 1906 and the Carpenter Shop dating from 1870.
The federal funding sources included the U.S. Economic Development Administration, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Appalachian Regional Commission and the SPHPC and NPS.
State funding sources include the Infrastructure Development Program, Communities of Opportunity Program and the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
In addition, a short trail is under construction from Downtown Johnstown to the Blacksmith Shop using funds from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the state Department of Conservation 
That trail will be part of the Path of the Flood-Mainline Train, which will be part of the Pittsburgh-to-Harrisburg Pennsylvania Mainline Canal Greenway.
The Path of the Flood-Mainline Trail will link Johnstown with three National Park sites in Cambria County: Johnstown Flood National Memorial, Allegheny-Portage Railroad and the Staple Bend Tunnel, which is the oldest railroad tunnel in America.
bar
[News], [Home]
bar
