_DOC_ [Federal Register: April 1, 2003 (Volume 68, Number 62)] [Rules and Regulations]
ACTION: Final rule.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
SUMMARY: The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service or we) hereby changes the classification of the gray wolf (Canis lupus) under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (Act).
We establish three distinct population segments (DPS) for the gray wolf in the conterminous United States.
Gray wolves in the Western DPS and the Eastern DPS are reclassified from endangered to threatened, except where already classified as threatened or as an experimental population.
Gray wolves in the Southwestern DPS retain their previous endangered or experimental population status.
All three existing gray wolf experimental population designations are retained and are not affected by this rule.
Gray wolves are removed from the protections of the Act in all or parts of 16 southern and eastern States where the species historically did not occur.
We establish a new special regulation under section 4(d) of the Act for the threatened Western DPS to increase our ability to respond to wolf-human conflicts outside the two experimental population areas in the Western DPS.
A second section 4(d) special regulation applies provisions similar to those previously in effect in Minnesota to most of the Eastern DPS.
We find that these special rules are necessary and advisable to provide for the conservation of the Western DPS and the Eastern DPS.
The classification, under the Act, of captive gray wolves is determined by the location from which they, or their ancestors, were removed from the wild.
This final rule does not affect the protection currently afforded by the Act to the red wolf (Canis rufus), a separate species found in the southeastern United States that is listed as endangered.
DATES: This rule becomes effective April 1, 2003.
The explanation of the need for an immediate effective date is found in the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION section under the heading Need for Immediate Implementation.
ADDRESSES: The complete file for this rule is available for inspection, by appointment, during normal business hours at our Midwest Regional Office: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Federal Building, 1 Federal Drive, Ft. Snelling, MN 55111-4056.
Call 612-713-5350 to make arrangements.
The comments and materials we received during the comment period are also available for public inspection, by appointment, during normal business hours at this and other Regional Offices and several of our Ecological Services field offices.
Use the contact information in the next paragraph to obtain the addresses of those locations.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: Direct all questions or requests for additional information to the Service using the Gray Wolf Phone Line-- 612-713-7337, facsimile--612-713-5292, the general gray wolf electronic mail address_GRAYWOLFMAIL@FWS.GOV, or write to: GRAY WOLF QUESTIONS, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Federal Building, 1 Federal Drive, Ft. Snelling, MN 55111-4056.
Additional information is also available on our World Wide Web site at http://midwest.fws.gov/wolf.
Individuals who are hearing-impaired or speech-impaired may call the Federal Relay Service at 1-800-877-8337 for TTY assistance.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Background
This rule begins with discussions on the biology, ecology, taxonomy, and the historical range of the gray wolf.
We then describe previous Federal listing actions taken for the gray wolf.
Next we provide information concerning specific issues related to this rulemaking, including our Vertebrate Population Policy, experimental population designations, and wolf-dog hybrids.
We conclude this introductory section with a discussion on the recovery of the gray wolf.
We next provide a summary of the many and diverse comments and recommendations on the proposal.
All substantive issues that were raised during that comment period are described, and we present our response to each of those issues.
A detailed discussion is then presented for the five listing factors as required by the Act.
We analyze these factors for the reclassification of certain populations in response to the current status of the species, which encompasses present and future threats and conservation efforts.
We designate three distinct population segments (DPSs), and we also discuss how this listing affects wolves in captivity and their role in wolf recovery.
We next describe the differences between our July 13, 2000, proposal (65 FR 43450) and this final rule.
In our proposal, we identified a variety of alternative actions that we considered but did not propose, and we explained the reasons for selecting the proposed action.
We also requested comments on those alternatives.
Those alternatives will not be discussed in this rule except in the cases where they were adopted or partially adopted in our final decision, or were otherwise addressed in substantive comments that we received.
Separate sections explain the two special regulations that are being adopted and how these special regulations are consistent with the conservation of the gray wolf within their respective DPSs.
We also explain the conservation measures that are being provided to the species by this rule.
The text of the regulatory changes for the gray wolf is found at the end of this document.
A. Biology and Ecology of Gray Wolves
Gray wolves are the largest wild members of the Canidae, or dog family, with adults ranging from 18 to 80 kilograms (kg)(40 to 175 pounds (lb)) depending upon sex and subspecies (Mech 1974).
The average weight of male wolves in Wisconsin is 35 kg (77 lb) and ranges from 26 to 46 kg (57 to 102 lb), while females average 28 kg (62 lb) and range from 21 to 34 kg (46 to 75 lb) (Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WI DNR) 1999a).
In the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains, adult male gray wolves average just over 45 kg (100 lb), while the females weigh slightly less.
Wolves' fur color is frequently a grizzled gray, but it can vary from pure white to coal black.
Wolves may appear similar to coyotes (Canis latrans) and some domestic dog breeds (such as the German shepherd or Siberian husky) (C. familiaris).
However, wolves' longer legs, larger feet, wider head and snout, and straight tail distinguish them from both coyotes and dogs.
Wolves primarily are predators of medium and large mammals.
Wild prey species in North America include white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) and mule deer (O. hemionus), moose (Alces alces), elk (Cervus canadensis), woodland caribou (Rangifer caribou) and barren ground caribou (R. arcticus), bison (Bison bison), muskox (Ovibos moschatus), bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis) and Dall sheep (O. dalli), mountain goat (Oreamnos americanus),
[[Page 15805]]
beaver (Castor canadensis), and snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus), with small mammals, birds, and large invertebrates sometimes being taken (Mech 1974, Stebler 1944, WI DNR 1999a).
In the Midwest, during the last 22 years, wolves have also killed domestic animals including horses (Equus caballus), cattle (Bos taurus), sheep (Ovis aries), goats (Capra hircus), llamas (Lama glama), pigs (Sus scrofa), geese (Anser sp.), ducks (Anas sp.), turkeys (Meleagris gallopavo), chickens (Gallus sp.), pheasants (Phasianus colchicus), dogs, and cats (Felis catus) (Paul 2001, Wydeven et al. 2001a).
Since 1987, wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming have also killed domestic animals, including llamas, horses, cattle, sheep, and dogs (Service et al. 2002).
Wolves are social animals, normally living in packs of 2 to 12 wolves.
However, 2 packs within Yellowstone National Park (NP) had 22 and 27 members in 2000, and Yellowstone's Druid Peak pack increased to 37 members in 2001 (Service et al. 2001, 2002).
Packs are primarily family groups consisting of a breeding pair, their pups from the current year, offspring from the previous year, and occasionally an unrelated wolf.
Packs typically occupy, and defend from other packs and individual wolves, a territory of 50 to 550 square kilometers (sq km) (20 to 214 square miles (sq mi)).
However, in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains territories tend to be larger, usually from 520 to 1,040 sq km (200 to 400 sq mi), and in Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada, territories of up to 2,700 sq km (1,042 sq mi) have been recorded (Carbyn in litt. 2000).
Normally, only the top-ranking (``alpha'') male and female in each pack breed and produce pups.
Litters are born from early April into May; they can range from 1 to 11 pups, but generally include 4 to 6 pups (Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MI DNR) 1997; Service 1992a; Service et al. 2001).
Normally a pack has a single litter annually, but producing 2 or 3 litters in one year has been documented in Yellowstone NP (Service et al. 2002).
Yearling wolves frequently disperse from their natal packs, although some remain with their natal pack.
Dispersers may become nomadic and cover large areas as lone animals, or they may locate suitable unoccupied habitat and a member of the opposite sex and begin their own territorial pack.
Dispersal movements on the order of 800 km (500 mi) have been documented (Fritts 1983; James Hammill, Michigan DNR, in litt. 2001).
The gray wolf historically occurred across most of North America, Europe, and Asia.
In North America, gray wolves formerly occurred from the northern reaches of Alaska, Canada, and Greenland to the central mountains and the high interior plateau of southern Mexico.
The only areas of the conterminous United States that apparently lacked gray wolf populations since the last glacial events are parts of California and portions of the eastern and southeastern United States (an area occupied by the red wolf).
In addition, wolves were generally absent from the extremely arid deserts and the mountaintops of the western United States (Young and Goldman 1944, Hall 1981, Mech 1974, Nowak 2000).
(Refer to the Taxonomy of Gray Wolves in the Eastern United States section below for additional discussion.)
European settlers in North America and their cultures often had superstitions and fears of wolves.
Their attitudes, coupled with perceived and real conflicts between wolves and human activities along the frontier, led to widespread persecution of wolves.
Poisons, trapping, and shooting-spurred by Federal, State, and local government bounties-resulted in extirpation of this once widespread species from more than 95 percent of its range in the 48 conterminous States.
At the time of the passage of the Act, likely only several hundred wolves occurred in northeastern Minnesota and on Isle Royale, Michigan, and possibly a few scattered wolves in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, Montana, and the American Southwest.
Researchers have learned a great deal about gray wolf biology, especially regarding the species' adaptability and its use of nonwilderness habitats.
Public appreciation of the role of predators in our ecosystems has increased, and we believe that the recovery of the species is widely supported.
Most importantly, within the last decade the prospects for gray wolf recovery in several areas of their former historical United States range have greatly increased.
In the western Great Lakes area, wolves have dramatically increased their numbers and occupied range.
Gray wolf reintroduction programs in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains have shown great success.
Additionally, the reintroduction and recovery program of the Mexican wolf in the American Southwest, although in its initial stages, is beginning to show similar progress after only a few years.
The gray wolf (Canis lupus) is one of two North American wolf species currently protected by the Act.
The other is the red wolf (C. rufus), a separate species that is listed as endangered throughout its range in the southeastern United States and extending west into central Texas.
The red wolf is the subject of a separate recovery program.
This final rule does not affect the current listing status or protection of the red wolf.
B. Taxonomy of Gray Wolves in the Eastern United States
Both the 1978 and 1992 versions of the Recovery Plan for the Eastern Timber Wolf were developed to recover the gray wolf subspecies Canis lupus lycaon, commonly known as the eastern timber wolf.
C. l. lycaon was believed to be the gray wolf subspecies historically occurring throughout the northeastern quarter of the United States east of the Great Plains (Young and Goldman 1944, Hall 1981, Mech 1974).
Since the publication of those recovery plans, various studies on the subspecific taxonomy of the gray wolf have been conducted with conflicting results (Nowak 1995, 2000; Wayne et al. 1995; Wilson et al. 2000).
At the time we prepared the July 13, 2000, gray wolf reclassification proposal, new information had recently become available that called into question the identity of the large canid in southeastern Canada, an area with an extant wolf population adjacent to the northeastern United States.
However, we believed that the preponderance of available data supported the position that the historical canid in the northeastern United States was a subspecies of the gray wolf, probably Canis lupus lycaon.
An alternative position advanced by Wilson et al. (2000) appears to be gaining wider acceptance.
That view is that the wolf currently occurring in Algonquin Provincial Park, and possibly the ancestral wolf of southeastern Canada and the northeastern United States, is a smaller form of wolf that is similar to or indistinguishable from the red wolf (C. rufus).
Still others argue that ecologically, the ancestral wolf in northern Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont, where moose and woodland caribou were the predominant ungulate prey (Hall 1981), was likely to be a large-bodied C. lupus, rather than a smaller, deer-eating wolf such as the red wolf (Daniel Harrison, University of Maine, pers. comm.).
The coyote is the dominant canid in the northeastern United States today, although wolf genetic material is also present in these animals.
Prey species' ranges in the Northeast have undergone significant changes in the last hundred-plus years as the whitetail deer has expanded north into Canada, while the
[[Page 15806]]
caribou has disappeared from the northeastern United States, and the moose has repopulated northern and central New England and are newly reestablished in the Adirondacks of northern New York.
Changes in prey base may trigger accompanying changes in the primary predator, because smaller canids and smaller canid social groups are able to subsist on deer, but are less well suited to preying on caribou and moose.
All of these changes have proceeded with surprising rapidity, as has the eastern expansion of the coyote.
Clearly, it becomes extremely difficult to determine the genetic identity of the wolf (or wolves) that occurred in the Northeast prior to European settlement.
Bounty records, old trapper notes, and discovery of heretofore unknown mounted specimens may hold clues that will be investigated.
However, the ranges of specific forms of wolf may have changed over time or intermingled along contact zones, and scientific consensus on one ancestral form of wolf for the Northeast may not be possible.
Currently, the existing molecular genetic and morphological data suggest several plausible identities for the large canid that historically occupied the Northeast.
Nowak's morphological data continue to support the contention that Canis lupus lycaon, a subspecies of the gray wolf, occupied part of the Northeast and adjacent southeastern Canada; however, his more recent work suggests a smaller United States range (and a possible hybrid origin) for that subspecies and a consequent larger range for the red wolf (Nowak 1995, 2000).
The recent molecular genetics studies (Wilson et al. 2000) identify this canid as something other than a gray wolf, which they tentatively refer to as C. lycaon.
Under this scenario the historical northeastern United States wolf could either be the red wolf (C. rufus) or a separate subspecies of C. lycaon.
Due to the extreme uncertainty over wolf taxonomy, at this time we are adopting no final position on the identity of the wolf (or wolves) that historically existed in the northeastern United States.
Instead, we are encouraging additional research on that question, and we are maintaining the listing of the gray wolf in the northeastern United States because there are insufficient data showing that listing to be in error.
C. Historical Range of the Gray Wolf
Until the molecular genetics studies of the last few years, the range of the gray wolf prior to European settlement was generally believed to include most of North America.
The only areas that were believed to have lacked gray wolf populations are southern and interior Greenland, the coastal regions of Mexico, all of Central America south of Mexico, coastal and parts of California, the extremely arid deserts and the mountaintops of the western United States, and parts of the eastern and southeastern United States (Young and Goldman 1944, Hall 1981, Mech 1974, and Nowak 1995).
(However, some authorities question the reported historical absence of gray wolves from parts of California (Carbyn in litt. 2000, Mech in litt. 2000)).
Authors are inconsistent on their views of the precise boundary of historical gray wolf range in the eastern and southeastern United States.
Some use Georgia's southeastern corner as the southern extent of gray wolf range (Young and Goldman 1944, Mech 1974); others believe gray wolves didn't extend into the southeast at all (Hall 1981) or did so to a limited extent, primarily at somewhat higher elevations (Nowak 1995).
The southeastern and mid-Atlantic States have generally been recognized as being within the historical range of the red wolf, and it is not known how much range overlap historically occurred between these competing canids.
Recent morphological work by Nowak (2000) supports extending the historical range of the red wolf into southern New England or even further northward, indicating that the historical range of the gray wolf in the eastern United States may have been more limited than previously believed.
Another possibility is that the respective ranges of several wolf species expanded and contracted in the eastern and northeastern United States, intermingling along contact zones, in post- glacial times.
The results of the recent molecular genetic (Wilson et al. 2000) and morphometric studies (Nowak 1995, 2000) may help explain some of the past difficulties in establishing the southern boundary of the gray wolf's range in the eastern United States.
It may be shown by additional genetics investigation that the red wolf, or another wolf species, historically populated the entire east coast of the United States, and the gray wolf did not occur there at all.
However, until additional data convincingly show that gray wolves did not historically occur in the northeastern States, we will view the historical range of the gray wolf as including those areas north of the Ohio River, the southern borders of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and southern Missouri; and west from central Texas and Oklahoma.
This boundary is a reasonable compromise of several published accounts, being somewhat south of that shown by Nowak (2000) and north of the range boundary shown by Young and Goldman (1944) and Mech (1974).
The historical range boundary we are using most closely approximates that given in Hall (1981).
D. Previous Federal Action
The eastern timber wolf (Canus lupus lycaon) was listed as endangered in Minnesota and Michigan, and the northern Rocky Mountain wolf (C. l. irremotus) was listed as endangered in Montana and Wyoming in the first list of species that were protected under the 1973 Act, published in May 1974 (USDI 1974).
A third gray wolf subspecies, the Mexican wolf (C. l. baileyi), was listed as endangered on April 28, 1976, (41 FR 17740) with its known range given as ``Mexico, USA (Arizona, New Mexico, Texas).''
On June 14, 1976, (41 FR 24064) the subspecies C. l. monstrabilis was listed as endangered (using the nonspecific common name ``Gray wolf''), and its range was described as ``Texas, New Mexico, Mexico.''
To eliminate problems with listing separate subspecies of the gray wolf and identifying relatively narrow geographic areas in which those subspecies are protected, on March 9, 1978, we published a rule (43 FR 9607) relisting the gray wolf at the species level (Canus lupus) as endangered throughout the conterminous 48 States and Mexico, except for Minnesota, where the gray wolf was reclassified to threatened (refer to Map 1 below, located after the Changes from the Proposed Rules section).
In addition, critical habitat was designated in that rulemaking.
In 50 CFR 17.95(a), we describe Isle Royale National Park, Michigan, and Minnesota wolf management zones 1, 2, and 3 (delineated in 50 CFR 17.40(d)(1)) as critical habitat.
We also promulgated special regulations under section 4(d) of the Act for operating a wolf management program in Minnesota at that time.
The depredation control portion of the special regulation was later modified (50 FR 50793; December 12, 1985); these special regulations are found in 50 CFR 17.40(d)(2).
On November 22, 1994, we designated areas in Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming as nonessential experimental populations in order to initiate gray wolf reintroduction projects in central Idaho and the Greater Yellowstone Area (59 FR 60252, 59 FR 60266).
On January 12, 1998, a nonessential experimental population was established for the Mexican gray wolf in portions of Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas (63 FR 1752).
These experimental population designations also contain special
[[Page 15807]]
regulations that govern take of wolves within these geographic areas (codified at 50 CFR 17.84(i) and (k)).
(Refer to Currently Designated Nonessential Experimental Populations of Gray Wolves, section below, for more details.)
We have received several petitions during the past decade requesting consideration to delist the gray wolf in all or part of the 48 conterminous States.
We subsequently published findings that these petitions did not present substantial information that delisting gray wolves in all or part of the conterminous 48 States may be warranted (54 FR 16380, April 24, 1989; 55 CFR 48656, November 30, 1990; 63 FR 55839, October 19, 1998).
On July 13, 2000, we published a proposal (65 FR 43450) to revise the current listing of the gray wolf across most of the conterminous United States (Refer to Map 2 following Changes from the Proposed Rules section below).
That proposal also included recommended wording for 3 special regulations that would apply to those wolves proposed for reclassification to threatened status.
The proposal was followed by a 4-month public comment period, during which we held 14 public hearings and many additional informational meetings in those areas of the country where wolves and people would be most affected by the proposed changes.
Following the development of our July 2000 proposal, but prior to its publication, we received petitions from Mr. Lawrence Krak, of Gilman, Wisconsin, and from the Minnesota Conservation Federation.
Mr. Krak's petition requested the delisting of gray wolves in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
The Minnesota Conservation Federation requested the delisting of gray wolves in the Western Great Lakes DPS.
Because the data reviews that would result from the processing of these petitions would be a subset of the review begun by our July 2000 proposal, we did not initiate separate reviews in response to those two petitions.
Subsequent to our proposal, but after the close of the comment period, we received petitions from Defenders of Wildlife to list gray wolf DPSs in the southern Rocky Mountains, northern California-- southern Oregon, and western Washington, and to grant endangered status to gray wolves in those DPSs.
Because wolves were already protected as endangered in those areas, we took no action on these petitions.
Additionally, there are no wolf populations in those areas, and a DPS cannot be designated for an area that is unoccupied by a population of the species of concern.
Since then, we have received a petition from Mr. Karl Knuchel on behalf of the Friends of Northern Yellowstone Elk Herd Inc.
Mr. Knuchel's petition requested the delisting of gray wolves in the Rocky Mountains.
Because the data review that would result from the processing of this petition would be a subset of the review begun by this rulemaking, we will not initiate action on this petition until after publication of this rule.
E. Summary of Issues Related to This Final Rule
Purpose and Definitions of the Act The primary purpose of the Act is to prevent animal and plant species endangerment and extinction.
One of the ways the Act does this is to require the Service to identify species that meet the Act's definitions of endangered and threatened species, to add those species to the Federal Lists of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants (50 CFR 17.11 and 17.12, respectively), and to plan and implement conservation measures to improve their status to the point at which they no longer need the protections of the Act.
When that protection is no longer needed, we take steps to remove (delist) the species from the Federal lists.
If a species is listed as endangered, we may first reclassify it to threatened status as an intermediate step before its eventual delisting; however, reclassification to threatened status is not required prior to delisting.
Section 3 of the Act provides the following definitions that are relevant to this rule: Endangered species--Any species which is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range; Threatened species--Any species which is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range; and Species--Includes any subspecies of fish or wildlife or plants, and any distinct population segment of any species of vertebrate fish or wildlife which interbreeds when mature.
(See additional discussion in the Distinct Population Segments Under Our Vertebrate Population Policy section, below.)
Distinct Population Segments Under Our Vertebrate Population Policy The Act's definition of the term ``species'' includes ``any distinct population segment of any species of vertebrate fish or wildlife which interbreeds when mature.''
On February 7, 1996, we, in conjunction with the National Marine Fisheries Service, adopted a policy governing the recognition of distinct population segments (DPSs) for purposes of listing, reclassifying, and delisting vertebrate species under the Act (61 FR 4722).
This policy, sometimes referred to as the ``Vertebrate Population Policy,'' guides the Services in recognizing DPSs that satisfy the definition of ``species'' under the Act.
To be recognized as a DPS, a group of vertebrate animals must satisfy tests of discreteness and significance.
To be considered discrete, a group of vertebrate animals must be markedly separated from other populations of the same taxon by physical, physiological, ecological, or behavioral factors or by an international governmental boundary that coincides with differences in control of exploitation, management of habitat, conservation status, or regulatory mechanisms.
A population does not have to be completely isolated by such factors from other populations of its parent taxon in order to be considered discrete.
The significance of a potential DPS is assessed in light of its importance to the taxon to which it belongs.
Evidence of significance includes, but is not limited to, the use of an unusual or unique ecological setting; a marked difference in genetic characteristics; or the occupancy of an area that, if devoid of the species, would result in a significant gap in the range of the taxon.
If a group of vertebrate animals is determined to be both discrete and significant, it is then evaluated to determine whether it meets the definition of threatened or endangered based on the five listing factors (section 4(a)(1) of the Act).
If it is recovered, a DPS can be delisted.
Although the Vertebrate Population Policy does not allow State or other intra-national governmental boundaries to be used in determining the discreteness of a potential DPS, a State boundary may be used as a boundary of convenience in order to clearly identify the geographic area included within a DPS designation when the State boundary incidentally separates two DPSs that are judged to be discrete on other grounds.
It is important to note that a DPS is a listed entity under the Act, and is treated the same as a listed species or subspecies.
It is listed, protected, subject to interagency consultation, and recovered just as any other threatened or endangered species or subspecies.
A DPS frequently will have its own recovery plan and its own recovery goals.
As with a species or subspecies, a DPS recovery program is not required to seek restoration of the animal
[[Page 15808]]
throughout the entire geographic area of the listed entity, but only to the point at which it no longer meets the definition of a threatened or endangered species.
Distinct Population Segments and Experimental Populations The Act does not provide a definition for the term ``population.''
However, the Act uses the term ``population'' in two different concepts--distinct population segments and experimental populations.
These two concepts were added to the original Act at different times and are used in different contexts.
The term ``distinct population segment'' is part of the statutory definition of a ``species'' and is significant for listing, delisting, and reclassification purposes, under section 4 of the Act.
Our Vertebrate Population Policy (61 FR 4722; February 7, 1996) defines a DPS as one or more groups of members of a species or subspecies within a portion of that species' or subspecies' geographic distribution that meets established criteria regarding discreteness and significance.
Congress included the DPS concept in the Act, recognizing that a listing, reclassification, or delisting action may, in some circumstances, be more appropriately applied over something less than the entire area in which a species or subspecies is found or was known to occur in order to protect and recover organisms in a more timely and cost-effective manner.
In contrast, Congress added the experimental population concept to give the Secretary another tool to aid in the conservation of ``species'' (i.e., species, subspecies, or DPSs) that have already been listed under the Act.
The Act also requires that an experimental population must be geographically separate from existing populations of the species.
The term ``population'' as used in the experimental population program is necessarily a flexible concept, depending upon the organism involved and its biological requirements for successfully breeding, reproducing, and establishing itself in the reintroduction area.
For purposes of gray wolf reintroduction by means of experimental populations in central Idaho and Yellowstone National Park, we needed to examine the biological characteristics of the species to determine if the reintroduced wolves would be geographically separate from other gray wolf populations.
We defined a wolf population to be two breeding pairs, each successfully raising two or more young for two consecutive years in a recovery area (Service 1994a).
This wolf population definition was used to evaluate all wolves in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains to determine if, and where, gray wolf populations might exist.
We determined that gray wolves in northwestern Montana qualified as a wolf population under this definition and that this population was geographically separated from the potential experimental population areas.
We therefore designated the two experimental population areas and began gray wolf reintroductions to establish the two experimental populations.
Because of these different purposes for experimental populations and distinct population segments, a DPS can contain several experimental populations, or a combination of experimental and nonexperimental populations.
Refer to the Designation of Distinct Population Segments section below, for further discussion and analysis of how our Vertebrate Population Policy has been applied in this rule.
F. Currently Designated Nonessential Experimental Populations of Gray Wolves
Section 10(j) of the Act gives the Secretary of the Interior the authority to designate populations of listed species that are reintroduced outside their current range, but within their probable historical range, as ``experimental populations'' for the purposes of promoting the recovery of those species by establishing additional wild populations.
Such a designation increases our flexibility in managing reintroduced populations, because experimental populations are treated as threatened species under the Act.
Threatened status, in comparison to endangered status, allows somewhat more liberal issuance of take permits for conservation and educational purposes, imposes fewer permit requirements on recovery activities by cooperating States, and allows the promulgation of special regulations that are consistent with the conservation of the species.
For each experimental population, the Secretary is required to determine whether it is essential to the continued existence of the species.
If the Secretary determines that an experimental population is ``nonessential,'' then for the purposes of section 7 of the Act (Interagency Cooperation), the population is treated as a species proposed to be listed as a threatened or endangered species, except when the population occurs within areas of the National Wildlife Refuge System or the National Park System.
Proposed species are subject to the advisory section 7(a)(4) conference process rather than the formal section 7(a)(2) consultation process.
The Secretary has designated three nonessential experimental population areas for the gray wolf, and wolves have subsequently been reintroduced into these areas.
These nonessential experimental population areas are the Yellowstone Experimental Population Area, the Central Idaho Experimental Population Area, and the Mexican Wolf Experimental Population Area.
The first two of these are intended to further the recovery of gray wolves in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains, and the third is part of our Mexican wolf recovery program, as described in their respective recovery plans (Service 1982, 1987) (Refer to Map 1, after the Changes from the Proposed Rules section below.)
The Yellowstone Experimental Population Area consists of that portion of Idaho east of Interstate Highway 15; that portion of Montana that is east of Interstate Highway 15 and south of the Missouri River from Great Falls, Montana, to the eastern Montana border; and all of Wyoming (59 FR 60252; November 22, 1994).
The Central Idaho Experimental Population Area consists of that portion of Idaho that is south of Interstate Highway 90 and west of Interstate 15; and that portion of Montana south of Interstate 90, west of Interstate 15, and south of Highway 12 west of Missoula (59 FR 60266; November 22, 1994).
The special regulations for these two experimental populations allow flexible management of wolves, including authorization for private citizens to take wolves in the act of attacking livestock on private land.
These rules also provide a permit process that similarly allows the taking, under certain circumstances, of wolves in the act of attacking livestock grazing on public land.
In addition, they allow opportunistic noninjurious harassment of wolves by livestock producers on private and public grazing lands, and designated government employees may perform lethal and nonlethal control efforts to remove problem wolves under specified circumstances.
On January 12, 1998, we established a similar third nonessential experimental population area to reintroduce the Mexican gray wolf into its historical habitat in the southwestern States.
The Mexican Gray Wolf Nonessential Experimental Population Area consists of that portion of Arizona lying south of Interstate Highway 40 and north of Interstate Highway 10; that portion of New Mexico lying south of Interstate Highway 40 and north of Interstate Highway 10 in the west and north of the Texas-New Mexico border
[[Page 15809]]
in the east; and that part of Texas lying north of U.S. Highway 62/180 (63 FR 1752).
This final rule will not affect any of these three existing nonessential experimental populations for gray wolves, nor will it affect the existing special regulations that apply to them.
G. Gray Wolf-Dog Hybrids
The many gray wolf-dog hybrids in North America have no value to gray wolf recovery programs and are not provided the protections of the Act.
Wolf-dog hybrids, when they escape from captivity or are intentionally released into the wild, can interfere with gray wolf recovery programs in several ways.
They are familiar with humans, so they commonly are attracted to the vicinity of farms and residences, leading to unwarranted fears that they are wild wolves hunting in pastures and yards.
In such situations they may exhibit bold behavior patterns and show little fear of humans, leading to human safety concerns.
They generally have poor hunting skills; thus, they may resort to preying on domestic animals, while the blame for their depredations is commonly and mistakenly placed on wild wolves.
These behaviors, when reported in the media or spread by word of mouth, can erode public support for wolf recovery efforts.
In addition, although unlikely, feral wolf-dog hybrids may mate with wild wolves, resulting in the introduction of dog genes into wild wolf populations.
For these reasons, this rule does not extend the protections of the Act to gray wolf-dog hybrids, regardless of the geographic location of the capture of their pure wolf ancestors.
In recovery programs for other threatened or endangered species, hybrids and hybridization could perhaps play an important role.
This decision to not extend the protections of the Act to gray wolf-dog hybrids should not be taken as an indication of our position on the potential importance of hybrids and hybridization to recovery programs for other species.
Determining the importance and treatment under the Act of hybrids requires a species-by-species evaluation.
H. Conservation and Recovery of the Gray Wolf
Understanding the Service's strategy for gray wolf recovery first requires an understanding of the meaning of ``recover'' and ``conserve'' under the Act.
``Conserve'' is defined in the Act itself (section 3(3)) while ``recovery'' is defined in the Act's implementing regulations at 50 CFR 402.02.
Conserve is defined, in part, as ``the use of all measures and procedures which are necessary to bring any endangered species or threatened species to the point at which the measures provided pursuant to this Act are no longer necessary.''
Recovery is defined as ``improvement in the status of listed species to the point at which listing is no longer appropriate under the criteria set out in section 4(a)(1) of the Act.''
Essentially, recover and conserve both mean to bring a species to the point at which it no longer needs the protections of the Act, because the species is no longer threatened or endangered.
Important Principles of Conservation Biology Representation, resiliency, and redundancy are three principles of conservation biology that are generally recognized as being necessary to conserve the biodiversity of an area (Shaffer and Stein 2000).
Although the Act is not a biodiversity conservation statute, in some ways it functions as such on a single species level.
Thus, we can and should apply these principles when establishing goals for individual species' recovery under the Act.
The principle of representation is the need to preserve ``some of everything''--every species, every habitat, and every biotic community--so biodiversity can be maintained.
At the species level it also calls for preserving the genetic diversity that remains within a species, in order to maximize the species' ability to cope with short- term environmental variability and to adapt and evolve in response to long-term environmental change.
Redundancy and resiliency both deal with preserving ``enough to last,'' but they address it at distinctly different levels.
Redundancy addresses the need for a sufficient number of populations of a species, while resiliency deals with the necessary size (numerical and geographic) of those individual populations that are needed for species' persistence over time.
Larger populations are more resilient to environmental changes and other threats to their existence.
The redundancy that comes from preserving multiple populations provides additional assurances of species' survival.
(In the broader conservation biology context, these two principles are also applied to biotic communities and ecosystems.)
Due to the vast array of life forms that are potentially subject to the protections of the Act, and the variety of physical, biological, and cultural factors acting on them, these three principles must be applied on a species-by-species basis to determine the appropriate recovery goals.
For example, addressing the need for redundancy and resiliency for nonmotile organisms, species of limited range (for example, island or insular species), or those species restricted to linear features of the environment (stream or shoreline species) should be expected to result in recovery goals that are quite different from goals developed for habitat generalist, widely distributed, and/or highly mobile species.
Application of These Principles to the Gray Wolf DPSs Because this rule finalizes three new DPS listings for the gray wolf (see ``Designation of Distinct Population Segments'' below), we evaluated what is necessary for long-term extinction avoidance in each DPS, and the extent of progress made to date toward that goal in each DPS.
This examined whether recovery is underway across a significant portion of each DPS to ensure long-term viability when that recovery is completed.
Each DPS evaluation used the principles of conservation biology and focused on the size, number, makeup, and distribution of wolves in the individual DPSs, and the threats manifest there, in order to determine if the gray wolf is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of the respective DPS. Eastern DPS The original Recovery Plan for the Eastern Timber Wolf and the 1992 revision of that plan (Service 1978, 1992a) established and reiterated criteria to identify the point at which long-term population viability would be assured in the eastern United States (Recovery Plans for the gray wolf are discussed in more detail below).
Although the 1978 Recovery Plan predated the scientific field of conservation biology, it embodied conservation biology tenets in its recovery criteria, and those criteria were carried forward unchanged in the 1992 revised recovery plan.
The Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team was subsequently queried by the Service in 1997, and at that time the Eastern Team reviewed the criteria and found them to be adequate and sufficient to ensure long-term population viability (Peterson in litt. 1997).
The principles of representation, resiliency, and redundancy are fully incorporated into the recovery criteria developed by the Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team.
The need to maintain the Minnesota wolf population is believed to be vital, because the remaining genetic diversity of gray
[[Page 15810]]
wolves in the eastern United States was carried by the several hundred wolves who survived in the State into the early 1970s.
The Eastern Team insisted that the remnant Minnesota wolf population must be maintained and expanded to achieve wolf recovery in the eastern United States, and the successful growth of that remnant population has maximized the representation of that genetic diversity among Midwestern gray wolves.
Furthermore, the Eastern Team specified that the Minnesota wolf population would increase to 1250-1400 animals, which would increase the likelihood of maintaining its genetic diversity over the long-term, and would provide the resiliency to reduce the adverse impacts of unpredictable chance demographic and environmental events.
The Minnesota wolf population currently is estimated to be double that numerical goal.
The need for redundancy was clearly recognized by the Eastern Team members, and they specified that it be accomplished by establishing a second population of gray wolves in the eastern United States.
They identified several potential locations for the second population.
To ensure that the second population also had sufficient resiliency to survive chance demographic and environmental fluctuations, the Recovery Teams specified a minimum size that must be maintained for a minimum of five years by the second population.
If the second population was isolated from the larger Minnesota wolf population, the recovery criteria required that the second population contain at least 200 wolves for a minimum of 5 years.
However, if it was near the Minnesota wolf population, the 2 populations would function as a metapopulation rather than as 2 separate and isolated populations; in that case the second population would be viable if it maintained 100 wolves for at least 5 years.
A metapopulation is a conservation biology concept whereby the spatial distribution of a population has a major influence on its viability.
In nature many populations exist as partially isolated sets of subpopulations-termed ``metapopulations.''
A metapopulation is widely recognized by conservation biologists as being more secure over the long-term than are several isolated populations that contain the same total number of packs and individuals (Service 1994a, Appendix 9, Dr. Steven Fritts).
This is because adverse affects experienced by one of its subpopulations resulting from genetic drift, demographic shifts, and local environmental fluctuations can be countered by occasional influxes of individuals and their genetic diversity from the other components of the metapopulation.
The close proximity to the larger Minnesota population would allow wolves to move between the two populations and would provide substantial genetic and demographic support for the smaller second population.
Therefore, the Recovery Team specified a lower recovery goal of 100 wolves if a second population would develop in a location that would allow it to be closely tied to (that is, less than 200 miles from) the Minnesota wolf population.
Such a second wolf population has developed in Wisconsin and the adjacent Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
This second population is less than 200 miles from the Minnesota wolf population, and it has had a late winter population exceeding 100 animals since 1994.
As described elsewhere in this final rule, there is no convincing evidence in recent decades of another wild gray wolf population in the United States east of Michigan, so the wolves in the western Great Lakes States represents all the known gray wolf genetic diversity found in the Eastern DPS.
In other words, the area in the western Great Lakes States where the wolf currently exists represents the entire range of the species within the Eastern DPS.
Furthermore, the number of wolves in the Eastern DPS greatly exceeds the recovery goals of (1) a secure wolf population in Minnesota and (2) a second population of 100 wolves for 5 successive years, and thus contains sufficient numbers and distribution (resiliency and redundancy) to ensure the long-term survival of gray wolves within the DPS.
The wolf's progress toward recovery in the Eastern DPS, together with the threats that remain to the wolf within the DPS, indicates that the gray wolf is not in danger of extinction in its entire range within the DPS.
Moreover, the progress towards recovery of each of the two populations that comprise the metapopulation within the western Great Lakes States demonstrates that the species is not in danger of extinction in any significant portion of the range of the species within the DPS.
We therefore conclude that gray wolves are no longer properly classified as endangered in the Eastern DPS.
Western DPS Similarly, the reclassification and recovery criteria that were found in the Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan (Service 1987) have been subsequently revised following peer review (Bangs 2002) to provide sufficient representation, resiliency, and redundancy to ensure the species is no longer endangered in the Western DPS when those criteria are met.
Large numbers of wolves in three widely-spaced locations in the Northern U.S. Rockies achieve the desired resiliency and redundancy.
Furthermore, the recovery program is based on 3 founder populations from 3 different Canadian source populations having high levels of genetic diversity (Forbes and Boyd 1997, Fritts et al. 1997).
This has achieved sufficient representation of the genetic diversity from the closest thriving wolf populations in Canada, and allowed the Northern U.S. Rockies wolves to benefit from the local adaptions of those source populations.
Additionally, the northwest Montana population remains connected to the Canadian wolf population, providing a conduit for continuing genetic exchange with wolves farther to the north.
This connection is exemplified by wolves such as ``Opal,'' which was radio collared in Banff National Park in Alberta, Canada, and subsequently moved south and successfully raised pups as the alpha female of the Boulder Pack in northwestern Montana.
The three initially isolated gray wolf populations in northwestern Montana, central Idaho, and the Greater Yellowstone Area have expanded in range and increased in numbers to the point that they are no longer isolated from each other and the movement of individual wolves from one to another is becoming more common.
Wolf dispersal and interbreeding has been documented between all three core recovery areas within the northern Rocky Mountains (see Dispersal of Western Gray Wolves).
They are now functioning as a large metapopulation rather than as three isolated populations.
The revised recovery criteria specify that at least 30 packs, comprising at least 300 wolves, should exist across the metapopulation's range for a minimum of 3 years.
Twenty packs (200 or more wolves) across the metapopulation for 3 years would indicate the species is no longer endangered in the DPS and should be considered for reclassification to threatened status.
There have been at least 300 wolves in a minimum of 30 packs since the end of 2000, and at the end of 2001 there were 563 wolves in 34 packs in the Northern U.S. Rockies.
There have been over 200 wolves in at least 20 packs since the end of 1997.
The gray wolf's substantial success in meeting the revised recovery criteria for the Northern Rocky Mountains area ensures the wolf's long- term survival within its range in the Western DPS (i.e., the area inhabited by the
[[Page 15811]]
metapopulation of gray wolves in the Northern Rocky Mountains).
We conclude, based both on the wolf's recovery progress, and on our assessment of the threats that will remain once the wolf is reclassified as threatened (including the continuation of the nonessential experimental population designation and its special regulations), that the gray wolf is not in danger of extinction throughout its range within the Western DPS.
Because the three initially isolated populations in the Western DPS now function as a single large metapopulation, and because there is no other population of wolves within the DPS, this conclusion applies to all parts of the wolf's range in the DPS, and so we also conclude that the wolf is not in danger of extinction within any significant portion of its range in the DPS.
The gray wolf therefore is no longer endangered throughout all or a significant portion of its range in the Western DPS.
Southwestern DPS The recovery program for the Southwestern (Mexican) gray wolf is based upon reintroductions of captive reared Mexican wolves to portions of their historical range in the Southwestern U.S. and Mexico.
These captive-reared wolves are the products of a carefully managed breeding program designed to preserve the remaining genetic diversity of the historical wolves in those areas and maximize the genetic diversity in the reintroduced population.
This propagation and reintroduction program ensures that the principle of representation is achieved in the Mexican wolf recovery program.
At this point, the Mexican wolf recovery program lacks a recovery goal.
A prime objective of 100 self-sustaining wolves in the wild was set in the 1982 Mexican Wolf Recovery Plan (Service 1982), but the Plan states that goal is preliminary, and is focused more on assuring the survival of wolves in the Southwest and Mexico, rather than on recovering and delisting them.
As more is learned about wolves and their conservation in the Southwest, the Service will endeavor to develop reclassification (endangered to threatened) and delisting criteria for the Mexican wolf.
When delisting criteria are developed, they too will incorporate the principles of representation, resiliency, and redundancy to assure the long-term survival of the Mexican wolf.
However, at this time we believe their geographic distribution, low numbers and population density, and relatively low rate of population increase indicate that the Mexican wolf recovery program has not achieved sufficient redundancy and resiliency to assure the long-term survival of the gray wolf in the Southwest and Mexico.
We conclude that the gray wolf continues to be in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range in the foreseeable future in the Southwestern DPS, and it remains properly classified as endangered in the DPS except where part of a nonessential experimental population.
I. Gray Wolf Recovery Plans
Section 4(f) of the Act directs us to develop and implement recovery plans for listed species.
In some cases, we appoint recovery teams of experts to assist in the writing of recovery plans and oversight of subsequent recovery efforts.
Once a species no longer meets the definition of endangered or threatened it is considered to be recovered and must be delisted.
Therefore, the restoration of a species throughout its historical range, or even throughout all the remaining suitable habitat, may not be necessary before a species may be delisted.
We initiated recovery programs for the originally listed subspecies of gray wolves by appointing recovery teams and developing and implementing recovery plans.
Recovery plans describe criteria that are used to assess a species' progress toward recovery, contain specific prioritized actions believed necessary to achieve the recovery criteria and objectives, and identify the most appropriate parties to implement the recovery actions.
Recovery plans contain criteria that are intended to trigger our consideration of the need to either reclassify (from endangered to threatened) or to delist a species due to improvements in its status.
Criteria are based upon factors that can be measured or otherwise objectively evaluated to document improvements in a species' biological status.
Examples of the type of criteria typically used are numbers of individuals, numbers and distribution of subgroups or populations of the species, rates of productivity of individuals and/or populations, protection of habitat, and reduction or elimination of threats to the species and its habitat.
The reclassification and recovery criteria contained in our recovery plans must be viewed in terms of the other currently available information.
In some cases, new information will demonstrate that reclassification or delisting is appropriate independent of the information in the recovery plan.
For example, our knowledge of a species and its conservation needs may be incomplete when the recovery plan is prepared.
The criteria are based on the best available scientific data and analysis at the time the plan is developed.
However, as recovery progresses and our knowledge of a species increases, we may need to reinterpret the original recovery goals, or even add or drop one or more recovery criteria.
If appropriate, and if funding and timing allow, we may revise or update recovery plans to reflect our new knowledge and modified recovery criteria.
However, revision of recovery plans or recovery criteria is not a required precursor to species reclassification or delisting.
The first gray wolf recovery plan was written for the eastern timber wolf, and it was approved on May 2, 1978 (Service 1978).
This recovery plan was later revised and was approved on January 31, 1992 (Service 1992a).
The 1978 Recovery Plan for the Eastern Timber Wolf (Eastern Plan) and its revision were intended to recover the eastern timber wolf, Canus lupus lycaon, believed at that time to be the only gray wolf subspecies that historically inhabited the United States east of the Great Plains.
Thus, the Eastern Plan covers a geographic triangle extending from Minnesota to Maine and into northeastern Florida.
The recovery plan for the eastern timber wolf was based on the best available information on wolf taxonomy at the time of its publication.
Since the publication of those recovery plans, various studies have produced conflicting results regarding the identity of the wolf that historically occupied the eastern States.
Therefore, this recovery program has focused on recovering the gray wolf population that survived in, and has expanded outward from, northeastern Minnesota, regardless of its subspecific identity.
(See the Taxonomy of Gray Wolves in the Eastern United States section above).
The Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan (Rocky Mountain Plan) was approved in 1980 and revised in 1987 (Service 1980, 1987).
The Rocky Mountain Plan states in its introduction that it should be understood to refer to ``gray wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains of the contiguous 48 States, rather than to a specific subspecies.''
The Rocky Mountain Plan focuses recovery efforts in Idaho, most of Montana, and Wyoming.
The Mexican Wolf Recovery Plan was approved in 1982 (Service 1982).
Based on a review of Southwestern (Mexican) subspecies of the gray wolf by Bogan and Mehlhop (1983), the plan combines the historical ranges of Canus lupus baileyi, C. l. monstrabilis, and the
[[Page 15812]]
presumed extinct C. l. mogollonensis (which historically occurred in parts of New Mexico and Arizona) to define the portions of Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, and Mexico where recovery of the Mexican wolf would be appropriate.
J. Recovery Progress of the Eastern Gray Wolf
The 1992 revised Eastern Plan has two delisting criteria.
The first criterion states that the survival of the wolf in Minnesota must be assured.
We, and the Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team (Rolf Peterson, Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team, in litt. 1997, 1998, 1999a, 1999b), believe that this first delisting criterion remains valid.
It identifies a need for reasonable assurances that future State and tribal wolf management practices and protection will maintain a viable recovered population of gray wolves within the borders of Minnesota for the foreseeable future.
While there is no specific numerical recovery criterion for the Minnesota wolf population, the Eastern Plan identified State subgoals for use by land managers and planners.
The Eastern Plan's subgoal for Minnesota is 1,251 to 1,400 wolves.
The second delisting criterion in the Eastern Plan states that at least one viable wolf population should be reestablished within the historical range of the eastern timber wolf outside of Minnesota and Isle Royale, Michigan.
The Eastern Plan provides two options for reestablishing this second viable wolf population.
If it is located more than 100 miles from the Minnesota wolf population, it would be considered ``isolated,'' and the frequency of movement of individuals and genetic material from one population to the other would likely be low or nonexistent.
Such an isolated population, in order to be self- sustaining, should consist of at least 200 wolves for at least 5 years (based upon late winter population estimates) to be considered viable.
Alternatively, if the second population is located within 100 miles of a self-sustaining wolf population (for example, the Minnesota wolf population), a reestablished population having a minimum of 100 wolves for at least 5 years would be considered viable.
Such a smaller population would be considered to be viable, because its proximity would allow frequent immigration of Minnesota wolves to supplement it numerically and genetically.
The Eastern Plan does not specify where in the eastern United States the second population should be reestablished.
Therefore, the second population could be located anywhere within the triangular Minnesota-Maine-Florida land area covered by the Eastern plan, except on Isle Royale, Michigan and within Minnesota.
While the 1978 Eastern Plan identified potential gray wolf restoration areas throughout the eastern States, extending as far south as the Great Smoky Mountains and adjacent areas in Tennessee, North Carolina, and Georgia, the revised 1992 Eastern Plan dropped from consideration the more southern potential restoration areas, because recovery efforts for the red wolf were being initiated in those areas (Service 1978, 1992a).
The 1992 Eastern Plan recommends reclassifying wolves in Wisconsin and Michigan from endangered to threatened status separately, recognizing that progress towards recovery may occur at differing rates in these two States.
The Plan specifies that wolves in Wisconsin could be reclassified to threatened if the population within the State remained at or above 80 wolves (late winter estimates) for 3 consecutive years.
The Plan does not contain a reclassification criterion for Michigan wolves.
Instead, it states that if Wisconsin wolves reached their reclassification criterion, consideration should also be given to reclassifying Michigan wolves.
However, with the subsequent increase in Michigan wolf numbers, it has frequently, but unofficially, been assumed that the ``80 wolves for 3 years'' criterion also would be applied to Michigan.
In other words, each State could be considered for reclassification if its wolf population reached 80 individuals or more for 3 successive years.
The Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team used these criteria in its recommendation that the gray wolf in the western Great Lakes States be reclassified to threatened as soon as possible (Peterson in litt. 1997, 1998, 1999a, 1999b).
The Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team clarified the second population delisting criterion, which considers the wolves in northern Wisconsin and the adjacent Upper Peninsula of Michigan to be a single population.
The Recovery Team stated that the numerical delisting criterion for the Wisconsin-Michigan population will be achieved when 6 successive late winter wolf surveys document that the population equaled or exceeded 100 wolves (excluding Isle Royale wolves) for 5 consecutive years (Rolf Peterson, in litt. 1998).
Because the Wisconsin-Michigan wolf population was first known to have exceeded 100 wolves in the late winter 1993-94 survey, the numerical delisting criterion was satisfied in early 1999, based upon late winter 1998-99 data (Beyer et al. 2001, Wydeven et al. 1999).
The Eastern Plan has no goals or criteria for the gray wolf population on the 546-sq km (210-sq mi) Isle Royale, Michigan.
This small and isolated wolf population is not expected to make a significant numerical contribution to gray wolf recovery, although long-term research on this wolf population has added a great deal to our knowledge of the species.
Over the last several years, the Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Team has consistently recommended that we designate a DPS in the western Great Lakes area and proceed with reclassification of wolves in that DPS to threatened status as soon as possible.
The Eastern Team recommended that the DPS include a wide buffer around the existing populations of wolves in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
This buffer was described as lands that may not be regularly occupied by wolves but which may be temporarily used by dispersing wolves.
Thus, the Eastern Team suggested the DPS also include the States of North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, Illinois, Indiana, and Ohio (Peterson in litt. 1997, 1998, 1999a, 1999b).
Minnesota During the pre-1965 period of wolf bounties and legal public trapping, wolves persisted in the more remote northeastern areas of Minnesota.
Estimates of population levels of Minnesota wolves prior to listing under the Act in 1974 include 450 to 700 in 1950-53 (Fuller et al. 1992, Stenlund 1955), 350 to 700 in 1963 (Cahalane 1964), 750 in 1970 (Leirfallom 1970), 736 to 950 in 1971-72 (Fuller et al. 1992), and 500 to 1,000 in 1973 (Mech and Rausch 1975).
While these estimates were based upon varying methodologies and are not directly comparable, they all agree in estimating the wolf population in Minnesota, the only significant population in the Lower 48 States during those time- periods, at 1,000 or fewer animals preceding their listing under the Act.
Various population estimates in Minnesota have indicated increasing numbers after the wolf was listed as endangered under the Act.
A population of 1,000 to 1,200 was estimated by L. David Mech for 1976 (Service 1978), and 1,235 wolves in 138 packs were estimated for the winter of 1978-79 (Berg and Kuehn 1982).
In 1988-89, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources (MN DNR) repeated the 1978-79 survey, and also used a second method to estimate wolf numbers in the State.
The resulting
[[Page 15813]]
independent estimates were 1,500 and 1,750 wolves in at least 233 packs (Fuller et al. 1992).
During the winter of 1997-98, a Statewide wolf population and distribution survey was repeated by MN DNR, using methods similar to those of the two previous surveys.
Field staff of Federal, State, tribal, and county land management agencies and wood products companies were queried to identify occupied wolf range in Minnesota.
Data from five concurrent radio telemetry studies tracking 36 packs, representative of the entire Minnesota wolf range, were used to determine average pack size and territory area.
Those figures were then used to calculate a Statewide estimate of pack numbers and the overall wolf population in the occupied range, with single (nonpack) wolves factored into the estimate (Berg and Benson 1999).
The 1997-98 survey concluded that approximately 2,445 wolves existed in about 385 packs in Minnesota during that winter period.
This figure indicates the continued growth of the Minnesota wolf population at an average rate of about 3.7 percent annually.
The Minnesota wolf population has shown approximately this average annual rate of increase since 1970 (Berg and Benson 1999, Fuller et al. 1992).
No rigorous survey of the Minnesota wolf population has been conducted since the winter of 1997-98, but biologists generally accept that the population has increased, and will continue to increase, perhaps at a slower rate and with occasional fluctuations (Mech 1998, Paul 2001).
Simultaneous with the increase in wolf numbers in Minnesota there has been a parallel expansion of the area in which wolves are routinely found.
During 1948-53 the major wolf range was estimated to be about 31,080 sq km (11,954 sq mi) (Stenlund 1955).
A 1970 questionnaire survey resulted in an estimated wolf range of 38,400 sq km (14,769 sq mi) (calculated by Fuller et al. 1992 from Leirfallom 1970).
Fuller et al. (1992), using data from Berg and Kuehn (1982), estimated that Minnesota primary wolf range included 36,500 sq km (14,038 sq mi) during winter 1978-79.
By 1982-83, pairs or breeding packs of wolves were estimated to occupy an area of 57,050 sq km (22,000 sq mi) in northern Minnesota (Mech et al. 1988).
That study also identified an additional 40,500 sq km (15,577 sq mi) of peripheral range, where habitat appeared suitable but no wolves or only lone wolves existed.
The 1988-89 study produced an estimate of 60,200 sq km (23,165 sq mi) as the contiguous wolf range at that time in Minnesota (Fuller et al. 1992), an increase of 65 percent over the primary range calculated for 1978-79.
The 1997-98 study concluded that the contiguous wolf range had expanded to 88,325 sq km (33,971 sq mi), a 47 percent increase in 9 years (Berg and Benson 1999).
The wolf population in Minnesota has recovered to the point that its contiguous range covered approximately 40 percent of the State during 1997-98.
Wisconsin Wolves were considered to have been extirpated from Wisconsin by 1960.
No formal attempts were made to monitor the State's wolf population from 1960 until 1979.
From 1960 through 1975 individual wolves and an occasional wolf pair were reported.
However, no evidence exists of any wolf reproduction occurring in Wisconsin, and the wolves that were reported may have been dispersing animals from Minnesota.
Wolf population monitoring by the WI DNR began in 1979 and estimated a Statewide population of 25 wolves at that time.
This population remained relatively stable for several years, then declined slightly to approximately 15 to 19 wolves in the mid-1980s.
In the late 1980s, the Wisconsin wolf population began an increase that continues today.
WI DNR intensively monitors its wolf population, using a combination of aerial, ground, and satellite radio telemetry, snow tracking, and wolf sign surveys (Wydeven et al. 1995, 2001a).
The number of wolves in each pack is estimated based on the totality of ground and aerial observations made of the individual packs over the winter.
During the winter of 2000-01, 30 of Wisconsin's 66 wolf packs (45 percent) had members carrying active radio transmitters much of the season.
Twenty-seven of these monitored wolves were located 20 or more times during the mid-September to mid-April period.
Five additional radio-tracked wolves were loners, and one was in an adjacent Minnesota pack.
Minimum wolf population estimates (late-winter counts) for 1994 through 2001 are 57, 83, 99, 148, 178, 205, 248, and 257 animals, comprising 14, 18, 28, 35, 47, 57, 66, and 66 packs respectively (Wydeven et al. 2001a).
WI DNR preliminarily estimated that about 320 wolves in 70 to 80 packs were in the State in late winter 2001-2002 (WI DNR 2002, Wydeven et al. 2002).
Because the monitoring methods focus on wolf packs, it is believed that lone wolves are undercounted in Wisconsin, and that, as a result, these population estimates are probably slight underestimates of the actual wolf population within the State.
In 1995, wolves were first documented in Jackson County, Wisconsin, an area well to the south of the northern Wisconsin area occupied by other Wisconsin wolf packs.
The number of wolves in this central Wisconsin area has dramatically expanded since that time.
During the winter of 2000-2001, there were 34 wolves in 9 packs, plus 3 lone wolves, in and around Jackson County (Wydeven et al. 2001a).
During the winter of 2000-2001, 10 wolves occurred on Native American reservations in Wisconsin, and this increased to at least 13 wolves in the winter of 2001-2002 (WI DNR 2002, Wydeven pers. comm. 2002).
These animals were on the Bad River (8) and Lac Courte Oreilles Reservations (5).
There also is evidence of individual wolves on the Lac du Flambeau and Menominee Reservations, with a high likelihood of wolf packs developing on these reservation in the near future (Wydeven pers. comm. 2002).
Wolf numbers in Wisconsin alone greatly surpassed the second population goal of 200 animals identified in the Eastern Plan and exceeded its reclassification criterion several years ago.
Although population growth nearly stalled between 1999-2000 and 2000-2001, a resumption of the steady upward trend was again quite apparent in the preliminary late-winter 2001-2002 estimate of 320.
(Refer to the Disease or predation section below for additional discussion.)
Michigan Michigan wolves were extirpated as a reproducing population long before they were listed as endangered in 1974.
Prior to 1991, and excluding Isle Royale, the last known breeding population of wild Michigan wolves occurred in the mid-1950s.
As wolves began to reoccupy northern Wisconsin, the Michigan Department of Natural Resources (MI DNR) began noting single wolves at various locations in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
In the late 1980s, a wolf pair was verified in the central Upper Peninsula and produced pups in 1991.
Since that time, wolf packs have spread throughout the Upper Peninsula, with immigration occurring from both Wisconsin on the west and Ontario on the east.
They now are found in every county of the Upper Peninsula.
The MI DNR annually monitors the wolf population in the Upper Peninsula by intensive late winter tracking surveys that focus on each pack.
Pack locations are derived from previous surveys, citizen reports, and ground tracking of radio-collared wolves.
During the winter of 2000-2001 at least 50 wolf packs
[[Page 15814]]
were resident in the Upper Peninsula.
Approximately 40 percent of these packs had members with active radio tracking collars (Hammill pers. comm. 2002.)
Care is taken to avoid double-counting wolves, and a variety of evidence is used to distinguish adjacent packs and accurately count their members (Beyer et al. 2001).
These annual surveys have documented the following minimum late winter estimates of wolves occurring in the Upper Peninsula from 1994 through 2001: 57 wolves in 1994, 80 in 1995, 116 in 1996, 112 in 1997, 140 in 1998, 174 in 1999, 216 in 2000, and 249 in 2001.
In recent years the annual rate of increase has been about 24 percent (MI DNR 1997, 1999a, 2001).
The MI DNR estimated a minimum of 278 wolves in the Upper Peninsula in late winter 2001-2002 (MI DNR 2002).
The Upper Peninsula Michigan wolf population has exceeded the unofficial criterion of 80 animals for reclassification from endangered to threatened status.
Similar to the situation in Wisconsin, the Upper Peninsula wolf population by itself has surpassed the goal of 200 wolves for a second population, as specified in the Eastern Plan.
During the winter of 1997-98, one wolf pack composed of four animals lived on lands of the Keewenaw Bay Indian Community.
No other wolves are known to be primarily using tribal lands in Michigan (Hammill in litt. 1998).
The wolf population of Isle Royale National Park, Michigan, is not considered to be an important factor in the recovery or long-term survival of wolves in the western Great Lakes States.
This population is small, varying from 12 to 29 animals over the last 15 years, and is almost completely isolated from other wolf populations (Peterson et al. 1998, pers. comm. 1999).
For these reasons, the Eastern Plan does not include these wolves in its recovery criteria and recommends only the continuation of research and complete protection for these wolves (Service 1992a).
Although there have been reports of wolf sightings in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan, including a 1997 report of 2 large canids believed to be wolves on the ice west of the Mackinaw Bridge, there is no evidence that there are resident wolves in the Lower Peninsula.
However, recognizing the likelihood that small numbers of gray wolves will eventually move into the Lower Peninsula, MI DNR has begun a revision of its Wolf Management Plan to incorporate provisions for wolf management there (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans'').
Northeastern United States Wolves were extirpated from the northeastern United States by 1900.
Few credible observations of wolves were reported in the Northeast during most of the 20th century.
However, in 1993 a single female wolf was killed in western Maine, and in 1996 a second wolf or wolf-like canid was trapped and killed in central Maine.
Another wolf-like canid was mistaken for a coyote and killed in 1997 in northern Vermont.
In early 2002 a 29 kg (64 lb) apparent wolf was killed by a trapper in southeastern Quebec, 20 miles from the New Hampshire border; tissue samples are undergoing genetic analysis.
These records and other observations and signs of large, unidentified canids in Maine during recent years led to speculation that wolves may be dispersing into the northeastern United States from nearby occupied habitat in Canada.
Many of the characteristics of the unidentified canids are consistent with an animal intermediate between the eastern coyote and the gray wolf.
Private conservation organizations, the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, the New York Department of Environmental Conservation, and the Service are continuing to seek evidence of the presence of wild wolves in northern New York and New England.
However, at this time there is no firm evidence that a breeding population of wolves or wolf-like animals exists in the northeastern United States.
A recent Geographic Information System analysis evaluated the potential for wolf dispersal from southern Quebec and Ontario into the northeastern United States (Harrison and Chapin 1998).
The study also estimated the amount of suitable wolf habitat present in northern New York and other New England States, and with Wydeven et al. (1998) evaluated the likelihood of natural wolf colonization from existing occupied wolf range in Canada.
These studies, and Mladenoff and Sickley (1998), found that sufficient suitable wolf habitat is available in the Adirondack Park region of New York and in Maine and northern New Hampshire.
However, the New York habitat is relatively isolated, and the authors concluded that natural recolonization is unlikely to occur there.
Furthermore, while there are relatively narrow potential dispersal corridors connecting expansive wolf habitat in Maine and New Hampshire with existing wolf populations north of Quebec City, there are significant barriers to dispersal, including about 18 km (11 mi) of the St. Lawrence River, an adjacent four lane highway, rail lines, and dense human developments that may preclude the movement of a sufficient number of wolves from Canada into Maine (Harrison and Chapin 1997).
In the study on the feasibility of wolf reintroduction in the Adirondacks, Paquet et al. (1999) found that suitable habitat for sustaining a small population of gray wolves is present, but that habitat fragmentation within the Adirondack Park and the lack of linkages to occupied wolf areas to the north suggest that wolves would not persist there without periodic human intervention.
As a result, the authors conclude that the ecological conditions in the Adirondack Park dictate against a successful reintroduction of gray wolves.
Other Areas in the Eastern United States The increasing numbers of wolves in Minnesota and the accompanying expansion of their range westward and southwestward in the State have led to an increase in dispersing, mostly young, wolves that have been documented in North and South Dakota in recent years.
An examination of skull morphology of North and South Dakota wolves indicates that of eight examined, seven likely had dispersed from Minnesota; the eighth probably came from Manitoba, Canada (Licht and Fritts 1994).
Genetic analysis of an additional gray wolf killed in 2001 in extreme northwestern South Dakota indicates that it, too, originated from the Minnesota-Wisconsin-Michigan wolf population (Straughan and Fain 2002).
The low potential for the establishment of a viable and self-sustaining wolf population in North and South Dakota, and the belief that all or most wolves in the Dakotas are biologically part of the Minnesota- Wisconsin-Michigan wolf population, leads us to conclude that any wolves in these States should be included in the Eastern Gray Wolf DPS.
In October 2001, a wolf was killed in north-central Missouri by a farmer who believed it was a coyote.
The wolf's ear tag identified it as having originated from the western portion of Michigan's Upper Peninsula, where it had been captured as a juvenile in July of 1999.
Wolves like these and others described below in the Western DPS are expected to continue to disperse from the core recovery populations and move into areas where wolf numbers are extremely low or nonexistent.
Unless they return to a core recovery population and join or start a pack there, they are unlikely to contribute to wolf recovery.
While it is possible for them to disperse and encounter another wolf, mate, and even reproduce,
[[Page 15815]]
throughout much of the Midwest the lack of large expanses of unfragmented public land will make it difficult for wolf packs to persist in new areas without causing significant conflicts with agricultural and other human activities.
Because gray wolf recovery in the eastern United States can be achieved by restoring the species to Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan, we do not intend to undertake wolf recovery programs in other areas of the Midwest.
However, we may provide technical assistance to States and tribes who wish to develop wolf recovery plans beyond those which we have undertaken.
K. Recovery Progress of the Rocky Mountain Gray Wolf
In 1974, an interagency wolf recovery team was formed, and it completed the Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan in 1980 (Service 1980).
The Rocky Mountain Plan focuses wolf recovery efforts on the large contiguous blocks of public land from western Wyoming through Montana to the Canadian border.
The revised Rocky Mountain Recovery Plan (Service 1987) identifies a recovery criterion of 10 breeding pairs of wolves (defined as a male and female capable of reproduction) for 3 consecutive years in each of the 3 recovery areas--(1) northwestern Montana (Glacier National Park; the Great Bear, Bob Marshall, and Lincoln Scapegoat Wilderness Areas; and adjacent public lands), (2) central Idaho (Selway-Bitterroot, Gospel Hump, Frank Church River of No Return, and Sawtooth Wilderness Areas; and adjacent, mostly Federal, lands), and (3) the Yellowstone National Park area (including the Absaroka-Beartooth, North Absaroka, Washakie, and Teton Wilderness Areas; and adjacent public lands).
The Plan states that if one of these recovery areas maintains a population of 10 breeding pairs for 3 successive years, wolves in that recovery area can be reclassified to threatened status.
If 2 recovery areas maintain 10 breeding pairs (totaling about 200 adult wolves) for 3 successive years, gray wolves across the coverage area of the Rocky Mountain Plan can be reclassified to threatened status.
It also states that if all 3 recovery areas maintain 10 breeding pairs for 3 successive years, the Northern Rocky Mountain wolf population can be considered as fully recovered and can be delisted.
The wolf population would be about 300 adult wolves upon attainment of full recovery.
The Plan also recommends that wolves be reintroduced into the Yellowstone National Park area as an experimental population.
Additionally, if natural recovery has not resulted in at least two packs becoming established in central Idaho within 5 years, the Rocky Mountain Plan states that other measures, including reintroduction, would be considered to recover wolves in that area.
The goals identified in the Rocky Mountain Plan are intended to ensure a well distributed and viable population in the Rocky Mountains, goals that could be met in a variety of ways while still adhering to the ``biological intent'' of the recovery plan.
Gray wolf populations were eliminated from Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, as well as adjacent southwestern Canada by the 1930s (Young and Goldman 1944).
After human-caused mortality of wolves in southwestern Canada was regulated in the 1960s, populations expanded southward (Carbyn 1983).
Dispersing individuals occasionally reached the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States (Ream and Mattson 1982, Nowak 1983), but lacked legal protection there until 1974 when they were listed as endangered.
In 1982, a wolf pack from Canada began to occupy Glacier National Park along the United States-Canada border.
In 1986, the first litter of pups documented in over 50 years was born in the Park.
In recognition of the ongoing natural recovery of wolves arising from these Canadian dispersers, the Rocky Mountain Plan was revised in 1987 (Service 1987).
The revised Rocky Mountain Plan recommends that recovery be focused in areas with large blocks of public land, abundant native ungulates, and minimal livestock.
Three recovery areas were identified-- northwestern Montana, central Idaho, and the Greater Yellowstone Area.
Promotion of natural recovery was advocated for Montana and Idaho (unless no breeding pairs formed in Idaho within 5 years), but recovery in the Yellowstone area was believed to require a reintroduction program.
By 1989, we formed an interagency wolf working group, composed of Federal, State, and tribal agency personnel.
The group conducted four basic recovery tasks, in addition to the standard enforcement functions associated with any take of listed species.
These tasks were--(1) monitor wolf distribution and numbers, (2) control wolves that attacked livestock by either moving or killing them, (3) research wolves' relationships to ungulate prey, livestock, and people, and (4) provide accurate information to the public through reports and mass media so that people could develop their opinions about wolves and wolf management from an informed perspective.
In 1995 and 1996, we reintroduced wolves from southwestern Canada to remote public lands in central Idaho and Yellowstone National Park (Bangs and Fritts 1996, Fritts et al. 1997, Bangs et al. 1998).
We designated these wolves as nonessential experimental populations to increase management flexibility and address local and State concerns (59 FR 60252 and 60266; November 22, 1994).
Wolves in northwestern Montana remain listed as endangered, the most protective category under the Act; they are not included within the nonessential experimental population areas.
(Refer to the Currently Designated Nonessential Experimental Populations of Gray Wolves section above, for additional details.)
The reintroduction of wolves to Yellowstone National Park and central Idaho in 1995 and 1996 greatly expanded the numbers and distribution of wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States.
Because of the reintroduction, wolves soon became established throughout central Idaho and the Greater Yellowstone Area.
In 1995, an estimated 8 breeding pairs (using the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) definition of a male and female successfully raising 2 pups until December 31), within a total population of about 101 individual wolves, produced pups in the northern Rocky Mountains.
By 1996, a total population of 152 wolves containing 14 breeding pairs were producing pups.
In 1997, 213 wolves with 20 breeding pairs produced pups.
In 1998, there were 275 wolves and 21 breeding pairs.
In 1999 there were 322 wolves with 24 breeding pairs.
December 1999 ended the third successive year in which over 20 wolf breeding pairs successfully produced pups in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains.
In 2000 there were 433 wolves with 30 breeding pairs.
As of December 2001 the wolf population was about 563 wolves, with 34 breeding pairs producing pups (Service et al. 2002).
The presence of 20 breeding pairs (using the EIS definition of a male and female successfully raising 2 pups) distributed in 3 recovery areas for 3 successive years, exceeded the biological criteria of having 10 breeding pairs (defining as a male and female capable of reproduction) in only 2 recovery areas as recommended in the 1987 recovery plan.
For this reason the Service proposed to reclassify the wolf population in the northern Rocky Mountains and adjacent States in July
[[Page 15816]]
2000.
Because the wolf population has continued to expand since that time, it no longer warrants listing as endangered.
Northwestern Montana Reproduction first occurred in northwestern Montana in 1986.
The natural ability of wolves to find and quickly recolonize empty habitat and the interagency recovery program combined to effectively promote an increase in wolf numbers.
By 1993 the number of wolves had grown to about 55 wolves in 4 packs.
However, since 1993 the number of breeding groups and number of wolves has slowed or perhaps stabilized, varying from 5 to 7 packs and from 48 to 84 wolves.
The reasons for this are unknown, but are being investigated.
The lack of continuing steady growth in documented wolf numbers may be due to a dramatic reduction of white-tailed deer numbers throughout northwestern Montana (Caroline Sime, Montana Dept.
Fish, Wildlife and Parks, pers. comm. 1998) due to the severe winter of 1996-97, which we believe was responsible for the record high level of livestock depredations and correspondingly high level of wolf control in northwestern Montana during summer 1997.
Our 1998 estimate was a minimum of 49 wolves in 5 reproducing packs.
In 1999, and again in 2000, 6 breeding pairs appear to have produced pups, and the northwestern Montana population increased to about 63 wolves.
In 2001, there were an estimated 84 wolves in 7 breeding pairs (Service et al. 2002).
Wolf conflicts with livestock have increased with the growing wolf population and with fluctuations in prey populations.
For example, in 1997, following a severe winter that reduced white-tailed deer populations, wolf conflicts with livestock increased dramatically.
That year alone accounted for nearly 50 percent of all the wolf livestock depredations that were confirmed and subsequent lethal wolf control actions that were taken in northwestern Montana during the period 1987- 1999 (Bangs et al. 1998).
Wolf numbers should increase as prey numbers rebound, but, for now, the need for wolf control measures has subsided.
Unlike Yellowstone National Park or the central Idaho Wilderness, northwestern Montana lacks a core refugia that also contains overwintering ungulates.
Therefore, wolf numbers are not ever likely to be as high in northwestern Montana as they are in central Idaho and northwest Wyoming.
Central Idaho In January 1995, 15 young adult wolves captured in Alberta, Canada, were released in central Idaho (Bangs and Fritts 1996, Fritts et al. 1997, Bangs et al. 1998).
During January 1996, an additional 20 wolves from British Columbia were released.
In 1998 the population consisted of a minimum of 114 wolves, including 10 packs that produced pups (Bangs et al. 1998).
In 1999 it had grown to about 141 wolves in 10 reproducing packs.
By 2000 Idaho had 192 wolves in 10 breeding pairs and in 2001 the population was about 261 wolves in 14 breeding pairs (Service et al. 2002).
Greater Yellowstone Area In January 1995, 14 wolves from Alberta, representing three family groups, were placed in 3 pens in Yellowstone National Park (Bangs and Fritts 1996, Fritts et al. 1997).
The groups were released in late March.
Two of the three groups produced young in late April.
In January 1996, this procedure was repeated with 17 wolves from British Columbia, representing 4 family groups, for release in early April.
Two of those groups produced pups in late April.
Furthermore, as the result of a September 1996 wolf control action in northwestern Montana, 10 5-month- old pups were transported to a pen in the Park.
These pups and 3 adults from the Greater Yellowstone Area, which were originally reintroduced from Canada, were released in spring 1997.
By 1998, the Greater Yellowstone Area population consisted of 112 wolves, including 6 packs that produced 10 litters of pups.
The 1999 population consisted of 118 wolves, including 8 breeding pairs.
In 2000 Yellowstone had 177 wolves, including 14 breeding pairs, and there were 218 wolves, including 13 breeding pairs, in 2001 (Service et al. 2002).
Dispersal of Western Gray Wolves Significant numbers of pups (9 in 1995, 25 in 1996, 99 in 1997, and steadily increasing to about 150 in 2000, and nearly 200 in 2001 and 2002) born to reintroduced wolves are becoming sexually mature and are dispersing from their natal packs.
Because dispersing wolves may travel extensively and often settle in areas without resident packs, we expect that these wolves will continue to initiate significant expansion in the number and distribution of wolf packs in the northern Rocky Mountains.
Dispersal will increase management costs and controversy, because many of these wolves will not be radio-collared and will attempt to colonize areas of private land used for livestock production.
This geographic expansion of wolf presence will also increase the amount of needed agency wolf control, particularly lethal control.
Wolves that disperse southward in central Idaho and the Greater Yellowstone Area will increasingly encounter the full range of domestic livestock, including sheep, which are more susceptible to predation and multiple-mortality incidents than are other domestic livestock (Bangs et al. 1995, Fritts et al. 1992).
We predicted that these three populations eventually would expand and begin to overlap, resulting in one meta-population of gray wolves in the northern U.S. Rocky Mountains.
In 1994 we believed that the most likely direction for wolf dispersal and population growth would be from northwestern Montana southward into the experimental areas.
Wolves most commonly disperse toward other wolves even when separated by great distances, and we speculated that the presence of reintroduced wolves in the central Idaho and Yellowstone experimental areas would increase the likelihood for wolf dispersal into those areas from northwestern Montana.
At that time, we believed that wolves in the northwestern Montana recovery area would be the first to reach 10 breeding pairs.
We now believe that the severe winter of 1996-97 temporarily depressed the number of wolves in northwestern Montana and limited the number of dispersal-aged wolves in that area (Service 1994a, Bangs et al. 1998).
In contrast, the wolves reintroduced into central Idaho and Yellowstone have increased their numbers greatly, and nearly two-thirds of those wolves are young, dispersal-aged animals that may move from those areas over the next several years.
We now believe that wolves that are offspring of the reintroduced animals will increasingly disperse into northwestern Montana and elsewhere.
A recent study of wolf genetics among wolves in northwestern Montana and the reintroduced populations found that wolves in those areas were as genetically diverse as their source populations in Canada and that genetic diversity was not a wolf conservation issue in the northern Rocky Mountains at this time (Forbes and Boyd 1997).
To date, from radio telemetry monitoring we have documented routine wolf movement between wolves in Canada and northwestern Montana, occasional wolf movement between wolves in Idaho and Montana, and at least two wolves that have traveled into Idaho from northwestern Wyoming.
Additionally,
[[Page 15817]]
in 2001-2002 a wolf from Yellowstone dispersed 240 km (150 mi) into northwestern Montana, and a wolf from Idaho dispersed over 480 km (300 mi) to northwestern Wyoming.
Since two-thirds of the wolf population is not radio-collared, additional dispersal has undoubtedly occurred in addition to that documented by radio-collared wolves.
Because of the long dispersal distances and the relative speed of natural wolf movement between Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, we anticipate that wolves will continue to maintain high genetic diversity in the three States.
If significant genetic concerns do arise at some future time, our experience with wolf relocation shows that we could effectively remedy those concerns with occasional wolf relocation actions.
We also anticipate additional movement of wolves from the northern U.S. Rockies and Canada into western Washington and Oregon and into the Cascade Range.
For example, one radio-collared wolf from northwestern Montana was found dead in 1994 from unknown causes in eastern Washington, and a radio-collared young female wolf from central Idaho dispersed into eastern Oregon in early 1999.
She was recaptured and returned to the Central Idaho Recovery Area where she would have a better opportunity to find a mate.
Since 1999, 2 other dead wolves (1 radio-collared in Idaho and one not radio-collared) were found in eastern Oregon.
These wolves were killed by a vehicle collision and an illegal shooting, respectively.
Furthermore, suitable habitat and prey conditions exist in other areas to which wolves may be able to disperse from current populations.
Given that wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains have dispersed over 800 km (500 mi), it is reasonable to assume that occasional but routine wolf dispersal will continue to occur within 400 km (250 mi) of the current boundaries of the wolf population.
Observation data indicate that the wolves outside of the core recovery areas mostly occur as individuals, although several wolf family units have been reported in the North Cascades (Almack and Fitkin 1998).
However, because efforts to locate family units have been unsuccessful, we are not sure whether wolves are reproducing in the North Cascades.
Under this final rule, any animals outside the core recovery areas are protected by the Act as threatened wolves, and we will continue to provide protection recommendations for den and rendezvous sites to Federal agencies on a site-specific basis.
While habitat that could support wolves certainly exists in several areas, we have no plans to initiate new wolf restoration efforts for any areas in the western United States outside of those already underway in Montana, Idaho, Wyoming, and the southwestern States.
However, this final rule continues the protections of the Act for any wolves in the wild within all States that are included within the boundaries of the Western DPS.
Therefore, any new gray wolf restoration programs undertaken by States or tribes within the boundaries of the DPS would benefit from the protections of the Act as long as the DPS remains listed as threatened.
While we have no plans to actively pursue wolf restoration in other areas of the Western DPS, we will not act to routinely prevent natural wolf recolonization in such areas.
Wolves that naturally disperse into other States will be managed on a case-by-case basis, and we have the authority to manage these wolves.
Generally, if there are no conflicts with human activities, such wolves will likely not be returned to the area of their origin.
If wolves move outside of the recovery areas and depredate livestock, they will be killed rather than moved.
In addition, States or tribes considering wolf restoration planning for lands under their jurisdiction may request us to provide technical assistance for those efforts.
Reclassification and Recovery Goals for the Northern U.S. Rocky Mountains The criteria for threatened and recovered wolf populations in the northern Rocky Mountains have been the subject of intense interest and several peer review efforts (Fritts and Carbyn 1995).
The 1987 Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan (Service 1987) defined a recovered wolf population as securing and maintaining a minimum of 10 breeding pairs in each of 3 recovery areas for a minimum of 3 successive years.
A breeding pair was defined as ``Two wolves of opposite sex and adequate age, capable of producing offspring.''
Recovery areas were relatively small and separate areas in northern Montana, central Idaho, and the Greater Yellowstone Area.
The 1994 environmental impact statement (EIS) review (Appendix 9, in Service 1994a) indicated that the 1987 recovery goal was, at best, a minimal recovery goal, and that modifications were warranted on the basis of more recent information about wolf distribution, connectivity, and numbers.
Fritts (Appendix 9, in Service 1994a) specifically reviewed the issue of a viable wolf population in the EIS on wolf reintroduction.
He concluded that ``Thirty or more breeding pairs comprising some +300 wolves in a metapopulation with genetic exchange between subpopulations should have a high probability of long-term persistence.''
Further, Fritts stated, ``My conclusion is that the 1987 wolf recovery plan's population goal of 10 breeding pairs of wolves in 3 separate recovery areas for 3 consecutive years is reasonably sound and would maintain a viable wolf population into the foreseeable future.
The goal is somewhat conservative, however, and should be considered minimal.''
In his review, a breeding pair was defined as ``An adult male and an adult female wolf that have produced at least 2 pups that survived until December 31 of the year of their birth, during the previous breeding season.''
His review was based upon abutting recovery areas that were much larger than those recommended in the 1987 plan.
This proximity would allow wolves to occasionally move from one recovery population to another, thus producing the metapopulation structure that was inherent to Fritts' analysis, but was absent from the 1987 Recovery Plan goal.
The Service (Bangs 2002) conducted another review of what constitutes a recovered wolf population in late 2001 and early 2002.
Relevant literature was reviewed, and responses were received and evaluated from 50 of 88 experts contacted.
That review showed that there is a wide variety of professional opinion about wolf population viability.
However, that review supported and reaffirmed Fritts' earlier conclusions that 30 breeding pairs of wolves (using Fritts' definition of a breeding pair) widely distributed in a metapopulation structure (that is, populations within dispersal distance to promote movement between recovery populations) throughout the mountainous portions of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming for 3 successive years would exceed the minimum biological requirements of a viable and recovered wolf population.
The experts also compared the 1987 recovery plan recommendation of a recovered wolf population with Fritts' recommendation and concluded that Fritts' definition was more likely to define a viable wolf population than the 1987 recovery plan definition.
Therefore, in place of the 1987 Recovery Plan goal, we have adopted the definition of wolf population viability and recovery developed in the 1994 EIS (Service 1994a).
That definition is ``Thirty breeding pairs of wolves (defined as an adult male and an adult female that raise at least 2 pups until December 31 of the year of their birth), comprising some +300
[[Page 15818]]
individuals in a metapopulation with some genetic exchange between subpopulations, for three successive years.''
A minimum of 30 breeding pairs was first documented in 2000, and a minimum of 34 breeding pairs was documented in 2001.
We fully expect to confirm in early 2003 that the wolf population in the northern Rocky Mountains will have again exceeded 30 breeding pairs in 2002, thus achieving the wolf population recovery goal.
At that point the Service could propose to delist the wolf population.
The 1987 recovery plan recommended that wolves be downlisted to threatened status throughout the northern Rocky Mountains at the time each of 2 recovery areas had maintained a minimum of 10 breeding pairs for 3 successive years.
In 2000, when the Service proposed to reclassify these wolves to threatened status, the year 2000 was the fourth successive year of having 20 or more breeding pairs in the northern Rocky Mountains.
The Service considered this to fully meet the intent of the downlisting goal.
Since that time, the wolf population has continued to grow even larger and should no longer be considered endangered.
L. Recovery Progress of the Southwestern (Mexican) Gray Wolf
The objectives of the Mexican Wolf Recovery Plan (Service 1982) are to maintain a captive breeding program and to reestablish a population of at least 100 Mexican wolves within its historical range.
The plan contains no numerical criteria that would support either revision of the endangered status of the Mexican wolf to threatened or delisting.
We consider the current recovery plan objective for the wild population to be an essential first step toward the eventual recovery of the Mexican wolf.
A revised recovery plan for the Mexican wolf will contain numerical criteria for reclassifying to a threatened status and for delisting.
Because recovery of the Mexican wolf is in its very early stages, we are establishing a Southwestern Gray Wolf DPS, but we are making no changes to the protective legal status of the Mexican gray wolf at this time.
Through managed breeding, the captive population of Southwestern (Mexican) gray wolves had increased to 247 animals as of August 2002.
Forty-five zoos and wildlife sanctuaries throughout the United States and Mexico cooperate in the maintenance and breeding of the captive wolves.
The Blue Range Wolf Recovery Area (BRWRA), an 18,000-sq km (7000-sq mi) area, has been designated for the re-establishment of a wild population of at least 100 wolves.
This area includes all of the Apache and Gila National Forests in eastern Arizona and western New Mexico.
Re-establishment of a wild population began with the release of 13 captive-reared Mexican gray wolves in eastern Arizona in 1998.
Releases have occurred each year since then, and as of August 2002, an additional 61 wolves, including uncollared pups, had been released in the BRWRA.
A minimum of 24 Mexican wolves representing 8 packs were free-ranging in the wild as of January 2003.
During 2002, we documented surviving wild-conceived offspring from the past 3 breeding seasons and documented the production of the first second-generation wild- conceived, wild-born offspring.
Efforts are ongoing to capture uncollared wolves living in the population.
The documentation of the birth of second-generation wild-born offspring and breeding pairs forming on their own are both key signs that a Mexican wolf population is establishing itself in the BRWRA.
Additional releases are planned to occur as they are needed to reach the current goal of a wild population of 100 wolves.
This reintroduced population of wolves, like those in central Idaho and the Greater Yellowstone Area, has been designated nonessential experimental (63 FR 1752-1772, January 12, 1998); these wolves can be legally killed by ranchers if the wolves attack livestock on private land.
Other provisions of the special regulation designating the population as nonessential experimental give agency managers flexibility to address wolf-human conflicts.
Defenders of Wildlife, a private conservation organization, compensates ranchers whose livestock are killed by these wolves.
Designation of Distinct Population Segments
Previously, the gray wolf was listed as threatened in Minnesota and as endangered in the other 47 conterminous States, effectively establishing a Minnesota DPS that was delimited by State boundaries in the absence of any other indications of discreteness (Map 1).
This separate designation of Minnesota gray wolves as threatened was established in 1978, before our adoption of the 1996 Vertebrate Population Policy (61 FR 4722, February 7, 1996); this final rule brings the current listing of the gray wolf into compliance with the policy.
As discussed above in the Distinct Population Segments Under Our Vertebrate Population Policy section, our Vertebrate Population Policy requires that we consider the concepts of ``discreteness'' and ``significance'' when deciding if a vertebrate population meets the requirements for a DPS designation.
If the population is determined to be discrete and significant, then we evaluate the conservation status of the population to determine if it is threatened or endangered.
The discussion of discreteness and significance for each DPS follows the descriptions of the geographic area included in each DPS.
Based on the Vertebrate Population Policy, this rule reclassifies the gray wolf by establishing the following 3 DPSs within the conterminous 48 States (Map 3).
Eastern Gray Wolf Distinct Population Segment.
Consisting of gray wolves within the States of North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Wisconsin, Illinois, Michigan, Indiana, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine; and those gray wolves in captivity that originated from, or whose ancestors originated from, this geographic area.
This DPS includes all the areas that we proposed in July 2000 for the Western Great Lakes DPS and the Northeastern DPS, as well as 12 additional States.
Western Gray Wolf Distinct Population Segment.
The exterior boundary of the Western DPS encompasses the States of California, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, Wyoming, Utah north of U.S. Highway 50, and Colorado north of Interstate Highway 70.
Gray wolves in this geographic area are included in the Western DPS, except for gray wolves that are part of an experimental population.
Gray wolves in captivity that originated from, or whose ancestors originated from, this geographic area are also included in the Western DPS.
Southwestern Gray Wolf Distinct Population Segment.
The exterior boundary of the Southwestern DPS encompasses the States of Arizona, New Mexico, Utah south of U.S. Highway 50, Colorado south of Interstate Highway 70, those parts of Oklahoma and Texas west of Interstate Highway 35, and Mexico.
Gray wolves in this geographic area are included in the Southwestern DPS, except for gray wolves that are part of an experimental population.
Gray wolves in captivity that originated from, or whose ancestors originated from, this geographic area are also included in the Southwestern DPS. Discreteness.
To date, we have no evidence that any wolves from any of these DPSs have dispersed across these DPS boundaries, although we expect
[[Page 15819]]
such dispersals to occur.
The current gray wolf populations within each of these DPSs are separated from the gray wolf populations in the other DPS by large areas that are not occupied by breeding populations of resident wild gray wolves.
Although small numbers of dispersing individual gray wolves have been seen in some of these unoccupied areas, and it is possible that individual dispersing wolves can completely cross some of these gaps between occupied areas and may therefore join another wolf population, we believe that the existing geographic isolation of wolf populations in each of these three DPSs from the other far exceeds the Vertebrate Population Policy's criterion for discreteness of each DPS.
(Refer to the Change to the Boundary Between the Western DPS and the Southwestern DPS section, below, for additional discussion on establishing these DPS boundaries.)
The Vertebrate Population Policy allows us to use international borders to delineate the boundaries of a DPS even if the current distribution of the species extends across that border.
Therefore, we will continue to use the United States-Canada border to mark the northern portions of the boundaries of the Western and Eastern DPSs due to the difference in control of exploitation, conservation status, and regulatory mechanisms between the two countries.
In general, wolf populations are more numerous and wide-ranging in Canada; therefore, wolves are not protected by Federal laws in Canada and are publicly trapped in most Canadian provinces.
Along our border with Mexico, the situation is quite different.
Gray wolves have been extirpated, or nearly so, from Mexico.
However, the captive animals that have been used to start the Mexican wolf recovery program in the United States are of Mexican origin, and Mexico is closely cooperating with the Service in the Mexican wolf recovery program in a number of ways.
The current Mexican Wolf Recovery Plan (1982) is a bi-national recovery plan, signed by both the U.S. and Mexico.
This bi-national recovery effort will continue with plans for Mexico and the Service to jointly revise the bi-national recovery plan for the Mexican wolf.
Because of the cooperative gray wolf conservation efforts we have with Mexico across our southern border, our Southwestern DPS does not end at the Mexican border, but rather it includes all historical gray wolf range in Mexico.
Significance.
We further believe that all three of these wolf populations satisfy the significance criterion of the Vertebrate Population Policy under examples 2 and 4, as provided in the Policy-- significant range gaps and genetic characteristics.
In our Vertebrate Population Policy, example 2 states that ``evidence that loss of the discrete population segment would result in a significant gap in the range of a taxon'' shows that the population meets the significance criterion.
Loss of the discrete wolf populations in either the Eastern DPS, the Western DPS, or the Southwestern DPS would clearly produce huge gaps in current gray wolf distribution in the 48 States.
Our Vertebrate Population Policy also states (example 4) that ``[E]vidence that the discrete population segment differs markedly from other populations of the species in its genetic characteristics'' is another indication that the population satisfies the significance test.
Although genetic studies are continuing, and the subspecific taxonomy of the gray wolf remains to be conclusively determined, several studies agree that these three recovery programs are recovering different evolutionary lineages of the gray wolf (Bogan and Mehlhop 1983, Nowak 1995, Wilson et al. 2000).
Even various gray wolf subspecies maps, which show vastly different numbers and ranges of subspecies and are still being disputed, all agree that the wolves currently being recovered in the Midwest, the northern U.S. Rockies, and in the Southwest are of different subspecific origins (Bogan and Mehlhop 1983, Hall 1981, Nowak 1995, 2000, Young and Goldman 1944).
At a minimum, even if these three groups of gray wolves are not separate subspecies, strong indications suggest that they are separate reservoirs of diversity that differ from each other and therefore are significant to the species (Bogan and Mehlhop 1983, Nowak 1995, Wilson et al. 2000).
The existence of large areas of potentially suitable wolf habitat and prey resources in parts of northern New York and northern New England, occurrence records of a few wolves or wolf-like canids during the 1990s, and the presence of wolf populations in neighboring areas of eastern Canada caused us to propose a DPS for the gray wolf in the Northeast (Map 2).
At the time of the proposal, we had limited information on extant wolves in the Northeast, and we specifically requested additional data and other information on Northeastern wolves.
However, no new data were provided to substantiate that a wolf population exists in the Northeast.
A wolf population must exist in an area in order for us to designate it as a DPS.
Therefore, as discussed above in the Taxonomy of Gray Wolves in the Eastern United States section, we do not have sufficient data on the identity of historical northeastern United States wolves or the current existence of wolves in the Northeast to support the designation of a DPS there.
However, we are retaining the listing of gray wolves in these States under the Act in order to preserve the ability to protect wolves that may occur there.
Because a separate DPS cannot be designated in the Northeast due to the lack of evidence of an extant wolf population, this area is being combined with the proposed Western Great Lakes DPS and with other States, and is being designated as part of the Eastern Gray Wolf DPS.
The future possibility of establishing a Service wolf recovery program in the Northeast remains possible if it is demonstrated to be necessary for the recovery of a wolf ``species,'' as defined in the Act.
We emphasize that the expansion of the boundaries of these three DPSs from our July 2000 proposal does not reflect any intent of the Service to expand our current gray wolf recovery programs beyond their current geographic areas, or to initiate new gray wolf restoration efforts in these DPSs.
Peer Review
In accordance with our longstanding practice and with our July 1, 1994 (59 FR 34270), Interagency Cooperative Policy on Peer Review (Peer Review Policy), we requested the expert opinions of independent specialists regarding pertinent scientific or commercial data and assumptions relating to supportive biological and ecological information in the proposed rule.
The purpose of such review is to ensure that our decision is based on scientifically sound data, assumptions, and analyses, including input from appropriate experts and specialists.
Our Peer Review Policy requires that we solicit expert opinions of three independent specialists.
Because of the complexity, geographic scope, and expected controversial nature of the proposed actions, we requested reviews from 14 independent experts and received comments from 11 of them during the comment period.
We contacted individuals who possess expertise on gray wolf biology and ecology, threats to wolves, and wolf health and diseases.
In order to adhere to the Policy's requirement for independent reviewers, this peer review did not use employees of the Service, or of States that have a significant stake in the outcome of this rulemaking.
The reviewers that we chose are from Alaska and Canada, as well as from across wolf range in the conterminous States.
They
[[Page 15820]]
were asked to review the proposed rule and the supporting data, and to point out any mistakes in our data or analysis, and to identify any relevant data that we might have overlooked.
We have incorporated their comments into the final rule, as appropriate, and have briefly summarized their observations below.
Of the peer reviewers who specifically expressed support for, or opposition to, our various proposed actions, all supported the DPS approach, that is, dividing the current listing into smaller geographic units that better reflect recovery progress and recovery needs, and providing the protections that are appropriate to that progress and those needs.
All but one supported reclassification of the wolves in the western Great Lakes area to threatened status, and that dissenting reviewer recommended that we go a step further and delist those wolves instead of reclassifying them.
Most peer reviewers supported reclassification of the Northern Rocky Mountain wolf population to threatened, but one questioned whether this is appropriate before the reclassification criteria of the 1984 Recovery Plan have been achieved.
Another reviewer supported reclassification of the Western DPS, but stated that delisting should not occur until each of the 3 recovery segments exceed 10 breeding pairs.
One reviewer suggested reducing the recovery goal for northwestern Montana to fewer than 10 breeding pairs.
Of those who specifically commented on it, all peer reviewers supported the proposed establishment of a separate Northeastern DPS.
There was general support for gray wolf delisting in areas where wolf restoration was not necessary and not feasible, but there was some disagreement on where those areas were.
Delisting in the Southeast was supported, but delisting in California and Nevada was opposed by two reviewers.
Delisting the Dakotas (instead of reclassifying to threatened, as we proposed) was recommended by one reviewer.
Five of the reviewers also recommended that the southern Rocky Mountains (Colorado, Utah, and the northern parts of Arizona and New Mexico) either be established as a separate DPS, or be included in the proposed endangered Southwestern (Mexican) DPS rather than in the threatened Western DPS.
One reviewer recommended that a Northwestern DPS be established, composed of California and the western halves of Washington and Oregon.
Numerous suggestions for technical corrections were provided by the peer reviewers, and they also pointed out parts of the proposal that needed clarification.
The recommendations of the peer reviewers, as well as the comments we received from other sources during the comment period, are discussed in the following section.
We also provide explanations for why the recommendations were, or were not, adopted in our final decision.
Summary of Comments and Recommendations
In our July 13, 2000, proposed rule and associated notifications, we requested that all interested parties submit comments, data, or other information that might aid in our decisions or otherwise contribute to the development of this final rule.
The comment period for the proposed rule was open from July 13, 2000, through November 13, 2000.
During that period we publicized and conducted 14 public hearings and numerous public informational meetings in order to explain the proposal, respond to questions concerning gray wolf protection and recovery, and receive input from interested parties.
We contacted appropriate Federal, State, and tribal agencies, scientific organizations, agricultural organizations, outdoor user groups, environmental organizations, animal rights groups, and other interested parties and requested that they comment on the proposal.
We conducted two national press conferences to promote wide coverage of our proposed rule in the print media, and we published legal notices in many newspapers across the range of the gray wolf announcing the proposal and hearings, and inviting comments.
We posted the proposal and numerous background documents on our Web site, and we provided copies upon request by mail or E-mail and at our hearings and informational meetings.
We established several methods for interested parties to provide comments and other materials, including verbally or in writing at public hearings, by letter, E-mail, facsimile, or on our Web site.
During the 4-month comment period and at our 14 public hearings we received nearly 16,000 separate comments, including comments from 329 individuals who spoke at public hearings and comments from 11 peer reviewers.
We also received form letters and ``petitions'' with over 27,000 additional signatures.
Comments originated from addresses in all 50 States, including the District of Columbia.
We revised and updated the proposed rule in order to make the final rule reflect comments and information we received during the comment period.
In the following paragraphs we address the substantive comments that we received concerning various aspects of the proposed rule.
Comments of a similar nature are grouped together under subject headings (referred to as ``Issues'' for the purpose of this summary) below, along with our response to each.
In addition to the following discussion, refer to the Changes from the Proposed Rule section (also below) for more details.
A. Technical and Editorial Comments
Issue 1: Numerous technical and editorial comments and corrections were provided by respondents, including the peer reviewers.
Clarification and consistent usage of terms such as ``public lands,'' ``tamed,'' ``domesticated,'' and ``breeding pair'' was recommended.
Response: We have corrected and updated numbers and other data wherever appropriate.
Wolf population estimates made during 1999 have been replaced with the final numbers calculated in late December 2001.
We also clarified numerous discussion points and have provided clearer terminology in several locations.
We have substituted ``domesticated'' for ``tamed'' and have standardized our use of the phrase ``breeding pair.''
Issue 2: Commenter pointed out inconsistencies between the text of the proposed Western DPS 4(d) rule, the text explaining that proposed rule, and the table that compared it to the experimental populations special rules and the normal protections of the Act.
In addition, the phrase ``public land'' is used several times in the table but is not defined there.
Response: We have revised the table, the explanatory text, and the wording of that 4(d) rule to make sure they are consistent.
For example, as defined in the 4(d) rule, the term public lands refers only to federally administered lands unless specifically defined otherwise in State or tribal wolf management plans (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans'').
Other public lands such as city, county, or State lands would be treated the same as private land for the purposes of wolf management under the Western DPS 4(d) rule.
B. Compliance With Laws, Regulations, and Policies
Issue 1: Commenters expressed concern that the proposal was not in compliance with the Act and implementing regulations.
[[Page 15821]]
Response: We have carefully reviewed the requirements of the Act and its implementing regulations.
We believe this final rule, as well as the process by which it was developed and finalized, complies with all provisions of the Act and applicable regulations.
The Act requires that we identify and protect species that are endangered or threatened, develop and implement recovery programs for those species, and delist them when they are no longer threatened or endangered.
These actions are not discretionary, but are mandated by the Act.
We do this to the extent possible under the funds appropriated to us each year and in accordance with priorities established by Congress, and by us pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
However, the Act does not require us to restore a species across its historical range, or to all remaining areas of suitable habitat.
Rather, we restore it to the point that the threats to its continued existence are reduced to the point that it no longer is threatened or endangered.
Our detailed analysis of the threats for each DPS is found in the Summary of Factors Affecting the Species section below.
Issue 2: A number of commenters stated that establishing numerical quotas for endangered or threatened species is contrary to the intent of the Act and that we should not use such quotas in reclassification or delisting decisions for the gray wolf.
Response: The Act (section 4(f)(1)) requires us to develop recovery plans that contain ``objective, measurable criteria'' that we are to use in making our determination of whether a species is recovered or is making significant progress toward recovery.
Our longstanding practice is to include numerical criteria in our recovery plans as one means to trigger consideration of delisting or reclassification.
However, we agree with the commenters that these numerical criteria should not be the sole basis for delisting or reclassification decisions.
As required by the Act (section 4(a)(1)), we also conduct an evaluation of the factors (threats) that currently affect the species and the factors that would impact the species, or would increase their impact, if the species were to be delisted or reclassified.
Issue 3: Other commenters questioned our compliance with the Vertebrate Population Policy and stated that we must list more DPSs in order to comply with that Policy.
Response: The Act gives us the authority to list by species, subspecies, or DPS.
However, Congress directed that we use our authority to list by DPS sparingly.
The DPS policy identifies the criteria that must be met for a vertebrate group to qualify as a DPS, but it does not require that we designate a DPS in all cases where a vertebrate group meets the DPS criteria.
The Service has the discretion to list, reclassify, or delist at the subspecies or species level instead of the DPS level, as we believe to be most appropriate to carry out our listing and recovery programs.
Issue 4: The Service should reclassify and delist the wolf on a State-by-State basis.
Response: The previous listing of the gray wolf, in which wolves in Minnesota were listed as threatened while wolves in adjacent States, including Wisconsin, are endangered, was done prior to our 1996 Vertebrate Population Policy, and that previous listing did not conform to the 1996 Policy.
The Policy states that listings not in conformance with the Policy will be brought into conformance whenever the listing status of that taxon is changed.
While the policy allows us to use boundaries between States as boundaries of convenience between two populations if those populations are already discrete in relation to each other, we cannot use a boundary between States to subdivide a single biological population in an effort to artificially create a discrete population.
Thus, although Minnesota wolves were listed separately in the past, we no longer list, or delist, them separately from the Wisconsin-Michigan wolf population because they are not biologically discrete.
By reclassifying wolves throughout the Midwest from endangered to threatened status and joining them into a single DPS, we have brought the listing into conformance with the Vertebrate Population Policy and given the overall Midwest wolf population a threatened designation, which is biologically more appropriate than is an endangered designation.
Issue 5: One respondent believes that the proposal was in conflict with our mission statement, which is ``working with others, to conserve, protect and enhance fish, wildlife, and plants and their habitats for the continuing benefit of the American people.''
Response: We believe the proposal portrays an example of doing exactly what is intended by our mission statement.
Gray wolf recovery programs involve many partners in the private and public sector, at all levels of government, and include numerous Federal agencies.
The wolf recovery successes described in the proposal resulted from working with others to conserve, protect, and enhance gray wolf populations in several areas across their historical range.
Those successes have now reached a point where several of those wolf populations no longer qualify for protection as endangered, so we are reclassifying them to threatened.
Congress, through its enactment of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, stated that such programs benefit our nation and the American people.
Furthermore, we have provided extensive opportunities and numerous pathways for all interested parties to become involved in the reclassification process.
Issue 6: A commenter believes that the proposal is not in compliance with our National Policy Issuance 96-06, which is also known as the ``10-point Plan for the Endangered Species Act.''
Response: The relevant points in this March 6, 1995 policy are these: base our listing/delisting decisions on sound and objective science; minimize social and economic impacts of our actions; treat landowners fairly and with consideration; promptly recover and delist threatened and endangered species; and provide State, tribal and local governments with opportunities to play a greater role in carrying out the provisions of the Act.
To the extent allowed by the Act and other Federal laws and regulations, we have conducted gray wolf recovery and reclassification in a manner that fully adheres to the points of this Policy.
We have used the best available scientific data, we have developed special regulations and depredation control programs that reduce social and economic impacts, we are reclassifying and intend to delist at the appropriate time, and we have provided State, tribal, and other governments many opportunities to participate in wolf recovery and in this rulemaking.
In many ways, gray wolf recovery and this reclassification is an excellent example of following National Policy Issuance 96-06.
Issue 7: The proposal was not in compliance with National Policy Issuance 95-03 and Director's Order No. 110, both dealing with using the ``ecosystem approach.''
Response: This 1995 Policy and 1999 Order state that the Service will apply an ecosystem approach in carrying out our programs for fish and wildlife conservation.
The goal of an ecosystem approach is for the Service, when carrying out its various mandates and functions, to strive to contribute to the effective conservation of natural biological diversity through perpetuation of dynamic, healthy ecosystems.
Preserving and recovering endangered and threatened species is one of the more basic aspects of an ecosystem approach to conservation.
Successful
[[Page 15822]]
recovery of a rare species requires that the necessary components of its habitat and ecosystem be conserved, and that diverse partnerships be developed to ensure the long-term protection of those components.
Thus, the recovery success demonstrated for gray wolves is also a demonstration of the ecosystem approach, including the various partnerships that are needed for success.
Issue 8: The Service has not adequately consulted with Native American tribes, as required by Secretarial Order 3206.
(Refer to issue V, Native American Concerns, below, for additional Native American concerns.)
Response: During the development of the proposal and this final rule, we endeavored to consult with Native American tribes and Native American organizations in order both to provide them with a complete understanding of the proposed changes and also to enable ourselves to gain an appreciation of their concerns with those changes.
Although we must base the decision on whether a species should be listed, reclassified, or delisted under the Act purely on scientific data concerning the threats and commercialization of the species, the manner in which we carry out listing, reclassification, or delisting vary so that we can address the cultural and spiritual importance of a species to Native Americans.
As we have become aware of Native American concerns through consultation with them, we have tried to address those concerns to the extent allowed by the Act, the Administrative Procedures Act, and other Federal statutes.
For example, the proposed 4(d) rule for lethal control of depredating wolves in Wisconsin and Michigan has caused concern among several tribes that have, or expect to soon have, wolves living on their reservations.
We are currently working with the Bad River Band and the WI DNR to develop a Memorandum of Understanding for the cooperative management of wolves in the area surrounding the Bad River Reservation (Wisconsin), in order to minimize the impacts that off- reservation depredation control actions by the WI DNR might have on reservation wolves.
This agreement may serve as a prototype for other tribes and States.
We acknowledge that our early consultation efforts could be improved.
Early consultation efforts were hampered primarily by the geographic scope and complexity of the proposal.
We tried to remedy this issue by making additional efforts to contact and inform tribes during the comment period.
Issue 9: The Service should propose critical habitat for the gray wolf.
Response: Critical habitat was designated in 1978 for the gray wolf in parts of northeastern and north-central Minnesota and on Isle Royale, Michigan (43 FR 9607, March 9, 1978).
We are not making any changes to the currently designated critical habitat, because we do not believe it is appropriate to do so.
The Endangered Species Act amendments of 1982 specified that, for any critical habitat designation for a species already listed as threatened or endangered at the time of enactment of the 1982 amendments, the procedures for revisions to critical habitat would apply (Pub. L. 97-304, section 2(b)(2)).
Consequently, designation of critical habitat for the gray wolf is subject to the procedures for revisions to critical habitat.
As such, it is not mandatory for the Service to designate critical habitat for the gray wolf.
Section 4(a)(3)(B) provides that the Service ``may'' make revisions to critical habitat ``from time-to-time * * * as appropriate'' (16 U.S.C. 1533(a)(3)(B)).
The Service has determined that there currently are no likely benefits to be derived from additional critical habitat designations, and it therefore is not appropriate to designate additional critical habitat.
Wolf populations in both the Eastern and Western DPSs are at their numerical recovery goals as a result of past and current protections, but the currently designated critical habitat played a negligible role in wolf recovery.
This is attributable to the fact that gray wolves are habitat generalists, and their numbers and range are not limited by a lack of suitable habitat or by any degradation of any essential habitat features.
Designating critical habitat would be an inappropriate use of our limited listing funds if done for a species that is successfully recovering without such designation, and at a time when we have determined that it is more appropriate to reduce, rather than increase, the Federal protections for the species.
It should also be noted that the Act (section 10(j)(2)(C)(ii)) prohibits us from designating critical habitat for the nonessential experimental populations established in the Western DPS and the Southwestern DPS.
Furthermore, 50 CFR 424.12(h) prohibits the designation of critical habitat in foreign countries.
Issue 10: The Service should have conducted additional public meetings and hearings, or extended the comment period to provide additional opportunities to learn more about the proposal and to provide comments.
We should have used the postmark date, rather than the received date, to determine whether comments were made during the open comment period.
Response: The Act requires that we provide at least a 60-day comment period and that we conduct one public hearing if we are requested to do so.
We recognized that the proposal would be controversial, would require more explanation than most of our proposals, and would result in a large number of comments.
Therefore, we went well beyond the basic requirements of the Act and other Federal rulemaking procedures.
We established a comment period that was twice the required length.
We prearranged 14 hearings from Maine to Washington State.
We conducted two national press conferences and two Congressional briefings.
We conducted multiple informational meetings.
We provided a variety of informational materials at hearings and meetings, by mail and e-mail, and on our Web site.
We established mechanisms for interested parties to ask questions and to submit comments verbally, in writing, by e-mail or fax, and on our Web site.
Finally, while the Service sometimes uses the postmark date to determine whether comments were received before a deadline in rulemakings, our normal practice is to use the date of receipt, and our intent to use that cutoff method at the close of the 4-month comment period was clearly stated in all our documents that referred to comment submission.
We believe we provided extensive, varied, and sufficient opportunities for interested partied to ask questions, obtain additional information, and provide input for our consideration.
Issue 11: The Service should conduct Population Viability Analyses (PVA) before reclassifying anywhere.
Response: The Act requires that we use the best scientific data available when we make decisions to list, reclassify, or delist a species.
The Service recognizes that PVAs are a tool that can provide some insight into the vulnerability of species, and we have conducted PVAs for a number of species, usually as an aid in establishing recovery goals or identifying the most critical gaps in our knowledge in order to prioritize research needs.
While we have found PVAs to be useful in some circumstances, in other cases the analyses provided little or no new information, or the outcome was not considered to be reliable.
PVAs can be a valuable as a tool to help us understand the population dynamics of a rare species (White 2000).
They can be useful in identifying gaps in our knowledge of the demographic parameters that are most important to a species' survival, but they cannot tell us how many individuals are necessary to
[[Page 15823]]
avoid extinction.
The difficulty of applying PVA techniques to wolves has been discussed by Fritts and Carbyn (1995).
Problems include our inability to provide accurate input information for the probability of occurrence of, and impact from, catastrophic events (such as a major disease outbreak or prey base collapse; we know of no catastrophic events that have significantly impacted large wolf populations except for human persecution), providing realistic inputs for the influences of environmental variation (such as annual fluctuations in winter severity and the resulting impacts on prey abundance and vulnerability), temporal variation, and individual heterogeneity, as well as dealing with the spatial aspects of extreme territoriality and the long-distance dispersals shown by wolves.
Each of these factors can be a powerful determinant of the outcome of a gray wolf PVA, and relatively minor changes in any of these input values can result in vastly different outcomes.
PVAs are also useful for studying small populations.
In a small- population study, the modeling exercise can provide clues to which demographic, genetic, or environmental parameters may have the greatest likelihood of influencing a species' survival, and thus possible insight into areas where initial conservation actions should be focused.
However, for obviously recovering entities like the gray wolf populations of the Northern U.S. Rocky Mountains and the Midwest, PVA modeling exercises may largely be an exercise in quantifying the recovery of a species whose increases, and the reasons for them, are already qualitatively quite apparent.
In the case of species like the gray wolf--a species that has been well studied and is well along the road to recovery--generally little is to be learned from a PVA.
The WI DNR conducted a PVA for the State's wolf population several years ago when its wolf population was considerably smaller than it is today.
Most scenarios that were modeled by WI DNR (varying the probability of catastrophic events, reproductive rates, and environmental variability) resulted in very low probabilities of extinction even with the maximum wolf population limited to only 500 animals (WI DNR 1999a).
The model treated the Wisconsin wolf population as a totally isolated population (that is, with no possibility of wolf immigration from Minnesota or Michigan), so even those low extinction probabilities were overestimates.
Because this reclassification reduces Federal protection of wolves only slightly, a PVA would not be expected show any resultant significant change in the risk of extinction.
Finally, we note that none of the 11 peer reviewers of the proposal indicated that there was any need for the Service to conduct a PVA or minimum viable population analysis for the 2 gray wolf populations for which we proposed changes in July 2000.
One reviewer stated that PVAs are of little value and may even be misleading.
Issue 12: The Service should prepare an Environmental Impact Statement for this rule.
Response: As stated in the proposal, the question of whether environmental assessments or environmental impact statements need to be prepared was addressed by our previous determination (48 FR 49244; October 25, 1983) in which we stated that such documents do not have to be prepared for regulations developed under section 4(a) of the Act.
Issue 13: A better notification process is needed for our public hearings.
Response: We did a great deal to alert interested parties to the details of public hearings.
Public hearing times and locations were announced in the Federal Register, posted on our Web site, publicized in local and national press releases, and, in some areas of the Midwest, advertised on local radio stations.
Notification letters were sent to numerous organizations so they could alert their memberships.
In addition, parties who requested to be added to our wolf electronic mailing list received information on hearings and public meetings electronically.
However, we acknowledge that, despite all these efforts, some interested parties did not learn of the hearings in time to attend.
We are interested in receiving ideas to further improve our efforts to publicize our public hearings in the future.
However, in this case there were numerous avenues, in addition to public hearings, for interested individuals to obtain information and submit comments on the proposal.
All comments received during the comment period, whether presented at a public hearing or provided in another manner, received the same review and consideration.
Issue 14: The Service should consider how to delist nonessential experimental populations.
Response: For the gray wolf, the nonessential experimental populations in the Northern Rocky Mountains are part of a larger recovery program that also includes the northwestern Montana wolves.
They will be delisted at whatever time the Western DPS is delisted.
Issue 15: One commenter stated that we cannot use wolves in experimental populations to count toward recovery or reclassification goals, because such populations can only be used for research purposes.
Response: The term ``experimental'' is used in the Act to describe these populations; however, this designation does not mean these populations may only be used for research purposes.
Reintroductions of plants and animals are often experimental in the sense that they may use techniques that are newly developed, untested on that species or locality, or uncertain in success rate for other reasons.
The authority to designate and establish experimental populations was added to the Act for the specific purpose of assisting the Service in establishing additional populations to further the recovery of the species.
We have used this authority for many species to help achieve recovery goals by expanding occupied range.
In the case of the two nonessential experimental populations (NEPs) in the northern U.S. Rockies, the final rule establishing those two NEPs indicated specifically that they were being established to help achieve the Western Plan's goals to establish viable wolf populations in central Idaho and the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem.
C. Comments Regarding the Number of Distinct Population Segments and Recovery Programs Necessary for Gray Wolf Recovery
Issue: A large number of comments expressed the opinion that additional gray wolf DPSs should be established, and that the Service should initiate additional recovery programs in order to achieve gray wolf recovery as mandated by the Act.
Additional DPSs and recovery programs were suggested for Nebraska, Kansas, Missouri, and Iowa; Virginia and Kentucky; the Carolinas, Georgia, and Tennessee; California and Nevada; Colorado, Utah, and the northern portions of New Mexico and Arizona; Oregon and Washington; the Pacific Coast; the Cascade Range; West Virginia; Missouri; Florida; and Utah.
In addition, some respondents recommended that gray wolves should be reintroduced and recovered throughout their historical range or ``in all States.''
Response: These comments appear to reflect a misunderstanding of the purpose of the Act and confusion regarding the meaning of ``recover'' under the Act.
The purpose of the Act is to provide for the conservation of endangered and threatened species.
Conservation is defined as the use of all methods and procedures which are
[[Page 15824]]
necessary to bring any endangered or threatened species to the point at which the measures provided pursuant to the Act are no longer necessary.
When a species no longer meets the definition of an endangered or threatened species under the Act, it is recovered, and we are to delist it.
The meaning given to ``recover'' in common conversational usage is ``to restore to a previous, or to the original, condition.''
However, incorrectly ascribing this common meaning to ``recover'' as used in the Act has led some individuals to mistakenly believe the Act functions as a biodiversity restoration program.
The goal of the Act--preventing species extinctions--is much narrower that the rangewide wolf restoration and biodiversity restoration goals implicit in these comments.
We have evaluated, in light of the conservation biology principles discussed previously, our three continuing recovery programs for the gray wolf in the context of its previous listing across the 48 conterminous States and Mexico.
We have concluded that sufficient redundancy and resiliency will be achieved by establishing three separate viable wolf populations or metapopulations in widely spaced areas of that geographic area.
If each of these three populations contains enough reproducing packs so that it is a viable and self- sustaining population, its numerical size and geographic extent will provide the resilience needed for it to bounce back from newly developing or expanding adverse factors (e.g., disease, massive wildfire, or the temporary decline of a prey species' population) in the foreseeable future.
Furthermore, if these three populations are widely spaced and somewhat isolated from one another it is very unlikely that all three populations would simultaneously, or in rapid sequence, suffer from the same catastrophic event.
Once they are completed, the Service's three current gray wolf recovery programs will result in wolf populations of sufficient size and relative isolation to provide the necessary resiliency and redundancy.
For example, the Northern Rocky Mountain gray wolf population--now at recovery levels--exceeded 560 animals at the end of 2001, and preliminary results from the end of 2002 indicate a population of approximately 660 wolves (Tom Meier, Service, in litt. 2003).
The Midwestern gray wolf population--which has exceeded the numerical goals of the Eastern Gray Wolf Recovery Plan--is estimated to be over 3000 wolves.
(Final recovery goals have not yet been established for the Southwestern (Mexican) gray wolf recovery program, but they will be designed to ensure long-term viability of that wolf population.)
The currently occupied areas of the Eastern and Northern Rockies populations are separated by approximately 1000 kilometers (600 mi), and a similar distance currently separates the Greater Yellowstone Area wolf packs from the reintroduced wolves in the Southwest.
Each of these gray wolf populations will be viable and self-sustaining when their recovery programs are completed, and the distances between them, while not providing total isolation, will provide a great deal of protection from multi-population catastrophic events.
Both the Northern Rocky Mountain and Eastern gray wolf recovery programs--when all recovery goals are achieved--will each cover sufficient geographic area and have enough wolves in a population or metapopulation structure to be sufficiently resilient to respond to adverse factors that may arise in the future.
The Southwestern (Mexican) gray wolf recovery program, when a final recovery goal is established and attained, similarly will have sufficient distribution and number of wolves.
Thus, the conservation biology principle of resiliency is satisfied by the achievement of the respective recovery goals of these 3 recovery programs.
Commenters suggested that additional gray wolf populations should be established in the western United States in order to maximize the species' long-term survival and minimize the likelihood of extinction.
However, the Act does not mandate maximizing species survival, nor does it require undertaking widespread species restorations to minimize extinction risk.
Rather, as discussed above, its mandate is to recover species to the point that they are ``not likely'' to become in danger of extinction in the foreseeable future.
We believe the ``not likely'' standard will be exceeded by establishing three geographically widespread gray wolf populations that are independently viable, because it is highly unlikely that future threats will endanger multiple widely separated wolf populations.
Thus, the conservation biology principle of redundancy is satisfied by our three current recovery programs.
The concept of representation, when applied to the conservation of the gray wolf, argues that we should preserve enough of its remaining genetic diversity so that future genetic problems are unlikely to lead to its extinction.
These problems may include genetic drift, inbreeding depression, and diminished ability to survive as new environmental conditions develop.
The three current gray wolf recovery programs are preserving all of what remains of the species' genetic diversity in the 48 States and Mexico.
The current genetic diversity of the wolves in the western Great Lakes is a product of the remnant wolf population that survived in northeastern Minnesota, Canadian wolves from southwestern Ontario and Manitoba that moved into Minnesota, as well as southern Ontario wolves that moved into the eastern portion of Michigan's Upper Peninsula.
The Northern Rockies wolf population is a mixture of southern Canadian wolves that repopulated the Glacier National Park area and wolves from Alberta and British Columbia, Canada that were brought into central Idaho and Yellowstone National Park.
These two recovery programs are preserving all the remaining genetic material of the gray wolves that formerly inhabited those areas.
Both the Midwestern and Northern Rockies wolf populations are believed to contain sufficient genetic diversity to survive over the long term, even if they were to become completely and permanently isolated from neighboring wolves across the Canadian border.
The reintroduced Southwestern (Mexican) gray wolf population originated from small captive populations composed of individuals captured in the wild in Mexico and identified in captive facilities in Mexico and the United States (Hedrick et al. 1997).
Detailed records and careful selection of captive breeding pairs has ensured the conservation of this founding Mexican wolf genome.
This recovery program is utilizing all the remaining genetic material that has been preserved from the wild Southwestern and Mexican wolf population, and when completed, it will ensure the long-term survival of that unique genetic diversity and maximize the ability of this isolated population to cope with, adapt to, and evolve in response to environmental change.
Thus, our three current wolf recovery programs are doing all that can be done to preserve the remaining genetic material from the gray wolves that previously occupied the 48 conterminous States and Mexico.
Establishing additional populations would provide no additional genetic benefits to wolf recovery under the Act (with the possible exception of the Northeast; see below).
Therefore, the conservation biology principle of representation is satisfied by these three gray wolf recovery programs.
[[Page 15825]]
Based upon the above points, the Act's mandate to recover the gray wolf will be satisfied by the restoration of three viable populations of the species, located in the Midwest, Northern U.S. Rockies, and Southwest.
Therefore, in order to recover the gray wolf, the Service intends to continue focusing its gray wolf recovery activities in the current core areas (i.e., Minnesota, Wisconsin, Upper Peninsula of Michigan, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, New Mexico, and Arizona) of those recovery programs.
We do not intend to initiate new gray wolf recovery programs in any area--except possibly the Northeast, pending ongoing genetic and taxonomic studies and efforts to locate a listable and recoverable wolf population there--because new recovery programs are not necessary to achieve recovery of the gray wolf under the Act either as formerly listed in the 48 States and Mexico or under the new listings established by this final rule.
Once wolf recovery goals are achieved in any one of the DPSs, we will proceed to delist the entire DPS, even if some of the States within the DPS lack wild gray wolves.
The presence or absence of gray wolves outside of core recovery areas is not likely to have a bearing on the long-term viability of the three wolf populations after their recovery goals have been achieved, and therefore such presence or absence will not be a factor in our consideration of delisting each DPS.
We have determined that the level of threats faced by wolf populations in the Eastern DPS and in the Western DPS warrant reclassification of each DPS to threatened.
These threatened DPS listings, along with the three retained nonessential experimental population designations and the retained endangered listing for the Southwestern DPS, will continue to provide the Act's protections to all wild gray wolves.
Furthermore, we believe that the delisting criteria for the Eastern DPS and the Western DPS can be achieved without establishment of additional populations within each DPS.
The Act gives us the authority to list by species, subspecies, or DPS.
The DPS policy identifies the criteria that must be met in order for a vertebrate group to qualify as a DPS.
In order for us to designate a DPS, a population must exist.
Most of the States have no wolves or in the States that do have some wolves, those wolves are part of a metapopulation.
However, our DPS policy does not require that we designate a DPS in all cases where a vertebrate group meets the DPS criteria; Congress directed that we use our DPS authority sparingly.
The Service has the discretion to list, reclassify, or delist at the subspecies, species, or DPS level, as we believe to be most appropriate to carry out our listing and recovery programs.
As described in the Taxonomy of Gray Wolves in the Eastern United States section above, there is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the identity of the large canid (or canids) that occurred historically in the Northeastern States.
At the time our proposal was developed, we believed that the canid was likely a gray wolf, although we were uncertain as to its subspecific identity.
However, subsequent molecular genetic and morphometric information has cast doubt on that interpretation of the evolutionary relationship of North American canids.
Although far from certain at this time, increasing scientific evidence suggests that the historical large canid in the Northeastern States was more closely related to the red wolf than to the gray wolf.
We will reevaluate our retained listing of the gray wolf in the Northeastern States at such time that we consider delisting Midwestern gray wolves, and at any time prior to that if significant new data become available.
D. Boundaries of Distinct Population Segments
Issue: We received comments expressing concerns with several aspects of the boundaries of the 4 proposed DPSs.
Some commenters wanted the DPS boundaries to conform exactly with the geographic coverage of the existing gray wolf recovery plans, while other commenters wanted the boundaries expanded beyond those we proposed.
Other commenters recommended that the boundaries be based solely on suitable wolf habitat and on physical barriers believed to subdivide that habitat.
We also received comments suggesting that the boundary between the Southwestern and Western DPSs should be moved northward so that parts or all of Utah and Colorado are within the Southwestern DPS.
Comments that deal with the number of DPSs are addressed above in issue C, ``Comments Regarding the Number of Distinct Population Segments and Recovery Programs Necessary for Gray Wolf Recovery''; those dealing with delisting wolves outside of DPSs are addressed below in issue E, ``The Service Should Not Delist Outside of Distinct Population Segments''; and those dealing specifically with the boundaries of the proposed Northeastern DPS are covered below in issue S, ``Use of Scientific Data.''
For a detailed discussion of DPSs, refer to the Distinct Population Segments Under Our Vertebrate Population Policy section above.
Also refer to the Distinct Population Segments and Experimental Populations section above for additional discussion of the purposes of these designations.
Response: A DPS is a listed entity that is usually described geographically rather than biologically.
Nothing in the Act or in our Vertebrate Population Policy requires DPS boundaries to correspond to recovery plans, habitat characteristics, or physical barriers.
DPS boundaries identify a geographic area that includes and surrounds a vertebrate biological grouping that has a separate listing under the Act.
The DPS boundaries must contain the biological grouping and cannot subdivide it, but they do not have to precisely correspond with its present location, suitable habitat, or other features of the environment.
In general, DPSs can be better understood, protected, recovered, and administered if their boundaries are placed beyond the area currently occupied by the biological grouping of concern, and even beyond the areas they are most likely to disperse into or colonize in the foreseeable future.
Such boundary placement minimizes the potential confusion caused by individual wolves frequently crossing the boundaries and thereby changing their legal status and protection under the Act, and provides more consistent protection to dispersers that may ultimately return to their original core recovery area and contribute to recovery there.
While the Vertebrate Population Policy prohibits our use of boundaries between States to subdivide an existing biological population to establish ``discrete'' populations, it does not prohibit our use of boundaries between States or other cultural features as ``boundaries of convenience'' to identify the area within which the DPS's legal designation applies.
By using boundaries between States (or other features such as major highways) that are located beyond the area currently occupied by wolf populations, we are able to clearly identify the geographic extent of the DPS listing (and thereby facilitate law enforcement and promote public understanding of the listing) while avoiding splitting the existing biological unit that we intend to recover.
Our proposed DPS boundaries were intended to serve two purposes.
The first purpose was to include the core areas where the respective wolf population is recovering, as well as a substantial surrounding ``buffer area'' in which wolves dispersing from the core
[[Page 15826]]
areas were reasonably likely to occur in the foreseeable future.
The second purpose was to remove Federal gray wolf protection in some areas of the 48 States where we believed restoration of wolves was unnecessary.
Thus, our proposed DPS boundaries were designed to include the areas into which most, but not all, gray wolf dispersal was expected to occur.
For example, most dispersing Midwest wolves have moved into the Dakotas, which were included in the proposed Western Great Lakes DPS.
The Michigan Upper Peninsula wolf that recently dispersed to northern Missouri moved well outside of the proposed boundary for its DPS, but it is the only Midwestern wolf known to have moved beyond the proposed DPS boundary.
However, as discussed in issue E (below), we have now expanded the areas covered by these gray wolf listings.
These new boundaries will provide continued protection under the Act to all gray wolves that disperse to any location within the species' historical range in the conterminous 48 States.
A portion of the boundary between the Western DPS and the Southwestern DPS has been moved northward to a location approximately midway between the core recovery populations in the northern Rockies and the Southwest, in order to be consistent with existing gray wolf dispersal data.
These final boundaries continue to serve our purpose of including the core recovery areas along with those areas into which wolves from the respective core areas are most likely to disperse.
(Refer to the Changes from the Proposed Rules section below for additional discussion on DPS boundary changes.)
The expansion of the DPS boundaries does not mean that we intend to broaden our current gray wolf recovery programs to additional areas within the DPS boundaries or that we will initiate new wolf restoration programs.
The expansion of these boundaries is being done solely because the Act requires that we maintain the gray wolf's listing in these areas until the species or the DPS is recovered.
Recovery within a DPS can be achieved by reestablishing gray wolves in a portion of the DPS at a level and under circumstances that ensure that the population will not become in danger of extinction in the foreseeable future.
E.
The Service Should Not Delist Outside of Distinct Population Segments
Issue: We received comments from many individuals and organizations regarding our proposal to remove the Act's protections for the gray wolf in all or parts of 30 States that were outside of the boundaries of the proposed DPSs.
The commenters recommended that gray wolves should not be delisted in areas where they have not recovered and do not currently exist.
Response: Our proposed delisting outside of the proposed DPS boundaries was based on our belief that, because restoration of gray wolves in these areas is unnecessary, and because we have no plans to restore gray wolves in those areas, there was no reason to maintain the Act's protection for any gray wolves that might turn up there.
We believed it was reasonable and appropriate to remove any unnecessary Federal regulatory burden, and any perception of such a burden, by removing the listing in those areas.
Furthermore, we thought it would be desirable to eliminate any uncertainty in those areas regarding Federal protection for escaped or released captive gray wolves, wolf- dog hybrids, or feral dogs that are mistaken for wolves.
However, further analysis of the Act and implementing regulations has led to our conclusion that the Act does not provide for delisting a species in parts of its listed historical range because restoration of wolves in these areas is unnecessary, even if wolf recovery is proceeding successfully in other areas.
Delisting can occur only when a species (or subspecies or DPS) is recovered, when it is extinct, or when the original data or analysis that led to the listing was in error (50 CFR 424.11(d)).
Therefore, we have modified those portions of our proposal that would have delisted the gray wolf in any part of its historical range.
This was done by expanding the boundaries of the remaining gray wolf DPSs so they now include all States within the historical range of the gray wolf.
This has the biological benefit of continuing Federal protection for all long-distance dispersers that remain within the species' historical range, thus providing them a greater probability of surviving and rejoining the core population in that area, or even joining the population in another gray wolf recovery area.
As discussed above in the Historical Range of the Gray Wolf section, we have now delisted the gray wolf in 14 States and in the eastern portions of Oklahoma and Texas.
These southeastern and mid- Atlantic States are not included within the boundaries of any listed gray wolf DPS, because they are outside the generally recognized historical range of the gray wolf (Hall 1981).
These States should not have been included when the gray wolf was listed at the species level in 1978.
Due to their close approximation of Hall's historical range boundaries, we have used State boundaries and an interstate highway as the boundaries around this delisted area to facilitate law enforcement efforts and public understanding of the areas now included and excluded in the three gray wolf DPSs.
F.
The Service Should Delist Gray Wolves in Additional Areas
Issue 1: A large number of comments recommended that we delist gray wolves in areas that we proposed for inclusion in one of the proposed DPSs, and thus would remain listed as threatened, endangered, or part of an experimental population and subject to the protective regulations that apply to it.
The reasons for the delisting recommendations include: wolves are common elsewhere (in other areas of the 48 States or in Alaska and Canada) so they are not threatened or endangered; wolves have recovered (in that area or elsewhere) so they should be delisted; wolves are extirpated from the State; and a State can manage a resident species better than the Federal government.
Response: The Act mandates that we identify, list, and protect those species, subspecies, plant varieties, and distinct vertebrate population segments that are threatened or endangered, and that we maintain the listing and protection until the entity is recovered or goes extinct, or until we determine that the original listing was done in error.
Unless and until one of these occurs, the entity must remain a threatened or endangered species.
Full management authority cannot be returned to States or tribes until recovery has occurred or an erroneous listing is removed.
For vertebrate species, the Act, as implemented by way of our 1996 Vertebrate Population Policy, allows us to use international borders to limit the geographic scope of the threats evaluation that is done when we are considering a species for listing as threatened or endangered.
This is appropriate, as it allows us to protect from extirpation within the United States those vertebrate species that might be more common elsewhere (e.g., in Canada or Mexico).
This approach has been successfully used for other species that are more common in Canada than in the United States, including the peregrine falcon, grizzly bear, and bald eagle, and we are witnessing similar success with the gray wolf.
In order to determine when a species is recovered, we must evaluate the current status of the species in comparison to recovery goals established for it in its recovery plan.
We must also analyze the threats that
[[Page 15827]]
still face the species, as well as the threats that might increase or develop if the species is delisted.
Five categories of threats are specified in the Act: loss or degradation of habitat or range; overutilization for commercial, scientific, or other purposes; disease or predation; inadequacy of regulatory mechanisms; and, any other natural or manmade factors.
At the time we developed our proposal and conducted this analysis of threats, we could not affirm that recovery goals had been met and also conclude that probable future threats had been sufficiently reduced so that recovery could be declared and delisting initiated for any of our gray wolf recovery programs.
Therefore, we proposed a reduction of Federal protections via a reclassification to threatened in some area, but did not propose the delisting of any gray wolf population.
Because we have not proposed delisting of any gray wolf populations, at this time we cannot finalize a rulemaking that would include such a delisting.
We must first propose such a change and provide an opportunity for public review and comment on it.
Given the continued recovery progress of gray wolves in the West and western Great Lakes States, and State wolf management plan development work that has happened subsequent to our reclassification proposal (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans''), we anticipate working on one or more gray wolf delisting proposals in the near future.
However, we have determined that this reclassification action should be finalized first.
Since the gray wolf is not extinct in the United States, the species cannot be delisted for that reason.
The final reason that could justify a delisting-that the original listing was done in error-is discussed above in issue E, ``The Service Should Not Delist Outside of Distinct Population Segments'', and in the Historical Range of the Gray Wolf section.
For this reason, we have delisted the gray wolf in all or parts of 16 States where the species should not have been listed originally because those areas are outside of the species' historical range.
Issue 2: Wolf management in the Western DPS needs to be transferred to the States.
Response: The Service agrees that a recovered wolf population is best managed by the respective States and tribes.
The Service will propose to delist the Western DPS wolf population as soon as possible under the conditions specified by the Endangered Species Act.
Two primary conditions have to be met for the western wolf population to be delisted.
First the recovery goal of having a minimum of 30 breeding pairs of wolves distributed throughout Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming for a minimum of 3 successive years must be met.
The Service is also required to make sure the factors that caused wolves to be listed are resolved.
The one factor that applies most to wolves is that human- caused mortality be regulated so it does not cause wolf populations to become threatened or endangered again.
The Service must be reasonably assured that adequate regulatory mechanisms are in place to conserve the wolf population so that it will not become threatened or endangered if the Act's protections are removed.
The Service is working closely with the States of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming as they develop wolf conservation plans that will meet this requirement.
Upon confirmation in early 2003 that the wolf population has met the wolf population recovery goal for the Western DPS and if the States have finalized their wolf management plans (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans''), the Service could propose to delist the gray wolf throughout the Western DPS in early 2003.
G. Threats From Humans Need Additional Consideration
Issue: A large number of commenters described the past persecution of wolves and expressed the belief that similar persecution will resume if the proposed rule is adopted.
Response: We recognize that human persecution of wolves is the primary reason for the decline of wolves across North America, and we analyze the nature and magnitude of this threat before and after this final rule in factor ``C. Disease or predation'' under the Summary of Factors Affecting the Species section.
We believe the protections of the Act, in combination with extensive public education efforts by the Service and numerous private and public partner organizations, have reduced human persecution and led to the increase in gray wolf numbers and range.
Therefore, in order for wolf population to remain recovered or nearing recovery, those prelisting levels of human-caused mortality must be avoided.
For two reasons, this final rule is not expected to increase the level of human persecution of gray wolves.
First, the reclassification of wolves in 2 DPSs to threatened does not remove the protections of the Act, nor does it eliminate the Federal penalties for illegally killing one of these gray wolves.
Second, by providing additional mechanisms for the control of problem wolves, including allowing certain landowner harassment/control actions in the Western DPS, we believe the incentive for illegally killing wolves will be significantly reduced.
Thus, we do not believe this reclassification action will increase the threats from human-caused mortality; conversely, the action may result in decreasing those threats.
At such time as we propose delisting gray wolves, we will again assess the threats from human-caused mortality.
H.
Other Threats Need To Be Assessed
Issue 1: The Service should consider the impacts of genetic risks on gray wolf recovery, because low genetic diversity can cause problems for a rare species.
Response: We agree that low genetic diversity is a concern for species with small populations or that have gone through a population bottleneck.
However, Midwestern gray wolf populations currently are showing no signs of diminished genetic diversity.
These wolves came from a remnant wolf population in northeastern Minnesota and Canadian wolves that have moved across the international border from western and eastern Ontario and Manitoba.
At its lowest level, the Minnesota wolf population was probably 350 wolves or more, a level well above that expected to potentially cause genetic problems, especially because there is frequent interaction with adjacent Canadian wolf populations.
Similarly, the recovering northern U.S. Rocky Mountain wolves are derived from several Canadian sources, which increased the genetic diversity of their founding populations.
They are not expected to have genetic problems.
In contrast, Southwestern (Mexican) wolves have all come from 7 founders, but through managed breeding of these founders during the past 22 years, 86 percent of the founding genetic diversity has been preserved.
Moreover, no signs of inbreeding depression have been detected (Kalinowski et al. 1999).
Issue 2: For the northern Rocky Mountain gray wolves, the Service should consider the impacts of wildfire, catastrophic events, human harassment, or genetic risks to gray wolf recovery.
Response: The Service evaluated a host of impacts as required by the Act, including habitat modification, human harassment and killing, and genetic risks.
A recent study of genetic diversity of wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains indicated that the population was genetically diverse, in fact as much so as its source populations in Canada.
None of these factors were thought to pose a significant risk to wolf
[[Page 15828]]
population viability in the foreseeable future; none would affect the reclassification of the gray wolf in the northern Rocky Mountains.
With regard to wildfires, which humans often view as catastrophic events, large mobile species such as wolves and their ungulate prey usually are not adversely impacted.
Wildfires generally lead to an increase in ungulate food supplies, leading to an increase in ungulate numbers, which supports increased wolf numbers in the area in the years following a wildfire.
I. Recovery Goals and Progress in the Western DPS
Issue 1: Commenters recommended that the Service abide by the strictest interpretation of the reclassification and recovery criteria found in the Northern Rocky Mountain Wolf Recovery Plan.
Response: We acknowledge that the proposed rule did not adequately explain how our goals for gray wolf reclassification and recovery in the northern Rocky Mountains have evolved since the 1987 Recovery Plan was written.
A complete explanation can now be found in the subsection Reclassification and Recovery Goals within the section Recovery Progress of the Rocky Mountain Gray Wolf.
Issue 2: Several comments indicated that restoration of wolves in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming does not warrant changing the classification of wolves throughout the much larger Western DPS from endangered to threatened.
Response: Wolf recovery in the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States has been defined as a minimum of 30 breeding pairs of wolves (a breeding pair is defined as a male and a female wolf that raise at least 2 young that survived until December 31) that are distributed throughout the mountainous portion of western Montana, Idaho, and northwestern Wyoming for a minimum of 3 successive years (see previous issue).
A review of that definition by a wide diversity of professional peer reviewers indicated that such a population would be comprised of about 300 individuals and that some minimum level of connectivity among the U.S. subpopulations and with the larger wolf population in Canada was necessary to guarantee long-term persistence.
That peer review indicated that population viability is a function of the population and not the area it occupies.
The reviewers felt that geographically expanding an area that a population occupies had no impact on that population's viability.
The Service believes that the Western DPS wolf population in the northern Rocky Mountains of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming is not in danger of extinction, and therefore is no longer endangered but rather warrants reclassification to threatened status.
Issue 3: Address how reclassification of gray wolves in the Western DPS eliminates the threat of extinction.
Response: Reclassifying a species from endangered to threatened is not intended to eliminate the threat of extinction; instead, it is done in recognition that the species no longer warrants endangered status.
Such is the case for gray wolves in the Western DPS.
There currently are about 563 wolves in 34 breeding pairs in the Western DPS.
Many of those breeding pairs are in extensive and secure habitats under public ownership, such as Yellowstone National Park and several National Forests.
The gray wolf in the northwestern United States has achieved a population that is rapidly approaching our recovery goal.
Reclassifying wolves in the Western DPS to threatened status still maintains the Service's management authority and the Act's protection for those wolves.
The Act's protections will continue to prevent the excessive human-caused mortality that caused wolf extirpations in the past.
When the States have adequate regulatory mechanisms in place, the Act's protections will no longer be needed.
The reasons that wolves are no longer endangered are described in more detail in the 5-factor analysis that is part of this rulemaking.
J. Recovery in Northwestern Montana
Issue: The Service should not reclassify wolves in northwestern Montana, because recovery has proceeded slowly and may have stopped.
Thus, full protection under an endangered classification should be maintained.
Response: The estimated wolf population in northwestern Montana is 84 wolves in 7 breeding pairs, which is the highest level recorded to date.
The final regulations will not cause any significant increase in wolf mortality that would impact wolf population levels or prevent additional recovery there.
We anticipate that the wolf population in northwestern Montana will enjoy the same benefits from more flexible management under this rule as have the rapidly expanding wolf populations in the nonessential experimental population areas.
In addition, that management flexibility will extend to areas where the Service currently has no plans to actively promote wolf restoration under the Act, but where wolves may occasionally disperse and may cause conflicts.
That flexibility should help increase local public tolerance of wolves.
Maintaining the connectivity of the wolf population in the northern Rocky Mountains of the United States with the much larger Canadian wolf population is important to the long-term viability of western United States wolves.
However, at the current time, research indicates that wolves in all three general recovery areas of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming are as genetically diverse as the source populations in Canada.
Long-term genetic and demographic viability of wolves in the northern Rocky Mountains will depend on long-term management by the States and tribes and their strategies for maintaining population characteristics such as genetic diversity.
That management could involve maintaining natural connectivity between United States and Canadian wolf populations or by active management such as relocation.
With about 563 wolves in 34 breeding pairs distributed throughout Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, the gray wolf in the northern Rocky Mountains--including northwestern Montana--is clearly no longer endangered with extinction.
The 4(d) rule is very similar to the nonessential experimental population rule, under which rule wolf populations in Idaho and Wyoming have flourished.
The Service believes the increased management flexibility under threatened status and a 4(d) rule is appropriate and the increased management flexibility will assist in completing the species recovery.
K. Special Regulations Under Section 4(d) for the Western DPS
Issue 1: The Service should not encourage harassment of wolves in the Western DPS.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule allows landowners and permittees on Federal grazing allotments to harass wolves in a noninjurious manner at any time.
This type of harassment will not affect the wolf population other than by making some individual wolves more wary of people.
Wolves are adept social learners.
Harassing wolves that have begun to be comfortable around people will cause those wolves to become more wary.
Wolves that are wary of people and places that are frequented by people may be less likely to be involved in livestock and pet depredations.
Wolves that are not wary of people are more vulnerable to being illegally killed or being hit by cars and, in rare and the most extreme circumstances, wolves can become habituated to human foods and can become a potential threat to human safety.
[[Page 15829]]
In some situations the 4(d) rule also allows the injurious harassment (for example, by rubber bullets) of wolves under a permit from us.
This type of harassment will permit management of situations (for example, loitering around vulnerable livestock, approaching humans, trying to attack pets) before they have escalated into a situation that calls for more drastic measures such as lethal control.
To prevent abuse, this type of activity would be limited by case-by- case evaluation and controlled by a permit.
In the experimental population areas, this type of management has been used in a few situations, and no wolves have been permanently injured.
Issue 2: The Service should only allow translocation (that is, livetrapping and releasing at a distant location) to control problem wolves.
Response: Translocation of wolves to reduce wolf-livestock conflicts can be a valuable management tool when wolf populations are low and empty habitat is available for translocated wolves.
Wolves are territorial, and resident packs will kill wolves that are translocated to their territory.
With the wolf population near recovery levels, few places are available to translocate wolves.
It also appears that translocation of problem wolves is often not successful at preventing further problems, because the wolf has learned that livestock can be prey and carries that learned behavior to its new location and becomes a problem wolf there.
Some wolves have traveled great distances after translocation and have returned to the area where they were captured.
The Service primarily will rely on lethal control for management of wolves that attack livestock, because most habitat in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming that does not have livestock is already occupied by resident wolf packs.
However, translocation may continue to be used to resolve pet dog depredations and excessive depredation of native wild ungulate populations.
Issue 3: The Service should allow a limited wolf hunting season in Montana.
Response: Hunting is a valuable, efficient, and cost effective tool to manage wildlife populations.
The Service has recommended that State wolf management programs in the West have regulated public hunting as part of their policy to conserve the wolf population.
Conservation programs to restore large predators such as mountain lions and wolves are succeeding because of the historic restoration of wild ungulates, such as elk and deer, by State fish and game agencies and sportsmen.
However, allowing public hunting of wolves while they are listed under the Act is unlikely.
(A Service-proposed public trapping season for threatened Minnesota wolves in areas of high wolf depredation was prohibited by a Federal court in the mid-1980s.)
Upon confirmation in early 2003 that the wolf population in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming has met the recovery goal and when State wolf management plans are completed (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans''), the Service will move as quickly as possible to delist the wolf population.
Following delisting, State-managed wolf hunting could be allowed by States if it is carefully managed and closely monitored.
Issue 4: The Service should relocate livestock if conflicts occur on public grazing allotments.
Response: Wolves and livestock, primarily cattle and horses, can live near one another for extended periods of time without significant conflict.
Most wolves do not learn that livestock can be successfully attacked and do not view them as prey.
However, when individual wolves learn to attack livestock, that behavior can quickly be learned by other wolves if it is not stopped.
Since large portions of wild ungulates winter on private property, even wolves that prey on wild ungulates will be in close proximity to livestock during at least some portion of the year.
Wolf recovery can occur without disruption of traditional western land-use practices and has successfully occurred without moving livestock off of public grazing allotments.
Public lands can have both large predators and seasonal livestock grazing.
Furthermore, the Service does not have the authority to relocate livestock on either public or private land, except on lands within the National Wildlife Refuge System.
Regulating or prohibiting livestock grazing on public lands is under the discretion of the respective land management agency.
Issue 5: The Service should emphasize nonlethal wolf control to resolve conflicts.
Response: We will continue to use nonlethal forms of wolf management, such as wolf harassment by landowners, injurious but nonlethal harassment by permitted individuals, use of scaring devices, working with conservation groups to provide fencing, alternative pasture, and guard animals and extra herders, and providing information on livestock management practices that can reduce conflicts with wolves.
However, these methods are only effective in some circumstances, and no one tool is a cure for every problem.
Wolf populations are at recovery levels, and wolf conflicts will increase as the population continues to grow.
Most habitats in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming, where conflicts between people and wolves are unlikely, are now occupied by wolves.
The Service will rely on a variety of management tools including nonlethal approaches, but lethal control will often be used to resolve conflicts with livestock.
Wolf populations can remain stable while withstanding 25-35 percent human- caused mortality per year.
Agency lethal control of problem wolves was predicted to remove about 10 percent of the wolf population annually, and at that level it will not reduce the wolf population, but will minimize conflicts with livestock.
Issue 6: The special rule under section 4(d) should not exempt Federal agencies from the section 7 consultation requirements of the Act.
Response: The proposed rule does not exempt Federal agencies from their consultation requirements under the Act for threatened species.
Federal agency consultation with the Service on their actions that may affect gray wolves is required, but under the special rule, it will not result in land-use restrictions unless these restrictions are needed to avoid take at active den sites between April 1 and June 30.
Wolves are very adaptable, and Federal activities--unless they directly kill wolves--will have no significant effect on them.
To date there have been virtually no land-use restrictions imposed for the benefit of wolves, and the wolf population has recovered quickly.
Issue 7: The Service should not loosen restrictions on lethal take; and we should base the take levels on scientific information.
Response: Wolf management, including the nearly identical forms of lethal wolf control included in the 4(d) rule, have been employed in the nonessential experimental population areas since 1995.
The wolf population in those areas has rapidly expanded, and very few wolves have been taken under those provisions.
Lethal take by agency personnel and lethal take under permits issued to the public are designed to target problem wolves and reduce the level of conflict with local rural residents.
This level of take is unlikely to affect wolf population recovery and is based upon the biology of wolf populations.
We have scientific data that show that such take is not excessive and allows the continuing growth of wolf populations.
Issue 8: The Service should allow wolves to be lethally taken for depredations on public land.
Response: The 4(d) rule allows wolves to be killed on public grazing allotments.
Livestock producers can
[[Page 15830]]
receive a permit from us to shoot a wolf that is physically attacking livestock or guard and herding animals after we have confirmed that a wolf depredation has previously occurred.
Comments on the environmental impact statement on wolf reintroduction, the experimental population designation process, and the proposal for this final 4(d) rule indicated that commenters believed that wolf management on public lands should be more closely controlled (that is, more protective of wolves) than on private land.
To address this public concern and the legal responsibilities of Federal land management agencies to conserve listed species and provide a balance between the needs of wildlife and other uses, the 4(d) rule distinguishes between wolf management practices on Federal lands versus those on private land, while also addressing chronic wolf depredation.
Under otherwise similar circumstances, the 4(d) rule will allow livestock producers to kill a gray wolf that is attacking their livestock on their private land without a Federal permit.
Issue 9: Commenters stated that the Service should deny a take permit to livestock producers who experience wolf depredation after improper disposal of livestock carcasses.
Other commenters recommended that the Service redefine ``problem wolf'' to exclude those involved with acts of human carelessness or negligence.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule states that wolves that attack livestock after being attracted to an area by artificial or intentional feeding, including livestock carcasses, may not be identified as problem wolves and may not be controlled, either by agencies or by permits to individuals.
However, it would take an unusual situation to warrant withholding Service-authorized control of wolves that attacked livestock (that is, outside of the scope of traditional livestock management practices).
In many instances, particularly in remote public land grazing allotments, it is nearly impossible to dispose of livestock carcasses.
Wolves are very effective scavengers and will feed on livestock carcasses they discover.
The fact that wolves feed on livestock carcasses does not mean that they will begin to depredate on livestock.
Many biologists believe that the more familiar wolves become with livestock, even by feeding on carcasses, the greater the odds are that one could try to attack livestock.
However, the bigger risk factor is that livestock carcasses may attract wolves to an areas near livestock which could increase the encounter rate and potential for depredation.
The occasional discovery of a livestock carcass that would occur through traditional Western rangeland animal husbandry practices is unlikely to significantly increase the risk of wolf depredation on livestock.
The Service does advise livestock producers of the potential for conflict that could occur when wolves are attracted to areas with livestock and, where possible, that livestock carcasses should be rendered or buried.
The Service may determine not to control wolves until the attractants are removed.
Issue 10: The Service should increase the issuance of take permits on private, State, and Federal public lands.
Response: For the purposes of the Western DPS 4(d) rule, the Service considers State grazing leases to be treated the same as private property, unless a State management plan approved by the Service specifies otherwise (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans'').
For instance, a permittee on a State livestock grazing allotment could shoot a wolf in the act of physically attacking livestock without a permit from the Service, just as he or she could do on private land.
The 4(d) rule allows wolves to be noninjuriously harassed without a permit, injuriously harassed under permit, and killed in the act of attacking livestock or herding and guarding animals.
In chronic problem situations, wolves can be shot on sight under permit.
Furthermore, Federal, State, and tribal agencies can harass, move, and/or kill wolves to reduce conflicts with livestock, other domestic animals, and pets, and even big game populations.
The Service does not plan to implement even more liberal practices for dealing with problem wolves at this time.
More liberal management--for example, management through regulations allowing defense of property and public hunting--might be a part of State-run wolf conservation programs once the wolf population is delisted.
Issue 11: The Service should provide clear guidelines to residents regarding their rights under the 4(d) rule.
Response: The Service will do many public information announcements on the 4(d) rule.
After the experimental population rule was completed, the Service prepared a summary of the special rule and distributed it to local landowners, livestock organizations, and the media to clarify what kinds of activities were allowed.
We will do the same for this special regulation.
In addition, the Service routinely conducts presentations and interacts with the public to clarify its regulations.
Issue 12: We should allow States and tribes outside a gray wolf recovery area to relocate wolves that are impacting ungulate populations.
Response: The 4(d) rule does allow any State and tribe to define an unacceptable impact resulting from wolf depredation in its State and tribal wolf plan and relocate wolves that are causing that impact.
If 10 or more breeding pairs are in a State, the Service, in cooperation with the State or tribe, may decide to move wolves that are impacting State ungulate populations, even if the State or tribe does not have an approved wolf plan.
Issue 13: The Service should drop the provision to translocate western wolves if they are causing ``unacceptable impacts'' to wild ungulate populations.
There is no evidence that Rocky Mountain wolves pose any significant threat to the ungulate populations in the region.
Response: In some situations, wolf predation, in combination with other factors, can contribute to dramatic localized declines in wild ungulate populations.
Segments of the public and State fish and game agencies are very concerned that if these unusual conditions exist and wolf predation is contributing to dramatic declines in a localized ungulate population, then management of wolf predation, in addition to management of other factors, must be an available option.
Moving wolves to resolve these types of situations can assist in ungulate management and ease local public and State game managers' fears about excessive unchecked wolf predation on native big game populations and hunter harvest.
Issue 14: The Service should define ``abnormal'' as it is used in the Western DPS 4(d) rule to allow taking of wild wolf-like canids that may be detrimental to gray wolf recovery.
Response: The 4(d) rule allows the Service or designated agencies to take any wolf or wolf-like wild canid that the Service determines has abnormal physical or behavioral characteristics.
The primary purpose of these provision is to allow for the removal of free-ranging privately owned captive wolves or wolf-dog hybrids.
There are a wide variety of traits that could be considered abnormal by the Service and each situation will be addressed on a case-by-case basis.
However, physical examples of abnormal would be wolf-like canids that have spotted pelt patterns or highly curled tails or otherwise appear to have dog-like traits.
Behavioral abnormalities would include a high affinity to humans or human dwellings, aggressive behavior toward humans, or displaying prolonged courtship or breeding behaviors with domestic dogs.
[[Page 15831]]
Issue 15: Provide expanded definitions of ``wolf conflicts,'' ``wolf problems,'' ``persistent activity,'' and other related terms.
Response: Terms such as these necessarily need case-by-case application and situational definitions.
A wolf pack living in an area and occasionally moving through livestock is routine and generally would not be considered to be a conflict or problem.
However, a pack that also ``tests'' or runs livestock has crossed the line into a different category that may involve ``wolf conflicts'' and a need for some type of aversive conditioning.
A wolf closely associated with a particular ranch for a short period of time may raise no specific concerns, whereas the same situation in proximity to a residential subdivision would.
The Service believes that, because management flexibility will be required, wolf behavior can vary with individuals, and the number of situational variables is limitless, more-specific definitions of these terms are not necessary and would be unreasonably confining.
Issue 16: The Service should adhere to the Control Plan when targeting problem wolves.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule now provides the regulatory framework under which problem wolves will be managed.
The 1988 and 1999 Interim Wolf Control Plans have been replaced by the 4(d) rule.
Issue 17: Clarify the criteria that constitute opportunistic harassment.
Response: The definition of opportunistic harassment is provided in the Definitions section of the Western DPS 4(d) rule.
Issue 18: Clarify how wolf take rules apply to private land.
Response: The 4(d) rule has been slightly modified and does clearly State how wolves may be taken on private land.
In addition, the comparison chart has been revised to clarify provisions of the Western DPS 4(d) rule as they apply to private and public land.
Issue 19: The Service should require verification of wolf depredation before allowing private control.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule requires agency confirmation of wolf depredation before agency control or lethal take permits can be issued.
The taking of a wolf that is physically attacking livestock on private land is allowed without a permit, but such take must be reported within 24 hours and evidence of a depredation (such as wounded livestock) must be present.
We believe that these stipulations prevent abuse and focus control on specific problem wolves.
Issue 20: The Service should encourage ranchers to take measures to reduce the risk of wolf depredation.
Response: The Service works with USDA/APHIS-Wildlife Services, livestock organizations, and private groups to identify and publicize ways that livestock producers can reduce the risk of wolf depredation.
In the past the Service and its cooperators have developed a host of tools that may help livestock producers prevent wolf-caused losses.
The decision to utilize any of the tools offered is strictly voluntary on the part of the livestock producer, but in the past most of them have been very willing to voluntarily take steps to attempt to reduce the risk of wolf predation.
Issue 21: The Service should allow for the intentional harassment of gray wolves depredating on livestock.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule allows all wolves on private land and those near livestock on public grazing allotments to be harassed at any time for any reason in a noninjurious manner.
A permit to injuriously harass wolves can be issued on private and public lands.
Wolves on private land that are actually seen depredating on livestock can be killed on private land without a permit, and on Federal grazing allotments a permit can be issued after a depredation has been confirmed.
Issue 22: The Service should allow landowners with inholdings within Federal lands to take wolves prior to suspicious activity or depredation.
Response: Wolves are very susceptible to human-caused mortality and were exterminated by excessive human persecution.
Wolf populations could not persist in the face of unregulated human-caused mortality.
Allowing any wolf seen to be shot on sight could significantly reduce wolf populations and jeopardize recovery.
The States do not allow other large predators or wild ungulates that are much more common to be shot on sight for the same reason.
Most large wildlife species, because of their relatively low reproductive rates and naturally high survival rates, will disappear in the face of unregulated human-caused mortality.
A wolf that is simply on private property is not normally a problem animal, but wolves that attack livestock are aggressively controlled.
Issue 23: The Service should allow the intentional harassment of wolves on public lands.
Response: The Western DPS 4(d) rule allows any wolves near livestock to be harassed in a non-injurious manner on public lands.
Issue 24: The incidental take language in the proposed rule may undermine support by traditional wildlife users in Oregon, because it is dissimilar to the current rules for the nonessential experimental populations.
Response: The final special regulation for the Western DPS is intended to have similar incidental take provisions as those that have applied to the nonessential experimental populations, as specified in 50 CFR 17.84(i)(3)(viii).
This is a change from the provisions of the previous endangered status, under which no incidental take of wolves was allowed outside of the nonessential experimental area.
Mistakenly shooting a wolf will not be classified as incidental take under the new special regulation; similarly, such an action has not been considered permissible as incidental take under the existing regulations for the nonessential experimental populations.
One of the basic rules of hunter and gun safety is to be sure of your target.
Just as is the case in current law in most States, a hunter who shoots a protected animal through mistaken identity is liable for that action.
Both the new special regulation for the threatened Western DPS wolves and the existing regulation for the nonessential experimental populations stress the need for shooters to exercise reasonable due care to identify their target and avoid taking a gray wolf.
Issue 25: Under the permitting provisions of section 10(a)(1)(A) of the Act, the Service already has all the management flexibility it needs to deal with problem wolves in northwest Montana, so there is no need to reclassify those wolves to threatened and create a special regulation.
The Service has not identified any additional flexibility that these changes would provide.
Response: We agree that the Service does have discretion to issue permits to manage wolves under the Act's 10(a)(1)(A) authority.
However, that authority is not as broad or flexible as the provisions of this special 4(d) rule.
The Service believes that the 4(d) rule clarifies the Service's intent and in some cases provides for the Service to allow management actions without the sometimes cumbersome process of issuing individual permits.
L. Nonessential Experimental Population Designations
Issue 1: Several respondents commented that the Service should review, delete, add to, and/or modify the NEP designations in central Idaho and the greater Yellowstone area.
One peer reviewer recommended the NEP designations be removed, because they
[[Page 15832]]
are ``no longer appropriate and create an overly complex regulatory structure.''
Response: One of the alternatives considered in the draft proposal, but not selected for further analysis in that proposal, was removing the NEP designation in the central Idaho and Yellowstone areas, making all the Western DPS threatened, and managing all wolves in the Western DPS under this 4(d) rule.
We chose to leave the NEP designations as they are, because in the 1994 rulemaking for the NEPs we stated we did not envision changing them until recovery occurred.
In addition, several Federal agencies expressed concern over the potential of having to do section 7 consultation again, and the NEP rules are working well and are understood by most local residents in those areas.
Instead, we have tried to make this 4(d) rule very similar to the special rule for the NEPs, thereby standardizing proven successful wolf management strategies throughout the Western DPS.
While the NEP rules and this 4(d) rule are separate regulations, they are nearly identical, and they both address most public and agency concerns.
Issue 2: The Service should maintain NEP status for wolves that stray beyond NEP borders.
Response: Both the DPS and NEP designations are geographically based.
Except for those wolves that are in captivity, gray wolves are listed and protected according to where they are located.
However, the regulations for the three existing gray wolf NEPs do allow the Service to capture and return wolves known to be from the NEP areas if they move beyond the NEP boundaries.
Thus, wolves that stray out of an NEP area can be moved back into the NEP area to further contribute to that recovery program.
Broadly applying all of the provisions of the NEP regulations to wolves that disperse and remain outside the NEPs would be equivalent to expanding the boundaries of the NEP.
In our regulations establishing the Rocky Mountain gray wolf NEPs we stated we did not envision changing them until those wolf populations were delisted.
We will not make such changes at this time in the absence of biological need and strong public support for such a change.
Evidence of such need or support was not forthcoming during the comment period, even though we specifically requested comments on the two northern Rocky Mountain NEP regulations.
However, this final 4(d) rule applies provisions similar to those of the two Rocky Mountain NEPs to wolves outside of the NEPs.
Thus, many of the provisions of the two Rocky Mountain NEPs will now be applied to wolves in the larger Western DPS.
M. Lethal Control of Gray Wolves
Issue 1: We received a number of comments that expressed varying degrees of opposition to the lethal control of gray wolves.
Some commenters asked that we prohibit any form of lethal taking of wolves.
Other comments supported killing of wolves only in defense of human life.
Other viewpoints supported lethal control only if it is carried out by designated government agents, while some commenters feel that lethal control should not occur on public lands.
The lethal control of wolves that kill only pets was opposed by some commenters.
Response: Current regulations under the Act that apply to both endangered and threatened species (50 CFR 17.21(a)(c)(2), Sec. 17.21(a)(c)(3), Sec. 17.31(a), and Sec. 17.31(b)) provide the authority to lethally take endangered and threatened wildlife under several different scenarios.
Furthermore, section 4(d) of the Act allows the promulgation of special regulations for threatened species if we determine that those regulations are ``necessary and advisable to provide for the conservation of such species.''
These special regulations can include provisions for lethal taking of the species, if appropriate.
In the case of experimental populations, special regulations can also be promulgated allowing lethal control.
The common feature across these various regulations is that lethal take is allowed if it is necessary to protect human life and safety or is necessary for the conservation of the species.
The Service has had gray wolf regulations that allow lethal take under various scenarios in different parts of the country.
Those regulations were necessary for wolf conservation, and they were tailored to meet the needs of the differing situations in their respective areas.
In all cases they have two purposes: reducing threats, and the perceptions of those threats, to human safety; and reducing conflicts between wolves and humans in order to lessen the likelihood that individuals would act on their own to reduce perceived conflicts, likely leading to the deaths of more wolves than would result from regulated lethal control actions.
We believe the special regulations that have been used in Minnesota to control wolves depredating on livestock and other domestic animals have reduced wolf-human conflicts, have diminished the illegal killing of wolves, and thus have aided the continuing recovery of gray wolves in that State.
The special regulations for Minnesota wolves provide for lethal control by designated government agents when wolf depredation has been verified and is likely to reoccur.
These restrictions result in the control, including killing or permanent captivity, of those wolves that are taking domestic animals, but provide protection for wolves that are members of packs that hunt only wild prey.
These regulations are biologically sound, and we believe they are consistent with wolf recovery in Minnesota.
We have no information that would lead us to suspect that the similar regulations finalized in this rule will interfere with continued wolf recovery in Wisconsin and Michigan.
We are not making any changes to the current lethal control regulations for Minnesota gray wolves.
We are allowing similar depredation control activities in most other States in the Eastern DPS, and providing the authority for tribes to salvage wolf parts for spiritual and cultural use and to conduct depredation control actions on reservation land without a Federal endangered/threatened species permit.
We have developed the two special regulations to provide the actions necessary to reduce human conflicts in the Western and Eastern DPSs.
Each special regulation is designed to address the unique needs within the respective DPS, and to minimize adverse impacts on wolf recovery.
Lethal depredation control is being authorized only to the extent that we believe is necessary to continue the recovery of the wolf populations to meet our recovery goals within those two DPSs.
We are providing lethal depredation control authority to most of the States and tribes within the Eastern DPS, including those States outside of the core recovery States of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
(This authority is not being provided to States and tribes east of Ohio).
It will be the decision of the respective tribes and States as to whether they want to utilize this authority to kill depredating threatened wolves in those rare incidents of verified depredation in those noncore areas.
In the Western DPS the 4(d) rule allows wolves that have been involved in livestock depredations to be killed by agencies and the public.
This take will be highly regulated and is not expected to significantly impact the wolf population.
To date about 6 percent of the wolf population in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming is affected by Service wolf control actions, including lethal control under the continuing authority of the nonessential experimental population regulations.
This level of
[[Page 15833]]
human-caused mortality will not keep the northern Rocky Mountains wolf population from continuing its rapid expansion.
As the wolf population has expanded rapidly, fewer areas of remote habitat remain for wolves to be moved to.
Therefore, to resolve livestock depredations, the Service will be lethally controlling wolves in most situations.
Issue 2: A number of comments stressed that we should emphasize nonlethal depredation control measures and increase research efforts aimed at improved nonlethal control measures.
Response: The Service will continue to cooperate with USDA/APHIS- Wildlife Services, State DNRs, universities, and special interest groups to investigate ways to reduce the level of conflict between people, livestock, and wolves.
To date we and our partners in wolf recovery have investigated and implemented the use of fencing; guard animals; extra herders; light, siren, and other scare devices, including those activated by wolf radio-collars; shock aversion conditioning; flagging; less-than-lethal munitions; offensive and repelling scents; supplemental feeding; harassing wolves at dens and rendezvous sites to move the center of wolf pack activity away from livestock; trapping and moving individual pack members or the entire pack; moving livestock and providing alternative pasture; investigating the characteristics of livestock operations that experience higher depredation rates; and research into the type of livestock and rate of livestock loss that are confirmed in remote public grazing allotments.
We also correspond with and maintain professional contact with researchers and wildlife managers throughout the world to discuss and learn how they are dealing with similar problems.
As a result of these attempts at nonlethal methods, we have not yet discovered a reliable method of nonlethal control.
It is apparent that lethal control will remain an important tool for managing wolves that learn to depredate on livestock.
Lethal depredation control in the Western DPS is further discussed under section K. Special Regulations under Section 4(d) for the Western DPS, above.
N. Comments Regarding the Eastern DPS (composed of the proposed Western Great Lakes DPS and the proposed Northeastern DPS, as well as additional States)
Most comments regarding the Eastern DPS expressed opposition to delisting Midwestern wolves, addressed the proposed special regulation for the proposed Western Great Lakes DPS, or dealt with the proposed Northeastern DPS.
Comments in the latter two categories are addressed in separate sections O and R, below.
Other comments regarding the Eastern DPS follow: Issue 1: Numerous comments expressed opposition to reclassifying Midwestern wolves to threatened status.
Response: Since our proposal was developed, we have received 2 additional years of data showing that wolf numbers in the Midwest are continuing to expand.
We have reviewed, and have included in this rule, that additional population data, as well as updated information regarding disease occurrence and human-caused mortality.
The additional information supports the reclassification from endangered to threatened.
Issue 2: The Service should support monitoring of gray wolves in the Midwest, and should improve wolf monitoring in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan.
Response: We have been partially funding wolf monitoring and research efforts by the Michigan and Wisconsin DNRs for many years.
This support is expected to continue as long as the gray wolf is protected under the Act, and may continue to some extent for 5 years post-delisting.
Currently, we are not aware of any wild gray wolves in the Lower Peninsula of Michigan.
While we understand the interest in identifying and protecting gray wolves that might occur in the Lower Peninsula, those wolves would be unnecessary to accomplishing gray wolf recovery under the Act.
While we would provide technical assistance to initiate wolf monitoring and conservation in the Lower Peninsula if requested by the State and interested tribes, it is unlikely that we will be able to provide funding for wolf monitoring in the Lower Peninsula.
Issue 3: We should consider the potential impacts of hybridization with coyotes in the Midwest.
Response: We are concerned about gray wolf-coyote hybridization.
There is mitochondrial DNA evidence that such hybridization may have occurred in the past (Lehman et al. 1991), but the nature of mitochondrial DNA provides little information on when, and how frequently, wolf-coyote hybridization may have occurred.
There currently is no evidence that hybrid events have significantly changed the wolves in the Midwest.
Morphologically, behaviorally, and ecologically they continue to look, act, and function as wolves, rather than like hybrids.
Issue 4: The Service should delist gray wolves in the Midwest.
Response: We recognize that wolf numbers in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan have surpassed the numerical goals of the Eastern Timber Wolf Recovery Plan.
However, at the time our proposal was being prepared, we lacked reliable information on future wolf management in Minnesota, and we were therefore unable to evaluate the threats that might impact Minnesota wolves if they were delisted.
See the Summary of Factors Affecting the Species section below under factor D., The adequacy or inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms, for additional discussion of Eastern DPS gray wolves.
The subsequent completion of the 2001 Minnesota Wolf Management Plan gives us the ability to better evaluate the extent of the threats that would likely be experienced by Minnesota gray wolves if they were delisted (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans'').
Therefore, now that we have completed this rulemaking, we intend to reevaluate the threats to wolves in the Midwest, in light of current data and expected future wolf management by the States and tribes, in order to determine if the Eastern DPS constitutes a recovered entity.
If we conclude that recovery under the Act has occurred, we will promptly publish a delisting proposal and open a public comment period.
As we develop the proposal and take final action, we will again evaluate information on gray wolf presence in the northeastern United States.
O. Special Regulations Under 4(d) for Parts of the Eastern DPS (formerly the Western Great Lakes and Northeastern DPSs)
Issue 1: The government should not be involved in control of depredating wolves in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.
It should be the farmers' responsibility to keep their livestock out of the reach of wolves.
Response: Assisting farmers in reducing the adverse impacts of wildlife on agricultural activities has long been a program of the Federal Government, and currently is accomplished by the Wildlife Services program of the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
In addition, the Service has a policy that directs us to minimize the adverse economic effects of our endangered and threatened species recovery programs.
Thus, reducing wolf depredation on livestock by removing the offending wolves and wolf packs is an appropriate part of our wolf recovery programs, as long as those activities are consistent with gray wolf recovery.
We believe that
[[Page 15834]]
controlling depredating wolves is consistent with wolf recovery.
Issue 2: Lethal control of depredating wolves on public lands should not be permitted.
Response: Trapping for depredating wolves on public land generally has not been done under the ongoing wolf depredation control program in Minnesota, and we do not expect such trapping to be commonly carried out in either Wisconsin or Michigan under the new special regulation (50 CFR 17.40(o)).
Such trapping is restricted to within 1 mile of the depredation site, and the trapping usually can be effectively carried out on private lands.
In addition, most Federal lands (National Parks, Lakeshores, and Riverways, and National Forests) in these States will not allow wolf trapping on their lands.
However, the special regulation will allow wolf trapping on State, tribal, county, or other publicly owned lands.
We believe that if wolf depredation has been verified, it is in the best interests of wolf recovery to remove the problem wolves in the most effective manner, so we will not put unnecessary restrictions on the trapping locations.
Issue 3: The Service should require evidence of conflict between livestock and wolves prior to initiating control measures.
Response: We agree with this comment.
The special regulation (both as proposed and as finalized) requires a determination that ``the depredation was likely to have been caused by a gray wolf'' and that ``depredation at the site is likely to continue'' if the problem wolves are not removed.
Issue 4: The special regulation should allow depredation control measures for wolf depredation of game farm animals.
Response: The special regulation allows depredation control measures to be carried out in response to wolf depredations on ``lawfully present livestock or domestic animals.''
The regulation does not specifically address game farm animals.
However, if State or tribal wolf management plans (see issue U, ``State Wolf Management Plans'') define livestock to include game farm animals, our special regulation can be invoked in game farm depredation incidents.
We expect such depredation control actions to occur in Wisconsin, because the Wisconsin Wolf Management Plan defines livestock to include ``pen- raised animals raised on licensed game farm operations'' (WI DNR 1999a).
Issue 5: We received a number of comments espousing various opinions on who should be allowed to conduct depredation control activities under the proposed special regulation that now applies to all midwestern States except for Minnesota.
Opinions ranged from allowing private individuals, including farmers and animal owners, to take problem wolves, to allowing only qualified government agents to kill such wolves.
Response: We believe the depredation control program, as operated in Minnesota since the mid-1980s, has been highly successful in removing depredating wolves and thus greatly reducing domestic animal losses, while not unnecessarily impacting the continued growth of the Minnesota wolf population.
Those regulations allow employees or designated agents of the Service or MN DNR to take depredating wolves.
We have chosen to apply the proven success of this program to the other midwestern States, with only two minor changes.
The first of those changes allows tribes or their designated agents to undertake depredation control actions on reservation lands without needing a Federal permit.
The other change increases the area in which trapping can occur from the one-half mile allowed in Minnesota to 1 mile in Wisconsin and Michigan and 4 miles throughout the remaining area covered by the special regulation.
We believe this approach will provide sufficient ability to control problem wolves without significantly impacting the ongoing wolf recovery in Wisconsin and Michigan.
Issue 6: The Service should require farmers to employ adequate animal husbandry practices in the Midwest as a prerequisite to being eligible for depredation control actions or compensation.
Response: While there is some evidence that supports the theory that certain animal husbandry practices will reduce the likelihood that a farm will experience wolf depredation, the only quantitative study on the subject in the Midwest to date did not find any clear connections between farm layout, animal husbandry practices, and wolf depredation incidents (Mech et al. 2000).
Furthermore, even the most careful and protective livestock producer can still fall victim to wolf depredations.
Given the uncertainty of success from ``better'' animal husbandry practices, we will not require such practices, but will continue to advocate for their use.
Similarly, USDA/APHIS-Wildlife Services also recommends such practices and provides livestock producers with information on these practices.
Depredation compensation payments are made by State agencies or private organizations, not by the Service.
The Service cannot dictate the criteria for such payments.
Issue 7: The special regulation for Michigan is too subjective.
Depredation by a wolf should be proven beyond doubt, the identity of the depredating wolf should be identified, and only that individual wolf should be trapped and removed.
Response: The special regulation requires that ``the depredation was likely to have been caused by a gray wolf'' in order for trapping and removal operations to commence.
Evidence, including tracks, location of bites, size and spacing of incisor punctures, and the presence and extent of subcutaneous hemorrhaging will usually allow trained depredation incident investigators to determine whether the predator was a wolf or coyote, and can even determine if a wolf killed the domestic animal or merely scavenged on it after it had died from other causes.
If the evidence does not allow the investigator to conclude that a gray wolf likely was the cause of the mortality, then lethal depredation control actions cannot be carried out.
The ``likely to have been caused'' standard has been used successfully in wolf depredation control activities in Minnesota for many years, and has allowed the wolf population in that State to continue to increase.
We do not believe it will result in excessive wolf mortalities in Wisconsin and Michigan.
We agree that an ideal depredation control program would remove only the wolf that killed the domestic animal, and the remainder of the pack would then pursue only wild prey.
However, this scenario is unrealistic for two main reasons.
First, it is not possible to determine which pack member or members attacked and killed the domestic animal, short of capturing the entire pack and doing stomach content analysis within a few days of the depredation incident.
This is not practical and in most cases it is impossible.
Second, the wolf pack functions as a hunting unit and in many cases the entire pack, not just one member, develops the practice of preying on domestic animals.
Thus, trapping and removing a single pack member will usually not stop the depredation problem.
Issue 8: The special regulations for Minnesota should be consistent with the special regulations for other areas of this DPS.
Response: We agree that the special regulations would be slightly easier to understand if they were identical across all the areas included within the Eastern DPS.
However, the Act allows special regulations under section 4(d) to vary with the conservation needs of the
[[Page 15835]]
species in that area.
Therefore, we have established smaller lethal control distances (that is, the radius around the depredation site in which lethal control can be carried out) in Michigan and Wisconsin than in the other States covered by the same 4(d) rule, in order to reduce the likelihood that the wrong wolves might be trapped in those two States with high wolf population densities.
In addition, this 4(d) rule does not apply to any of the States in the Eastern DPS that are east of Ohio.
With respect to the differences between the continuing special regulation for Minnesota wolves (50 CFR 17.4
