2001 ACO #244 STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION GRAYFORD GRAY (JANE GRAY, GUARDIAN), PLAINTIFF, V DOCKET #00-0417 KROLL CONSTRUCTION, INCORPORATED AND THE ACCIDENT FUND COMPANY, AND SECOND INJURY FUND (TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY PROVISIONS) DEFENDANTS.
APPEAL FROM MAGISTRATE STEPHEN C. OLDSTROM.
DARYL ROYAL AND RICHARD J. EHRLICH FOR PLAINTIFF, GERALD M. MARCINKOSKI FOR DEFENDANTS KROLL CONSTRUCTION, INCORPORATED AND THE ACCIDENT FUND COMPANY, VICTORIA A. KEATING FOR SECOND INJURY FUND (TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY PROVISIONS).
OPINION PRZYBYLO, COMMISSIONER Defendants appeal and plaintiff cross-appeals the decision of Magistrate Stephen C. 1 Oldstrom, mailed October 2, 2000, granting plaintiff benefits for his multiple injuries .
Defendant Kroll Construction, Incorporated and The Accident Fund Company contest the magistrate's conclusion that it employed plaintiff on the date of his injury.
The magistrate analyzed the proofs and decided the employment status as follows.
The defendants concentrated much of their attention on Mr. Gray's 1997 and 1998 federal income tax returns which, they claimed, established that he maintained a separate business.
The income tax returns are red herrings based upon the following considerations.
First, the court cases do not dwell on tax matters.
The common law test did not include tax matters.
See the eight McKissic tests.
Second, the reader should keep in mind the fact that tax laws exist to raise revenue.
The Worker's Disability Compensation Act exists to compensate injured workers.
Third, to the extent that Mr. Gray's income tax returns might hint at a separate business, the reader should remember that Mr. Gray listed Kroll Construction as his business 1
Our determination on the first issue renders all other issues moot.
name on Schedule C, Profit of Loss from Business (Sole Proprietorship) of his 1997 and 1998 federal income tax returns.
By so doing, he regarded himself as a Kroll employee.
Fourth, the defendants did not place Mr. Gray's 1999 federal income tax return into evidence.
Therefore, it would be improper to speculate on what might be on that form.
See Dillon v Lapeer State Home 
The year 1999, not 1998 or 1997, was the critical year because he was injured on April 10, 1999.
The reader may wish to refer to section 161(1)(n) of the Act which limits the inquiry to the time of the injury, in this case April 19, 1999.
Fifth, on the 1997 and 1998 Schedules C, Mr. Gray used his social security number.
He did not have an employer identification number (EIN).
This also suggests the absence of a separate business.
The defendants concentrated on the business deductions on Mr. Gray's 1997 and 1998 federal tax returns.
I repeat that the 1999 return was the critical return and the defendants' (who put the 1997 and 1998 returns into evidence) did not produce the critical 1999 return.
Sixth, the defendants overlooked the fact that all taxpayers may deduct certain job expenses, miscellaneous expenses and miscellaneous deductions.
See any federal Schedule A.
The tax returns do not establish that Mr. Gray maintained a separate business for the above reasons and for the additional reason found in Hoste, Page 572, footnotes 8 and 9.
b.
Mr. Gray depended upon Kroll for his income.
The third test of McKissic, page 208, seems to be a facet of the separate business inquiry.
It reads as follows: Third, is the position or job of such a nature that the [alleged] employee primarily depends upon the emolument [gain from employment or position; payment received from work, salary, wages, fees, etc.
­ Webster's New World Dictionary, 1994 edition] for payment of his living expenses? The reader should consider the Court of Appeals' use of the word "emolument."
The Court did not limit the test to mere "wages" or "salary."
The Court used "emolument" to include any kind of monetary transfer.
The defendants claimed that Mr. Gray was an independent contractor because Kroll Construction paid him for completed jobs after he gave invoices to Kroll Construction.
The "invoices" were handwritten on blank sheets of paper.
The invoices do not list any business name or address.
They are informal at best.
They certainly do no resemble the kinds of papers that one separate business submits to another business for
2
payment.
The reader may wish to read the various invoices found in defendants" exhibit E.
There is no evidence that Mr..
Gray earned money from sources other than Kroll Construction in 1999.
Mr. Gray worked only for Kroll Construction.
He derived the significant part of his income from his Kroll Construction work.
The 1997 and 1998 tax returns show that he also received social security payments but those payments were but a fraction of the income that he derived from his work for Kroll Construction.
The careful reader will also have realized that Mr. Gray's 1997 and 1998 income tax returns do not report any earned income other than the income he received from Kroll Construction.
The defendants did not present Mr. Gray's 1999 tax return which is the critical return because Mr. Gray was injured on April 19,1999, the defendants put the 1998 and 1997 returns into evidence.
I find that Mr. Gray primarily depended upon the money he earned as a Kroll Construction siding application for payment of his living expenses.
This fact also helps to establish that he did not maintain a separate business.
c. Equipment and materials.
The fourth McKissic test reads as follows: Fourth, does the [alleged] employee furnish his own equipment and materials? Mr. Gary's work required a limited amount of equipment ­ ladders, saws, hampers and other small tools.
He owned these items.
He also used a pickup truck in his work.
Most of us weekend warriors have similar tools.
Many people have pickup trucks.
Mr. Gray's equipment does not establish a separate business.
This is especially true when the reader considers that Kroll Construction provided him with its distinctive hats, shirts, truck and yard signs.
Mr. Gray's tools should be contrasted with the amount and kind of equipment that a company engaged, for example, in road building has ­ large tool cribs, impressive amounts of construction equipment and the like.
The reader should consider this statement, McKissic at 209: By way of illustration, an automobile mechanic usually furnishes his own tools, but if hired to work in a pubic garage would undoubtedly be classified as an employee.
Mr. Gray did not furnish any materials.
Kroll Construction even reimbursed him for any wood that he bought to complete a project.
He obtained siding materials from the suppliers selected by Kroll Construction for the jobs that
3
Kroll Construction sold.
The Kroll Construction salesperson and the customer agreed on the materials before the salesperson contacted Mr. Gray.
Mrs. Gray spoke with Kroll Construction sales people about the new jobs and they gave her the information about the jobs.
Mrs. Gray did not independently develop this information.
She told her husband about the jobs.
Mr. Gray visited each construction site and spoke with the owner after Kroll Construction completed the sale.
He got the materials from the supplier that Kroll Construction sales people designated.
Then, he applied the siding and other materials as required by the Kroll Construction contract.
The limited amount of equipment that Mr. Gray used in his work and the materials that he obtained as directed by Kroll Construction establish that he did not have a separate business.
This is reinforced by Mr. Gray's use of Kroll Construction's hats, shirts and signs that the company gave him to advertise its business.
Mr. Kroll testified that these items were used to advertise Kroll Construction's business.
By contrast, Mr. Gray did not have shirts, signs or hats (for example) advertising himself.
d. Work customarily done by independent contractors.
The sixth McKissic test, page 208, reads as follows: Sixth, is the work or the undertaking in question customarily performed by an individual as an independent contractor? There was no significant testimony on this point.
Mr. Kroll testified that the siding applicators he used were "subs."
Mr. Kroll's concept of "subcontractor" or "independent contractor" may not be consistent with the Act.
Mr. Kroll was in the home improvement business; he was not a law professor.
Therefore, I have given his testimony about using "subs" very little weight.
Defendants' exhibit G, an audit report for the period March 15, 1998-1999 contains a "workers section" and a "subcontractors section."
The Grays do not appear in either section.
Furthermore, the audit report does not cover April 19, 1999, the injury date.
Presumably, expert testimony surveying the home improvement field and siding applicators could have been presented by the defendants who contended that Mr. Gray was an independent contractor.
The evidence concerning this point was too weak to be useful to me in carrying out my fact finding duties.
e. Control and other factors.
The seventh McKissic test reads as follows:
4
Seventh, control, although abandoned as a exclusive criterion upon which the relationship can be determined, is a factor to be considered along with payment of wages, maintenance of discipline and the right to engage or discharge employees.
i. Control Control was not an issue because Mr. Gray was a hard worker who did excellent work.
He was so good in his field that other home improvement businesses regularly sought his services.
He rejected their overtures.
As Mr. Kroll said, "they worked."
Mr. Kroll, exercised subtle control of Mr. Gray's activities.
The company specified the source of siding materials and the Kroll Construction contract with the siding purchaser or homeowner controlled the project.
Mr. Gray was required to properly install the materials.
For example, if he found that the sheathing on the house where he was installing siding was rotten, he knew that he was required to replace the bad sheathing with good sheathing before applying the siding.
Mr. Kroll did not testify about his relationship with his office staff and salespeople, for example, and how he controlled their activities or their clothing.
For example, he may have given his office and sales people Kroll Construction hats and shirts to wear during their hours of employment.
This would have been an important factor for me to consider because I could have then compared control (or lack of control) of the office staff and salespeople against Mr. Kroll's relationship with Mr. Gray insofar as it concerned the company's control of Mr. Gray's activities as a siding applicator. ii. Wages.
Kroll Construction did not pay "wages" to Mr. Gray.
Webster's New World Dictionary, 1994 edition, states that "wage (also often wages) applies to money paid to an employee at relatively short intervals, often daily, or weekly, esp. for manual or physical labor."
The company paid Mr. Gray for each completed job based upon the number of squares of siding and other items that he applied.
The payment method seems to be inconsistent with employment.
However, Kroll Construction also gave him money for vacations and money at Christmas time.
Those additional payments are inconsistent with the status of an independent contractor.
The payments are consistent with an employee-employer relationship.
The manner in which Mr. Gray was paid was a neutral factor and I would be guilty of speculating (see Dillon, supra) if I used the payment method as a factor establishing that Mr. Gray was an independent contractor.
iii. Discipline.
5
Maintenance of discipline was never an issue because Mr. Gray was an excellent siding applicator.
As Mr. Kroll said, "they worked."
The fact that Kroll Construction provided hats, shirts and signs suggests a subtle kind of discipline on the part of Kroll Construction.
Subtle discipline also existed in Kroll Construction's selection of siding materials supplier.
I would expect an independent contractor to select the materials.
iv. Employees.
Mr. Gray had no employees on April 19, 1999, the day he was injured.
This fact suggests that Mr. Kroll and Mr. Gray never discussed the matter of employees.
The foregoing four items do no establish that Mr. Gray was an independent contractor on April 19, 1999.
* * * ** I find based upon the foregoing points, that Mr. Gray did not maintain a separate business on April 19, 1999.
In Betancourt v Ronald Smith, 1999 ACO #608, we have provided a clear outline of our interpretation of the statutory exclusion of persons maintaining a separate business.
MCL 418.161(n).
We included a reference to the Supreme Court's Hoste v Shanty Creek Management, Inc, 459 Mich 561 (1999), mandates.
We held: Accordingly, I find that plaintiff has not established himself as an employee of defendant and that defendant has established that plaintiff is, in fact an independent contractor.
As such, he is not entitled to worker's compensation 11 benefits.
In stating his claim of legal error, plaintiff asserts that the statutory requirement of "maintaining a separate business" requires proof that plaintiff filed an assumed name, printed business cards, advertised, or otherwise manifested a business enterprise to the outside world.
In essence, plaintiff would apply only factor five of the economic realities test: Did plaintiff hold himself out to the public as an independent businessman? Defendants counter that the comments in Hoste regarding the economic realities test are dicta and that all eight factors come into play in deciding whether plaintiff maintained his own business.
In our view the statements in Hoste limiting economic reality test are not dicta, even though the application of subsection (n).
The court's discussion of was part and parcel of their analysis of the statute.
the application of the result did not turn on the economic reality test Because they read both
6
subsections (1) and (n) together and their interpretation of (1) altered the interpretation of the economic realities test, their comments on subsection (n) were an integral part of the reasoning used to resolve the case.
We do not agree with plaintiff, however, that the only relevant factor is factor five, holding oneself out to the general public.
If this were the only factor to be considered for the question of maintaining a separate business, then this provision would be identical with the second element of the proviso, rendering them duplicative of each other.
Rather, we take the words of the statute at their face value.
Thus, the question to be answered is: Did the claimant perform services to the alleged employee through a distinct business enterprise? In this case the Magistrate found as fact that plaintiff maintained a separate business based on his tax records which showed he treated his income from Ron Smith Trucking as gross revenue for a business.
He depreciated the cost of the garage at his home and also deducted the replacement cost of his own tools.
In addition, the Magistrate found that plaintiff purchased a private accident insurance policy on which he listed himself as self-employed.
After being audited in 1993 and 1994, plaintiff was assessed self-employment tax on his income from his business.
These facts unequivocally establish that plaintiff maintained a separate 12 business with the meaning of MCL 418.161(1)(n).
Plaintiff contends that the maintaining of a separate business for tax purposes should not be determinative for compensation purposes.
We disagree.
Because the statute distinguishes between maintaining a separate business and holding oneself out to the public, it is not necessary to show, under the maintaining a separate business factor, the indicia of holding oneself out to the public or the creation of a separate legal entity.
In this case, plaintiff's tax records show not only income treated as revenue for a separate business, but the deduction of the cost of personal tools, and the depreciation of his home garage and his van It would be hard to envision facts more clearly showing that plaintiff had a separate business.
In addition, we accept the interpretation of the statute that several elements of the economic reality test are relevant inquiries on the question of maintaining a separate business.
These include, whether the work is integral to the employer's business, whether the employee furnishes his own tools or equipment, whether the undertaking of customarily performed by independent contractors, and the control and method of payment.
The Magistrate resolved all of these facts against plaintiff.
The Magistrate's findings of fact are based on competent, material, and substantial evidence and we affirm them.
The fact[s] found support the sole conclusion that plaintiff maintained a separate business.
As a result, under MCL 418.161(1)(n) plaintiff is not an employee.
7
__________________________________________________________________ 11
Magistrate's opinion at 14-18.
In Wheelock v X-Cel Transport, Inc, 1999 ACO # 508; 1999 Mich ACO 2312, we held that tax forms demonstrating income shown on Schedule C as business income rather than as wages is compelling evidence of maintaining a separate business.
After oral argument plaintiff submitted a supplemental argument attempting to distinguish Wheelock from the instant case.
Plaintiff interprets Wheelock as an endorsement of the "totality of the circumstances" test for whether plaintiff was an employee.
Plaintiff also distinguishes Wheelock factually because it involved a written contract describing Mr. Wheelock as an independent contractor and because he use[d] his own tools and equipment.
We do not find plaintiff's argument persuasive.
The Wheelock decision clearly turned on the existence of a separate business, which was established in great part based on the tax records as in the present case these records showed income treated as gross revenues from a business reported on IRS form 1040 Schedule C. 2
12
The magistrate's analysis cannot stand in light of Betancourt.
The magistrate misstated the importance of tax returns when determining the existence of a separately maintained business.
That overemphasis led him to a legally erroneous conclusion, that plaintiff did not maintain a separate business.
We believe a proper analysis leads to the opposite conclusion.
Namely, plaintiff's tax filings declare business income, take deductions for depreciating assets and acknowledge the owing of self-employment taxes.
Quite simply, when a person voluntarily pays $5,783.00 in self-employment taxes, they have essentially admitted to maintaining a separate 3 business.
The remaining proofs also support the conclusion that plaintiff maintained a separate business.
Plaintiff employed other workers to assist him.
Plaintiff received payment for the amount of siding he applied rather than an hourly or salaried wage.
Plaintiff admitted that he owned his tools and truck.
Finally, all of the evidence showed that independent contractors apply siding.
Thus, under Bentacourt, plaintiff does not receive benefits.
Therefore, we reverse the magistrate's decision and deny plaintiff's request for benefits.
2
See also, Blanzy v Brigadier General Contractors, Inc 240 Mich App 632 (2000) 3
The magistrate's concentration on the 1999 return is equally misplaced.
Trial occurred in May of 2000.
Plaintiff's 1997 tax return is dated April 4.
Plaintiff's 1998 tax return is not dated.
This suggests that the 1999 tax return was not available at the time of trial.
Moreover, the 1999 tax return was under plaintiff's exclusive control.
Thus, if it could prove that plaintiff's tax status changed, plaintiff would have introduced the document.
Therefore, the fact-finder would not speculate to find that plaintiff's filing status remained the same in 1999.
In fact, no competent and substantial evidence supports his finding that the status was unknown.
8
Commissioners Martell and Kent concur.
Gregory A. Przybylo Marie E. Martell James J. Kent Commissioners
9
STATE OF MICHIGAN WORKER'S COMPENSATION APPELLATE COMMISSION GRAYFORD GRAY (JANE GRAY, GUARDIAN), PLAINTIFF, V DOCKET #00-0417
KROLL CONSTRUCTION, INCORPORATED, THE ACCIDENT FUND COMPANY, AND SECOND INJURY FUND (TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY PROVISIONS) DEFENDANTS.
This cause came before the Appellate Commission on appeal by defendants and cross appeal by plaintiff from the decision of Magistrate Stephen C. Oldstrom, mailed October 2, 2000, granting plaintiff benefits for his multiply injuries.
The Commission has considered the record and briefs of counsel, and believes that the magistrate's decision should be reversed.
Therefore, IT IS ORDERED that the decision of the magistrate is reversed and plaintiff's benefits denied.
Gregory A. Przybylo Marie E. Martell James J. Kent Commissioners
