Objectives and Strategies The following section provides 10 objectives and identifies strategies for effective implementation.
The recommended strategies following each objective are specific areas needing attention as identified by the strategic plan working group.
These objectives and strategies were identified by the strategic plan working group as priorities for implementing effective noxious weed management.
Objectives and strategies outlined by this plan are: Objective One: Strategy One: Objective Two: Strategy Two: Objective Three: Strategy Three: Objective Four: Strategy Four: Objective Five: Strategy Five: Objective Six: Strategy Six: Objective Seven: Strategy Seven: Objective Eight: Strategy Eight: Objective Nine: Strategy Nine: Objective Ten: Strategy Ten: Leadership and Organization Provide consistent statewide and local leadership and organization Cooperative Partnerships Develop and expand partnerships Planning and Prioritizing Develop and maintain noxious weed lists and plans all levels Education and Awareness Provide education and awareness Integrated Weed Management (IWM) Continue to support and advocate the principles of IWM Early Detection and Control of New Invaders Implement early detection and control Noxious Weed Information System and Data Collection Upgrade Noxious Weed Information System Monitoring and Evaluation Monitor noxious weed projects to evaluate effectiveness Policy, Mandates, Law, Compliance and Enforcement Use mandates, policy and law to encourage effective weed management Funding and Resources Increase base level funding for state, county, local, and federal noxious weed control programs to address priorities and to assist private land managers.
Additional funding sources for weed control programs
Strategy Eleven:
24 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
Objective One Leadership and Organization Leadership and organization are required to direct cooperative noxious weed projects and allocate limited resources.
Leadership is needed at the federal, state, and local levels to organize weed control projects, develop partnerships, provide assistance, and implement effective programs.
Strategy One Provide consistent statewide and local leadership and organization.
1.
Leadership and Organization through ODA Oregon Department of Agriculture (ODA) is designated as the primary agency that provides leadership for noxious weed management.
The number and diversity of national, regional, and state noxious weed issues necessitates the need for leadership and organization at the state level.
ODA and the Oregon State Weed Board (OSWB) will continue to provide statewide coordination of noxious weed management, oversight of statewide priorities, and assist with local efforts.
County and Local Programs County programs provide the vital role of organization and implementation of local control programs.
Counties are the primary local contact and provide the enforcement of the state weed laws and county ordinances.
State and Federal Natural Resources and Land Management Agencies It is necessary that agencies take an active role in noxious weed management.
· Establish a noxious weed coordinator position within each agency · Encourage agencies to assist and cooperate with statewide and local program objectives · Encourage agencies to identify and develop policy, management plans, and implement control projects
2.
3.
25
Objective Two Cooperative Partnerships Partnerships Noxious weeds do not respect ownership and watershed boundaries.
Effective management requires support and participation from all parties.
Cooperative management of noxious weed control allows for prioritizing and pooling of limited resources.
Partnerships allow management across jurisdictional and ownership boundaries.
Strategy Two Develop and expand partnerships.
Formation of partnerships is essential for successful weed control projects.
Encourage and support partnerships between private landowners, state agencies, federal agencies, tribal governments, counties, weed management areas, watershed associations, and conservation groups.
Develop contacts, memorandums of understanding, and cooperative agreements to encourage the development of partnerships.
1.
Agency Coordination and Partnerships · Designate formal weed control contacts between ODA and state and federal natural resource and land management agencies · Encourage partnerships to address noxious weed management on public lands · Network among agencies to facilitate noxious weed management 2.
Memorandum · Develop a statewide memorandum of understanding between state and federal agencies to foster cooperative partnerships for noxious weed projects 3.
Cooperative agreements · Use cooperative agreements to facilitate control projects 4.
Weed Management Areas · Actively promote and develop Cooperative Weed Management Areas to organize local control efforts 5.
Build Partnership with Private Land Managers · Actively promote and foster partnerships with the private sector.
Work through existing state, county, and federal programs and state and local weed control boards.
Assist private control efforts through technical assistance, planning, implementation, and cost-assistance.
26 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
Objective Three Planning and Prioritizing Planning and prioritizing allocates limited resources and provides direction for implementation of programs and projects.
Strategy Three Develop and maintain noxious weed lists at the state and county levels.
Develop and implement noxious weed management plans at state, federal, and local levels.
1.
Maintain State Noxious Weed List OSWB will continue to list and rate weeds at the state level as "A", "B", and "T" classified weeds (see Appendix 1).
Statewide Plans and Priorities OSWB and ODA will continue to develop and maintain statewide management plans and objectives for state priority listed "A" and "T" noxious weeds.
County Weed List County weed boards should continue to list and classify weeds at the local level.
Regional Plans Organize and conduct planning meetings among ODA, county weed boards, weed management areas, watershed groups, and private land managers to assist plan development, prioritization, and implementation of control projects.
State and Federal Agencies Plans As major land stewards, agencies have the regional responsibility to plan and provide noxious weed control projects on lands under their jurisdiction.
Western States Planning among western states is important to address regional and national issues such as biocontrol, introductions of new invasive species, research and funding, sharing of information, and to organize support for federal noxious weed control programs.
National and Regional Issues There is a need to work cooperatively with neighboring western states to address regional issues.
It is critical that Oregon cooperators work with federal agencies, national interest groups, such as FICMINEW and WWCC, and other western states to capture national attention and interest to support and address regional concerns.
It is also important to be informed of national and regional issues that may affect Oregon.
Strategic plan working group
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
27
· Use organizations such as WWCC, INWAC, FICMNEW, and the Western Society of Weed Science (WSWS) as forums to identify, plan, move issues forward and gain political support.
Weed Awareness Survey A February, 2000 survey and report by Eastern Oregon State University sponsored by Columbia--Blue Mountain Resource Conservation and Development Area, recommends a public awareness campaign on the spread and impacts of noxious weeds.
Respondents to the survey were well aware that noxious weeds are a problem for all Oregonians, but were not aware of the full impacts of weeds.
Ninety-two percent of the respondents are interested in receiving noxious weed information (EONWSR 2000).
Objective Four Education and Awareness The public is generally not aware of the economic and environmental impacts of noxious weeds.
There is a need to improve awareness of noxious weeds and to provide educational information to cooperators, land managers, and the public.
Pamphlets, bulletins, and brochures are useful at meetings, for follow-up consultations, and educational purposes.
As people become more aware of noxious weeds, the probability of detecting them is greatly increased, which allows for more effective and timely control.
Education and awareness assist weed identification, reporting new infestations, prevention and control, and fosters cooperation and partnerships.
State and federal natural resource agencies and county noxious weed control programs responded strongly, in an August 2000 ODA survey, indicating the need for more agency and public awareness of noxious weed issues.
Strategy Four Provide education and awareness.
Increase awareness of noxious weeds among the general public, private landowners and public land managers.
Increase awareness of decision-makers (managers, policy makers and Legislators) and encourage their participation in developing and achieving solutions.
1.
2.
Develop and Implement Noxious Weed Education Programs Develop Educational Materials Noxious weed cooperators should develop pamphlets, brochures, video, CDs, and other educational materials.
Provide Noxious Weed Information A. Weed Programs · Provide noxious weed education through ODA, counties, federal agencies, and local programs.
B. Universities · Support OSU Extension as a resource to provide noxious weed education.
3.
28 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
C.
Organizations · Encourage organizations (i.e., The Nature Conservancy, Blue Mountain RC 
National Funding Funding at the national level for rangeland and wildland research has declined by as much as 50 percent during the past decade (Mullin 2000).
D. Noxious Weed Internet Site · ODA will develop and maintain web based information.
Provide noxious weed identification, technical information, and resource materials.
Include a noxious weed reporting form and updated noxious weed distribution maps.
E. News Releases · ODA and cooperators will produce news releases on priority noxious weed issues 4.
State and Federal Agency Awareness Develop and implement noxious weed awareness programs.
A. ODA will work, through contacts with natural resource and land management agencies, to develop programs that increase awareness within agencies.
· Provide information to increase awareness with managers · Conduct identification education with field staff · Provide technical assistance to aid planning and implementation
Objective Five Integrated Weed Management (IWM) IWM is a multi-disciplinary approach to weed control based on the best available science and experience of weed managers.
Control options are based on site-specific information and the best strategies for effective management are implemented.
IWM uses all available methods and techniques for noxious weed control including prevention, mechanical, cultural, chemical, and biological control (see Appendix 5).
Strategy Five Continue to support and advocate the principles of IWM.
Support training and technical assistance.
Support research on IWM practices to improve and provide effective methods of control.
29
1.
Expanding and Implementing Biological Control
Technical Assistance Transfer information from weed control professionals to assist local programs, state and federal agencies, and private land managers A. Develop and provide technical and general information to facilitate noxious weed management through bulletins, pamphlets, classes, and web sites B. ODA will continue to host the Oregon Interagency Noxious Weed Symposium
2.
Research Research and develop IWM methods A. IWM Methods · Establish test plots to assess treatment and application methods · Evaluate control methods and refine techniques to specific needs
The Galerucella leaf beetle is a biocontrol agent that attacks purple loosestrife.
For noxious weeds that are widely distributed and are beyond the economic and environmental possibility of regional control, biological control may be the only hope.
A successful biocontrol project against tansy ragwort yielded a 15:1 benefit cost ratio.
Oregon can select biocontrol targets, but the research and testing required to get approval for new biocontrol agents is done in the foreign countries where the weed originated.
Oregon must either rely on joining existing projects with other states, under the direction of USDA-ARS and APHIS, or contract work to foreign organizations.
It takes three to five years at a cost of $250,000 to $500,000 to find, test, and import a new biocontrol agent for release in the U.S.
· Assess herbicide treatments, timing, rates, and application methods · Review cultural methods such as grazing and rotations · Conduct demonstration projects · Evaluate integration of chemical and biological control · Develop and evaluate competitive planting methods B. Biological Control · Fully implement available biological control · Establish nursery release sites of new biocontrol agents · Monitor and evaluate impacts of biological control · Review and evaluate target weeds · Assist foreign exploration for new biocontrol agents · Complete host specificity testing for new biocontrol agents · Write petitions for introduction and release of approved biocontrol agents C. Restoration · Identify restoration needs · Refine and improve restoration techniques
30 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
3.
Prevention Develop and implement prevention programs on a statewide basis.
A. Weed-Free Feed, Straw and Mulch · Encourage the use of weed-free feeds and mulch on public lands · Implement a noxious weed-free forage, feed, and straw program · Provide certification of weed-free hay, straw, and feed · Provide certification of straw and mulch for restoration and construction B. Weed Free Seed · Develop and distribute guidelines for procurement of weed free seed · Maintain and update State Noxious Seed List to prohibit sale of contaminated seed C. Restoration Guidelines · Organize an interagency committee to identify restoration needs and develop restoration guidelines for noxious weed control sites D. Risk Assessment Develop and formalize a process of risk assessment for new invasive weeds and possible listing as state noxious weeds Kudzu, a noxious vine that kills and degrades other plants by smothering, was recently found in limited distribution in Oregon.
Kudzu is reported to be spreading at a rate of 125,000 acres per year in the southeast U.S. and is causing millions of dollars in economic losses.
Kudzu is an example of the need for a noxious weed emergency fund for early treatment of new invading species.
Kudzu
Objective Six Early Detection and Control of New Invaders Prevention and treatment of new noxious weed introductions is the most successful, cost effective, and least environmentally damaging means of control.
If new invasive noxious weeds are allowed to go unchecked, economic losses will exceed the present control costs of eradication or containment by several orders of magnitude.
After initial introduction of a new invasive plant, there is a short period of opportunity for eradication and containment (see Figure c).
Once permanently established, a new invader becomes a long-term management problem.
A current economic assessment of six potential weeds in Oregon demonstrates the benefit of early detection and control of new invaders.
31
Purple starthistle
Long-term contingency planning for "A" classified weeds is critical in maintaining a proper defense against them.
Having emergency funds available to implement early detection and treatment of new invaders can prevent their widespread establishment and associated impacts.
Currently the state lists 37 species as "A" classified weeds.
These weeds are of known economic importance and occur in the state in small enough infestations to be contained or eradicated, or are an imminent threat because they occur in neighboring states.
Percent of Biological Potential (Acres)
Detection Pest Status by Professionals
General Public Awareness
Purple starthistle, a new invader to the state in 1995, infests less then ten acres of pasture in Clackamas County.
This noxious weed has the biological potential to invade 1.5 million acres of productive agriculture and pasture lands in Oregon.
An aggressive eradication program costing $3558 per year has been effective at containing the infestation.
It is estimated that purple starthistle would have economic impacts of $12 million per year if left to exploit its biological potential in Oregon.
This purple starthistle project demonstrates the importance of early detection and eradication projects.
Introduction
Intervention Programs
Time Figure C A new invader goes through certain phases; introduction, establishment, and spread.
After initial introduction, it increases slowly.
After a period of time, the rate of increase and spread becomes exponential.
This rate of increase continues until a limiting factor in the environment stops further spread (biological potential).
Limiting factors may be natural or a result of human intervention (some type of management).
Often the general public does not become aware of the problem until the weed is widespread and established.
Early detection and control programs intervene on the lower portion of this growth curve to prevent new weeds from reaching their full biological potential.
These programs intervene with prevention, survey, eradication, and containment projects.
Strategy Six Implement early detection and control.
Prevent the establishment and spread of new invader noxious weeds through early detection, eradication, and containment.
List and evaluate the threats of new invaders.
Develop contingency plans for new and/or potential invading weeds.
1.
Watch List Formalize a process at the state level to identify new species for potential listing as state listed noxious weeds.
Develop and
32 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
maintain a Watch List of invasive plants to evaluate for possible addition to the State Noxious Weed List.
2.
Contingency Planning ODA and OSWB will develop contingency plans for all state "A Listed" noxious weeds to facilitate early detection and control.
A. Work with affected land managers, industries, and state and federal agencies to develop plans to address new invader weeds.
3.
Early Detection and Control Expand the efforts of ODA and its cooperators for early detection and control programs to decrease the time between initial detection and treatment of priority noxious weeds.
A. Survey for priority noxious weeds B. 4.
Implement timely treatment of new invaders Smooth cordgrass invades an estimated 4,000 acres of Washington State estuaries costing more than $1 million in control costs annually.
Infestations are increasing at about eight percent per year in Washington.
All of Oregon's 13 major estuaries, more than 64,000 acres, are at imminent threat to cordgrass invasion.
Smooth cordgrass is able to alter the biological functions of estuaries, impacting waterfowl, shorebirds, shellfish, and marine vertebrate and invertebrate habitat (Isaacson 2000).
It is estimated that smooth cordgrass would cause over $17 million in annual losses once established in Oregon's major estuaries.
Smooth cordgrass
Proposed Invasive Species Council Participate in the proposed Oregon Invasive Species Council (ODA and other state and federal agencies) A. Risk Assessment Develop a process to asses risk of new invasive weeds.
B. C. Evaluate the economic and environmental risk of new invasive weeds.
Evaluate imported plant materials to prevent the introduction of noxious weed reproductive plant parts.
D. List and regulate the importation of known invasive plants.
Objective Seven Noxious Weed Information System and Data Collection Survey, inventory, and mapping are very important processes for documenting weed infestations.
Quality collection and use of weed distribution data provides information that is needed to make informed decisions and implement effective eradication, containment, and control projects.
Prioritization of noxious weed projects cannot be done until infestations are accurately delimited.
The collection of
33
weed data at the state level needs to be standardized and stored at a central repository to improve noxious weed control efforts.
Weed Mapper At the present time, noxious weed information is fragmented and is recorded and stored in various formats and locations.
Information is collected and used by state, county, and federal programs.
A standardized, centralized data collection and record storage system for noxious weed information is needed.
Strategy Seven Upgrade Noxious Weed Information System Update the ODA system for noxious weed survey, inventory, and mapping.
Update Geographical Information System (GIS) hardware and software, develop and test a standardized data collection process and reporting procedure.
1.
Comprehensive Survey Coordinate with federal, state, and county programs to implement, maintain, and update a comprehensive statewide inventory of noxious weeds Repository and Provider of Information ODA should act as the repository and resource for noxious weed information for the state
Oregon State University Department of Rangeland Resources in cooperation with Oregon Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Land Management and US Forest Service is developing an Internet based database, reporting and mapping system.
When fully functional, this system will facilitate weed information exchange among federal, state, and county weed programs as well as private citizens.
More information on weed mapper can be found on the web at www.weedmapper.org.
2.
Objective Eight Monitoring and Evaluation The collection of information allows informed decision-making and long-term planning.
Monitoring and evaluation directs limited resources toward effective management activities.
Strategy Eight Monitor noxious weed projects to evaluate effectiveness.
1.
Evaluate Projects Monitor and evaluate projects for effectiveness and improvements.
Evaluate Progress Develop and implement measures of progress in noxious weed management statewide.
2.
34 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
Objective Nine Policy, Mandates, Law, Compliance and Enforcement Mandates, laws, and policies direct and strengthen the management of noxious weeds.
They give authority and direction to resource and land management agencies and heighten the importance of noxious weed management.
Oregon weed law gives governing agencies the authority for enforcement and compliance.
Strategy Nine Use mandates, policy and law to encourage effective weed management 1.
Address Current Gaps Develop law, mandates, and policy to address current gaps.
A. Level of Services by State Agencies Mandate a level of service for noxious weed management by state natural resource and land management agencies.
Include noxious weed management as a part of natural resource management.
· All natural resource agencies should establish a noxious weed coordinator.
· Agencies would be encouraged to assist and cooperate with local and statewide objectives.
· Agencies would be encouraged to develop policy and plans to address the spread and control of noxious weeds.
· Agencies should budget resources to implement noxious weed control plans.
B. Authority Gap Develop law to address authority gaps in noxious weed enforcement.
ODA should have parallel authority with the counties for state "A" listed weeds in order to address weed control of statewide concern where local programs do not exist.
Risk Assessment Develop a formal policy to address risk of introduction of new invasive weeds and potential listing as State "A" listed noxious weeds.
C.
35
D. Imports of Invasive Plants Explore authority and policy to regulate the importation of known or potentially invasive plants.
2.
Enforce existing policy and law A. Enforce existing noxious weed law County weed control programs, courts, and weed boards should enforce existing weed laws to assist and address the needs of local interests.
County programs should be the primary level of enforcement for noxious weed law (ORS 570).
B. Enforce Noxious Weed Quarantine ODA should continue to enforce the recently enacted noxious weed quarantine to prevent sales of state listed noxious weeds (OAR 603-52-1200).
Objective Ten Funding and Resources Stable, consistent funding dedicated to noxious weed control is needed.
Noxious weed management requires consistent ongoing coordination, planning, and implementation of treatment projects to effectively manage noxious weeds.
A recent survey of state and federal natural resource agencies and county weed control programs ranks funding as the primary need for implementing effective weed control projects.
Strategy Ten Increase base level funding for state, county, local, and federal noxious weed control programs to address priorities identified by the respective programs and to assist private land managers.
The total additional budgetary needs identified by state, county, and federal programs are estimated at $12.4 million per year.
Given the conservative estimate of losses from noxious weeds is identified at $83 million annually, spending an additional $5.2 million from state and local sources and $7.2 million from federal sources would be a prudent investment.
The dedication of additional resources towards noxious weed management is supported by the findings of a current economic assessment that accompanies this plan, Economic Analysis
36 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
of Containment Programs, Damages, and Production Losses From Noxious Weeds in Oregon (see Appendix 3).
1.
State Programs Support priority noxious weed control activities identified by ODA and state natural resource and land management agencies.
A. ODA Noxious Weed Control Program The ODA weed control program needs additional resources to maintain its professional staff.
The cost to restore the statewide role and focus on priorities, as recommended by this plan, is an additional $375,000 per year.
Priorities Include: · Providing statewide leadership for noxious weed management · Developing and coordinating cooperative state, county, and federal projects · Assisting private landowners · Providing education, technology transfer, and consultation services · Implementing biological control projects · Implementing new invader control and eradication projects · Implementing survey, inventory and mapping projects · Implementing prevention programs B. Oregon State Weed Board (OSWB) OSWB needs additional funds to address the needs of education, research, and to provide assistance and incentive programs in the form of grants and cost-share.
OSWB cost assistance should be used to develop and assist local weed control programs and to address priorities on private lands.
Funds are also needed to address needs for weed control education, Integrated Weed Management (IWM) research, weed control emergencies, and grant administration.
Additional needs are $1 million per year for cost-assistance, education, research, weed control emergencies, and grant administration.
Maintain existing $1.1 million per biennium for noxious weed grants.
37
Priorities for OSWB Include: · Administering grants for local control projects · Providing funds for county cost-share and program development · Funding education and awareness programs · Funding research for Integrated Weed Management · Addressing weed control emergencies and special projects C. State Natural Resource and Land Management Agencies State natural resource and land management agencies need additional resources to address basic weed control priorities.
State agencies estimate the additional need at $1 million per year (see Appendix 6, Table 4).
Priorities for each Agency Include: · Establishing and providing noxious weed coordinator position · Increasing agency awareness · Developing noxious weed control plans · Implementing control activities · Developing and maintaining cooperative partnerships 2.
County Programs Counties need to fund and support local weed control boards and programs.
OSWB should have funds for assistance to counties through cost-share, and grants.
A basic county noxious weed control program costs about $150,000 per year.
Approximately two thirds of Oregon's 36 counties do not have active programs; thus, the approximate need to correct this shortfall is estimated at $3.2 million per year.
Priorities Include: · Developing and coordinating local programs · Implementing local control projects · Implementing survey, inventory, and mapping projects · Assisting private landowners · Providing education and consultation · Implementing prevention activities
38 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
3.
Federal Programs Support federal noxious weed programs by working with federal agencies, noxious weed working groups, other western states, and congressional delegates to encourage the allocation of additional resources to address noxious weeds on federal lands.
Federal agencies estimate an additional $7.2 million per year is needed to adequately implement weed control programs on federal lands in Oregon (see Appendix 6, Table 5).
A. Oregon Cooperators Can Assist Federal Programs · Supporting and encouraging federal agencies to develop, fund, and implement noxious weed control projects · Supporting OSWB and local weed boards to voice concerns and to address federal and national issues (e.g., letters to agency heads, members of Congress) · Participating in noxious weed work groups ( i.e., WWCC, Intermountain Noxious Weed Advisory Council (INWAC), FICMNEW) to assist federal program funding and address national issues
Scotch broom
Pasture heavily infested with Scotch broom Early settlers of the Pacific Coast introduced Scotch broom as a garden ornamental.
It has spread far beyond the bounds of cultivation and covers millions of acres west of the Cascades in the Pacific Northwest.
Strategy Eleven Additional funding sources for weed control programs 1.
Explore and Develop Alternative Funding Sources The introduction and spread of invasive weeds is an unfortunate by-product of human activity.
New introductions have increased dramatically in the past decade due to the increased ease and speed of world travel and the expansion of global commerce.
Local spread of noxious weeds can be natural with wind, water, and animals; but human activities such as, recreation, vehicle travel, and the movement of contaminated equipment, products, and animals greatly increase the rate and distance of dispersal.
There is a need for funding that is tied to the source and magnitude of the problem.
Funding sources are needed that mirror trends in those aspects of weed dispersal that contain a component of risk for weed introduction and spread.
The following is a list of examples to provoke thought about alternative funding sources.
A. Imported Plant Material · A small percentage of intentionally introduced plants have become invasive weeds (e.g. kudzu, Scotch broom, Himalayan blackberry, and purple loosestrife).
Weeds 39
Yellow starthistle
also hitchhike on imported nursery stock.
Since the importation of plants carries a level of risk, this activity should help pay for programs that respond to new weed problems.
· A surcharge could be added to the nursery license fee for importers of plant material.
Nursery license fees are currently based on a sliding scale of gross purchases or gross sales.
A similar sliding scale fee could be added for imported plants.
Nurseries importing a large amount of plant material would pay more; those dealing only in Oregon-grown plants would not pay an additional fee.
B. Imported Seed · Imported seed often contains small amounts of weed seed.
Some weed contaminants will establish and become problems in the future (e.g., small broomrape).
The risk associated with seed imports could be offset by adding a surcharge to the seed dealers license related to the amount of imported seed from out-of-state.
Yellow starthistle, native to the Mediterranean, was first introduced as a contaminate of alfalfa seed in the 1800s.
Oregon now has more then 1.8 million acres infested by this noxious weed.
C.
Trade and Travel · Weeds hitchhike on vehicles, trucks, railroad cars, boats, ships, and airplanes.
Many weeds, like the knapweeds, are "roadrunners" that spread rapidly along roads and railroad tracks.
Hydrilla, an aquatic weed not yet established in Oregon, threatens to arrive any day hanging from a boat's propeller or clinging to its trailer.
· One way of connecting revenues to the source of the problem is to expand the use of the gas tax.
Gas taxes are used primarily for highway maintenance in Oregon, but perhaps the definition of highway maintenance should include protecting Oregon's lands from deleterious weeds that are spread along roadways by cars and trucks.
Other examples could include international travel and shipment fees, port fees, fees on driver licenses for new residents, and license fees on ATVs and boats.
40 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
