REDUCING WA S T E , Annual Report 2002-03 to the Indiana General Assembly BUILDING BUSINESS Joseph E. Kernan, Governor INDIANA DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE ONE NORTH CAPITOL, SUITE 700 INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA 46204 TEL 317 232 8800 www. indianacommerce.com
Members of the General Assembly: The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce's Recycling Market Development Program, administered through the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice, has been making a dif ference in Indiana's recycling industr y for over a decade.
Through its financial and technical assistance and outreach, the program has helped ensure that Recycling is Working in Indiana for businesses and communities across the state.
The recycling and reuse industr y employs over 75,000 people at 1,700 businesses throughout Indiana.
Among these are businesses that manufacture products from recycled plastic, make mats from recycled r ubber, create mulch from discarded pallets, and refurbish old electronic components.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce is committed to suppor ting these businesses and increasing our ef for ts to encourage Indiana companies to use r ecyclables in manufacturing and to reduce waste.
Commerce is also committed to bringing recycled products into the mainstream consumer marketplace by encouraging local communities to buy recycled.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce's Recycling Market Development Program of fers loans, grants, technical assistance, and infor mational tools to Indiana businesses and communities to not only improve recycling and waste reduction, but to improve Indiana's economic development capabilities as well.
This fiscal year alone, four projects were approved in FY 2002­2003 for loans totaling $995,000, leveraging over $995,000 in private investment.
These projects will diver t more than 63,500 tons of material from disposal, save almost 9 Mmbtu's and create 26 new jobs.
Also this year, 27 grant projects were approved totaling $310,037.
Commerce's new structure, with 12 regional of fices around the state, has helped bring these valuable ser vices to more businesses and communities this year.
Commerce continues to promote the economic and environmental benefits of waste reduction and recycling through improved programs and technical assistance.
An increasing number of companies are finding that recycling and r educing waste can and should be par t of their daily business, as it helps keep them competitive, ef ficient and r esponsible.
These companies are leading the way in new technologies and resource ef ficiency practices, as well as creating quality jobs for Hoosiers.
Your continued suppor t of these impor tant programs is appreciated.
Together, we can build a stronger economy and provide a more sustainable environment for Hoosiers.
Sincere l y,
Joseph E. Kernan Governor
T ABLE OF CONTENTS Executive Summary 3-4
Introduction
5
Strategy for Waste Reduction and Market Development Financial Assistance Tools Comprehensive Online Tools Focus on Electronic Scrap Management Promoting Recycling's Economic Impact Public Education and Marketing Legislative Examination of State Recycling Ef for t s New Projects and Events in Fiscal Year 2002­2003 Next Steps
6-10 6 7 8 8 9 9 10 10
Priorities for Market Development
11-12
Financial Assistance Loans to Indiana Business: Equipment Purchases to Facilitate Recycling Grants to Encourage Innovation in Waste Reduction and Buying Recycled Recycling Market Development Program Grants Loan and Grant Success Stories for Fiscal Year 2002­2003
13-21 14 17 18-19 20-21
Economic Impact of Recycling and Reuse in Indiana
22-24
Waste Reduction and Recycling Saves Energy and Reduces Greenhouse Gas Emissions
25-26
Markets for Indiana Recyclables
27-30
Par tnerships and Cooperative Assistance
31
Indiana Depar tment of Commerce Contacts
32
This repor t is submitted in compliance with IC 4-4-3-8(c), which requires that "The depar tment shall submit a repor t to the general assembly before October 1 of each year concerning the availability of and location of markets for recycled products in Indiana."
The Indiana General Assembly char ged the Indiana Depar tment of Commerce with recycling market development in 1990 through amendments to IC 4-23-5.5.
2
EXECUTIVE SUMMAR Y Recycling is working in Indiana.
The recycling and reuse industr y in Indiana contributes significantly to waste reduction, job creation and revenue generation in the state, in addition to decreasing energy consumption, greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and the amount of waste going to landfills.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce's Ener g y and Recycling Of fice works to suppor t and expand this industr y sector through financial and technical assistance in order to help Indiana achieve its 50 percent waste-reduction goal and to build Indiana's economy.
Between 1990 and 2002, Indiana's population grew from 5,544,159 to an estimated 6,160,000 (Source: U.S. Census Data).
Indiana reduced the amount of material going to landfills by approximately 39 percent during that same period (Source: Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management).
While great strides have been made recently, we must work hard to ensure that Hoosier communities and businesses continue to make recycling a priority.
Cer tain waste streams, including electronics, mixed glass and scrap tires, continue to of fer challenges to both collection and market development, and require focused ef for ts to assure that the State moves for w a rd on r educing the prevalence of these wastes in landfills.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice is committed to reducing waste while encouraging the success of recycling businesses in Indiana.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce encourages Indiana businesses to reduce waste, increase recycling and manufacture and use recycled-content products and industrial feedstocks.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice helps businesses meet these goals by of fering loans, grants and technical assistance, always working toward its mission "to promote the ef ficient, economic and environmentally responsible use of ener gy and natural resources."
Recycling and waste reduction saves energy in the manufacturing process and in the extraction of natural resources as well as reduces GHG emissions produced in the extraction, manufacturing and disposal stages.
New tools have been developed that allow solid waste of ficials to more clearly calculate these exact benefits.
National and statespecific studies also prove that recycling is doing much more than conser ving natural resources.
Recycling creates jobs, encourages investment and creates revenue for the state.
The industr y is an impor tant and significant par t of Indiana's economy, representing 1,700 establishments that employ approximately 75,000 people in Indiana, with annual revenues of $19 billion and payroll of approximately $3 billion (Source: Recycling Economic Information Study, 2001, based on 1999 figures).
The recycling and reuse industries involve the collection, processing, r emanufacturing and sale of many materials such as paper, metals, plastics, computers, electronics and other industrial and consumer scrap.
The recycling manufacturing sector is par ticularly strong in Indiana.
To assist Indiana in suppor ting and expanding this impor tant sector of the economy, the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice has increased the number of tools available and has provided loan and grant funding for hundreds of Indiana businesses and communities.
The expanded financial assistance program, launched in fiscal year 2000­2001, has allowed significantly more businesses and local governments around the state to receive financial help for increasing r ecycling activities and purchasing recycled-content products, thus diver ting thousands more tons of material from Indiana landfills.
Technical assistance tools, including the Recycled Product Showroom, Market Director y for Recyclables and the Materials Available Database are available as user-friendly databases on the Commerc e Recycles website: www.CommerceRecycles.in.gov.
This fiscal year brought a reor ganization of the Indiana Depar tment of Commerce, including the creation of 12 regional district of fices.
The reor ganized str ucture has allowed the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice to more ef fectively reach out to potential customers and ensuring that these tools become available to more Hoosiers.
3
EXECUTIVE SUMMAR Y A team of Commerce staf f and other exper ts gives all financial assistance projects a thorough technical, financial and business plan review.
Applicants that meet all program criteria are presented to the Recycling and Ener g y Development Board for a funding decision (IC 4-23-5.5).
Many high-quality applications were reviewed this year, and the Recycling and Ener gy Development Board approved four projects in fiscal year 2002­2003 for loans totaling $995,000, leveraging over $995,000 in private investment.
These projects will diver t more than 63,500 tons of material from disposal, save almost 9 Mmbtu's and create 26 new jobs.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice's grant program also had an active year, approving 27 grants totaling $310,037.
This fiscal year has brought a legislative review of state and local solid waste and recycling programs, as the legislature examines the results of 10-year-old solid waste legislation that set up state recycling goals, state recycling programs and local solid waste management districts.
Commerce hopes that this endeavor will allow the state to fine tune the waste reduction and recycling ef for ts to the current state of solid waste in Indiana.
Also this fiscal year, a statewide Electronics Scrap Action Program (ESAP) was launched, sponsored by the Indiana Recycling Coalition and funded in par t by the Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management.
Commerce has taken a lead role in this ef for t, which aims to bring public, private and non-profit entities together that have interest in electronics scrap management in order to find unique ways to create a sustainable and environmentally friendly electronics scrap management infrastr ucture in Indiana.
The next year will see the ESAP project gain significant momentum.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice continues to expand its base of par tner or ganizations involved in encouraging waste reduction.
This coming year will bring the continued promotion of financial and technical assistance along with the improvement of the Of fice's successful programs.
4
INTRODUCTION The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce seeks to develop Indiana's economy through the suppor t of new and existing businesses.
The mission of Commerce's Ener gy and Recycling Of fice is to "promote the ef ficient, economic and environmentally responsible use of ener gy and natural resources."The Of fice's ef for ts include assisting the state in reducing the amount of material incinerated and disposed in Indiana landfills, as well as developing and promoting markets for recyclable items (IC 4-4-3-8).
Programs that increase waste diversion have been implemented successfully through national, state and local ef for ts. Indiana has achieved a 39 percent waste diversion rate between 1990 and 2002 (Source: Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management).
This level of waste reduction is similar to many states across the nation.
Indiana has moved for w a rd significantly since 1990, when its waste reduction programs began, and the State continues to develop and implement programs that help us increase waste diversion while addressing the needs of businesses and communities in these changing times.
Business ef for ts to reduce waste and make recycled-content products assist Indiana in saving landfill space and also boost the business environment by saving energ y, building jobs and reducing reliance on vir gin materials.
Recycling means business in Indiana.
This repor t discusses Commerce's strategy for increasing markets for recyclables, defines priority materials for market development, provides an over view of activities during the past year, discusses the cur r ent markets for Indiana recyclables and addresses the economic and environmental impact of recycling, as well as current happenings r elated to recycling in Indiana.
If you would like to receive only an electronic copy of next year's annual repor t, please send an e-mail to Tif fany Sorge in the Energy and Recycling Of fice: tsorge@commerce.state.in.us.
5
STRA TEGY FOR W ASTE REDUCTION AND MARKET DEVELOPMENT The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce's Ener gy and Recycling Of fice is challenging Indiana businesses to reduce waste, increase reuse and recycling, and use and manufacture recycled-content products and industrial feedstocks.
To suppor t and encourage these ef for ts, the Of fice provides technical and financial assistance to businesses and communities throughout the state.
This year, Commerce operated with a new str ucture.
In addition to a more ef ficient internal agency str ucture, 12 r egional of fices were opened to help better ser ve communities around the state.
The Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund grant and loan program saw an increase in applications to the program, and many exciting projects were funded.
As a result of these projects, companies will be creating new recycled-content products and investigating new ways to use recycled materials and reduce waste.
Communities will be able to purchase recycled products for use in local construction, beautification and education projects.
The program continues to seek new marketing oppor tunities and new ways to integrate recycling projects with other Commerce programs.
Updated technical assistance tools cater to those seeking markets to recyclables, recycled products or available recyclable material supply.
Also this year, Commerce began work on other exciting programs, including the Indiana Electronics Scrap Action Program, an ef for t to bring stakeholders together to find solutions to managing electronics scrap in the state.
In the coming year, we will build on these successes by promoting our various programs, expanding business par ticipation, developing additional technical assistance tools, par ticipating in state-wide ef for ts to promote recycling and waste r eduction, and continuing to adjust our ef for ts to ef fectively build markets for recyclables in Indiana.
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE TOOLS The expanded financial assistance program now allows businesses more flexibility when applying for project suppor t .
The "Financial Assistance" section later in this repor t provides details about the successes this program has had over the past three years it has been in place.
The financial assistance program was expanded in 2000 to include both loans and grants, and to allow businesses more flexibility in funding oppor tunities.
This expanded program has been a success, and Commerce continues to examine ways to improve it to best ser ve its customers.
The Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund, established by IC 4-23-5.5-14, of fers a variety of grants and loans to encourage companies to find ways to reduce waste and increase recycling.
This program is designed to provide funding assistance for all stages of recycling that bring secondar y materials past collection and into the marketplace.
8 8
Grants of up to $6,000 as 50 percent matching funds are available to assist companies in analyzing their waste streams and finding potential ways to reduce waste or increase recycling.
Grants of up to $100,000 as 50 percent matching funds for research and demonstration projects can assist in testing a new product or process that allows a company to reduce its waste or create a recycled feedstock or product.
These grants help assure companies that the proposed process will succeed when fully implemented.
8
Projects to reduce waste or increase the manufacturing of recycled-content products or industrial feedstock can receive assistance through zero-percent interest loans of up to $500,000 as 50 percent matching funds
6
STRA TEGY FOR W ASTE REDUCTION AND MARKET DEVELOPMENT for equipment purchases once the product or feedstock is ready for commercialization.
Successful expanding companies are eligible for increased funding levels of up to $1 million as 50 percent matching funds, which is an incentive for successful companies to choose Indiana for their expansion sites.
8
To close the recycling loop, Indiana manufacturers can receive grant funding of up to $30,000 as 50 percent matching funds to assist in marketing their recycled-content products, and local governments can receive grant funding of up to $5,000 as 50 percent matching funds to purchase these products for trial or demonstration projects.
Products purchased this way are educational tools to be shared within the government agency as well as with the public.
These assistance tools are designed to help create successful markets for recyclables in Indiana by bringing recycled materials into the marketplace.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice's expanded financial tools have taken hold over the past three years, and this year showed the continued completion of successful projects funded through this program (see "Loan and Grant Success Stories" later in this repor t).
The number of applicants to this program continues to increase, and the program continues to see a rise in companies willing to make investments in new technologies and the development of new products.
Some companies that put these plans on hold after the events of September 11, 2001, can now af ford to move for w a rd with such financial endeavors.
The program has seen an increase in communities, schools and local government entities applying for grants to purchase recycled products as a trial or demonstration, suggesting that local governments are facing tighter general budgets for beautification, education, parks and re c reation and constr uction projects, which have forced them to look elsewhere for funds.
In some cases, Commerce funding has encouraged these entities to use recycled products where budget restrictions may not have allowed them to purchase even their vir gin counterpar ts.
This investment in and education about recycled products in the state continues to expand the markets for these products, thus suppor ting the businesses that create these products and the collection programs that supply material to these companies.
These financial tools will continue to be used to fund innovative and high-quality projects and will be adjusted when necessar y to fit the needs of customers.
COMPREHENSIVE ONLINE TOOLS The website of the Recycling Program--www.CommerceRecycles.in.gov--continues to be updated and expanded to better ser ve our customers and make technical and financial infor mation more accessible and easier to use: An impor tant tool of the technical assistance program, the Recyclable Material Market Directory, is now updated and exclusively available in a searchable for mat on the website.
This director y locates markets for Indiana's r ecyclables and contains listings for more than 250 brokers, processors and end users.
Markets for recyclables can be found on this database via a material search combined with a regional search.
Commerce has also updated and improved a resource for finding recycled-content product vendors, the Recycled Product Showroom.
This is a showcase of recycled-content products manufactured or distributed in Indiana.
The newest tool, the Materials Available Directory, can be a resource for companies seeking feedstock to find it from other companies' scrap material.
Companies may list their available materials on this database or searc h the database for material by accessing the website.
Commerce is working to expand this database so that it can be useful for those seeking material supply.
7
STRA TEGY FOR W ASTE REDUCTION AND MARKET DEVELOPMENT In addition to these tools, the website of the Recycling Program of fers downloadable infor mation about the financial assistance program as well as downloadable publications such as the Annual Repor t, the Buy Recycled Indiana Guide and now the Indiana Recycling Economic Infor mation Study and accompanying fact sheet.
The site also lists press releases and upcoming events related to the Recycling Program.
These resources will be expanded and promoted in the coming year to increase their ef fectiveness.
Final repor ts, pictures and success stories, national websites, new online tools and relevant news will continue to be added to the website in the coming year.
This infor mation will ser ve to facilitate technology transfer and public education about reducing waste, recycling and buying recycled.
Please visit www.CommerceRecycles.in.gov to use these valuable r esources.
FOCUS ON ELECTRONIC SCRAP MANAGEMENT Proper, environmentally friendly management of electronics scrap, or "e-scrap," has become an issue of major impor tance both nationally and here in Indiana.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce lists electronic scrap as a priority reusable and recyclable material, and recognizes the impor tance of finding ways to diver t electronic waste from landfills.
E-scrap may consist of both solid waste material such as glass, plastic and metal, as well as hazardous materials such as lead.
Businesses may not only be concerned about generation and management of e-scrap, but may be interested in the business oppor tunities that arise from collecting, reselling or recycling the material.
Proper management of these materials, as well as utilization of reuse oppor tunities, ensures that electronics do not harm the environment, but instead create oppor tunities and business activity for Hoosiers.
This year, Commerce began par ticipation in a statewide ef for t to bring together key stakeholders in the public, private and not-for-profit sector to find solutions to e-scrap management in Indiana.
This ef for t, suppor ted by Commerce, the Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management, the Indiana Recycling Coalition, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) Region 5 in Chicago and several other public, private and notfor-profit entities, is a two-year ef for t to define and grow the state's e-scrap management infrastr ucture in order to minimize the negative environmental impact of e-scrap on the state.
PROMOTING RECYCLING'S ECONOMIC IMP ACT Commerce continues to promote the valuable economic impact that the recycling and reuse industr y has on the state, as shown by the 2001 Indiana Recycling Economic Information (IN REI) Study.
As communities and businesses seek ways to cut costs, and job creation is a nationwide concern, Commerce emphasizes that investing in recycling and reuse programs and businesses bring revenue, jobs and down-stream economic benefits to the state.
Unlike landfilling material, where the economic benefits end when the material is buried, recycling or reusing the material allows it to continue to circulate in the market, generating new jobs, sales revenue and tax revenue for the state.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency continues to promote the National Recycling Economic Information Study (U.S. REI) as well.
In the coming year, it is expected that preliminar y work will begin on a second round of REI studies, in order to understand how the recycling and reuse industr y has changed over the past few years.
8
STRA TEGY FOR W ASTE REDUCTION AND MARKET DEVELOPMENT PUBLIC EDUCA TION AND MARKETING The Energy and Recycling Of fice continues to work with public and private sectors to increase awareness about waste reduction, reuse and recycling as well as to provide information about financial and technical assistance tools available through the Of fice.
During fiscal year 2002­2003, the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice continued to widely distribute the existing marketing material, both via mail, email and the Recycling Program's website.
In addition, the 12 newly for med Commerce regional of fices help disseminate program infor mation to their local communities.
As par t of an ongoing ef for t to best ser ve its customers and integrate the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice materials into the overall look and feel of other Commerce materials, the Of fice is working with an Indiana marketing company t o develop a new logo, updated marketing materials and to find ways to better tar get its audiences in order to encourage maximum use of existing technical and financial assistance tools.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice's staf f has presented and exhibited infor mation at many conferences, workshops and meetings, including the Association of Indiana Solid Waste Management Districts annual conference, the annual Indiana Recycling Coalition Conference, Ear th Day, America Recycles Day and at a national Plastics trade show.
In addition, the Of fice held an annual Buy Recycled Workshop in conjunction with the American Institute of Architects of Indianapolis' Green Products Expo and the Indiana Recycling Coalition Conference.
The Workshop, which was open to the public, taught attendees why, how and where to purchase recycled-content products.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice will continue to promote its financial and technical assistance programs as well as the Indiana REI Study through marketing and attending industr y meetings.
LEGISLA TIVE EXAMINA TION OF ST A TE RECYCLING EFFOR TS During fiscal year 2002­2003, the Legislative Ser vices Agency (LSA) was charged to conduct a study and formulate a repor t on state recycling and solid waste management ef for ts, and a legislative Recycling Evaluation Committee has been established to review the repor t and deter mine if any recommendations should be made or legislative action taken (per authority from Legislative Council Resolution 01-09 and IC 2-5-21).
The repor t examines ef for t s of state agencies, solid waste management districts, and localities to meet the legislatively established goal of 50 percent waste diversion by 2001.
Commerce's Recycling Market Development Program is examined by this LSA study.
During the next fiscal year, the Recycling Evaluation Committee will conduct meetings to discuss the r epor t's findings and ways to improve Indiana's approach to recycling and waste reduction.
These ef for ts of fer an oppor tunity to char t a course for Indiana's future and to examine new areas of necessar y focus, such as electronics waste management.
9
STRA TEGY FOR W ASTE REDUCTION AND MARKET DEVELOPMENT NEW PROJECTS AND EVENTS IN FISCAL YEAR 2002­2003:
8 8 8 8
Commerce reor ganizations and new regional of fices Expanded Online Recycled Product Showroom Kick-of f of statewide Electronics Scrap Action Program Legislative Ser vices Agency study on state and local recycling programs published; legislative Recycling Evaluation Committee begins review
NEXT STEPS The strategy for the coming year includes extending our reach so that more companies and communities can find new ways to reduce waste and recycle by utilizing these Ener gy and Recycling Of fice tools.
The Of fice will:
8
Continue to increase the reach of its financial and technical assistance programs to encompass more communities and lar ger projects by expanding the grant and loan program and adding more infor mation to the technical assistance tools;
8 8 8 8 8 8 8
Assist Indiana recycling entrepreneurs with business, investment and marketing guidance and tools by developing a recycling business assistance guide; Promote the impact of the recycling and reuse industr y to citizens, economic development of ficials, the investment community and decision-makers to expand their suppor t of this economic sector; Work with Commerce regional of fices to develop projects and conduct outreach; W ork with other agencies, or ganizations and the private sector to move specific priority materials out of the waste stream; Focus on electronics scrap as a priority material by working with stakeholders across the state to improve Indiana's electronics scrap management infrastr ucture; Work to strengthen Indiana's recyclable material markets through workshops and dialogue; and Continue to improve the content and accessibility of the Web tools available through the Recycling Program.
10
PRIORITIES FOR MARKET DEVELOPMENT The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice continues to prioritize building markets for materials that do not cur r ently have strong markets in Indiana and that many times make up a significant por tion of the waste stream.
Priority recyclables include those that have few markets, are dif ficult to recycle or are high-volume materials that, if recycled, can significantly impact the waste-diversion rate.
Some materials are dif ficult to recycle because they have a low market value and cannot be shipped great distances.
Others are prioritized because of rapid industrial and technological advances that have provided new uses for the material.
The Energy and Recycling Of fice places increased emphasis on priority materials in its technical and financial assistance programs.
Most loan and grant projects awarded this year focused on these priority materials.
The $1 Million RPA F Attraction/Expansion Loan provides zero-interest loan funding for successful recycled feedstock or product manufacturers that use priority materials to expand in or relocate to Indiana.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice suppor ts businesses that have been successful at creating markets for priority materials.
These businesses bring with them new technologies in recycling that can help Indiana expand its markets for these recyclables.
The priority materials tar geted are computers and electronics, plastics, mixed glass, construction and demolition debris, tires and non-hazardous industrial by-products, including coal combustion materials and foundry sand.
Other materials may also be considered as priority materials on a case-by-case basis.
Following is a shor t discussion on each priority material.
COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS: Obsolete computers and electronic equipment are ever increasing.
Many of these items are reusable in other organizations or contain reusable components.
If the product is unusable, the components may be separated and potentially recycled.
This process can be costly and complicated, as materials may contain hazardous substances and must be dealt with in and environmentally sound manner, but the field is advancing.
Commerce suppor ts ef for ts to keep electronics scrap and any potentially hazardous substances out of Indiana landfills.
Recently there has been growing concern about how and where electronics are being reused or recycled and the possible health and environmental risks that may result from inappropriate recycling.
There is a growing ef for t in Indiana and the nation to be sure that these materials are properly handled.
Indiana government, private, and non-profit organizations have come together this year to identify the current electronics scrap management infrastr ucture in the state and to find ways to improve the ability to and manner in which electronics scrap is handled.
Energy and Recycling Of fice Recycling Program grants and loans can be applicable to electronic recycling projects.
The Of fice continues to work with other state, private and non-profit or ganizations to find ways to keep electronic waste out of Indiana landfills.
PLASTICS: The recycling of plastics and manufacturing of products from recycled plastic compounds continues to be a growing area.
As more and more products and packages are shifted away from other materials and into plastics, the need for r ecycling scrap industrial materials and post-consumer discards continues to gro w. Indiana's strong automotive par t s industr y uses and recycles a significant amount of plastics.
In addition, recycling technologies have opened a market for plastic and r ubber composite material as well as plastic and wood composite material in recent years.
Several composite material manufacturers in the state are thriving.
More recycled plastic processors have also recently opened in the state.
As the industr y advances, the state is seeing more advanced recycled polymer combinations develop, allowing for a broader range of products to be made from recycled materials.
Mixed plastic scrap streams continue to be challenging for manufacturers to use.
A developing realm of plastics recycling involves plastic scrap from electronics casings.
The types of plastics used in electronics are widely varied, may be mixed when collected, may be complex polymers, and may contain flame-retardants
11
PRIORITIES FOR MARKET DEVELOPMENT or hazardous materials.
These factors make separating and recycling these plastics challenging, and Indiana is working to find solutions to these issues that would allow for more recycling and remanufacturing of these materials.
Nationally, an ef for t is under way to encourage electronics manufacturers to not only use more easily-recycled plastics in their products, but also to produce them with recycled content and make products more durable and with replaceable par ts.
MIXED GLASS: Long-ter m market shifts away from glass and toward other types of containers make recyclable glass dif ficult to market.
In addition, specialized glass wastes, such as automobile window glass, continue to lack strong markets.
The Ener g y a n d R e cycling Of fice has worked with other gover nment agencies, private businesses, and local gover nments on projects to encourage civil engineering uses for recycled glass to be piloted.
Civil engineering uses may include using glass in asphalt, as fill material, as additives to road paint, as sandblasting material, as decorative landscaping material, and as sand substitute.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (C
Ever y year tons of wood waste, asphalt, concrete, brick, shingles, cardboard, wallboard, vinyl siding, carpet scrap, piping and wiring end up in Indiana landfills unnecessarily.
Education and business investment is necessar y to move this material back into use.
Better collection ef for ts and willingness by recyclers/brokers/end users to take this material is necessar y to increase C
These ef for ts are happening across the state, and the interest is growing.
TIRES: Approximately six million scrap tires are generated in Indiana ever y year.
Still more tires remain in piles that are tar geted for clean up.
Finding end-use options for these tires continues to be a challenge.
Many tires are still being shredded and landfilled because of the lar ge supply of tires and smaller amount of end uses.
More industries are needed that successfully recycle and use lar ge quantities of tires.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice has been working with the Indiana Depar tment of Transpor tation and the Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management to encourage the use of tire chips in civil engineering projects, both by the State and by local governments and private business.
The Of fice has also funded several projects that involve the use of tire chips as feedstock for the creation of rubber or rubber composite products, such as automotive par ts and flooring material.
These products provide value-added end uses for a priority recyclable material.
INDUSTRIAL BY-PRODUCTS: Various industries in the state produce non-hazardous, solid by-products from their production process.
These materials can be costly to dispose of and often must be placed in special landfills.
There are, however, a number of beneficial reuse oppor tunities for many of these materials, which would allow the producing companies to r educe their disposal costs and keep these materials out of landfills and in economically valuable uses.
The paper-producing industr y, metals/foundr y industr y, coal power industr y, and cement industr y all produce some sor t of by-product that can be beneficially reused in some way.
Some materials have uses that are approved by state regulator y agencies as accepted uses, others are approved on case-by-case basis.
There is an ongoing regional ef for t, led by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 5 in Chicago, to bring industr y and government together to find ways to safely make it easier for these by-products to be used.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice is cur r ently working on several projects that are researching and testing new ways to use these materials.
Foundr y sand, coal combustion by-products and cement kiln dust are lar gely the focus of these projects.
12
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice of fers financial assistance to encourage reduction, reuse and recycling, as well as the use and manufacture of recycled-content products and industrial feedstocks.
The Of fice's financial programs are administered through the Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund established to promote and assist recycling throughout Indiana by focusing economic development ef for ts on businesses and projects involving recycling.
The fund is administered by the Recycling and Energy Development Board, a legislatively defined board that consists of 13 members from various related industr y sectors and Indiana universities, as well as private citizens (IC 4-23-5.5).
Financial tools available through the Energy and Recycling Of fice's Recycling Program include the following: Loans Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund (RPAF) Loan $1 Million RPAF Attraction Loan Grants Innovations Grant Recycled Product Marketing Grant Recycled-Content Purchasing Grant Three R's Assessment All project applications receive rigorous review by the internal Recycling Program Review Team.
Projects must meet specific program requirements as defined in approved guidelines.
Loans are reviewed for financial, technical and business planning details.
Projects that meet the required criteria are taken to the Recycling and Ener g y Development Board (REDB) for funding consideration.
The REDB closely reviews applications for loans and grants, and approves or denies funding and any subsequent project changes.
All approved projects must also meet the contingencies that the REDB places upon them and must remain in good standing with the Indiana Depar tments of Revenue and Environmental Management to receive funds.
Loans and grants are monitored.
Loan projects receive several site visits: one before consideration by the REDB, one early in the implementation phase, and at least one annually through the life of the loan (seven years).
Grant applications also receive a number of site visits, depending on the size of the grant and length of the project.
Sometimes approved projects do not receive funding because they are not able to meet the contingencies placed upon them by the REDB or because their business plan cannot be implemented as expected and the project does not move for w a rd. Occasionally, businesses that received funding are moved or closed.
For example, a fire may cause a company to close, or decisions made by a parent company may close or move the project to a dif ferent location.
13
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE LOANS TO INDIANA BUSINESSES: EQUIPMENT PURCHASES TO F ACILIT A TE RECYCLING Four projects were approved in fiscal year 2002­2003 for loans totaling $995,000, leveraging over $995,000 in private investment.
These projects will diver t more than 63,500 tons of material from disposal, save almost 9 Mmbtu's and create 26 new jobs.
Loan funds are available through two programs:
8
Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund (RPAF): The cornerstone of the Recycling Program's financial tools continues to be the RPA F.
This economic development tool provides zero-percent interest loan financing up to $500,000 on the purchase of equipment that is used to reduce waste generated, prepare material for use as an industrial feedstock or make recycled-content products.
The loans require a oneto-one match.
8
$1 Million RPAF Attraction Loan: This loan provides up to $1 million in zero-percent interest loan financing on equipment purchases to successful businesses expanding their markets for priority materials.
This level of funding is an economic development tool that can attract successful businesses to expand in Indiana.
Recycling businesses and technologies have been developing around the world for the past 10 to 15 years.
As these companies expand, Indiana is in a prime location to capitalize on their successes.
Indiana is centrally located to many cities and industries, boasts an expansive transpor tation system, and has a strong existing industrial recycling infrastr ucture.
The $1 Million RPAF Attraction Loan projects are lower risk and have a high recycling return because they provide markets for hard to recycle materials.
Since the program began in 1991, over 60 loans have been awarded.
There are cur r ently 23 active RPAF Loans totaling over $6,815,402.
These are leveraging over $78,000,000 in private funds, diver ting over 1.5 million tons of waste from landfills and creating approximately 200 new jobs for Indiana.
LOANS APPROVED IN FISCAL YEAR 2002­2003: GreenCycle of Indiana (Whitestown, Ind.): A warded $80,000 expanded RPAF Loan for equipment to produce recycled mulch at the company's Whitestown, Ind., facility.
This is the company's second RPAF Loan award.
American Manufacturing and Recycling, Inc.
(Terre Haute, Ind.): A warded $119,497 RPAF Loan for equipment necessar y to expand the company's wood recycling operations, which includes pallet reuse and remanufacturing and the conversion of scrap par ticleboard into new endboards for packaging.
G
(Wabash, Ind.): A warded $600,000 expanded RPAF Loan for equipment used to r ecycle 356 alloy high-grade aluminum for the automotive industr y.
This equipment will allow the company to r ecycle 100,000 tons per year of aluminum.
This is the company's second RPAF Loan award.
Anco Products, Inc.
(Elkhar t, Ind.): A warded $165,000 expanded RPAF Loan for equipment to recycle waste fibrous glass (e-glass) into several types of insulation products.
This is the company's second RPAF Loan award.
14
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE Table 1: Companies with Active* RPAF Loan-Funded Projects
Loan Recipient
County
Loan Approval Amount (projected)
Material Recycled Annually
New or Retained Jobs (projected)
Materials Recycled
Fiscal Year 2002­2003 GreenCycle of Indiana, Inc.
American Recycling a Manufacturing, Inc.
G
Anco Products, Inc.
Fiscal Year 2001­2002 Dekalb Molded Plastics, Inc.
G
GDC, Inc.
Max Katz Bag Company, Inc.
Fiscal Year 2000-2001 Anco Products, Inc.
Envirotech Extr usions, Inc.
GE Plastics 
Har ris Material Exchange, Inc.
Lake County Transfer, Inc.
OmniSource Corp.
Fiscal Year 1998-1999 VIM Recycling Inc.
Fiscal Year 1997-98 G-P Gypsum Corporation Har ris Material Exchange, Inc.
Jasper Adams $500,000 $150,000 350,000 tons 17,000 tons 65 new 20 new, 11 retained Fiscal Year 1996-97 HT Aluminum Specialties, Inc.
Max Katz Bag Co., Inc.
LaPor t e Marion $209,165 $500,000 4,000 tons 1,000 tons 10 new 56 retained aluminum plastic synthetic gypsum plastic Elkhar t $416,000 35,000 tons 5 new wood Elkhar t W ayne Marion Marion Adams Lake Allen 225,623.20 $563,000 $323,000 $202,150 $225,000 $202,274 $352,168 2,000 tons 2,100 tons 6,500 tons 9,832 tons 29,000 tons 26,060 tons 5,200 tons 4 new 22 new 13 new 2 new 8 new 3 new 4 new fibrous glass r ubber, plastics r ubber, plastic wood plastics wood and vegetable scrap aluminum, steel DeKalb W abash Elkhar t Marion $475,000 $388,000 $455,833 $500,000 1,225 tons 42,000tons 460 tons 700 tons 12 new 5 new 9 new 11 new r ubber, plastic aluminum r ubber plastic, film Vigo W abash Elkhar t $119,497 $600,000 $165,000 4,550 tons 36,000 tons 2,000 tons 10 10 3 pallets aluminum fibrous glass Boone $80,000 21,000 tons 3 pallets, br ush
15
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE Loan Recipient County Loan Approval Amount (projected) Material Recycled Annually New or Retained Jobs (projected) Materials Recycled
Fiscal Year 1995-96 Envirotech Extr usions, Inc.
W ayne $479,000 4,000 tons 32 new, 31 retained Fiscal Year 1994-95 Industrial Pallet Corp.
American Fiber tech Fiscal Year 1992-93 Tr ee Pro T ippecanoe $75,000 103 tons 10 new plastic T ippecanoe $165,000 16,300 tons 16 new wood cr umb r ubber 
*Active projects are those that have been approved and are cur r ently conducting the loan project or have conducted the project and are repaying the loan.
PROJECTED ANNUAL TONS OF RECYCLABLES DIVER TED FROM DISPOSAL AS A RESUL T OF APPROVED RP AF LOAN PROJECTS
Fiscal Year 91-92 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98 98-99 99-00 00-01 01-02 2002-2003 500 19,438 36,938 69,838 78,838 91,556 458,556 493,556 961,761 1,418,152 1,474,787 1,544,422 300,000 600,000 900,000 1,200,000 1,500,000 1,800,000
Materials in Tons 0
16
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE GRANTS TO ENCOURAGE INNOV A TION IN W ASTE REDUCTION AND BUYING RECYCLED The Recycling Promotion and Assistance Fund Grant Program encourages Indiana businesses, manufacturers and local government entities to find new ways to reduce waste and increase recycling and the use of recyclables.
Companies in all sectors, from manufacturing to retail, can make a positive impact on reducing the amount of material going to landfills.
Since its inception in 2000, the Grant Program has assisted 82 businesses and local government entities by granting $990,275 to assist in assessing their waste streams, developing innovative uses for secondar y materials, marketing recycled-content products produced in Indiana, purchasing recycled-content products and developing new markets for these products.
More than 60 communities around the state have directly benefited from these grants.
In fiscal year 2002­2003, 27 projects were approved totaling $310,037.
All grants require a one-to-one funding match.
In addition, the grant program has created successful par tnerships between the private sector, local and state governments and educational institutions on many recycling and waste reduction projects.
Purdue University, the Indiana Depar tment of Transpor tation and Ciner g y, Inc., have par tnered on a project to use coal combustion byproducts in transpor tation-related constr uction.
Brooks Constr uction Company, Inc., has par tnered with the Indiana Depar tment of Natural Resources to create the first bike and pedestrian path in the state made with r ecycled glass from local markets.
Such projects promote a united ef for t t o c reate new uses and markets for priority r ecyclables in Indiana and allow resources and knowledge to be pooled for greater success.
Types of grants available include:
8
The 3R's Grant provides funds (up to $6,000) to companies to car ry out recycling audits of facilities to deter mine what is in the waste stream and investigate more ef ficient operating procedures that will r educe waste and/or increase the use of recycled materials.
8 8 8
The Innovations Grant funds research and development projects (up to $100,000) on products or processes that reduce waste or utilize a recyclable material.
The Recycled Product Marketing Grant provides funds (up to $30,000) to recycled-content product manufacturers for the development or implementation of a marketing campaign to promote use of the product.
The Recycled Product Purchasing Grant provides grants (up to $5,000) to local Indiana government entities for the purchase of recycled-content products as a trial or demonstration.
The products ser ve as educational tools for the public and the government entity.
17
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE RECYCLING MARKET DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM GRANTS Approved Fiscal Year 2002­2003 Innovations Grant (Awards of up to $100,000)
Organization Name Ashley Industrial Molding, Inc.
Lehigh Cement Company
County Dekalb Marion
Amount $24,000 $20,000
Innovations Project Description Research/test fiber glass recycling options Research on ways to reclaim and reuse cement kiln dust
Recycled Product Purchasing Grants (Awards of up to $5,000) Organization Name Car r oll County Soil and W ater Conser vation District Cass County Solid Waste Management District City of Hammond City of Warsaw Dearborn County Solid W aste Management District Greencastle Parks and Recreation Depar tment Jackson County Solid Waste Management District Lake County Parks and Recreation Depar tment Lake County Solid W aste Management District LaPor te Community Schools Mar tin County Soil and Water Conser vation District Rome City/Orange Township Fire Depar tment Scherer ville Parks and Recreation Depar tment Lake $3,944 Recycled-content car stops Noble $1,116 Recycled plastic cribbing Mar tin $2,500 Various recycled-content products for display Lake LaPor t e $2,306 $5,000 Recycled trash and recycling receptacles, r ecycled planters Recycled tables, benches, signs Lake $5,000 Recycled plastic furniture Jackson $5,000 Recycled lumber for boardwalk Putnam $5,000 Recycled-content re c reational products Dearborn $5,000 Recycled-content signs Cass Lake Kosciusko $5,000 $1,071 $3,258 $5,000 Recycled plastic lumber for gazebo constr uction Recycled-content decking Recycled plastic cribbing Recycled­content recycling bins City of Lawrence Fire Depar tment Marion Car r oll $1,481 Recycled plastic tables, planters County Amount Recycled-Content Product(s)
18
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE South Bend Parks and Recreation Depar tment Sullivan County Commissioners Sullivan County Parks and Recreation Depar tment Town of Dyer Parks and Recreation Depar tment Town of Flora Town of Fowler Town of Morocco Town of Prince's Lakes Wor th Township Fire Depar tment Lake Car r oll Benton Newton Johnson Boone $5,000 $5,000 $2,504 $5,000 $4,997 $1,449 Recycled playground equipment Recycled playground equipment Recycled trash and recycling receptacles Recycled playground equipment Recycled playground equipment, timbers, mats Recycled plastic cribbing Sullivan $5,000 Recycled re c reation equipment, r ecycling bins St. Joseph Sullivan $1,762 $5,000 Recycled-content benches Recycled paper of fice supplies
19
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE LOAN AND GRANT SUCCESS STORIES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2002­2003 The RPAF Loan and Grant funds have promoted the development of new companies and recycling technologies, the expansion of existing companies, the creation of new recycling technologies and the increase in recycled-content purchasing throughout the state.
Following are some highlights of successful and innovative loan and grant projects that have been approved or completed this fiscal year.
G
(Wabash, Ind.)--RPAF Loan G
The goal of the company is to provide a product that is vir tually the same quality as aluminum from primar y producers.
G
Demand for this high-quality recycled material continued to increase, especially as the company became a preferred source of secondar y aluminum for Ford Motor Company.
The company applied for and was awarded a second RPAF Loan for expansion in 2002.
As a result of the second project, the company now has the capacity to r ecycle almost 40,000 additional tons per year of aluminum, and employs close to 100 Hoosiers.
Dekalb Molded Plastics (Butler, Ind.)--RPAF Loan Dekalb Molded Plastics embarked on a venture to produce guardrail bumpers from recycled plastic and r ubber.
The design had shown to be lighter to handle, easier to install and longer lasting than its wood counterpar ts.
The company r eceived an RPAF Loan in 2001 to purchase the equipment necessar y to manufacture these products.
By the end of fiscal year 2002­2003, the company's new product line is r unning at full force 24 hours a day, seven days a week to produce enough recycled-content guardrail bumpers for the distributor that sells the product.
In fact, the company is producing more product than was originally anticipated, citing a production of up to 5,000 units per day.
This project will allow the company to diver t 7,300 tons per year of plastic and r ubber material from landfills.
This figure includes 6 million pounds of crumb rubber that will be used in production during 2003.
The project has also allowed the company to hire approximately 12 new employees.
Cinergy/PSI (Plainfield, Ind.) in Par tnership with Purdue University and the Indiana Depar tment of Transpor tation-- Innovations Grant Ciner gy/PSI of Indiana sought Commerce's Innovations Grant in 2001 as it began to investigate new beneficial ways to reuse the coal combustion by-products (bottom ash and fly ash) generated from its coal-burning power generation.
Ciner gy par tnered with Purdue University and the Indiana Depar tment of Transpor tation (INDOT) to investigate the use of coal combustion products as a fill material for road embankments.
Previous testing has shown that using a mixture high in bottom ash content for this purpose is acceptable to INDOT, but this mixture cannot be supplied in lar ge quantities, so the par tners decided to investigate use of a mixture with much higher fly ash content.
This fiscal year, the par tners successfully completed tests on the material to develop specifications for the constr uction of the r oad embankment on Highway 61 in Terr e Haute.
Actual constr uction of this embankment began in late fiscal year 2002­2003, and is expected to be completed by early fiscal year 2003­2004.
This specific project will use up to 80,000 tons of ash, but results from the project may open the door for reuse of the 640,000 tons of ash generated in Indiana ever y year that is not already utilized for beneficial reuse.
20
FINANCIAL ASSIST ANCE Jackson County Solid Waste Management District (Brownstown, Ind.)--Recycled Product Purchasing Grant The Jackson County Solid Waste Management District, in par tnership with the Muscatatuck National Wildlife Refuge in Seymour, Ind., received Recycled Product Purchasing Grant funding to purchase recycled-content plastic lumber to construct a 300'x 6' boardwalk in the refuge.
The boardwalk will be completely constructed with recycled content lumber that is derived from post-consumer bottle waste.
The Solid Waste District and the Wildlife Refuge decided to use recycled-content plastic lumber not only to diver t waste from landfills and seemed an appropriate fit for both groups' focus on conser vation, but because the lumber is weather-resistant, requires little maintenance, and is not treated with preser vative chemicals.
As a result of the project, 20,190 pounds of material will be diver ted from landfills.
21
ECONOMIC IMP ACT OF RECYCLING AND REUSE IN INDIANA EXAMINING BENEFITS OF RECYCLING Indiana continues to examine waste reduction and recycling that exist in addition to the primar y benefit of keeping valuable natural resources out of landfills and reducing the need to extract new resources for the creation of new products.
The Indiana Depar tment of Commerce's Energy and Recycling Of fice acknowledges the economic benefits of recycling and reuse to the state, and works to create jobs and economic gro w t h t h rough the Recycling Market Development Program.
The Of fice also recognizes that waste reduction, recycling and reuse decrease ener g y consumption and the GHG emissions associated with global war ming that result from this consumption.
These benefits also bring downstream economic, as well as environmental, benefits to Indiana.
Studies and newly developed tools allow us to more fully understand these benefits and allow the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice to promote investment in recycling for these reasons.
ECONOMIC IMP ACT OF RECYCLING AND REUSE IN INDIANA In conjunction with the National Recycling Coalition and R.W. Beck, Inc., the Indiana Depar tment of Commerc e completed a study of the impact of the recycling and reuse industr y on Indiana's economy.
The study shows that recycling is working in Indiana ­ the state has a strong recycling and reuse industr y that provides a significant number of jobs and substantial economic activity to Hoosiers.
IDOC hopes to update these numbers in the coming year.
According to the Recycling Economic Information Study, completed in 2001 based on 1999 data, the reuse and recycling industry in Indiana
8includes 8employs 8has 8has
1,700 establishments; approximately 75,000 people;
a payroll of approximately $3 billion; and annual revenues of $19 billion.
The recycling and reuse industr y companies are involved in metals, paper, plastics, glass, or ganic materials, computers and electronics, tires and other post-consumer and post-industrial scrap.
Jobs in this industr y involve collection, processing, reuse, remanufacturing, sales, and more.
The economic size of Indiana's recycling manufacturing sector far exceeds the recycling collection, processing and reuse sectors.
The collections and processing sectors make up a smaller por tion of total employment, but have the ver y impor tant job of providing feedstock material into the manufacturing and reuse sectors.
The recycling manufacturing sector covers a wide range of industries, including metal casters, plastics manufacturers and automobile par ts manufacturers.
Indiana's recycling manufacturing sector is strong and well diversified.
There are local markets for many of the recyclables generated by households as well as the commercial and industrial sectors in Indiana.
Recycling of scrap materials feeds directly into building Indiana jobs.
Local level public and private investments in collection and processing of recyclables, and public policies favoring recycling and reuse, are suppor ting lar ger private-sector investments in downstream processing and manufacturing.
22
ECONOMIC IMP ACT OF RECYCLING AND REUSE IN INDIANA According to the study, the recycling manufacturing sector in Indiana
8accounts 8$2.8 8$16.8 8pr
for 63,000 jobs;
billion in payroll; billion in receipts; of the highest paying jobs in the recycling and reuse industr y; and
8consists
ovides 92 percent of Indiana's total recycling and reuse industr y tax revenues
Many of our industrial sectors have such a high demand for recovered materials that a significant amount of material is purchased and impor ted from other states and countries--to Indiana's benefit.
Many of these industries' products suppor t other manufacturing jobs in the state or bring profits into the state from the sale of those products outside Indiana's borders.
Indiana's economy significantly benefits from this industrial sector in terms of the jobs it provides, the suppor t it gives to the state's manufacturing base and other economic sectors and the tax revenues that flow to the state and local governments.
MIDWEST AS A LEADER IN RECYCLING BUSINESS ACTIVITY The Mid-America Council of Recycling Of ficials, a non-profit regional or ganization of recycling of ficials of which Commerce is a member, in cooperation with U.S. EPA Region 5 combined data from 14 member states' Recycling Economic Impact studies in order to examine the size and impact of the recycling industr y in the Midwestern r egion of the United States.
This data was compared with national REI Study data to deter mine what impact, as a percentage, the Midwestern recycling industr y had on the national recycling industr y.
The results show that the Midwest is a leader in recycling business activity, and is a great location for the location of recycling businesses and the development of recycling technologies.
The data show that the Midwestern recycling industry contributes
833 835 820 835
percent of the total national recycling industr y jobs; percent of the total national recycling industr y wages; percent of the total national recycling industr y establishments; and percent of the total national recycling industr y sales.
Ef for ts to encourage the public and private sectors to expand recycling and reuse assist in maintaining and raising this significant economic activity.
This study of the recycling and reuse industr y has been conducted around the nation and in sponsoring states.
The methodology for the study was developed and tested by the National Recycling Coalition and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, with contract assistance from R.W. Beck.
The industr y includes 26 industr y categories.
Data come from existing data (census), sur vey data and economic modeling.
This methodology was peer reviewed and is comparable to similar studies of other industries.
23
ECONOMIC IMP ACT OF RECYCLING AND REUSE IN INDIANA Direct results provide infor mation on the number of establishments in this industr y as well as its employment, wages, revenues and throughput (as available).
Indirect ef fects were estimated for the impact of additional economic activity accr uing to establishments that provide goods or ser vices to the recycling and reuse industr y. Induced ef fects were estimated for economic activity from workers spending personal earnings on goods and ser vices.
Multipliers were identified for jobs, personal income, industrial output and value added.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice published a fact sheet for the Indiana Recycling Economic Infor mation Study.
This brochure highlights the main findings of the study, as well as the purpose and methodology for the study.
For more infor mation about this study or to obtain a copy of the Indiana Recycling Economic Infor mation Study fact sheet, contact the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice at (317) 232-8940.
24
W ASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING SA VES ENERGY AND REDUCES GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS TOOLS FOR DETERMINING ENERGY SA VINGS AND DECREASE IN GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS AS A RESUL T OF W ASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING Waste reduction and recycling saves energy by eliminating the need to use natural resources and extract virgin materials.
Solid waste disposal is a business and community expense.
Developing feedstocks from recycled materials saves energ y in the manufacturing process; limits ener gy consumption from extracting vir gin materials; and promotes business oppor tunities, employment and technology innovation.
It reduces the need for landfill disposal and thereby decreases landfill methane emissions.
These activities assist the state in meeting the goal of 50 percent landfill diversion.
W aste reduction, reuse and recycling reduce the amount of ener gy consumption and thus reduce GHG emissions as well.
If fewer natural resources are used, or if materials are reused or recycled, GHG emissions are reduced because of reductions in ener gy consumption, landfill methane production, incineration emissions and ener gy used to extract vir gin materials.
Reducing the initial consumption of natural resources and reusing materials provides the greatest amount of reduction of GHG emissions.
The U.S. EPA has developed a tool that allows users to calculate the global war ming ef fects from various solid waste management practices.
This tool, the Waste Reduction Model, calculates and totals GHG emissions of baseline and alternative waste management practices--source reduction, recycling, combustion, composting and landfilling.
The model calculates in metric tons of carbon equivalent (MTCE), metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2E), and ener gy units (million BTU) across a wide range of material types that compose municipal solid waste.
The following table lists the GHG Emission Factors based on each solid waste management technique for 28 categories of solid waste.
Figures show the MTCEs per each ton of the par ticular solid waste produced by various waste management techniques.
Negative numbers indicate a reduction in MTCEs.
The data show that source reduction and recycling can significantly reduce the amount of greenhouse gasses associated with the listed wastes as compared to landfilling or combusting those wastes.
The emission factors presented in this table reflect national average landfill gas recover y practices and transpor tation distances.
(Source: U.S. EPA ) Greenhouse Gas Emission Factors (MTCE per shor t ton) Material Aluminum Cans Steel Cans Glass HDPE LDPE PET Cor r ugated Cardboard Magazines/third-class mail Newspaper Of fice Paper Phonebooks Textbooks Source Reduction -2.47 -0.79 -0.14 -0.49 -0.61 -0.49 -0.51 -1.04 -0.81 -0.80 -1.28 -1.23 Recycling -4.01 0.49 -0.08 -0.38 -0.47 -0.42 -0.71 -0.74 -0.95 -0.68 -0.91 -0.75 Landfilling, 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.01 0.08 -0.12 -0.21 0.62 -0.21 0.62 Combustion National Average 0.02 -0.42 0.01 0.23 0.23 0.28 -0.19 -0.13 -0.21 -0.18 -0.21 -0.18 Composting N N N N N N N N N N N N A A A A A A A A A A A A
25
W ASTE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING SA VES ENERGY AND REDUCES GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS Material Dimensional Lumber Medium Density Fiberboard Food Scraps Yard Trimmings Grass Leaves Branches Mixed Paper, Broad Mixed Paper, Residential Mixed Paper, Of fice Mixed Metals Mixed Plastics Mixed Recyclables Mixed Or ganics Mixed MSW Source Reduction -0.55 -0.60 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA Recycling -0.67 -0.67 NA NA NA NA NA -0.67 -0.67 -0.83 -1.74 -0.41 -0.76 NA NA Landfilling, National Average -0.10 -0.10 0.17 -0.09 0.01 -0.29 -0.10 0.10 0.07 0.15 0.01 0.01 0.05 0.03 0.07 Combustion 0.22 -0.22 -0.05 -0.06 -0.06 -0.06 -0.06 -0.19 0.18 -0.17 -0.26 0.25 -0.17 -0.06 -0.04 Composting NA NA -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 -0.05 NA NA NA NA NA NA -0.05 NA
Materials that account for over 64 percent of national Municipal Solid Waste are those that can most easily be recycled or composted, including aluminum cans, steel cans, glass, HDPE, LDPE and PET plastics, corr ugated cardboard, magazines, newspapers, of fice paper, phone books, textbooks, lumber, fiberboard, food, and yard trimmings.
Reducing demand for and use of these products as well as using recycled feedstocks in the production of similar products can decrease the need for raw materials, thus decreasing the accompanying ener gy use and GHG emissions.
RECYCLED-CONTENT PRODUCTS ALSO SA VE ENERGY AND REDUCE EMISSIONS In addition to providing tools to calculate ener gy and emissions savings from recycling and waste reduction, the U.S. EPA's Climate and Waste Program is developing a new Manufacturing and Purchasing Greenhouse Gas (MAP-GHG) tool that allows users to calculate the GHG benefits of using recycled inputs in the materials they manufacture and/or purchase.
This tool is currently being finalized, and will help show another benefit of manufacturing and purchasing r ecycled-content products.
For more background on EPA 's analysis of climate change and waste management, see the EPA repor t entitled: Solid Waste Management and Greenhouse Gases: A Life-Cycle Assessment of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks, available at: http://yosemite.epa.gov/oar/globalwarming.nsf/content/ActionsWasteToolsRepor ts.html.
This repor t ser ves as the basis for the emission factors used in the MAP-GHG tool.
Encouraging waste reduction, reuse, recycling and more ef ficient manufacturing processes can help significantly lower ener gy consumption and GHG emissions in Indiana.
In addition to using recycled materials in the manufacturing process, encouraging ener g y - e f ficient and clean manufacturing strategies will also help achieve this goal.
Encouraging product redesign to involve less ener gy use and less waste production should be involved in creating more ef ficient manufacturing processes.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice programs provide financial and technical assistance to help Indiana businesses take on these improvements.
26
MARKETS FOR INDIANA RECYCLABLES Recyclables are commodities in the market, and thus are impacted by the global marketplace.
Some recyclable materials are shipped throughout Indiana, across the United States and around the world.
Indiana's strong industrial sector provides markets in Indiana for much of our household and industrial recyclables.
Similar to other commodities, market prices for recyclable materials fluctuate because of changes in product demand; petroleum prices; and local, national and international economic situations.
Periodically, cer tain materials have enjoyed a high market value, but generally recycling end uses are built on stable low prices.
Pricing can influence the amount of material diver ted from landfill.
It is impor tant to continue to build demand for recyclables.
In fiscal year 2002­2003 market values for several commodities crept up slightly or remained steady.
Several industries began to see recover y from the economic downturn, or at least have seen increased expor t demand.
The following sections discuss the market situation for each of the commonly collected recyclables.
Building demand for products made with recycled content will increase these materials' market value over time.
Local markets for recyclables reduce transpor tation costs and pollution and often prove to be more reliable markets.
Commodity Price Market Summaries for Fiscal Year 2002­2003 All prices based on per ton cost.
Source: WasteNews (www.wastenews.com) High/Low Pricing for Fiscal Year 2002­2003 Commodity PAPER News 6 News 8 Cor r ugated Residential Mixed Sor ted Of fice METALS Steel Cans White Goods Aluminum Cans GLASS Flint Glass Amber Glass Green Glass PLASTIC PET Natural HDPE Colored HDPE RUBBER Ti res $100 $75 $120 $280 $140 $260 $360 $260 $15 $5 $0 $30 $18 $0 $40 $40 $500 $75 $75 $700 $10 $70 $10 $0 $10 $34 $90 $75 $0 $40 Low High
27
MARKETS FOR INDIANA RECYCLABLES P APER Domestic paper stock markets, which last year suf fered from low demand, have solidified this fiscal year.
A slight rise in domestic use coupled by expor ts have contributed to the upward price movement.
As a result of last year's mill downtime and closures, the supply of recovered fiber has been reduced, which has led to steady pricing.
Demand for mixed paper, both domestically and abroad, also continues to rise.
Exper ts foresee the recovered fiber market to move for w a rd strongly in the coming year as mills become more competitive and purchase material at higher prices.
PLASTICS Expor t demand in fiscal year 2002­2003 has increased, which has helped keep pricing steady.
On the Polyethylene Terphthalate (PET) side, the main challenge for the plastics industr y is increasing the amount of r ecovered PET collected as increased demand continues to rise.
The PET recycling rate has actually dropped recently, at the same time that major PET bottle manufacturers are increasing the amount of recycled-content in their products.
Prices for High Density Polyethylene fluctuated in fiscal year 2002­2003, rising in late 2002, dipping in early 2003 and rising again in mid 2003.
GLASS Prices for flint and amber glass dropped slightly in fiscal year 2002­2003, while green glass prices held steady.
The number of domestic glass container manufacturers has dropped sharply in the past 20 years, thus reducing the market for container glass.
Low demand, high handling and processing costs, and lack of strong end markets for the glass has made the material less profitable for municipalities and companies alike to recycle, though there are significant ener gy benefits to using recycled glass in the manufacturing process.
Another issue of concern t o potential glass recyclers is contamination from single-stream recycling.
As the use of glass in container manufacturing decreases, new alternative end markets continue to be developed in order to create an end use for glass scrap.
These include use of glass cullet in road constr uction, for decorative landscaping, and as sand substitute.
ALUMINUM Price for aluminum scrap rose slightly and held steady in fiscal year 2002­2003, par tly due to the fact that reduced scrap generation is leading to competition.
Expor t demand for scrap is also high.
This competition for scrap, however, has kept profit mar gins tight as it becomes less cost ef fective to collect, sor t, and purify scrap.
Industr y data show, however, that the coming year may present a potential for price upturn due to the increased use of aluminum in the transpor tation industr y. Aluminum continues to face competition from plastic, however, in the area of beverage containers.
FERROUS AND OTHER MET ALS The steel industr y in the United States is finally showing some profitability, according to the Institute of Scrap Recycling Industries.
The industr y notes that electric arc furnace steelmakers have helped to keep the U.S. steel industr y competitive.
The local steel industr y, however, is not positive that the coming fiscal year will necessarily bring an upturn, as the economy and demand from the auto and manufacturing sectors may fluctuate.
There has been elevated demand in fer r ous scrap, leading scrap dealers to become more profitable, but this trend does not necessarily make the steel mills more profitable as well.
In fact, as scrap prices rise, steel mini-mills, which use lar ge amounts of scrap steel, may feel the financial burden.
WOOD SCRAP AND P ALLETS In fiscal year 2002­2003, the wood scrap and pallet industr y continued to face market development challenges.
Indiana is home to more than 1,000 wood scrap producers, whose scrap from sawmills, fur niture factories, constr uction, home maintenance and other facilities creates a significant par t of the state's waste stream.
28
MARKETS FOR INDIANA RECYCLABLES Pallets and crates are used by nearly ever y Indiana manufacturer as well as many retailers.
There are several existing Indiana companies that can recycle scrap wood by using it for rebuilding pallets, mulching, composting, creating par ticle board, creating animal bedding or as a feedstock in plastic composite lumber.
One of these companies r eceived IDOC funding to expand their capacity this year.
There are not enough of these operations in the State, however, to successfully diver t the lar ge amount of wood waste that is landfilled or incinerated each year in Indiana.
Continued work to expand these markets and create successful wood recycling infrastr uctures is needed to decrease this waste stream in Indiana.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS Constr uction and demolition (C
The United States Environmental Protection Agency estimates that in 1996, more than 136 million tons of buildinggenerated C
Main C
While many of these components can be and are being easily recycled, the majority are still being landfilled.
Wide swings in commodity prices and marketability sometimes af fects the C
Significant work on collection strategies and development of successful end-markets is needed in order to decrease the amount of C
With the momentum in the Green Building movement both nationally and in Indiana, and with continuing developments in technology related to C
INDUSTRIAL SOLID W ASTE BY-PRODUCTS Several industries produce large amounts of single non-hazardous solid waste streams.
These industrial by-products include coal combustion ash, foundr y sand, cement kiln dust, slag, and other substances.
These materials often have the potential for beneficial reuse as aggregate, fill, or raw material for a manufacturing process.
An ef for t is under way in the Midwest to bring industr y and government sectors together to discuss how to overcome bar riers to and increase the occurrences of beneficial reuse of these materials.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice continues to fund projects that help develop markets for industrial by-products in Indiana in order to divert this material from landfills and keep it circulating in the commodity market.
This year, approved projects include researc h i n g how to reclaim and reuse cement kiln dust and researching uses for fiber glass material from the manufactured housing industr y. Coal Combustion Materials Indiana consumes over 70 million tons of coal annually, according to the United States Depar tment of Ener g y. Coal combustion by-products present a waste management concern to both solid waste of ficials and state utilities.
These materials, such as fly ash and bottom ash, can be used as aggregate for many types of projects, including cement manufacturing, road base and subbase constr uction, str uctural fill constr uction, and as a soil amendment.
Markets for coal combustion projects continue to develop as possible uses are tested and proved.
A project funded by the Ener gy and Recycling Of fice to study the use of coal combustion by-products in road constr uction was near completion at the end of fiscal year 2002­2003.
Other markets for this material need to be explored, and potential end-users need to be educated on the acceptable uses.
Foundry Sand More than 120 foundries in Indiana use sand in their casting processes.
This sand is either disposed of in landfills or reused.
Nationwide, over 100 million tons of foundr y sand is used and reused annually.
As Indiana's foundr y
29
MARKETS FOR INDIANA RECYCLABLES strive to become more ef ficient and competitive, they look to reduce the amount of sand they must acquire as well as the amount of sand they dispose of.
Redesign of the casting process and improved sand reclamation technologies has allowed many foundries to reduce the amount of sand they dispose of.
Many foundries look for ways to reuse their spent sand.
Foundr y sand has been proven to be successfully used in road subbase, grout and mor t a r, constr uction fill, cement manufacturing, flowable fill, highway bar riers, landfill daily cover, and pipe bedding applications.
Finding and proving alternative uses in Indiana will help lower disposal costs for Indiana foundries and allow them to be more competitive.
The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice has funded two research projects that are studying new ways to reuse and recycle foundr y sand.
TIRES AND RUBBER Scrap tires continue to be a major solid waste issue in Indiana.
The scrap tire market continues to be driven more on supply than demand.
As was evident with the lar ge tire fire at the CR3 tire recycling facility in Muncie, Ind., tire processors and end-users must take care to balance their on-hand supply with product demand in order to remain safely within regulator y compliance.
This event also demonstrated the need for the state to develop more viable end-markets for tires.
An estimated 6 million scrap tires are produced ever y year in Indiana, with still more sitting in existing tire piles.
Prices have stayed low this year, though a slight upswing occur r ed in early 2003.
While scrap tires may be recycled into r ubber-based products and used in civil engineering projects, some of the available markets have not taken hold in Indiana.
Other uses that constitute lar ge end markets in other states - including the use of tire shreds in septic and drainage systems and as Ti re Derived Fuel - still need to be developed and proven in Indiana in order to open these potentially lar ge markets in the state.
The State has and continues to par ticipate in pilot projects to use tires in civil engineering projects, such as with road constr uction and septic systems.
The Energy and Recycling Of fice has several ongoing projects involving the use of crumb rubber from scrap tires as feedstock to create recycled-r ubber products, such as sheeting and automotive par ts.
30
PA R TNERSHIPS AND COOPERA TIVE ASSIST ANCE The Ener gy and Recycling Of fice works with local, state and national par tners to assist in waste reduction and recycling market development.
Through these connections we ensure that Commerce programs reflect state priorities and meet the needs of market development.
Some of these par tners include the following: Indiana Depar tment of Commerce
8 8 8 8
Economic Development Division Of fice of Community Assistance Of fice of the Ombudsman Regional Of fices
Indiana Depar tment of Environmental Management
8 8
Of fice of Pollution Prevention and Technical Assistance Of fice of Land Quality
Indiana Depar tment of Administration
8
Greening the Government Program
Indiana Depar tment of Transpor tation
8
Materials and Tests Division
Indiana Local Economic Development Organizations Indiana Solid Waste Management Districts Indiana Recycling Coalition Mid-America Council of Recycling Of ficials National Recycling Coalition United States Environmental Protection Agency (Region 5) Scrap Tire Management Council Foundry Industry Recycling Star ts Today Various industry associations
31
INDIANA DEP AR TMENT OF COMMERCE CONT ACTS Indiana Depar tment of Commerce T im Monger, Executive Director One Nor th Capitol, Suite 700 Indianapolis, IN 46204 www.indianacommerce.com Community Development Division Niles Parker, Director Phone: (317) 232-8940 Fax: (317) 232-8995 nparker@commerce.state.in.us Energy and Recycling Of fice Phil Powlick, Director Phone: (317) 232-8979 Fax: (317) 232-8995 ppowlick@commerce.state.in.us Tif fany Sor ge, Recycling Market Development Program Manager Phone: (317) 233-1951 tsor ge@commerce.state.in.us www.CommerceRecycles.in.gov Economic Development Division Main Phone: (317) 232-8800 Of fice of Community Assistance Main Phone: (317) 232-8911
32
Indiana Depar tment of Commerc e Ener gy 
