Pennsylvania' Abandoned Mine s Reclamation Program The Department of Environmental Protection' s (DEP) Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation administers Pennsylvania' abandoned mine lands s reclamation program.
Every year, DEP reclaims thousands of acres through contracted and in-house projects, through grant programs for volunteers groups and by promoting the reuse of these sites by today' mining industry.
Despite these efforts, s Pennsylvania is faced with a vast abandoned mine legacy, which pollutes the environment and endangers the public.
DEP receives more than 800 requests for assistance with potential abandoned mine problems every year.
Most of these requests are from private property owners.
DEP staff investigates these incidents and works with the public to explain the findings and implement solutions.
Approximately 30 percent of these requests are eligible for reclamation work through DEP. Project eligibility is dependent on a number of factors: · The problem is caused by an abandoned mine.
· The problem is hazardous to people or the environment.
· The reclamation is technologically and economically feasible.
· There are no parties responsible for the reclamation under state or federal laws.
regulations, mine operators would simply abandon the site after all the coal was mined.
As a result, Pennsylvanians are faced with abandoned mine problems in 45 of the Commonwealth' 67 s counties.
These problems include open pits, coal refuse and spoil piles, acid mine drainage, highwalls (the cliff-like faces of abandoned surface mines), old mine buildings, open shafts, subsidence and mine fires.
Many of these abandoned mines have severely degraded the quality of the surrounding land and water and pose hazards to the people of Pennsylvania.
The cost to correct all of these problems is an estimated $15 billion.
Funding for Mine Reclamation There are three basic funding sources currently in place for abandoned mine reclamation: · Growing Greener · Title IV of the federal Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA) · Bond Forfeiture Growing Greener Gov. Tom Ridge signed Growing Greener into law on Dec. 15, 1999.
It is the largest environmental investment in Pennsylvania' s history, investing nearly $650 million over five years.
The funds are divided among four state agencies.
DEP is using Growing Greener to fund projects to protect and restore watersheds, plug abandoned oil and gas wells and reclaim abandoned mine lands.
DEP has established a grants program to fund reclamation and watershed restoration projects by volunteer groups, local governments and schools.
Growing Greener is also funding reclamation projects that are awarded through competitive bid.
The projects put out for bid are typically larger, more labor-intensive jobs that require more equipment and manpower.
The addition of Growing Greener funds to DEP' abandoned mine s reclamation program is allowing DEP to contract a greater number of projects and has significantly advanced efforts to reclaim Pennsylvania' s abandoned mine legacy.
Title IV Funds Funds are provided to DEP from the U.S. Department of Interior' Office of Surface Mining s (OSM) through Title IV of SMCRA.
This program is funded by a tax paid by active mine operators on each ton of coal mined ­ 35 cents for surface mined coal and 15 cents for deep mined coal.
This tax is paid to the federal government, which funnels the money back to the states for their abandoned mine reclamation programs.
An abandoned mine problem is eligible for funding if it resulted from mining before Aug. 3, 1977 (the passage of SMCRA).
The site is also eligible if the
mine operator forfeited bonds before July 30, 1982, when Pennsylvania assumed primary responsibility for regulating its surface mining industry.
If the forfeiting operator' bonding company is in s bankruptcy, the site is eligible if mining ceased before Nov. 5, 1990.
Yearly funding levels for the program depend on the Department of Interior' annual appropriation s from Congress.
Pennsylvania has received an average of $25 million per year since 1982.
DEP can use Title IV funds for two categories of projects: Priority 1 ­ Protection of public health and safety and property from extreme danger due to abandoned mines.
Extreme danger is defined as a condition that could be expected to cause substantial physical harm to people, property or the environment, and to which people or improvements to the property are exposed.
Priority 2 ­ The protection of public health, safety and general welfare from the adverse effects of abandoned mines.
In addition, DEP can set aside up to 10 percent annually from Title IV money to address acid mine drainage problems from eligible abandoned mines.
Projects that are sudden and life threatening and that demand immediate attention are addressed through OSM' emergency program.
Emergencies s typically include subsidence, methane gas leaks and recently ignited coal refuse fires.
Bond Forfeiture Program All mine operators are required to post bonds to cover the cost of reclamation in the event they are not able to meet their obligations.
These bonds, along with other supplemental sources, are used to reclaim the mined area to current environmental and safety standards.
DEP administers the bond forfeiture program to reclaim sites when operators abandon them without performing the necessary reclamation.
Fees collected from mine operators for violations cited on active mining operations are used to help support this program.
What are the Types of Reclamation Projects? Mine reclamation is the process of cleaning up environmental problems, eliminating public safety hazards and returning the land to a productive condition.
Reclamation projects include backfilling and regrading open pits, sealing mine openings, eliminating dangerous highwalls and extinguishing underground and coal refuse fires.
DEP also administers projects to control abandoned mine subsidence, treat and abate acid mine drainage, reestablish stream channels, remove dilapidated buildings and equipment, and revegetate abandoned mine sites.
Contracted and In-House Projects For contracted reclamation projects, DEP first develops preliminary project scopes of work and cost estimates.
DEP then determines property ownership and secures necessary funding and rights of entry from all affected property owners.
The project is then competitively bid, and DEP awards a construction contract to the lowest responsible bidder.
For smaller projects, DEP' in-house construction s crew performs the work.
Doing the projects "inhouse" simplifies the process, since no contractual work needs to be done, and speeds up the time period from investigation to construction.
Why is There a Need for Reclamation? Pennsylvania has been a national leader in coal production since the mid-1800s.
Coal from Pennsylvania mines fueled the Industrial Revolution and two World Wars, employed thousands of immigrant workers, heated homes and business, and helped make Pittsburgh the "Steel City."
At a point in the 1970s, Pennsylvania had produced approximately one-third of all the coal mined in the United States.
Unfortunately, there were no laws in place to protect the environment from damage when mining was completed.
Before modern environmental
Reclaim PA This program embodies a new approach to abandoned mine reclamation that uses the talents and resources of volunteers and the mining industry, and focuses on new technologies to maximize Pennsylvania' s reclamation efforts.
Reclaim PA includes initiatives such as the Environmental Good Samaritan Act, which limits liability for volunteer reclamation projects, and initiatives to make "remining" of abandoned sites easier.
Today' mining industry is an active partner in s helping to reclaim abandoned mines.
Through remining incentives offered by DEP, operators are reusing and reclaiming abandoned mines at no cost to Pennsylvania taxpayers.
Operators who remine abandoned sites must reclaim the land to current environmental and safety standards.
In recent years, remining operations have reclaimed an average of three acres for every one acre reclaimed at public expense.
The Benefits of Mine Reclamation Reclamation eliminates public safety and environmental hazards.
These sites pollute the Commonwealth' land and water and threaten its s citizens.
Oftentimes, they become illegal garbage dumps, which further compounds the problem.
There are many important environmental benefits from reclaiming abandoned mines, including restoring the land to a useful purpose and improving the quality of Pennsylvania' rivers and s streams.
The restoration of these areas results in land that can be used for farming, wildlife habitat and recreation, or as much-needed "green" space.
The economic benefits of reclamation are also very important.
Reclaiming these abandoned sites can clear the way for new development and businesses, and help renew community pride.
The economies of many coalfield communities in western and northeastern Pennsylvania have benefited from reclamation projects.
The reclamation contracts themselves also have a positive influence ­ most contracts are with Pennsylvania companies employing Pennsylvania workers.
DEP estimates that for every million dollars spent for reclamation contracts, about 27 people are employed either directly or indirectly.
For more information on Pennsylvania' s abandoned mine reclamation program or to report abandoned mine problems, please contact the following DEP office nearest you.
DEP staff is available to speak to local governments, watershed groups or other interested parties about reclamation in Pennsylvania.
Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation Rachel Carson State Office Building 400 Market Street, P.O. Box 8476 Harrisburg, PA 17105-8476 717-783-2267 Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation Wilkes-Barre District Office 2 Public Square, 5th Floor Wilkes-Barre, PA 18711-0790 570-826-2371 Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of Abandoned Mine Reclamation Cambria District Office 286 Industrial Park Road Ebensburg, PA 15931-4119 814-472-1800 This and related environmental information are available electronically via Internet.
For more information, visit us through the PA PowerPort at http://www.state.pa.us or visit DEP directly at http://www.dep.state.pa.us (directLINK "Mineral Resources").
Pennsylvania's Abandoned Mines
"Stay Out ­ Stay Alive" Many abandoned mines are located in residential areas ­ near schools, hospitals, churches and homes ­ and have become dangerous attractions for the curious, particularly young people.
Every year, both children and adults are injured or killed from accidents at abandoned mines.
Until all abandoned sites can be reclaimed, the best defense to prevent accidents is education and outreach.
DEP has joined the national "Stay Out ­ Stay Alive" campaign to educate the public about the dangers of these sites.
The campaign includes partners from the federal government and state governments, as well as the mining industry and concerned citizens.
DEP staff has visited schools and community groups to inform the public about the dangers of abandoned mines.
The success of this outreach campaign is based on community involvement.
DEP encourages and welcomes local groups to join this effort.
PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS
What Can You Do? Get involved.
Through Growing Greener, Pennsylvanians have an unprecedented opportunity to help reclaim abandoned mines and improve their watersheds and communities.
DEP is awarding grants to volunteer watershed groups, counties, local governments and schools.
Growing Greener can also help fund the start-up costs of forming a watershed group to do future projects.
The Good Samaritan provisions are limiting civil and environmental liability for reclamation and acid mine drainage remediation projects, and are helping to encourage more volunteer efforts.
If you are interested in reclaiming abandoned mines and restoring streams and rivers impacted by acid mine drainage, contact DEP today about a Growing Greener grant application or go on-line at www.GrowingGreener.org.
www.GreenWorks.tv - A web space dedicated to helping you learn how to protect and improve the environment.
The site features the largest collection of environmental videos available on the Internet and is produced by the nonprofit Environmental Fund for Pennsylvania, with financial support from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, 877-PA-GREEN.
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA Tom Ridge, Governor DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION James M. Seif, Secretary
5400-PA-DEP1494 Rev. 3/2001 An Equal Opportunity Employer
