Coastal Zone Boundary Definitions ­ Statewide Federal Lands May 2, 2001 ­ For Task I Metadata Boundary Definition Excluded from Alaska's coastal zone boundaries are "those lands owned, leased, held in trust or whose use is otherwise by law subject solely to the discretion of the Federal Government, its officers or agents..." (15CFR 923.33).
All uses and activities on excluded federal lands that directly affect the coastal area must be consistent to the maximum extent practical with the ACMP and are subject to the consistency provisions of Section 307 of the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, as amended.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary is the "outer limit of the United States territorial sea" (15 CFR 923.32), which is the "three geographic mile line" (43 CFR 3301.1).
The statewide seaward boundary depicted was extracted from the Outer Continental Shelf Official Protraction Diagram map series (Bureau of Land Management, October 1977).
The inland coastal zone boundary includes entire (minor) islands and the lands and waters within (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce/hemlock forest, (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes entire (minor) islands and the lands and waters within (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce/hemlock forest, (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The state-approved inland coastal zone boundary includes all islands, and the lands and waters other than perennially snow-capped peaks, active volcanic peaks, and glaciers.
Reference to 1:63,360 or larger source information may be necessary to delineate perennially snow-capped peaks.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal boundary in the Aleutians West CRSA includes all islands.
The island of Adak is excluded from the Aleutians West CRSA boundary.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
Seaward Coastal Zone Boundary
Outside Coastal Districts Prince William Sound Outside of Coastal Districts
Southeast Alaska Outside of Coastal Districts
Districts Aleutians East Borough
Aleutians West CRSA
Municipality of Anchorage
1
City of Angoon
The inland coastal boundary of the Municipality of Anchorage along the coast between the MatanuskaSusitna Borough and Potter Creek includes all lands and waters within: (1) a zone extending 1,320 feet inland, measured horizontally, from the extent of the 100-year coastal flood; (2) the 100-year floodplain or 200 feet from the center (whichever is greater) of each river and stream intersected by the 1,320-foot zone up to the 1,000-foot elevation contour; and (3) other areas as delineated on this map (map #94, Coastal Zone Boundaries of Alaska, ACMP, June 1988).
The inland boundary in watersheds of the upper Knik River and south of Potter Creek includes all lands and waters within the 1,000-foot elevation contour.
Reference to 1:25,000 or 1:63,360 USGS topographic maps, Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate maps, or the Anchorage Coastal Management Program may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether the use or activity lie within the coastal zone (Coastal Zone Boundaries of Alaska, Alaska Coastal Zone Management Program, 1988).
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Angoon.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The Bering Straits CRSA inland coastal zone boundary encompasses a combination of selected watersheds, drainage basins, and uniform one-mile corridors from ordinary high water along each side of fish streams and rivers that provide habitat for important populations of anadromous fish (Map 3-1).
In addition, all offshore islands within the Bering Straits CRSA (including St. Lawrence Island) are included in their entirety.
To protect anadromous fish resources and habitats in the areas with greatest potential for mineral development, the Bering Straits CRSA coastal area boundary includes watersheds and drainages where mineral potential is rated as high or very high by the Alaska Department of Natural Resources (ADNR).
For lands within the CRSA south of Cape Denbigh where mineral potential has not been recently evaluated by the ADNR, the potential for mineral development has been associated with highly mineralized terranes, as identified by the Arctic Environmental Information and Data Center in a map series published in 1982 (Volume 2, Map 7-1).
Areas inland from the interim coastal boundary with identified mineral resources of lesser potential have not been included in the coastal area boundary due to the reduced likelihood of development in the foreseeable future.
Inland from the interim coastal boundary, rivers and streams which support anadromous fish in areas where the likelihood of mineral or other development is low are included in the coastal area boundary through provision of a corridor extending one mile from the ordinary high water mark on both sides of the stream, or from the outermost active channel within braided or split-channel
Bering Straits CRSA
2
floodplains.
This corridor extends upstream to one mile above the limits of known distribution of anadromous fish.
The Bering Straits CRSA coastal boundary also provides for an inland setback of two miles from the marine coastal shoreline where bluffs are adjacent to or in close proximity to the coast.
Application of the 200-foot elevation biophysical criteria for the interim coastal boundary is inappropriate where bluffs higher than 200 feet adjoin or are in relatively close proximity to marine waters; in some instances, the interim coastal boundary does not even encompass the coastal bluff.
In these situations, an inland boundary has been prescribed to encompass areas clearly within a zone of marine coastal influence and in which uses and activities could have direct and significant impacts on coastal habitats and coastally-dependent resources.
Map 3-1 shows that the coastal area boundary south of the Inglutalik River to the southern limits of the CRSA is comprised of the interim coastal boundary, one mile corridors along anadromous fish streams, and limited extent mineralized areas within portions of the drainage basin of the Unalakleet, Shaktoolik, Ungalik, and Inglutalik Rivers.
From the Koyuk River west to the Sinuk River, extensive and contiguous zones of high mineral potential encompass the watersheds of the Koyuk, Tubutulik, Fish, Niukluk, and Sinuk Rivers within stream reaches utilized by anadromous fish.
The portions of these watersheds which emanate from high potential mineralized areas inland from the inland boundary are included within the coastal boundary.
Coastallyassociated bluffs within two miles of the marine coastline are included in the coastal boundary near Bald Head, and between Moses Point and Cape Darby.
The City of Nome has developed its own coastal management program, and the area encompassed by the Nome district is not included within the Bering Straits CRSA coastal boundary.
Anadromous fish habitats in rivers draining to Imuruk Basin and Port Clarence include non-mineralized areas south of the Basin, and extensive mineralized zones in the Kuzitrin, Noxapaga, Agaigpuk, and American Rivers.
Watersheds and portions of drainage basins which originate in these high potential mineral areas are included in the coastal area boundary.
Where mineralized areas are not present within the watersheds of anadromous fish streams, one mile corridors along the watercourse are delineated.
Coastally-associated bluffs within two miles of the marine coastline of Port Clarence south and east of Teller are included within the coastal boundary.
West of Port Clarence to Cape Prince of Wales, and north along the coast to Shishmaref Inlet, anadromous fish habitats and high potential mineral areas are more widely distributed and interspersed, creating a coastal boundary comprised of smaller watersheds, portions of anadromous fish stream drainage basins, and one mile corridors along anadromous streams where high mineral potential has not been identified.
The coastal topography northeast from Cape Prince of Wales changes to a broad coastal plain which extends inland up to 15 miles before foothills are encountered.
West of Brevig Lagoon near
3
Lost River, coastally-associated bluffs within two miles of the marine coastline are included in the coastal area boundary.
From Shishmaref Inlet north to the common boundary with the NANA CRSA, the broad coastal plain is principally encompassed by the interim coastal boundary and shorter drainage systems which have not been documented to support anadromous fish.
This area does not contain identified mineralized areas adjacent to the coast, but mineralized areas are present in the upper portions of stream watersheds.
In the coastal boundary regions described above, the transition between watershed or drainage basin criteria and one mile corridor criteria follows the most reasonable and appropriate features available (drainage divides, topography, political boundaries) to appropriately represent resource concerns and to provide an identifiable coastal boundary.
Some areas surrounded by the coastal area, have not currently been documented to provide anadromous fish habitats, and at present are considered low potential for mineral development or other uses and activities with the likelihood of direct and significant impacts to coastal resources.
Some areas outside the Bering Straits CRSA coastal boundary could be affected by development activities, but there is less certainty that activities occurring in these areas could result in direct and significant impacts to coastal resources.
These areas are classified as "Permit Notification Areas" (PNA), and are shown on Map 3-1.
The areas include wetlands south of St. Michael, portions of the uplands along the southern part of the Serpentine River watershed, and portions of the Fish River and Tubutulik River watersheds.
Authorizing and permitting agencies must notify the Bering Straits CRSA of permit applications which are received for activities in the PNA.
The CRSA and the agencies then evaluate each project on a case-by-case basis to determine whether the project is likely to have direct and significant impacts on coastal resources within the coastal boundary.
If a project is likely to have such impacts, the project will be subject to the same consistency review procedures applied to uses and activities which occur within the coastal area boundary (see Chapter 6, Implementation).
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary for the Bristol Bay CRSA includes: (1) The interim coastal boundary designated by state, which includes the 200-foot contour, and isolated hills; (2) All water bodies designated in the Catalog of Waters Important for Spawning, Rearing, and Migration of Anadromous Fish, plus a one (1) mile corridor from ordinary high water (OHW) on each bank; and (3) All tributaries to these aforementioned designated waterbodies, plus a 200 foot corridor from ordinary high water (OHW) on each bank.
This coastal boundary is graphically depicted on Map 2 of the district program.
The tributaries identified in
Bristol Bay CRSA
4
City of Bethel
(3) are not delineated due to limitations of map scale.
Reference to 1:63,360 or larger maps or the anadromous fish catalog may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Bethel.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the Bristol Bay Borough.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary for the Ceñaliulriit CRSA is defined as: (1) All lands and waters within the 200-foot elevation contour, isolated hills, and all islands; (2) All water bodies designated in the Catalog of Waters Important for Spawning, Rearing, and Migration of Anadromous Fish (ADFG 1999), plus a corridor extending from ordinary high water on each bank landward one mile or to the highest surrounding contour, whichever is less; and (3) All tributaries to these aforementioned designated water bodies, plus a corridor extending from ordinary high water on each bank landward 200 feet.
An exception is made for tributaries whose confluence with an anadromous stream is located inland from any coastal district boundary.
The tributaries identified in (3) are not delineated due to limitations of map scale.
Reference to 1:63,360 or larger maps or the anadromous fish catalog may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The Cordova inland coastal zone boundary may change with a significant amendment to its coastal management program in 2001.
The 1986 Cordova Coastal Management Program defines the limits of the inland coastal zone as extending from the western edge of the right-of-way of the State highway (a combination of New England Cannery Road, Railroad Avenue, Copper River Highway, and Three Mile Road) seaward to the Cordova city limits.
The Cordova Coastal Zone also includes that portion of Eyak Lake Area which Merits Special Attention which lies within the city limits as of 1986, and the area between Chase Avenue and the Copper River Highway.
Notably, there are two exceptions where the zone extends uphill of the State highway.
These are Ski Hill and the Fleming Creek, including the lagoon at the mouth of Fleming Creek.
Along the lagoon and creek, the zone includes all land that is encompassed by a setback of 50 feet from the center of the stream, or the line at mean high tide along the lagoon.
As there are few
Bristol Bay Borough
Ceñaliulriit CRSA
City of Cordova
5
City of Craig
natural or manmade features to indicate a demarcation line, the 50-foot setback was employed.
This distance was deemed sufficient to control development adjacent to the water.
At Ski Hill, the zone would include those lands designated in the 1976 comprehensive plan as publicly owned in the Ski Hill area, and a large platted, but undeveloped area lying between Ski Hill and the developed area in central Cordova.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within City of Craig.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Haines.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Hoonah.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Hydaburg.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes the lands and waters within (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce/hemlock forest, (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Kake.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes the land area below the 1,000 foot elevation contour and all islands in their entirety.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
City of Haines
City of Hoonah
City of Hydaburg
City and Borough of Juneau
City of Kake
Kenai Peninsula Borough
Ketchikan Gateway Borough
6
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the Ketchikan Coastal Management district, which includes all land and water within the following described townships of the Copper River Meridian with exclusions as noted: T.72S ., R.89E. excluding all waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.72S., R.90E., T.72S., R.91E., T.73S., R.89E. excluding all waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.73S., R.90E., T.73S., R.92E., T.74S., R.89E. excluding all waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.74S., R.90E., T.74S., R.91E., T73S., R.92E., T.74S., R.89E. excluding all waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.75S., R.90E., T.75S., R.91E., T.75S., R.92E., T.76S., R.89E. excluding all waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.76S., R.90E., T.76S., R.91E. excluding Annette Island and the waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough, T.76S., R.92E. excluding Annette Island and the waters outside of the boundary of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough.
The inland coastal zone boundary in the remainder of the Ketchikan Gateway Borough includes entire (minor) islands and the lands and waters within (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce/hemlock forest, (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone.
The Standards and Guidelines of the Alaska Coastal Management Act and the Forest Service management regulations will continue to operate in areas of the Borough outside the current Coastal Management district boundaries.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the city of Klawock.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
All islands within the boundaries of the Kodiak Island Borough in 1983 (east of Shelikof Strait) are included in the coastal zone.
On March 5, 1990, the Alaska Legislature tacitly approved a Local Boundary Commission decision approving the annexation of a portion of the Alaska Peninsula by the Kodiak Island Borough.
The annexation area essentially follows the ridge line along the Alaska Peninsula from Cape Douglas on the north to Wide Bay on the south and includes the Semidi Islands and Chirikof Island.
The inland coastal zone boundary in this portion of the Borough includes all islands and the lands and waters within (1) the 1,000-foot elevation contour draining into the Pacific Ocean, and isolated hills; (2) one mile measured from ordinary high water of each bank of all anadromous fish waters designated in "An Atlas to the Catalog of Waters Important for the Spawning, Rearing and Migration of Anadromous Fishes"; and (3) 200 feet measured from ordinary high water of each bank of all tributaries to the waters described in (2).
Onsite
City of Klawock
Kodiak Island Borough
7
visits or reference to 1:63,360 determine if the above criteria visits or reference to 1:63,360 determine if the above criteria
or larger topographic apply and whether a or larger topographic apply and whether a
maps use or maps use or
or other source data activity will lie within or other source data activity will lie within
may be necessary to the coastal zone.
Onsite may be necessary to the coastal zone.
Lake and Peninsula Borough
The portion of the Alaska Peninsula annexed by the Borough prior to annexation was part of the Bristol Bay Coastal Resource Service Area (BBCRSA).
The Semidi Islands and Chirikof Island prior to annexation were not part of any local coastal management program.
Coastal management planning in these areas will be administered by the Kodiak Island Borough subject to the appropriate local coastal management plan in effect prior to the annexation.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the Lake and Peninsula Borough, except for perennially snow-capped mountains, glaciers, and volcanoes.
In accordance with the Citizen/Agency Joint Forum's selection of a coastal boundary based on survey lines and related man-made features, the legal description delineates the Mat-Su Borough coastal management area to include all lands and waters within the following townships or portions of townships described on a protracted basis whether surveyed or unsurveyed.
T12N, T13N, T13N, T14N, T14N, T15N, T15N, T16N, T16N, T16N, T16N, T16N, T16N, T17N, T17N, T17N, T17N, T18N, T18N, R7, 8 9W: All that portion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R4, 5 6W: All that portion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R7, 8, 9W: All.
R3, 4W: All that portion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R5 through 11W: All R5, W3: All that portion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R4 through 11W: All.
R1E: All that potion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R4E: All.
R4E: Sections 4 through 10, 13 through 36.
R5E: Section 19 through 21, 28 through 33.
2, 3W: All that portion within the Matanuska-Susitna Borough boundary.
R4 through 13W: All R1, 2E: All R3E: Section 6 through 8, 16 through 22, 25 through 36.
R4E: Section 31.
R1 through 12W: All.
R2E: All.
R3E: Section 15 through 36.
Matanuska-Susitna Borough
8
T18N, R4 through 12W: All.
T19N, R4W: All that portion lying west of the east boundary of the Parks Highway right-of-way.
T19N, R5 through 12W: All.
T20N, R5 through 12W: All that portion lying west of the east boundary of the Park Highway right-of-way.
T21N, R4W: All that portion lying west of the east boundary of the Parks Highway right-of-way.
T21N, R5 through 12W: All.
T22N, R4W: All that portion lying west of the east boundary of the Park Highway right-of-way.
T22N, R5 through 12W: All.
T23N, R4W: All that portion lying west of the east boundary of the Parks Highway right-of-way.
T23N, R5 through 12W: All.
In addition, where the above described boundary intersects the below-listed rivers and creeks, the management boundary extends upstream to the 1000-foot contour level.
The width of this extended boundary is the width of the water course and 200 feet on each side as measured from the ordinary high water mark: 1.
Skwenta River 2.
Yentna River 3.
Kahiltna River 4.
Chulitna River 5.
Susitna River 6.
Talkeetna River 7.
Montana Creek 8.
Sheep Creek 9.
Kashwitna River 10.
Little Susitna River 11.
Willow Creek 12.
Little Susitna River 13.
Matanuska-River 14.
Lake Creek 15.
Moose Creek 16.
Kroto Creek 17.
Lower Kroto Creek (Deshka River) 18.
Talachulitna River Finally, the inland coastal zone also includes all lands and waters within the 400-foot elevation contour near Beluga Lake.
Reference to 1:63,360 source data, Federal Emergency Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps or other information that defines the 100-year floodplain may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
Northwest Arctic Borough
9
The inland coastal zone boundary includes the following six areas of lands and waters: 1) 2) All coastal islands, beaches, barrier islands, spits, bars, shoals, lagoons, and tidal flats and other intertidal areas of the NAB.
The entire watershed area, to the extent of the highest surrounding contour, of the following major rivers.
The watershed area includes the main stem and all tributary waters of the: o o o o o o o o o o 3) 4) 5) Kivalin a, Wulik, Noatak, Kobuk, Selawik, Buckland, Kiwalik, Kugruk, Inmachuk, and Goodhope Rivers.
The drainage area, other than the watersheds of the Kobuk and Selawik Rivers, of Selawik, Kobuk and Hotham Lakes, and the lakes themselves.
The drainage area, other than the watersheds of the Buckland, Kiwalik, and Goodhope Rivers, of Spafarief, Eschscholtz and Goodhope Bays, and the bays themselves.
The drainage area, other than the watersheds of the Kivalina, Wulik, Noatak, Kugruk and Inmachuk Rivers, of the estuarine and marine waters of the Kotzebue Sound and Chukchi Sea.
All villages, including Kotzebue.
6)
City of Nome
Drainage areas are defined as a corridor extending five miles either side of any water connected by surface or subsurface flow (i.e. wet tundra area) to the larger water body specified.
The major rivers and other drainage areas provide important spawning, rearing, and overwintering habitats for significant populations of anadromous fish within the region (Maps 3 and 4 of the Map Atlas).
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary within the City of Nome includes all lands and waters up to the 200-foot elevation contour.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
North Slope Borough
10
The inland coastal zone boundary is divided into two sectors, the mid-Beaufort coastal sector and the Point Hope/Point Lay coastal sector (Map 1).
The mid-Beaufort coastal sector lies between the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR) and the National Petroleum Reserve - Alaska (NPRA).
The Point Hope/Point Lay coastal sector lies between the National Petroleum Reserve - Alaska and the NANA Coastal Resource Service Area.
The North Slope Borough coastal zone boundary extends inland from the interim boundary (a line drawn roughly 25 miles inland from the coast for most of the borough as depicted in Coastal Zone Boundaries of Alaska) as follows: (1) in the mid-Beaufort sector the boundary extends inland along selected streams to include all anadromous fish spawning and overwintering habitat and (2) in the Point Hope/Point Lay sector the boundary extends inland to include anadromous fish spawning and overwintering habitat on the Kukpuk River.
The inland boundary extends inland from the interim boundary along the Kukpuk, Chandler, Anaktuvuk, Kanayut, Nanushuk (including May and Cobblestone Creeks), Itkillik, Sagavanirktok (including Accomplishment and Section Creeks), Ridbon, Lupine, Echooka, Ivishak, Saviukviayak (including Flood Creek), Shaviovik, Kavik, Canning and Marsh Fork drainages.
Along each stream, a one-mile corridor from mean high water is included within the coastal zone.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Pelican.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone for the City and Borough of Sitka includes entire (minor) islands and the lands and waters within (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce/hemlock forest (generally between 2,000 and 2,500 feet), (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of St. Paul.
The boundary encloses all lands and waters of St. Paul, Walrus, and Otter Islands.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
City of Pelican
City and Borough of Sitka
City of St. Paul
City of Thorne Bay
11
City of Valdez
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Thorne Bay.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters up to 1500 feet in elevation within the City of Valdez.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary includes all lands and waters within the City of Whittier.
The statewide seaward coastal zone boundary and the exclusion of federal lands from the coastal zone are described at the beginning of this section.
The inland coastal zone boundary for the City and Borough of Yakutat includes all islands and the lands and waters within: (1) the timberline of the coastal Sitka spruce and hemlock forest, (2) slopes contiguous with marine waters where mass wasting is evident or likely to occur, and (3) unvegetated areas left by receding glaciers where the coastal forest is likely to invade.
Onsite visits or reference to 1:63,360 or larger topographic maps or other source data may be necessary to determine if the above criteria apply and whether a use or activity will lie within the coastal zone
City of Whittier
City of Yakutat
12
