MONTANA DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE Registered Field Rodenticides in Montana 2001 Registered Rodenticides for Ground Squirrel Control Zinc Phosphide Grain Baits - Restricted Use Pesticide Registered Products ZP Rodent Bait Ag - Bell Laboratories Hopkin's Zinc Phosphide Bait - Haco, Inc.
Zinc Phosphide Oat Bait - Hacco, Inc.
Use Directions: Apply by hand with calibrated dipper at one teaspoon (4 g) per active burrow.
Scatter bait near mound or in runway.
Do not pile.
Prebait with untreated oats 2 to 3 days before toxic bait application.
Test ground squirrel bait acceptance before application of prebait and toxic bait.
Do not apply bait until squirrels show good bait acceptance.
Use Restrictions: Apply to cropland sites only by hand on bare ground near burrows.
Broadcast application is permitted only on rangeland and noncrop areas.
Important: Use zinc phosphide baits that are formulated on an oats, either whole, crimped or hulled and rolled.
Zinc phosphide baits formulated into pellets or on whole or cracked corn are not as well accepted as oats.
Best result occur when green vegetation is not abundant, i.e. early spring, mid-summer.
Anticoagulant Grain Bait - Restricted Use Pesticide Registered Product Rozol Treated Oats For Controlling Ground Squirrels - Lipha Tech Chemical Co.
Use Directions: Apply by hand with calibrated dipper at one tablespoon (0.3 oz/9 g) per burrow.
Scatter bait on bare ground near burrows.
Do not pile.
Apply second application in 4 days.
Test bait acceptance before application.
Do not bait if test bait is not eaten within 2 days.
Limitations: Do not skip the second application.
Poor control will result.
Important: Active ingredient is a multidose anticoagulant.
Two applications are needed for good results.
Do not make a single application or make a single application at double the rate.
Time applications when dry weather is expected.
Anticoagulants in Bait Stations - General Use Pesticide Registered Products Hopkins Ramik Green (formulated into pellets) - Haco, Inc.
Use Directions: This is a multidose poison requiring that the squirrels feed on the bait several times over several days.
Apply only in bait stations.
Do not attempt to use by scattering bait around burrow openings.
Use sufficient bait stations to service the squirrel population, up to 4 bait stations per acre.
Space station 50-200 feet apart depending on squirrel density.
Bait stations may be spaced along crop borders between squirrel colonies and crops.
Limitations: Cost for bait stations and bait (5 - 10 lbs/acre) plus labor of maintaining stations usually limit practical use to small acreages or isolated squirrel populations.
Important: A continuous bait supply is important.
If bait stations are empty for too long, squirrels may recover from the initial bait consumption and survive.
Burrow Fumigants Registered Products Ignitable Gas Cartridges - General Use Pesticide The Giant Destroyer Atlas Chemical Corp Dexol Gopher Gasser Dexol Industries Gas Cartridge USDA Pocatello Supply Depot Aluminum Phosphide (Tablets/Pellets) - Restricted Use Pesticide Several registrants Use Directions: Place in burrows then seal with soil.
Best results occur when soil moisture is high.
Efficacy is reduced in dry, porous soils which allows gas to escape into soil structure and slows release of phosphine gas from aluminum phosphide fumigants.
Limitations: Cost and labor limit use to small acreages and isolated populations.
Registered Rodenticides for Pocket Gophers Anticoagulant Grain Baits - General Use Pesticide Registered Products Rozol Pocket Gopher Bait (formulated on wheat) Lipha Tech Chem.
Use Directions: Make 2 to 3 four (4) oz placements per burrow system by probe and funnel method or hand placement in burrows.
Apply when gophers are actively building mounds.
Limitations: May require 5 to 10 lbs. of bait per acre.
Hand application is labor intensive making use over larger acreages difficult.
Application of Rozol grain bait by mechanical burrow builder is not recommended.
Important: Decrease in pocket gopher activity may take 2 weeks.
Retreat in areas of active mound building after two weeks.
Strychnine Grain Baits - May be classifed as either Registered Products Fort Dodge Gopher Bait Strychnine Treated Grain Bait Several Formulations Elston Gopher Getter Bait Restricted or General Use Fort Dodge Chemical, Inc.
USDA Pocatello Supply Depot Rue R. Elston, Inc.
Uses of strychnine baits for ground squirrel and praire dog control is an illegal and unregistered use..
Use Directions: Apply 2 to 3 one teaspoon placements per burrow system by probe and funnel method.
Apply by mechanical burrow builder at 1-2 lbs. per acre.
Make applications when gophers are actively building mounds.
Limitations: Acceptance of strychnine bait by pocket gophers is highly variable.
Adjust timing of application and bait formulation to determine what works best in your area.
Burrow builder operation limited to soil type and soil moisture that will form a clean burrow without collapsing.
Burrow Fumigants Registered Products See list under Ground Squirrels.
Use Directions: See Ground Squirrels.
Limitations: Not generally recommend for control of pocket gophers.
Fumigant gases in shallow, complex tunnels of pocket gophers disperse poorly resulting in poor control unless numerous applications are made in the same burrow system.
Registered Rodenticides for Prairie Dogs Zinc Phosphide Grain Baits - Restricted Use Pesticide Registered Products Zinc Phosphide on Steam-Rolled Oats - USDA Pocatello Supply Depot ZP Rodent Bait AG (prairie dog formulation, crimped oats) Bell Labs.
Hopkins's Zinc Phosphide Bait - Haco, Inc.
Zinc Phosphide Oat Bait - Hacco, Inc.
Use Directions: See Ground Squirrels.
Use Restrictions: See Ground Squirrels.
Burrow Fumigants: See Ground Squirrels for Registered Products, Use Direction 
Important: Where labels refer to restrictions for protection of the black-footed ferret consult with Fish and Wildlife authorities or the Montana Department of Agriculture before bait or fumigant application.
SAFETY PRACTICES FOR USE OF RODENTICIDES Safety in rodenticide use is important to prevent needless death or injury to people or nontarget animals.
Following a few simple, common sense precautions can avoid most potential accidents.
1.
Buy only enough rodent bait for a single season.
Strength of the toxicant usually does not weaken but in the case of grain baits the bait may dehydrate and may reduce its acceptability to rodents.
2.
Store the rodenticide in a locked, weather-tight, rodent proof area.
Mice feeding on rodent bait will be killed but they have a higher tolerance to many rodenticides and can cause considerable bait spillage.
Contamination of bait by mouse dropping or odors from other pesticides or petroleum products can reduce bait acceptance.
Bait that becomes wet may be reduced in strength or mold resulting in reduced effectiveness or poor acceptance.
3.
Keep the rodenticides in their original, labeled containers.
Grain baits and grain based pellets can easily be confused with livestock feed.
4.
Read and review the rodenticide labels before use each season.
Check for changes in use recommendations and use restrictions.
Understand procedures to follow in case of accidental poisoning.
5. Use calibrated dippers to apply bait at the label recommended amount.
6.
Do not over apply.
Results will not improve, cost will increase, and greater quantities of residual bait will remain increasing hazard to nontarget animals.
7.
When applying surface bait scatter the bait over a 2-3 square foot area near each active burrow.
Ground squirrels are surface foragers and not accustomed to finding the food in piles.
Piling bait increases hazard to livestock and wildlife.
Place bait on hard, bare ground or areas with short, sparce vegetation.
Bait placed in dense grass will usually go unfound by the squirrels.
8.
Do not apply bait in the burrow or on the soft mound dirt.
This usually results in the bait being soiled or buried rather than consumed.
Any residual exposed bait can present a hazard to nontarget animals.
9.
When applying bait keep excess bait in locked or latched storage.
Use canvas bags that can be zippered or tied shut when not in use.
Each year livestock are killed by feeding from open bait containers left unattended on the ground or in vehicles.
10.
Consider additional precautions when applying grain baits in areas frequented by waterfowl or other seed eating birds.
Time applications during periods when waterfowl are not using the area.
Patrol or use scare devices to keep waterfowl from the area for several days after bait application.
Consider use of alternative control methods such as burrow fumigants or bait stations in areas frequented by waterfowl or other seed eating birds.
11.
Dispose of poisoned squirrel carcasses when practical to reduce risks to predators and scavengers.
Bury carcasses individually in burrows to prevent concentration of poisoned carcasses.
Use gloves and a shovel to avoid contact with external parasites that may transmit diseases to humans.
12.
Notify nearby neighbors of your bait application.
Suggest confinement of dogs, cats or other animals for a period of time after bait application.
13.
Destroy empty bait sacks.
Do not reuse for other purposes.
14.
Cut or untied bait bags carefully to prevent dust from billowing from bait containers.
Stand up wind when transferring bait.
FOR INFORMATION ON OR ASSISTANCE WITH THE MANAGEMENT OF RODENTS OR OTHER VERTEBRATE PESTS CONTACT: Montana Department of Agriculture Vertebrate Pest Program P.O. Box 200201 Helena, MT 59620-0201 (406) 444-5400 [TDD 406-444-4687] BULLETINS: The Columbian Ground Squirrel.
Its Biology and Control The Richardson Ground Squirrel.
Its Biology and Control Managing Ground Squirrels with Bait Stations Controlling Burrowing Rodents with Burrow Fumigants Rozol Ground Squirrel Bait - Proper Use Practices Pocket Gopher Control Techniques Prairie Dog Control Using Zinc Phosphide Effectively In Helena: Daniel Sullivan Phone - (406) 444-5400 In Billings: Monty Sullins Phone - (406) 652-3615
VIDEOS: Managing Prairie Dogs in Montana - 1992 (23 minutes) Managing Richardson Ground Squirrels in Montana - 1994 (23 minutes) Managing Columbian Ground Squirrels in Montana - 1995 (22 minutes) Managing Pocket Gophers in Montana - 1994 (15 minutes) Pocket Gopher Control in the Yard and Garden - 1994 (13 minutes) Pocket Gopher Control Using Mechanical Burrow Builders - 1994 (13 minutes)
MONTANA POISON CONTROL INFORMATION 1-800-525-5042 ROCKY MOUNTAIN POISON CENTER 1-800-322-3073
