New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Long Island City Business Development Corporation's Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) Background The Long Island City Business Development Corporation (LICBDC) is a non-profit organization dedicated to improving the business environment in western Queens (New York City) with programs that enhance productivity and profitability of local firms.
Long Island City is New York State's largest and most diversified industrial center outside of Manhattan with over 2,100 firms employing almost 65,000 workers.
In 1993, LICBDC developed the Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) to aid local businesses with improving their waste management practices and to help them minimize their costs.
Firms in the area are in danger of leaving New York City or going out of business because of high costs, tend to be relatively small quantity waste generators and often have problematic waste streams which are difficult to reduce, reuse or recycle.
It is estimated that each of these firms lose about $5,000 to $15,000 per year in missed opportunities to save money and/or create revenue through purchasing secondary inputs/feedstocks and reducing, selling and recycling their waste materials.
Unfortunately, these firms often lack the in-house resources to cost-effectively address their waste management problems.
Project Description This two-year technical assistance project allowed LIBDC to assist firms through two programs from January 1996 to December 1997.
Through INWRAP staff provide hands-on technical Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: INWRAP 29-10 Thomson Ave, Long Island City, NY 11101 Queens John Okun 718.786.5300 ext. 24 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 assistance to better equip company managers to make the changes needed for reducing their waste management costs.
INWRAP staff conduct facility assessments and then assist firms with implementing recommended operational, purchasing, and waste management improvements.
Through the NYS Wa$te Match materials exchange, they assist firms with selling buying or donating secondary materials.
In both programs, shared savings or revenues are negotiated with the firms served, generating over $25,000 per year in revenue to INWRAP.
Results INWRAP saves local businesses over $237,000 per year in avoided disposal and purchase costs while diverting over 3,000 tons per year from disposal.
In one example, INWRAP assisted Premier Brands of America, an insole manufacturer, to segregate, bale and recycle 12 tons of old corrugated cardboard per month, diverting this material from disposal and saving the company $12,785 per year in avoided disposal costs.
INWRAP's unique approach to brokering materials for reuse through the materials exchange and its hands-on approach to direct company assistance has earned it the City Club of New York's 1995 Good Business Earthling Award, the National Council for Urban Economic Development's 1996 Economic Development Program Silver Award and a 1997 USEPA Environmental Quality Award.
Investment: NYS EIP Investment: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $85,000 $129,548 $214,548 Dec 1997
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary East Williamsburg Valley Industrial Development Corporation Background The East Williamsburg Valley Industrial Development Corporation (EWVIDCO) is a local economic development organization with a mission to promote economic development and improve conditions for manufacturers in North Brooklyn, area of New York City.
Since EWVIDCO was already providing services to these firms, the organization was well positioned to add a program allowing them to assist their clients with waste reduction.
Components of EWVDICO's Waste Assessment and Reduction Program (WRAP) were adapted from the neighboring Long Island City Business Development Corporation's Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP).
Project Description The purpose of this technical assistance project was to help area businesses reduce costs associated with the management and disposal of their solid waste, and to help businesses increase revenues from the sale of recyclable or reusable materials.
The targets for the project were to assist 50 companies, establish programs to divert 650 tons per year of solid waste from disposal, reduce costs or generate revenues for the companies by $35,000 per year, and facilitate 50 waste exchanges that would Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: EWVIDCO 11-29 Catherine Street Brooklyn, NY 11211 Kings Mr. Jose Leon 718.388.7287 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 produce one-time, benefits of $20,000.
Results Business clients of EWVIDCO reduced costs or increased revenues totaling $59,174, of which $42,753 were recurring monetary benefits and $16,421 were one-time benefits resulting from successful waste exchanges.
EWVIDCO was able to collect $2,639 in revenues through shared savings arrangements with their clients.
The WRAP had three components.
First, EWVIDCO conducted waste assessments and developed waste minimization programs for 10 clients, creating $36,329 in avoided disposal costs and recycling revenues and reducing or recycling 438 tons of material.
Second, EWVDICO established a materials exchange database through which 32 transactions occurred saving or earning participants $16,421 from the exchange of 25 tons of material.
Finally, EWVIDCO prepared four industry-specific waste minimization guides and distributed them to 34 clients.
The industries targeted were food, textile and apparel, wood products and the warehousing/distribution industries.
Through suggestions written in the guide books and technical assistance provided by EWVIDCO staff, six companies identified a total of $6,424 in waste disposal savings or recycling revenues.
Investment: NYS EIP Investment: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $39,180 $44,401 $83,581 Jan 1997 non-recurring monetary
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary SUNY Research Foundation (on behalf of SUNY Stony Brook) Company Background SUNY Stony Brook is situated in Suffolk County NY.
The campus population of 28,000 generated more than 7,000 tons of solid waste in 1995 at a cost of over $700,000 to the University.
The campus has 121 building locations where solid waste is generated on an 1100-acre site.
It conducted waste audits showing that 50 percent of the solid waste consisted of materials that could be recycled.
At the time, several pilot recycling programs were in operation at various campus locations.
Project Description The project was to finance a campus-wide collection program for recyclable materials.
The University sought assistance to buy collection containers for placement around the campus and it was committed to covering other equipment costs and educational and operational expenses associated with the program.
The targets for the program were to: 1) divert 1,500 tons/year of material, (2) avoid disposal costs of $63,000, and (3) generate $20,000/year in revenues from sales of recovered materials.
Project Results The University had increased its recovery of commingled containers and mixed paper by 112 tons per year.
There were no revenues from sales reported.
The disposal cost savings could not be Contractor: calculated because there were no cost figures that netted the recycling costs out of the avoided disposal fees.
Implementation quickly bogged down by the sheer enormity of the task to set-up a large-scale program for a population that turned over so frequently.
Other problems emerged with regard to the roll-off containers where the sleeve sizes were not compatible with those of the contract hauler's collection vehicles.
The original recycling coordinator left, and program management was delayed until a new coordinator could be hired.
The new coordinator discovered that the targets were too ambitious.
Sales revenues assumed that container processors would pay for commingled bottles and cans.
The costs of the University setting up and operating its own processing facility far outweighed any revenues that could be obtained from sales of sorted and baled material.
Benefits There are environmental benefits from a University the size of Stony Brook implementing a campus-wide recycling program.
However, in the absence of a complete cost accounting that compares the costs of recycling with disposal, the economic benefits are merely speculative.
Lessons Learned None identified Investment:
County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
SUNY Research Foundation SUNY Stony Brook Office of Research Services Stony Brook, NY 11794-3366 Suffolk Michael Youdelman, Recycling and Waste Management Coordinator 516.632.9673 Randal Coburn 518.292.5340
NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$33,734 $62,968 $96,702 Dec 1999
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Rochester Institute of Technology, Eliminate Waste, Allowing You Savings (RITEWAY$) Background The RITEWAY$ Program was designed as a waste reduction assistance service that hired graduate, coop students studying environmental management to identify and help implement solid waste prevention and recycling opportunities at local businesses.
Project Description RITEWAY$ proposed to: · Provide a permanent, ongoing solid waste prevention service for businesses in Western, NY; · Develop a methodology for making these services self-supporting; · Create a tool for training new solid waste professionals, including hands-on experience; · Address the solid waste and economic impacts of the work on participating businesses; and, · Produce a documented and transferable solid waste reduction training format.
By fulfilling these objectives, 10 RIT co-op students would achieve $125,000 in savings for Rochesterarea businesses and earn $50,000 in shared-savings from the benefiting companies to help the program become self-supporting and ensure its continuation.
Project Results Eight students worked 12 quarters and identified $465,000 in estimated savings opportunities at nine Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: Rochester Institute of Technology 31 Lomb Memorial Drive Rochester, NY 14445 Monroe County John Morelli, Chair Environmental Management 716.475.7213 Brenda Grober 518.292.5340 firms.
At the close of the one-year project, actual, measured savings came to $64,000.
RITEWAY$ earned $45,950 from its assistance efforts.
Project Learnings Estimates were reported, as it was often impossible to tally exact savings.
RITEWAY$ students were to identify opportunities, but execution of recommended actions was left to clients.
Eight students participated instead of 10 because it was useful to keep experienced co-ops for two quarters to train new students.
Co-ops identified opportunities for reducing waste, and related savings from decreased disposal costs and raw material purchases.
Although these usually would justify a financial contribution to RITEWAY$, it was too difficult to ask firms to pay based on potential savings.
So, RITEWAY$ began charging $525/week, per student for its services.
This money was used to pay the student and contribute to the program.
Initially, students were to analyze facility operations and assess solid waste management practices.
This often left little or no time to act on findings.
The approach was revised so an initial evaluation only identified the reduction and recycling opportunities.
Detailed studies of operations were put off until after these were identified.
A second assessment fee would then be imposed if the company wanted to proceed.
If not, the student would move on to a new client.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $50,620 $63,926 $114,546 Apr 1998
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Research Project Summary Auxiliary Services, State University of New York College at Oswego, Inc.
Background SUNY Oswego managed solid waste and recyclable material with campus equipment and personnel.
Recyclable materials were delivered to the Oswego County Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) at no charge.
College personnel questioned whether this system was financially optimal since the college assumed the entire cost of recycling without obtaining any financial benefit in the form of revenues from the sale of recyclable material, or avoided disposal costs.
In addition, the collection equipment was nearing the end of its useful life, creating added expenses for repairs and impending costs for replacement.
Project Description The project was designed to increase recycling rates, gain revenues from the sale of materials, and find ways to reduce waste management costs.
Laidlaw Waste Systems was hired to audit the campus waste streams and propose a plan for increasing recycling and reducing waste.
The college began to implement the plan and prepared a Request for Proposals (RFP) to outsource collection and recycling services.
Findings and Conclusions The RFP was not issued during the contract period.
However, the process of preparing the RFP did generate discussions among the departments at the college having the most impact on solid waste generation and waste management costs.
The largest single generator of solid waste on campus is the Auxiliary Services Corporation (57% of the total) whose contribution to waste management costs is far Contractor: below 57 percent of total costs.
For the Auxiliary Services to contribute its fair share to waste management costs, it needed to reduce financial support of other important campus programs.
It was not determined how best to do this.
Issuance of the RFP was also delayed because of collective bargaining agreements between the University and the unions.
Management at SUNY Oswego could not simply outsource a function traditionally accomplished by union workers.
Instead, management needed to negotiate terms with the unions and ensure compliance with existing contracts.
Implementation of Study Findings Some additional progress was made in reducing the generation and recycling of solid waste at the University.
The dining halls changed purchasing and operational practices to minimize packaging and other waste.
Custodial operations switched to a proportioned control system, eliminating packaging normally associated with cleaning products.
The campus began collecting scrap metal and marketing it to a local scrap dealer.
Campus waste generation was reduced by 102 tons during the course of the project.
Future Implications Efforts to address the challenges to outsourcing continue and campus personnel continue to improve waste and recycling methods.
Nonetheless, as is the case in many organizations, the lack of cost awareness and/or financial return to individual units is a major disincentive for managers of those units to participate in solid waste reduction and recycling programs.
Investment:
Aux.
Services, SUNY Oswego
Room 507, Culkin Hall Oswego, New York, 13126 County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: Oswego George Stooks, Assistant Director, Phys.
Plant 315.341.3300 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $4,050 $7,960 $12,010 Sept 1998
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary Tioga County Industrial Development Agency (on behalf of Upstate Shredding, LLC) Company Background Ben Weitsman and Son, Inc. is upstate New York's largest scrap metal processor and recycling center and has been in operation in Tioga County since 1938.
Prior to the project, Weitsman and Son lacked on-site scrap metal shredding capacity and brokered materials to steel mills and out-of-state shredding operations in the Northeast, Midwest and South.
Consequently, much of the value-added from the processing and marketing of scrap metal directly to steel mills and foundries was being lost.
To address this problem, Weitsman and Son created Upstate Shredding LLC, a full-scale, state-of-the-art metal shredding operation on 16 acres in the Tioga County Industrial Park, Owego, NY. Project Description The total project included land acquisition, site and infrastructure development and purchase of machinery and equipment totaling over $20 million.
Ten inches of concrete were laid over twelve acres to control run-off and mud.
A rail spur was brought directly to the site.
The shredder itself cost $3.2 million and is four stories high.
A three-month supply of flattened automobiles, light iron and appliances was aggregated at the site prior to start up.
The project included the acquisition and installation of an eddy current separation unit.
The unit separates non-ferrous metals, (aluminum, copper, brass, bronze and stainless steel) from the "shredder fluff," the mix of non-ferrous, fabric, Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: Tioga County IDA 56 Main Street Owego, NY 13827 Tioga LeeAnn Tinney 607-687-8259 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 plastic and some ferrous that exits the shredder after the majority of ferrous has been separated.
Because of the eddy current, Upstate can market a high percentage of non-ferrous metal rather than disposing of it along with the shredder fluff.
In August 1998, no other shredding operation in the Northeast had this system in place allowing them to produce such a pure non-ferrous stream.
Project Results The new shredding operation has an annual capacity of about 180,000 tons.
Nearly 80% of the material passing through the shredder is generated within NYS and about 60% of that is comprised of non-automobile scrap.
In total, 7,200 tons/month of material generated by NYS businesses and municipalities that was formerly sent to landfill (15%) or brokered by Weitsman (85%) is now processed at Upstate Shredding.
Benefits Upstate is now able to pay customers a better price than before when material was simply being brokered.
NYS businesses and municipalities are benefiting through increased revenues on the scrap they formerly brokered through Weitsman, and avoided disposal costs and new sales revenue on the low grade material that formerly went to landfill for lack of local markets.
Using 1998 prices, this translates into about $4 million per year in improved operating expenses at NYS businesses and municipalities.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $ 300,000 $3,332,115 $3,632,115 Aug 1998
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary East Williamsburg Valley Industrial Development Corporation Background The East Williamsburg Valley Industrial Development Corporation (EWVIDCO) is a local development organization with a mission to promote economic development and improve conditions for manufacturers in North Brooklyn.
The organization, through its Industrial Waste Assessment and Reduction Program (WARP), seeks to identify recycling, reselling and reuse opportunities in production and disposal process.
Specifically, the program provides waste assessments, technical assistance on waste issues and operates a materials exchange program for businesses in North Brooklyn.
Project Description The project was designed to assist EWVIDCO expand its existing Industrial Waste Assessment and Reduction Program (WARP).
EWVIDCO set targets to divert 2,150 tons from disposal, create cost savings of $171,250 and collect $33,000 in shared savings.
EWVIDCO also projected it would provide waste assessments and provide technical assistance to 16 companies, broker 100 material exchange transactions, publish two industry guidebooks and distribute 4,800 copies of its newsletter.
Contractor: Project Results The corporation only succeeded in diverting 174 tons of material.
It created $119,073 in cost savings for clients, but collected only $10,398 in shared savings.
EWVIDC exceeded their waste assessment target of 16 companies by one (17).
Technical assistance was provided to 13 companies.
Seventy-four (74) materials exchange transactions were brokered.
Only two of the eight seminars were held.
Seven issues of the newsletter were published and 5,600 copies were distributed.
Target shortfalls in part reflect the absence of a steady project manager and belie the considerable outreach effort undertaken by the corporation.
Several lessons can be drawn from this project.
First, it is important to recognize that larger companies are more apt or able to immediately implement recycling programs.
Second, nonprofit organizations have limited ability to pay for services.
Third, more up-front planning and analysis to better identify the solid waste materials targeted for reuse and recycling help to make the performance targets more realistic.
County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
East Williamsburg Valley Industrial Investment: Development Corporation.
11-29 Catherine Street Brooklyn, NY 11211 Kings NYS EIP: Contractor Mr. Jose Leon Match: 718.388.7287 Total: Tom Kacandes Completion Date: 518.292.5340
$100,756 $97,649 $198,405 Mar 1999
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Research Project Summary Center For Integrated Waste Management at SUNY Buffalo Background Findings and Conclusions By 1996, many industries in Western New York had initiated recycling or reduced their largest waste streams.
However, few had examined the potential for the remaining components of their waste streams to be used as raw materials by others, nor had they examined the potential to use waste streams generated by their neighbors in their own processes.
For this project, the Center for Integrated Waste Management at SUNY Buffalo constructed a Targeted Industrial Waste Inventory (TIWI) which identified and catalogued the physical and chemical characteristics of the solid waste streams generated by key sectors in Western New York.
The primary purpose of the inventory was to identify opportunities for companies within that region to make use of one another's by-products.
A secondary goal was to test the inventory process as a tool for EMIG to encourage recycling and reuse of industrial solid waste streams across all regions of the State.
Project Description The project served the largest industrial sectors (by employment) in the Western and Finger Lakes regions of NYS.
These included lumber and wood products; furniture and fixtures; rubber and miscellaneous plastics; stone, clay, glass and concrete; fabricated metal products; industrial and commercial machinery and electronics.
Fifty-five companies participated in the data collection effort.
Contractor: SUNY Buffalo CIWM 207 Jarvis Hall Buffalo, New York 14260-4400 Western NY, Finger Lakes Regions Lou Zicari 716.645.3446 ext. 2340 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 Several opportunities for recycling and reusing industrial by-products were identified.
Implementation of Study Findings CIWM assisted two of the largest producers of swarf, the grindings from metal working industries.
CIWM obtained a second RD
Once implemented, these solutions should save the two companies about $100,000 per year in avoided landfill costs.
CIWM also provided assistance to other companies in the stone, clay and concrete sector.
Specifically, CIWM helped companies obtain a beneficial use determination from the Department of Environmental Conservation so that their dust, sludge sand and concrete waste could be used in the construction industry.
Future Implications The small number of companies inventoried prevented extrapolation of the results to an entire region or state.
However the approach proved to be a cost effective means to identify waste types by sector and for identifying potential recycling and exchange opportunities.
Investment:
County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$37,099 $19,155 $56,254 Mar 1998
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Cornell Cooperative Extension Dutchess County (CCE)/ Dutchess County Environmental Management Council (EMC) Background In Dutchess County, the Environmental Management Council (EMC) is a program area of Cornell Cooperative Extension.
In 1995, the EMC, in collaboration with the Dutchess County Resource Recovery Agency, established a program to provide technical assistance on solid waste prevention and recycling to the businesses, citizens and institutions of the County.
At the time, 15 waste assessments for businesses and institutions had been completed and the EMC worked with each to produce an estimated annual reduction in solid waste of 23 tons and annual cost savings of $20,000.
The cost savings were in the form of lowered solid waste management and purchasing costs.
In addition, three seminars were conducted for 75 businesses on how to achieve cost savings through solid waste prevention and recycling.
Project Description The purpose of this technical assistance project was to provide support to the Cornell Cooperative Extension in its efforts to expand the Program.
The two-year expansion plan called for providing on-site waste assessments, developing cost-savings based waste reduction implementation plans, and implementing the developed strategies at 26 facilities in the health care, manufacturing, construction, and hotel sectors located in Dutchess or surrounding counties.
The project plan anticipated that solid waste generated by area businesses would Contractor: be reduced by a total of 850 tons, resulting in disposal savings of over $114,000 and purchasing savings of about $57,000.
Project Results Approximately 141 businesses were contacted during the project with 30 of these businesses implementing strategies to reduce solid waste based on recommendations, research, or actions to facilitate such strategies.
Sixty-four technical assistance/waste assessments were completed.
The project diverted 548 tons and resulted in avoided disposal costs of $42,000 and purchasing savings of about $74,000.
The project terminated five months earlier than expected and the targets were adjusted accordingly.
The program was able to document and define the barriers to waste reduction prevalent among the business community.
The greatest success was with return-to-vendor arrangements.
Small quantities of material generated at individual business establishments proved to be a limiting factor for implementing recycling programs.
Customers who benefited the most from technical assistance were those facing a loss in recycling services and those under pressure to meet housekeeping requirements for insurance or building code purposes.
The sectors most responsive to the services being offered through the Program were manufacturing and wholesale.
of Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $33,657 $48,164 $81,821 June 1999
Cornell Cooperative Extension Dutchess County Dutchess County: Contract Project Mark Wheeler, Waste Prevention Specialist Manager: 914.677.8223 x112 Phone: EIP Manager: Tom Kacandes 518.292.5340 Phone:
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary Onondaga County Industrial Development Authority Company Background Oberdorfer, L.L.C. casts complex aluminum parts for the aerospace and defense industries.
Its casting processes relied on 1950's era equipment, resulting in extensive rework and in-process scrap costs.
Along with the $66/ton costs of purchasing new sand and disposing of used sand for each casting, the plant's basic process inefficiencies created continuing losses at Oberdorfer.
As a new owner, parent company Citation faced closing the plant and laying off the entire workforce.
Project Description Through this capital project, Citation instead spent $10 million to replace the entire casting operation with modern equipment including nearly $1 million for a mold sand reclamation system.
Sand molds, after pouring and cooling are placed onto vibratory shaker tables to separate the sand and aluminum parts.
Sand clumps are broken down in a mill and fed into a Simpson reclaim unit which thermally scrubs the sand free of most casting binder.
The reclaimed sand is inventoried in a 200-ton reclaim silo.
A 70/30 reclaim/virgin sand blend is transported for use in new molds.
Project Results The project target was to avoid sand purchase and disposal costs equal to $270,000 annually and retain Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: Onondaga County Industrial Development Authority Onondaga 165 jobs.
Actual avoided sand purchase and disposal costs have ranged from $270,000 to over $300,000 per year.
The clear success of the recycling project was not sufficient to offset other issues in Oberdorfer's business that led Citation to move toward closing the plant.
Instead, the company was saved when purchased by Advance Metals Group, L.L.C. in June 1999, who presently employ 99 full-time workers.
Benefits The sand reclamation system was fully operational by May, 1998 and recovered 6,493 tons as of December 10, 1999 avoiding a purchase price of $46/ton and disposal of $20/ton.
In addition, the shape of the recovered sand has some advantages over virgin sand, resulting in better quality castings.
Lessons Learned Oberdorfer is typical of longstanding foundries in need of significant modernization and increased competitiveness through process efficiencies, such as sand reclamation.
Foundry operations have a distinct opportunity to employ recovery technology with reasonable payback periods allowing for reuse of most of their molding sand while also avoiding the disposal of thousands of tons of used-once sand.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $400,000
Mr. Donald Western 315.435.3770 Tom Kacandes 518.292.5340
$442,783 $842,783 Dec 1998
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Phoenix Recycling and Maintenance, Inc.
Background A not-for-profit agency, the Institute for Community Living, Inc.
(ICL) manages an extensive network of residential and commercial property in Brooklyn.
Waste reduction or recycling were not part of ICL's services, and were being required as a result of enactment of New York City's Local Law 19.
Project Description ICL would create a subsidiary, Phoenix Recycling and Maintenance, Inc., that would hire at least 20 individuals with psychiatric and/or developmental disabilities to provide waste prevention and recycling services to 17 institutions in Brooklyn, and at least 15 businesses located at the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
EIP funds would be used to hire experts from Rainbow Recycling Inc., of Staten Island, and Hammer Environmental Consulting, Inc. to provide technical assistance and training to Phoenix staff as well as employees of the institutions to be served.
Phoenix would sort and transport weighed recyclables to a centralized site to be located in the Brooklyn Navy Yard.
Phoenix staff would aggregate and package the sorted materials, and arrange for their shipment to various markets.
Experts from Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: Hammer Consulting would also work with the benefiting facilities to help renegotiate waste management contracts based on actual reductions in waste generated.
Project Results In total, 37 individuals were hired to carry out Phoenix Recycling's mission.
On-site training and recycling programs were developed for 13 of the 17 residential and day centers.
Unfortunately, after many months of unsuccessful negotiations with representatives of the Brooklyn Navy Yard, which focused primarily on legal issues related to the creation of an internal waste management program at the Navy Yard, an agreement was never reached.
So instead, Phoenix proposed pursuing a different strategy for offering waste reduction to ICL-managed facilities.
Phoenix would purchase and implement a "vermicomposting system" to reduce and divert organic wastes from its clients' facilities and reduce waste management costs.
Unfortunately, by May, 2000 this project had still not gotten off the ground, and EIP's involvement was terminated.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $1,051 $1,051 $2,102 Mar 1999
Institute for Community Living, Inc.
New York Paul W. Shumsker 212.385.3030 Ext. 109 Brenda Grober 518.292.5340
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Long Island City Business Development Corporation's Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) Background The Long Island City Business Development Corporation (LICBDC) is a non-profit organization dedicated to improving the business environment in western Queens (New York City) with programs that enhance productivity and profitability of local firms.
Long Island City is New York State's largest and most diversified industrial center outside of Manhattan with over 2,100 firms employing almost 65,000 workers.
In 1993, LICBDC developed the Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) to aid local businesses with improving their waste management practices and to help them minimize their costs.
Firms in the area are in danger of leaving New York City or going out of business because of high costs, tend to be relatively small quantity waste generators and often have problematic waste streams which are difficult to reduce, reuse or recycle.
It is estimated that each of these firms lose about $5,000 to $15,000 per year in missed opportunities to save money and/or create revenue through purchasing secondary inputs/feedstocks and reducing, selling and recycling their waste materials.
Project Description This two-year technical assistance project allowed LIBDC to assist firms through two programs from January 1997 to December 1999.
INWRAP provides companies with access to the citywide "NY Wa$teMatch" materials exchange and staff assist firms with selling, buying or donating materials Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: INWRAP 29-10 Thomson Ave, Long Island City, NY 11101 Queens John Okun 718.786.5300 ext. 24 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340 through the exchange.
Staff actively broker matches for the firms and provide hands-on technical assistance.
This assistance better equips company managers to make the changes needed to reduce waste management costs.
INWRAP staff conduct facility assessments and then assist firms with implementing recommended operational, purchasing, and waste management improvements.
Results INWRAP saved local businesses just under $500,000.
A total of 229 companies engaged in transactions through NY Wa$teMatch with INWRAP's assistance.
Through 467 one-time or on-going transactions, INWRAP-assisted firms diverted 2,885 tons of material to recycling or reuse, saving them $261,479 in avoided disposal and purchasing costs.
INWRAP assisted 27 firms to divert 3,211 tons of material, saving them $238,039.
Both programs generated savings to the firms that were shared with LIBDC.
During the period of this project, shared savings produced $59,735 in revenues for the program.
INWRAP's unique approach to creating results earned it the City Club of New York's 1995 Good Business Earthling Award, the National Council for Urban Economic Development's 1996 Economic Development Program Silver Award and a 1997 USEPA Environmental Quality Award.
NYS EIP Investment: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$128,800 $187,712 $316,512 Dec 1999
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Western New York Technology Development Center, Inc.
Background The Western New York Technology Development Center (TDC) is a not-for-profit corporation whose mission is to strengthen, expand and diversify the technology and manufacturing base in Western New York.
The TDC has been in operation since 1982 and is part of the national Manufacturing Extension Partnership.
Project Description The purpose of this technical assistance project was for the TDC to integrate solid waste prevention assistance into its outreach efforts to businesses.
The TDC was slated to perform formal and informal Waste Reduction Opportunity Analyses at 49 companies and committed to saving them $100,000 per year in aggregate by helping businesses address inefficiencies in their production processes.
Project Results Twenty-two of the companies chose to implement recommended improvements on their own, 22 did not respond and five companies (for a total of six projects) engaged the TDC to assist with Implementation Projects.
The TDC charged businesses for the projects.
Half that cost was supported through the EIP. Savings were tracked through a TDC survey mailed 12 - 18 months after each project was completed.
Contractor: The five companies that engaged the TDC to conduct implementation projects were: Borg Warner, Inc.; Enviropac, Inc./Fibercel (2 projects); Flexovit Inc; Motorola Automotive 
These companies had begun saving, in aggregate, approximately $803,400 per year, the vast majority at Fieldbrook Farms, that made a capital investment to improve process efficiencies at the TDC's recommendation.
The savings figure is likely to increase once surveys are collected from Motorola and Enviropac Inc./Fibercel.
TDC projects at these companies were completed too close to end of the contract to mail out surveys before it closed.
Although project results were ultimately very positive, the "conversion rate" was low ­ only five of the 49 companies assessed hired the TDC for further assistance.
The project, originally estimated to take two years, took over 3 years.
The TDC attributes the low conversion rate to the generally low value of the savings identified by the Opportunity Analyses.
Companies that engaged the TDC were the exception.
The TDC project managers believe that technical assistance projects that are focused on pre-determined sets of companies faced with specific waste management/cost issues are likely to be more successful.
Investment:
County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
Western New York Technology Development Center, Inc. 1576 Sweet Home Rd. Amherst, New York 14228 Erie Ms. Melissa Kelly-McCabe 716.
636.3626 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340
NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$100,000 $118,172 $218,172 Feb 2001
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Research Project Summary Center For Integrated Waste Management at SUNY Buffalo Background In 1998, the SUNY at Buffalo Center for Integrated Waste Management completed a Targeted Industrial Waste Inventory (TIWI) of industrial establishments in Western NY.
The purpose was to characterize the industrial non-hazardous solid waste generated by key sectors in Western New York.
One particular industrial waste, metal grinding swarf, was identified as a good candidate for further research.
Swarf is a mixture of small metal particles, cooling fluids, lubricants, and residuals from grinding media such as abrasive belts or stone wheels.
It is typically high in liquid content due to the cooling/cutting fluids used in the grinding process.
The mixture of liquids and fine particles makes swarf difficult to manage.
Project Description The purpose of the project was to create recycling opportunities for swarf generated by two companies in the metal working industry by identifying: potential categories of end-uses for the material, specific end-users within those categories, enduser's material specifications, and by analyzing the feasibility for the companies to recycle their swarf.
Findings and Conclusions Several potential end uses were identified as well as specific companies within those end use categories.
It was determined that end-user specifications for accepting swarf could be met given the physical and Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: SUNY Buffalo CIWM 207 Jarvis Hall Buffalo, New York 14260-4400 Erie Lou Zicari 716.645.3446 ext. 2340 Randal Coburn 518.292.5340 chemical characteristics of the swarf generated by the two participating companies, and, technologies for preparing the material to maximize market value were found.
Implementation of Study Findings One of the companies purchased a coolant recovery technology that will save it over $70,000 per year in avoided transportation and disposal costs, and lower its purchases of coolant.
It is currently marketing its swarf to a steel mill.
Through increased awareness of the value of its swarf, the other company was able to renegotiate its waste management service contract and reduce costs by $15,000/year.
The contractor agreed to recycle the swarf with the company's other metal by-products, instead of disposing it as a special industrial waste.
Future Implications There are many factors that determine whether it is cost-effective to recycle metal grinding swarf and no "one size fits all" solution to managing this material.
Nonetheless, this project showed that there are options for companies to consider that can save money.
This project also illustrated the importance for companies generating industrial wastes to focus attention on alternatives to disposal.
Those that do are better positioned to keep waste management pricing and services more competitive.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $50,621 $20,819 $71,440 May 1999
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Long Island Forum for Technology (LIFT) Background Project Results LIFT provides direct technical assistance to Long Island manufacturers and strategic services to the high technology industry sector.
LIFT is a national Manufacturing Extension Center and the NYS designated Technology Development Organization (TDO) for Long Island.
LIFT provides a range of business programs and technical seminars to help strengthen the Long Island economy.
Project Description For this project, LIFT would be acting on behalf of the NY Manufacturing Extension Partnership (MEP).
MEP is a nationwide network of not-forprofit centers whose purpose is to provide small and medium-sized manufacturers with technical assistance.
The objective would be to evaluate a method for providing technical assistance to printers by training MEP field engineers in techniques for conducting on-site manufacturing assessments focused on waste reduction, pollution prevention and efficient materials use.
In Phase Two of the project, the field engineers would provide assessments using knowledge gained during the training.
Anticipated results were to conduct 20 assessments that would save printers' $1.2 million annually and divert 2,400 tons of waste from disposal.
The training was done at the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) Center for Integrated Manufacturing Studies.
Six MEP field engineers attended.
The training was highlighted by an onsite assessment at a local printer, Cohber Press.
High Technology of Rochester (HTR) followed up with Cohber and identified $200,000 in savings from process improvements and waste reduction opportunities.
LIFT found that the printing industry was not highly receptive to this type of technical assistance, even when offered free of charge.
Non-profit centers affiliated with the MEP have encountered this difficulty with the printing industry in the past when reaching out to companies in the industry for both general manufacturing extension services as well as the more targeted environmental services.
Consequently, only two assessments were completed for this project.
Nonetheless, the success of HTR with Cohber suggests that there is potential value for this service in the printing industry if companies that are receptive and supportive can be identified.
An important factor that led to success with Cohber was that RIT had an existing relationship with the company ­ a relationship that provided HTR with an entry and enabled the organization to work productively with Cohber.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $21,113 $24,946 $46,059 Dec 1999
Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
Long Island Forum for Technology SUNY Farmingdale, Ward Hall Farmingdale, NY 11735 Nassau Anne G. Dillenbeck 631.755.3321 Randal Coburn 518.292.5340
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary County of Oswego IDA (on behalf of Alcan Aluminum Corp.)
Company Background Alcan Aluminum Corporation is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Alcan Aluminum Ltd., a Canadian company employing 33,000 worldwide in the manufacture of aluminum products.
The Oswego Works facility is Alcan's only New York State operation.
Oswego Works is the largest of seven, integrated facilities in Alcan's Sheet Products Group, with 741 full-time employees.
Project Description The purpose of this capital project was to convert the Oswego plant from a manual to an automated "Glama" system for lifting, staging and moving large crucibles of molten aluminum used beverage cans (UBCs) and can scrap from the recycle area to the melt and cast furnaces.
The new system was designed to alleviate human handling and related safety factors, and increase crucible size to allow for more molten metal to be moved faster, increase consumption of scrap aluminum, increase output, and eliminate third-party purchases of raw materials.
Project Results Alcan's Oswego Works consumed 27,000 more tons of scrap aluminum than it had in 1998, and increased annual output by 15,100 tons.
Consumption of UBCs grew by 8,150 tons/year (from 83,650 tons in 1998 to 91,800 tons in 2000), and its use of can sheet waste grew by 18,850 tons (from 40,250 tons Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: County of Oswego IDA 44 West Bridge Street Oswego, NY 13126 Oswego County Pamela Caraccioli 315.343.1545 Brenda Grober 518.292.5340 The investment proved more valuable than anticipated and Oswego Works is being showcased as a model facility by Alcan Aluminum Ltd.
The plant now operates more efficiently and has eliminated critical ergonomic and safety risk factors related to molten metal handling.
It has reduced waste, and increased recycling capacity and output while reducing costs.
These benefits have improved the facility's competitive standing and helped assure that the plant will continue to operate in New York.
In addition, this project benefited New York's recycling community.
Although Oswego Works did not identify specific suppliers contributing to the increase in UBCs consumption, plant managers reported that at least 22,000 tons of UBCs (24% of its supply) are generated in New York.
The plant is also recycling can sheet scrap generated by all its New York customers.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $450,000 $2,132,528 $2,582,528 Dec 2000 in 1998 to 59,100 tons in 2000).
An unexpected shutdown in 2000 kept the plant from using even more UBCs.
It is anticipated that Oswego Works will use at least 96,000 tons UBCs/year.
By eliminating third-party purchases of sheet ingot, Alcan saved $1.25 million.
Also, as a result of using Glama trucks with larger crucibles, Alcan was able to de-commission a secondary melting operation, saving another $700,000/year.
Benefits
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary Monroe County Department of Environmental Services Company Background Since 1991 Monroe County has had a successful commercial recycling program.
Several Monroe County businesses expressed a willingness and desire to expand their recycling programs beyond the current mandatory materials if: 1) the county provided a processing facility with the capability to handle commingled recyclable materials, 2) the outlet remained available throughout all market cycles, and 3) the facility was centrally located.
In order to take advantage of this opportunity, Monroe County decided to develop a multi-materials facility for handling and processing commercially generated solid and non-hazardous industrial wastes for recycling.
The facility would be located in a former Resource Recovery facility, owned by the county and operated by a private contractor on a fee per ton basis.
The location was crucial because it takes advantage of an underutilized facility with ready access to the highway system.
The facility is adjacent to both the county's transfer station and to the municipal recycling facility.
The site is already permitted as a solid waste transfer station so little additional permitting work would be required.
Project Description The project included building renovations and installation of new equipment consisting primarily of conveyor systems, platforms and sorting stations.
The facility operator contributed a baler as part of its agreement with the county.
Materials enter the recycling facility in two ways.
Select loads of industrial and/or commercial materials are directed from the adjacent transfer station to a conveyor which moves them into the facility for sorting.
Residue is re-conveyed back to the transfer station for disposal.
Clean loads of material are sent directly to the facility tipping floor for processing.
Project Results In the first seven months of operation, 24,000 tons of industrial and commercially generated materials were processed through the facility, 9,500 tons of which were marketed.
As more companies become aware of the facility's existence and benefits to them, it is expected that the facility will eventually achieve a throughput of about 60,000 tons/year and an output of 26,000 tons/year.
Through a special arrangement with the county, the facility gainfully employs 18 full time equivalent people, most of whom previously received Social Services benefits.
Lessons Learned The key lesson learned is that given the opportunity to recycle easily and economically, businesses will respond.
They will be quite willing to do more than the minimum required.
Investment:
Contractor:
Monroe County Department of Environmental Services 50 West Main Street Rochester, New York 14614 Monroe County
County: Contractor Project Manager: Phone: EIP Project Manager: Phone:
Russell Rutkowski 585.760.7610 x 7515 James Gilbert 585.325.1944
NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$250,000 $859,442 $1,109,442 July 2000
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Research Project Summary Bronx Overall Economic Development Corporation (BOEDC) Background In 1997, a working group of volunteers convened by the Bronx Borough President was asked to develop a solid waste management system for the borough in light of the pending closure of the Freshkills landfill.
One of the key policy tenets in the plan was the idea of mining the urban wastes to turn an environmental burden into an opportunity for new jobs, businesses, and economic activity.
One concept put forth by the group was the creation of a Recycling Industrial Park.
Seeing promise in this idea, the Borough President assembled a project team to undertake a more in-depth analysis of the concept.
Project Description The purpose of this project was to determine the feasibility of developing a recycling industrial park in the Bronx that could serve the interests of existing recycling based businesses and to help new recycling enterprises get established.
The project team set out to examine whether existing recyclingbased businesses could benefit if their activities were coordinated and organized into an "in-place" industrial park, and/or whether a cluster of businesses should be relocated to a new industrial park location.
Findings and Conclusions The study results indicate that the development of a Recycling Industrial Park in the Bronx is feasible.
Several major material segments that are largely available for enterprise development were identified, Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: BOEDC 198 E. 161st Street Bronx, NY 12204 Bronx Andrew Hyman, General Counsel 718.590.6201 Tom Kacandes 518.292.5340 Additional funding was secured in 1999 from Con Edison, BOEDC, ESD and others to create cooperative routing and marketing plans for existing businesses and to attract new businesses to the area.
Future Implications If the technical assistance project is successful in helping existing businesses expand through cooperative marketing and routing and/or in attracting new recycling businesses, this may assist BOEDC in developing a recycling industrial park.
All progress in this direction helps the Bronx ameliorate the negative effects of its concentration of waste hauling and transfer stations while advancing economic development in the borough.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $75,000 $44,818 $119,818 Apr 2000 including: tires, organic materials, food scraps, wood, sawdust, pane glass, mixed cullet, used building materials, plastic film, industrial plastics, and textiles.
The team identified and evaluated more than 15 different companies and/or technologies that can create value-added products from these materials.
A Bronx recycling industrial park would likely be a combination of an "in-place" industrial park and a new development that would include both processing operations and manufacturers as well as several smaller operations that add value to materials through repair or remanufacture.
Implementation of Study Findings
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary High Technology of Rochester Business Waste Prevention Project Background Project Results High Technology of Rochester (HTR) is an affiliate of the National Manufacturing Extension Partnership, a program of the U.S. Department of Commerce.
HTR is part of a network of extension services created to help smaller manufacturing firms identify opportunities for increasing productivity and competitiveness.
Project Description Using resources and contacts already available through its "Maintenance Initiative," HTR field agents and other experts worked with a minimum of eight area manufacturers to assess opportunities and means for improving materials management at a facility.
HTR provided waste and process assessments, and when feasible, helped companies to implement strategies to address problems in production processes that were causing inefficient use of resources and related productivity losses.
The costs of the Program Services were shared with the companies.
Positive outcomes were to be promoted with other regional businesses.
Combined, over a two-year period these efforts were to yield at least $240,000 in savings for participating companies.
Over two years, 18 waste assessments, 16 process assessments, and eight implementation projects were completed.
Combined, the results of these efforts led to savings totaling over $405,000/year.
In addition, another $208,000 in potential savings were outlined, and are expected to be implemented.
Several of the companies, receiving waste or process assessments that required more detailed analyses to determine exactly how to proceed, also received assistance applying for and obtaining funds from Empire State Development's Industrial Effectiveness Program (IEP).
Four participating companies discovered that they needed to implement strategies that went beyond the scope of the HTR program, and applied for additional funding through the Environmental Investment Program.
Two subsequently received awards and are moving forward with implementation.
HTR has shown this program to be an effective mechanism for measuring the economic benefits of improved environmental performance and getting management support for process improvements that lead to waste reduction.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $64,308 $93,420 $157,728 March 2001
Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
High Technology of Rochester 5 United Way Rochester, NY 144604 Monroe County Richard W. Krause, PE 585.327.7930 Brenda Grober 518.292.5340
New York State Environmental Investment Program
Capital Project Summary Erie County IDA on behalf of Riefler Concrete Products, LLC Company Background Riefler Concrete operates seven concrete batch plants in the Buffalo area.
The Cheektowaga plant is their smallest and busiest.
Riefler produces 300,000 yards per year of concrete and generates $28,000,000.00 per year in sales revenues.
They have been in operation since 1954 and employ 200 people.
Prior to this project, Riefler was incurring excessive waste handling costs at the Cheektowaga facility because it lacked both the capacity and space to reuse concrete components on site.
Leftover ready mix concrete returned from job sites in mixer trucks was poured out on-site, allowed to harden and hauled to Riefler's Hamburg location where it was stockpiled (there is no room to stockpile waste concrete at the Cheektowaga facility.)
Some of this material was also occasionally tipped directly from the mixer trucks at Swift River Associates where it was then sold as clean fill.
Water from truck drum rinsing and truck exterior washing was allowed to collect in a basin, pumped out daily and trucked to Riefler's Hamburg facility where it was reused in the manufacture of new concrete.
Project Description Through this project, Riefler purchased an EnviroPort ready-mix concrete reclamation system.
The system captures leftover concrete mixture directly from returning trucks, separates and cleans the aggregate and sand and captures the truck rinse and wash water (which is more accurately a slurry of water and fine particles).
All of these materials can then be used in the manufacture of new concrete.
Contractor: The system measures and adjusts the specific gravity of the slurry before adding it to the manufacturing process.
Project Results Riefler is now saving $133,500 per year in: the avoided purchase of sand and aggregate, avoided dump truck rental charges (for hauling hardened concrete to Hamburg for stockpiling) and avoided labor and fuel costs (for hauling to Hamburg and Swift River).
There are 8,263 tons per year of sand and aggregate formerly dumped or used as fill is being recycled back into Riefler's Cheektowaga batch plant.
Benefits In addition to creating recycling and economic benefits, Riefler will permanently avoid any future potential for the Cheektowaga water storage basin to overflow into nearby surface waters.
Because of the Enviro-Port System, Riefler has begun to work with other concrete producers to encourage the NYS DOT to use recycled concrete.
Finally, Riefler is beginning to observe unanticipated opportunities to save on cement purchases.
Because it contains cement, the slurry produced and reused in the manufacture of new concrete lends that concrete strength qualities normally obtained from cement.
Riefler is quantifying by how much they may be able to reduce cement purchases and intends to begin doing so next year.
Erie County Industrial Development Investment: Agency Erie County: NYS EIP: Contract Project Contractor Match: David Kerchoff Manager: 716.856.6525 Phone: Total: ESU Project Completion Date: Manager: Linda Jacobs 518.292.5346 Phone:
$92,983 $213,317 $306,300 Sept. 2001
New York State Environmental Investment Program Capital Project Summary Onondaga County IDA on behalf of Syracuse China Company Company and Project Background Syracuse China is one of the leading manufacturers of ceramic dinnerware for the foodservice industry in the US.
Purchased in 1995, it is owned by Libbey Inc. of Toledo, Ohio.
Syracuse China, founded in 1871 as Onondaga Pottery, employs 420 people at this single location.
At the time the project was proposed, Syracuse China was operating three tunnel kilns using 63- year-old technology to fire bisque for whiteware ceramics.
The company proposed spending at least $7.3 million to completely replace these kilns with a single fast-fire, automatic kiln.
All of Syracuse China's domestic competitors were already employing the new technology.
The project would help them realize $1.8 million in savings in many areas throughout the facility over the next several years.
The Environmental Services Unit (ESU) was requested to assist with the portion of the project that would help the company save on disposal costs and on the cost of raw materials.
The new kiln technology produces 10% less defective product.
The company estimated that this improvement would help them avoid spending $41,837 per year on disposal of 850 tons of firedbisque waste (defective product) and $29,509 per year on the clay used to make it.
(Clay tonnage is lower than waste bisque tonnage since the company planned to expand production after installation of the new kiln).
In addition, with the new technology, the company would switch from cordierite to special nitride bonded silicon carbide "kiln furniture" Contractor: Onondaga County Industrial Development Agency Onondaga (bisque travels through the kiln supported by this furniture).
The company needed to replace the cordierite furniture every nine to twelve months.
The nitride bonded silicon carbide furniture needs replacement only after at least three years.
Syracuse China estimated that they would save $14,963 per year on the avoided cost of disposing 304 tons per year of spent kiln furniture.
Project Description The project involved completely demolishing and removing the old kilns and installing the new Riedhammer Fast-Fire Kiln and Lippert Ware Handling System (the special nitride bonded silicon carbon kiln furniture).
Both were delivered and installed on schedule and were placed into production by September 2001.
Project Results By the end of the project, Syracuse China was avoiding the disposal of 1,848 tons per year of refractory waste and waste bisque (defective product) and realizing savings of $228,016 per year in avoided purchase and disposal costs.
These results are well in excess of the project performance targets mostly because the new kiln is exceeding the yield target of 90%.
Instead, it is yielding an average of 94-96% saleable product.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: $200,000 $891,259 $1,091,259 (kiln furniture only) December, 2001
County: Contract Project Robert James Manager: 315.435.3770 Phone: ESD Project Manager: Phone:
Linda Jacobs 518.292.5346
Completion Date:
New York State Environmental Investment Program Capital Project Summary Genesee County Industrial Development Agency on behalf of Lapp Insulator Company LLC Company Background Lapp Insulator Company is one of the world's largest manufacturers of electronic transmission line insulators in the world and competes on a national and international basis.
Lapp's products range from small basketball-sized insulators to over 8 feet tall, weighing several hundred lbs.
Insulators are made of ceramic materials, primarily kaolin clay.
In the normal course of manufacturing high voltage porcelain insulators, short ends from a cutoff process and daily scrap resulting from accidental breakage or quality issues results in approximately 5,000 tons of porcelain scrap per year.
Over the last several years, Lapp accumulated over 10,000 tons of insulator scrap on its premises.
To reduce the pile and to provide an ongoing solution, Lapp decided to recycle its porcelain scrap by crushing it for use as replacement/supplement roadbed construction aggregate.
This use of the material was granted a Beneficial Use Determination by the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
Marketing is being done in conjunction with a local aggregate mining company.
Project Description The purpose of this capital project was to help the company finance the equipment to begin crushing insulators for beneficial reuse.
Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: ESU Project Manager: Phone: Genesee County IDA Batavia, New York Genesee County John C. Dwyer 585.343.4866 James Gilbert 585.325.1944 Insulators are extraordinarily hard compared to natural aggregate found in Western New York.
Standard aggregate crushers utilized locally exhibit extraordinarily high maintenance needs when used to crush insulators.
After an extensive search, and several trial runs, Lapp identified an Eagle Ultra Max 500-05 recycle impactor.
The hammering motion this impactor uses turned out to be ideal for crushing its insulators.
Additionally, unlike the other crushers tried, it has the ability to remove the metallic hardware, which is then separated by an electromagnetic belt, and conveyed into a roll-off container to be recycled at a local scrap yard.
Project Results At the start of this project Lapp had accumulated 12,300 tons of scrap on premises.
As a result of this project, Lapp completed crushing the stockpile and is poised to crush future estimated annual tonnage of 5,000.
The cost to contract out the crushing operation would have been $24/ton, but the cost to do it with its own equipment is $10/ton, a savings of $14/ton.
Lapp saved $172,200 in the first year by recycling the stockpile, more than covering the cost of its investment.
Annual savings will be $70,000 per year.
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $170,628 $170,628 $341,256 December 2001
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Technical Assistance Project Summary Long Island City Business Development Corporation's Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) Background The Long Island City Business Development Corporation (LICBDC) is a non-profit organization dedicated to enhancing the business climate of Long Island City so that vital industrial, commercial, high tech and non-profit businesses can thrive.
Long Island City is New York State's largest and most diversified industrial center outside of Manhattan with over 2,100 firms employing almost 65,000 workers.
In 1993, LICBDC developed the Industrial Waste Recycling and Prevention Program (INWRAP) to aid local businesses with improving their waste management practices.
Firms in the area are in danger of leaving New York City or going out of business because of high costs.
They also tend to be relatively small quantity waste generators and often have problematic waste streams that are difficult to reduce, reuse or recycle.
Project Description This two-year project allowed LICBDC to assist firms from January 2000 to January 2002.
It was the third in a series of EIP investments supporting INWRAP's on-going activities.
INWRAP provides companies with access to the citywide "NY Wa$teMatch" materials exchange and staff assist firms with selling, buying or donating materials through the exchange.
Staff actively broker matches for the firms and provide hands-on technical assistance.
This assistance better equips company managers to make the changes needed to reduce waste management costs.
INWRAP staff also conduct waste management assessments and then assist firms with implementing recommended operational, purchasing, and waste management improvements.
There are no up-front costs to the Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone: businesses but INWRAP usually negotiates a "feefor-savings" of anywhere from 5% to 50% of first year savings or revenues.
Businesses pay INWRAP their negotiated amounts upon realizing savings.
INWRAP also has a separate research, development and education outreach component for hard to reduce, reuse and recycle materials such as industrial wood waste and textiles.
Results During this project, INWRAP saved local businesses just under $115,393 from on-site assistance and $535,618 through materials exchanges, totaling $651,011.
A total of 6,652 tons of material was diverted from disposal.
Shared savings produced $20,000 in revenues for the program.
Since its inception in 1993, INWRAP has assisted 600 businesses to save $1,878,305 and diverting 30,000 tons from disposal to reuse or recycling.
INWRAP's unique approach to creating results is nationally recognized.
This year INWRAP was awarded two prestigious awards: The 2000 Governor's Waste Reduction and Recycling Program Achievement of Excellence Award and the Tim McClure Award for Outstanding Environmental 
In the past, INWRAP also earned the City Club of New York's 1995 Good Business Earthling Award, the National Council for Urban Economic Development's 1996 Economic Development Program Silver Award and a 1997 USEPA Environmental Quality Award.
INWRAP 29-10 Thomson Ave, Long Island City, NY 11101 Queens Gayle Baron 718.786.5300 Linda Jacobs 518.292.5340
NYS EIP Investment: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$193,374 $202,406 $395,780 Jan., 2002
New York State Environmental Investment Program Capital Project Summary Town of Islip IDA Company Background U.S.A. industries, Inc. in the Town of Bayshore (Township of Islip), has been in operation since 1986 as a remanfacturer of alternators, starters, axles and calipers for automobiles.
Project Description U.S.A Industries contracted the services of the Rochester Institute of Technology to assess their operations.
As a result, RIT suggested improvements that required the purchase of $502,220 of new equipment that facilitated higher efficiencies, and incorporated new cleaning and testing methods that insured a higher quality of remanufactured products.
USA Industries expected to see significant new sales from its existing vendor outlets and by entry into the export market.
The company anticipated additional annual sales of $7 million, the processing of an additional 225 tons/year of automotive parts that would otherwise go to landfill and the hiring of 50 new full time employees.
Project Results At project completion U.S.A Industries fell below the new sales growth figure of $7 million.
Company financials recorded an annual sales increase of only $6.2 million.
The company indicated that due to transportation and logistical breakdown issues experienced in the NYC Metro region after the bombing of the World Trade Center on September 11, they issued over $1.5 million in credits because of shipments that had to be returned to their facility.
Factoring these credits would have placed total sales at $0.5 million above target.
The company exceeded its tonnageprocessing expectations by 217 tons, processing a total of 442 tons of additional materials.
The company did not meet its employment target.
Starting at an employment base of 172 the company reported at project closing that it had 218 positions ­ a job creation measure of 46.
Benefits The project created additional processing capacity of automotive parts, eliminating the disposal to landfill of a previously unusable material.
Further, it assisted a company in entering a new market for the sale of its materials and created new employment opportunities.
Contractor: County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EMIG Project Manager: Phone:
Town of Islip IDA 1 DiPronio Drive Waterloo, NY 13165-1681 Suffolk Mr. Bill Mannix (631)224-5512 Charles Radier (845)567-4882
Investment: NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date: $250,000.00 $252,220.86 $502,220.86 Sept. 30, 2001
New York State Environmental Investment Program (EIP) Capital Project Summary Broome County Industrial Development Authority (on behalf of Phillips Foundry) Company Background Phillips Foundry, Inc. is an aluminum sand casting foundry; a third generation family-owned business since 1926.
The Foundry had been at its present location in Binghamton since 1937.
In 1997, business increased by 35%.
The growth in business put a strain on production capacity at the old location so the company decided to build a new $9 million, 80,000 sq. ft. castings manufacturing facility.
An important element of the new state-ofthe-art production facility is a sand reclamation project that would allow Phillips to continually recover 85% of the sand for reuse, reducing the cost of operations both through the reduction of sand purchased and the reduction of disposal costs.
The entire project was essential to the company's longterm viability.
Project Description The purpose of this capital project is to enable Phillips Foundry to purchase and install a $645,000 sand reclamation system into their new castings manufacturing plant.
The project would reduce the amount of foundry sand currently being landfilled from 2,200 tons/year to 330 tons/year after the first year of operation.
Contractor: The company anticipates that through sales growth, production increases, and greater quantities of sand purchased, used and generated as industrial waste, the project will divert as much as 17,000 ton/year of used sand from being landfilled at the end of a two-year period.
The company will realize $150,000 in cost savings the first year resulting in future savings based upon anticipated growth of up to and exceeding $1.3 million per year.
The overall capital expansion project will make the company more cost-efficient and competitive, help to preserve 110 new jobs, and create 30 jobs.
The sand reclamation system will contribute significantly to the competitiveness issues and will also help extend the life of the Broome County landfill (an important objective for County officials).
Project Results The project is still underway.
Construction and operation of the new manufacturing facility is lagging behind schedule.
County: Contract Project Manager: Phone: EIP Manager: Phone:
Broome County IDA 44 Hawley Street Edwin L. Crawford County Office Blg. P.O. Box 1510 Binghamton, NY 13902 Broome
Investment:
NYS EIP: Contractor Match: Total: Completion Date:
$320,000
Mr. Stan Key 607.778.2730 Linda Hosking 518.292.5340
$325,140 $645,140
