1.2.1 UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD POLICY The information in this policy (UPRR) and Burlington Northern Santa 5-9-96), Drawing # 106613 (Revised with Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) Plan Submittals to Railroad (RR) Preliminary Design When the preliminary layout (TS
The submittal should include a Plan View, an Elevation View showing the layout criteria, bridge cross-section and for UPRR only an overhead submittal checklist.
Final Design Final Plans shall be submitted to the railroad liaison for approval.
For metric projects, the equivalent English dimensions for every item on the overhead submittal checklist shall be written in parenthesis next to the metric dimensions.
See UPRR overhead submittal checklist 1.2.1.4 
Layout Criteria The following sketch illustrates the general layout criteria for UPRR and BNSF. is based on the Union Pacific Railroad Fe (BNSF) Drawings # 82495M (Revised Date: Date: 3-31-98) and written correspondence both companies.
LAYOUT SKETCH Concrete Slope Protection Concrete slope protection shall be provided for slopes steeper than 1 vertical to 2 horizontal.
The Assistant Bridge Engineer Section Leader will determine the type of slope protection for slopes less than or equal to 1 vertical to 2 horizontal.
Future Tracks Union Pacific UPRR or BNSF may require space be provided for future tracks or access roads.
Additional clearance may be required adjustments in track sag or vertical curve or if future track may for flood considerations.
This information should be obtained by Division from UPRR or BNSF before the TS
January 20, 2000
additional for future be changed the Bridge
REV: Feb. 20, 2001
1.2.1.1
Note: For future tracks, the horizontal spacing between two tracks measured at right angle from centerline of tracks shall be 20 FT for UPRR and 25 FT for BNSF.
Track Profiles Surveys for the profile of the existing top of rail 1000 ft. each side of the proposed structure need to be performed only on one rail for each mainline track and shall be shown on both the preliminary and final submittals to the railroad.
A profile is not needed for industrial tracks.
The low rail (in a curve) shall be used for the profile.
In straight-through tracks, the right rail shall be used.
The right rail is defined as the rail on the right side of the track when looking towards increasing railroad milepost number.
Railroad UPRR milepost numbers usually increase from South to North and East to West, designers need to verify the direction of milepost numbers increase with the railroad liaison.
Profiles are to be superimposed together onto one sheet.
The following note (Note #660) shall be placed on the final bridge design plans: The top of rail elevations shall be verified in the field before beginning construction of the bridge.
If the rail elevations are not as shown on the plans, the NDOR Project Manager shall contact the NDOR Bridge Division.
Track Clearances The required vertical clearances shall be 23'-6" (7165 mm) above the plane of the top-of-rails.
If the required vertical clearances could can not be met, designers can use a minimum of 23'-0" (7010 mm) with the Assistant Bridge Engineer Section Leader approval.
Separate shots shall be taken from the high rail(s) to measure vertical clearance and shall be shown on the TS
L Where provision is made for more than 2 tracks, space is to be provided for access roads on both sides of the track.
Required horizontal clearances are to be increased 1 1/2" per degree of curve where the structure is located adjacent to or within 80' of the curve limits.
Construction Clearances Minimum construction clearances shall be as follow: 21'-0" plane 12'-0" angle (6400 mm) for UPRR 
(3650 mm) for UPRR 
Drainage Drainage from the overpass must be diverted away from the Railroad UPRR's tracks and not discharged onto the tracks or roadbed.
The direction of drainage flow will be shown on the Plans (Consult with the Assistant Bridge Engineer Section Leader and Roadway Designer).
Drainage at the abutments or approach slabs will be diverted perpendicular to the roadway and flow to the Roadway ditch, in coordination with the roadway designer.
A "V"-shape or flat-bottom ditch will be provided on each side of the tracks to match the existing ground or as required by the RR company UPRR.
Culverts may be installed on the opposite side of the pier from the track in lieu of ditches when approved by the railroad's UPRR's Chief Engineer Design.
January 20, 2000 REV: Feb. 20, 2001
1.2.1.2
Bridge Deck Drainage When floor drains are required, a flat bottom ditch will be required by the railroad UPRR to carry any increased drainage from the embankment slope.
The Bridge Designer will take the necessary precaution to minimize erosion and prevent erosion deposits from building up in the ditch.
This will interfere with the proper track ballast drainage and lead to settlement of the tracks.
Railroad UPRR Barriers Bridges without a sidewalk will provide a modified concrete rail with 6'-6" (1.98 m) chain link fence on both sides of the bridge as detailed in the UPRR railroad base sheets, see Chapter 6.
In locations where switching or other frequent railroad activities are performed, Union Pacific and Burlington Northern Santa Fe may have additional special requirements.
Footings The top of the footings will be a minimum of 6'-0" (1830 mm) below the base of the track rail, 4'-0" (1220 mm) below the natural ground, and a minimum of 1'-0" (305 mm) below flow line of ditches.
Lighting Lights are to be installed on the underside of the viaduct for bridges over 80' in width.
Pier Protection Pier protection (crash walls) shall be provided in accordance with the Manual for Railway Engineering, which reads as follows: Pier Protection Adjacent to Railroad Tracks To limit damage by the redirection and deflection of railroad equipment, piers supporting bridges over railways and with a clear distance of less than 25 feet from the centerline of a railroad track shall be of heavy construction (defined below) or shall be protected by a reinforced concrete crash wall.
Crash walls for piers from 12 to 25 feet clear from the centerline of track shall have a minimum height of 6 feet above the top of rail.
Piers less than 12 feet clear from the centerline of track shall have a minimum crash wall height of 12 feet above the top of rail.
January 20, 2000
REV: Feb. 20, 2001
1.2.1.3
The crash wall shall be at least 2 feet 6 inches thick and at least 12 feet long.
When two or more columns compose a pier, the crash wall shall connect the columns and extend at least 1 foot beyond the outermost columns parallel to the track.
The crash wall shall be anchored to the footings and columns, if applicable, with adequate reinforcing steel and shall extend to at least 4 feet below the lowest surrounding grade.
Piers shall be considered of heavy construction if they have a crosssectional area equal to or greater than that required for the crash wall and the larger of its dimensions is parallel to the track.
Consideration may be given to providing protection for bridge piers over 25 feet from the centerline of track as conditions warrant.
In making this determination, account shall be taken of such factors as horizontal and vertical alignment of the track, embankment height, and an assessment of the consequences of serious damage in the case of a collision.
January 20, 2000
REV: Feb. 20, 2001
1.2.1.4
OVERHEAD SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST PROJECT INFORMATION HWY/STREET NAME: CITY AND STATE: COUNTY/PARISH: PROJECT NO.: DATE: FILE: GRADE SEPARATION STATE: LOCATION: STREET/HWY: RTE: M.P.: SUB: DOT NO.: AWO: Min. Req'd As Submitted
Item
Required Information
Railroad Remarks A=APPROVED R= REJECTED A/R Left side by direction of RR Mile Posts Right side by direction of RR Mile Posts Top of Rail to lowest clearance in first span Edge of footing to Center of Track Top of Footing to Base of rail (8" below top rail) Crash wall if face of pier less than 25' to center track No shoring closer than 12' to center track
Abutment or Bent #
1 2 3
Horizontal Clearance (left) (CL to face) Horizontal Clearance (Right) (CL to face) Vertical clearance (from top of rail) Horizontal clearance to footing from CL track Depth top of footing below base of rail Pier protection required for 
18'-0" 18'-0" 23'-0" 25'-0" 6'-0" 25'-0" 12'-0"
* *
4 5 6 7 1 2 3
Bent # Horizontal Clearance (left) (CL to face) Horizontal Clearance (Right) (CL to face) Vertical clearance (from top of rail) Horizontal clearance to footing from CL track Depth top of footing below base of rail Pier protection required for 
18'-0" 18'-0" 23'-0" 25'-0" 6'-0" 25'-0" 12'-0"
* *
4 5 6 7 1 2 3
Bent # Horizontal Clearance (left) (CL to face) Horizontal Clearance (Right) (CL to face) Vertical clearance (from top of rail) Horizontal clearance to footing from CL track Depth top of footing below base of rail Pier protection required for 
18'-0" 18'-0" 23'-0" 25'-0" 6'-0" 25'-0" 12'-0"
* *
4 5 6 7 1 2 3
Bent # Horizontal Clearance (left) (CL to face) Horizontal Clearance (Right) (CL to face) Vertical clearance (from top of rail) Horizontal clearance to footing from CL track Depth top of footing below base of rail Pier protection required for 
18'-0" 18'-0" 23'-0" 25'-0" 6'-0" 25'-0" 12'-0"
* * *
4 5 6 7
If the horizontal clearance (4) to footing from CL track is less than 25'=0" then the top of footing (5) must be at least 6' below base of rail
January 20, 2000
1.2.1.5
OVERHEAD SUBMITTAL CHECKLIST Item Required Information Track Requirement Min. Req'd As Submitted
Railroad Remarks A=APPROVED R= REJECTED
A/R Measure maximum track centers at bridge width Yes or No RR to advice spread or future tracks
1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 1 2 3 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Existing track center Track spreading taken into consideration Future track centers
Required Required 20'-0"
Safety Requirements Splashboards or barrier rail Near Side (NS) Splashboards Far Side (FS) Splashboards limits adequate Fence (w/ pedestrian walkway) (NS or FS) Fence (w/o pedestrian walkway) (NS or FS) Fence limits adequate 5'-0"/3'-6" 25'-0" R/W to R/W 8'-0" to 10'-0" 10'-0" R/W to R/W Near side is by direction of RR Mile Post Far side is by direction of RR Mile Post 25' minimum past center of outside tracks Near Side or Far Side, Ped. walk Near Side or Far Side, without Ped. walk 25' minimum past center of outside tracks
Drainage Requirements Adequate drainage (Left) Adequate drainage (Right)) Drain from Str. /Leaders at Bents Required Required Left of tracks by RR Mile Post Right of tracks by RR Mile Post Show drainage on structure to-off RR right of way
General Requirements Access road (25' from CL to face) RR R/W shown correctly All tracks labeled correctly Existing utilities Arial or underground Maximum gap between structures Lights required for width of structures over 80' Track profile for 1000' on each side of str.
Demolition required Abutment slope protection Temp.
Construction vertical clearance Temp.
Construction horizontal clearance Mile Post number 
INSTRUCTIONS: Milepost and direction of Milepost must be shown in the plans.
Left and Right are the orientation of structure elements facing in the direction of increasing milepost.
FILL ALL APPLICABLE PARTS OF Table above: In Column "As Submitted" INSERT ALL APPLICABLE VALUES FROM PLANS.
For any exception to the minimum requirements on the checklist, a detailed explanation/reason why the minimum requirements cannot be provided PRELIMINARY PLAN REVIEW: IF ITEMS ON ABOVE TABLE SHOW DEFICIENCIES, ACCEPTANCE OF PRELIMINARY PLANS WILL NOT BE GRANTED UNTIL DEFICIENCIES ARE RESOLVED.
FINAL PLAN REVIEW : Before STRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION SIGNED FINAL PLANS, SPECIAL PROVISIONS, AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS IF REQUIRED SHALL BE SUBMITTED FOR FINAL REVIEW.
IF ALL ITEMS ARE RESOLVED AND PLANS COMPLY, WILL RELEASE STRUCTURE FOR CONSTRUCTION.
UNITS: UNITS FOR THE ABOVE CHECKLIST TO BE IN ENGLISH.
January 20, 2000
