Part I INTRODUCTION Hi story Pallid sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus albus) evolved from an ancient group of bony fishes, the subclass Paleopterygii, which was dominant during the Paleozoic Era.
This group continued to flourish through the late Paleozoic Era and early Mesozoic Era.
Most species in this subclass became extinct sometime in the Mesozoic Era.
The living descendants of this group in North America include paddlefish (Polyodontidae), and eight species of sturgeon (Acipenseridae).
The North American species of sturgeon, in addition to pallid sturgeon, are the shovelnose sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus platorynchus Rafinesque); white sturgeon (Acipenser transmontanus Richardson); green sturgeon (Acipenser medirostris Ayres); Atlantic sturgeon (Acipenser oxyrhynchus Mitchill); shortnose sturgeon (Acipenser brevirostrum LeSueur); and lake sturgeon (Acipenser fulvescens Rafinesque).
An eighth species, the Alabama sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus suttkus Williams), was recently described from the Mobile Basin in Alabama and Mississippi (Williams and Clemmer 1991).
This location is outside the range of pallid sturgeon and is not included in further discussions of Scaphirhynchus species in this plan.
The pallid sturgeon was first described by S.A. Forbes and R.E. Richardson in 1905 from nine specimens collected from the Mississippi River near Grafton, Illinois, in June 1904 (Forbes and Richardson 1905).
Known locally as the white sturgeon, they named it Parascaphirhynchus albus and suggested it be considered as its own genus.
Later classifications, however, placed it in the genus Scaphirhynchus where it has remained (Bailey and Cross 1954).
Electrophoretic analysis of the two species of Scaphirhynchus have suggested a very close genetic relationship.
Phelps and Allendorf (1983), using electrophoretic techniques, were unable to distinguish the species by looking at 37 enzyme systems.
Pallid sturgeon from the Missouri River in Missouri and shovelnose sturgeon from the Missouri, Yellowstone, and Mississippi Rivers were analyzed.
The authors concluded that the close genetic similarity of pallid sturgeon and shovelnose sturgeon was due to recent or incomplete reproductive isolation.
General DescriDtion Pallid sturgeon have a flattened, shovel--shaped snout; long, slender, and completely armored caudal peduncle; and lack a spiracle (Smith 1979).
As with other sturgeon, the mouth is toothless, protrusible, and ventrally positioned under the snout.
The skeletal structure is primarily cartilaginous (Gilbraith et al. 1988).
Pallid sturgeon are similar in appearance to the more common, darker shovelnose sturgeon.
Pflieger (1975) reports the principal features distinguishing pallid sturgeon from shovelnose sturgeon are the paucity of dermal ossifications on the belly, 24 or more anal fin rays, and 37 or more dorsal fin rays.
1
:
Bailey and Cross (1954) measured morphological characteristics of pallid sturgeon collected from the middle and lower Missouri River and middle Mississippi River.
They found the ratio between the lengths of the inner and outer barbels of pallid sturgeon and shovelnose sturgeon to be one of the quickest and most reliable means for separation of these two Scaphirhynchus species: the outer barbel is 1.2--1.5 times longer than the inner barbel in the shovelnose and 1.7 to 2.4 times longer in the pallid.
Bailey and Cross (1954) also found that the inner barbels of pallid sturgeon typically lie ahead of the outer barbels, unlike on shovelnose sturgeon, where they are typically in--line.
Furthermore, in pallid sturgeon, all the barbels are further back on the lower surface of the snout than in shovelnose sturgeon: the "snout tip to outer barbel/mouth to inner barbel" ratio varies from 2.3 to 3.3 in pallid sturgeon and 1.3 to 2.2 in shovelnose sturgeon (Bailey and Cross 1954) (Figure 1).
B Shovelnome Sturgeon
in
C in
K
A -- 1.3-2.2 E--1.1-1.4 Bin F -- 4.0-5.0 A -1 .3-2~5 D--1.2-1.5 Cm F -- 3.6-5.8
Figure 1: Comparative diagrams of the ventral surface of the head of shovelnose sturgeon and pallid sturgeon, showing several measurement ratios of value for identification.
Redrawn from Bailey and Cross (1954).
2
Fishery researchers and managers have found that in most cases the ratios shown in Figure 1 more clearly separated the species in the upper basin States than they did in the lower basin States.
They also found that upper basin specimens of both species are typically larger in average weight and length than species collected from the lower Missouri River and Mississippi River.
Although in most instances pallid sturgeon are lighter in color than shovelnose sturgeon, coloration cannot consistently be relied upon as a means of separating the two species (Kallemeyn 1983).
The pallid sturgeon is one of the largest fish species found in the Missouri/Mississippi River drainage, with specimens approaching 39 kilograms (kg) (86 lbs) reported (Gilbraith et al. 1988).
Adult pallid sturgeon collected from the upper Missouri River are generally larger than adults collected from the middle Missouri River and Mississippi River.
The maximum recorded weight of a pallid sturgeon collected from the Missouri River in Montana and North Dakota is approximately 39 kg (86 lbs).
From the Missouri River in South Dakota and Nebraska, the maximum weight recorded is approximately 21 kg (46 lbs).
In the Mississippi River the maximum weight recorded is approximately 12 kg (26 lbs).
Historical Distribution and Abundance The historic range of pallid sturgeon as described by Bailey and Cross (1954) encompassed the middle and lower Mississippi River, the Missouri River, and the lower reaches of the Platte, Kansas, and Yellowstone Rivers (Figure 2).
The pallid sturgeon was not recognized as a species until 1905, therefore little is known concerning its early abundance and distribution (Pflieger 1975), but available information suggests a probable decline since the species was described.
Forbes and Richardson (1905) and Bailey and Cross (1954) indicated that the species was always uncommon.
Of the 250 pallid sturgeon reported by Bailey and Cross (1954), approximately 76 percent were collected from the Missouri River in Montana and the Dakotas; most were collected in the upper ends of the five main stem reservoirs as they were filling.
At the time of their original description, pallid sturgeon composed 1 in 500 river sturgeon captured in the Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois (Forbes and Richardson 1905).
Pallid sturgeon were more abundant in the lower Missouri River near West Alton, Missouri, where they composed one--fifth of the river sturgeon captured (Forbes and Richardson 1905).
Bailey and Cross (1954) provided additional information on the proportions of pallid sturgeon in the total commercial catch of river sturgeon from various parts of the species' range as follows: Kansas River at Lawrence, Kansas (8 percent); Missouri River in South Dakota, 3 of 62 specimens (5 percent); and Mississippi River at New Orleans, 3 of 4 specimens (75 percent).
Fisher (1962) recorded 4 of 13 river sturgeons (31 percent) from the Missouri River in Missouri as pallid sturgeon.
Comparable commercial catch records are not available for the upper river reaches where commercial fishing was light or nonexistent.
3
:
R.
Figure 2.
Historic range of pallid sturgeon.
4
Present Distribution and Abundance Pallid sturgeon remain one of the rarest fish of the Missouri and Mississippi River basins.
Carlson and Pflieger (1981) stated that pallid sturgeon are rare, but widely distributed in the Missouri River and in the Mississippi River downstream from the mouth of the Missouri River.
Keenlyne (1989) recently updated information on distribution of the pallid sturgeon.
Keenlyne reported pre--1980 catch records in the Mississippi River from its mouth upstream to its confluence with the Missouri River, a length of 1,857 kilometers (kin) (1,154 miles (mi)); in the lower 56 km (35 mi) of the Yazoo/Big Sunflower and St. Francis Rivers (tributaries to the Mississippi); in the Missouri River from its mouth to Fort Benton, Montana, a length of 3,323 km (2,065 mi); and in the lower 64 km (40 mi) of the Kansas River, the lower 34 km (21 mi) of the Platte River, and the lower 322 km (200 mi) of the Yellowstone River (tributaries to the Missouri River).
The total length of the species' range is approximately 5,656 km (3,515 mi) of river.
States within this range are Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Iowa, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, Mississippi, and Louisiana.
Since 1980, reports of most frequent occurrence (Figure 3) are from the Missouri River between the Marias River and Ft. Peck Reservoir in Montana; between Ft. Peck Dam and Lake Sakakawea (near Williston, North Dakota); within the lower 113 km (70 mi) of the Yellowstone River to downstream of Fallon, Montana; in the headwaters of Lake Sharpe in South Dakota; and from the Missouri River near the mouth of the Platte River near Plattsmouth, Nebraska.
Areas of most recent and frequent occurrence on the Mississippi River are near Chester, Illinois; Caruthersville, Missouri; and in both the Mississippi and Atchafalaya Rivers in Louisiana at the Old River Control where the Atchafalaya diverges from the Mississippi River (Mark Dryer, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, pers. comm.).
Larval sturgeon of any species rarely have been collected from within the range of pallid sturgeon.
This may be due to low reproductive success or the inability of standard sampling gear to capture larval sturgeon.
Hesse and Mestl (1993a) collected two sturgeon larvae from the Missouri River adjacent to Nebraska between 1983 and 1991 (the species of sturgeon is not yet distinguishable at larval stages).
These larvae were among 147,000 fish larvae collected during filtration of 519,400 cubic meters of river water.
Gardner and Stewart (1987) collected no sturgeon larvae in 339 samples from the Missouri River or in 77 samples from tributary streams where 3,124 and 5,526 fish larvae were collected, respectively.
Habitat Preference Forbes and Richardson (1905), Schinulbach et al. (1975), Kallemeyn (1983), and Gilbraith et a].
(1988) describe pallid sturgeon as being a fish well adapted to life on the bottom in swift waters of large, turbid, free-flowing rivers.
5
:
Figure 3.
Frequent occurrences of pallid sturgeon.
-
6
Pallid sturgeon evolved in the diverse environments of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers.
Floodplains, backwaters, chutes, sloughs, islands, sandbars, and main channel waters formed the large--river ecosystem that provided macrohabitat requirements for pallid sturgeon and other native large-- river fish, such as paddlefish and other sturgeon.
These habitats were historically in a constant state of change.
Today these habitats and much of the once naturally functioning ecosystem has been changed by human developments.
The historic floodplain habitat of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers provided important functions for the native large--river fish.
Floodplains were the major source of organic matter, sediments, and woody debris for the main stem rivers when floodflows crested the river s banks.
The transition zone between the vegetated floodplain and the main channel included habitats with varied depths described as chutes, sloughs, or side channels.
The chutes or sloughs between the islands and shore were shallower and had less current than the main channel.
These areas provided valuable diversity to the fish habitat and probably served as nursery and feeding areas for many aquatic species (Funk and Robinson 1974).
The still waters in this transition zone allowed organic matter accumulations, important to macroinvertebrate production.
Both shovelnose sturgeon and pallid sturgeon have a high incidence of aquatic invertebrates in their diet (Carlson et al. 1985; Gardner and Stewart 1987).
Floodflows connected these important habitats and allowed fish from the main channel to utilize these habitat areas and to exploit available food sources.
Floodflows also stimulated spawning migrations.
Before impoundment behind reservoirs, there were two periods of peak discharge on the Missouri River; one in April resulting from spring runoff and snowmelt on the Great Plains and a second higher peak in late May to early June resulting from mountain snowmelt.
Both shovelnose sturgeon and paddlefish spawning migrations occur in response to increased flows in June (Berg 1981).
Although there is no information on pallid sturgeon spawning migrations, it is assumed these migrations would similarly occur in response to increased June flows.
Micro--habitat characteristics of pallid sturgeon are just recently being described.
Much of the micro--habitat research to date has been a characterization of habitat where pallid sturgeon are being located in the significantly altered environments of today.
This research does not necessarily indicate preferred or required habitats; instead it may only indicate which habitats of those presently available are used by the pallid sturgeon.
Also capture locations may have conditions representing seasonal habitat preferences.
Current Velocity: Preliminary findings from a study on the Missouri River in South Dakota indicate that pallid sturgeon most frequently occupy river bottoms where velocity ranges from 10 to 30 centimeters per second (cps) (0.33 to 0.98 feet/sec), (J. Erickson, South Dakota State University, pers. comm. 1992).
Studies on microhabitat selection of pallid sturgeon in Montana found that they are most frequently associated with water velocity ranging from 40 to 90 cps (1.3 to 2.9 feet/sec) (P. Clancey, Montana Dept. of Fish, Wildlife, 7
and Parks, pers. comm. 1992). the species' range.
These velocities are commonly found throughout
Pallid sturgeon collected from the Missouri River above Garrison Reservoir in North Dakota during spring and fall seasons of 1988 to 1991 were found in deep pools at the downstream end of chutes and sandbars, and in the slower currents of near--shore areas (A. Sandvol, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, pers. comm. 1992).
These areas may have been providing good habitat for energy conservation and feeding.
Turbidity: Pallid sturgeon historically occupied turbid river systems.
Turbidity levels where pallid sturgeon have been found in South Dakota range from 31.3 Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) to 137.6 NTU (J. Erickson, pers. comm. 1992).
Water DeDth: The range of water depths where pallid sturgeon were frequently found in South Dakota are 2 to 6 m (7 to 20 ft) (J. Erickson, pers. comm. 1992).
In Montana, pallid sturgeon were captured from depths that ranged from 1.2 to 3.7 m (3.9 to 12.1 ft) in the summer, but they were captured in deeper waters during winter (P. Clancey, pers. comm. 1992).
During late summer in North Dakota, pallid sturgeon were captured at depths that ranged from 2.1 to 7.6 m (6.9 to 24.9 ft) (A. Sandvol, pers. comm. 1992).
One pallid sturgeon collected on the Yellowstone River in July 1991 was captured at a depth of 1 to 2 m (3.3 to 6.6 ft) (Watson and Stewart 1991).
One pallid sturgeon collected in the lower Platte River in May 1989 was captured at a depth of 1.5 m (4.9 ft) (N. Harberg, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, pers. comm. 1992).
Substrate: Pallid sturgeon are most frequently caught over a sand bottom, which is the predominant bottom substrate within the species' range on the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers.
The pallid sturgeon collected on the Yellowstone River in July 1991 by Watson and Stewart (1991) was over a bottom of mainly gravel and rock, which is the predominant substrate at that capture site.
TemDerature: Pallid sturgeon inhabit areas where the water temperatures range from 00C to 300C (320F to 860F), which is the range of water temperature on the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers.
There is no information to indicate temperature preference or the effects of temperature on the species.
Curtis (1990) found no relation between surface water temperatures and depth used by shovelnose sturgeon on the Mississippi River and no indication that shovelnose sturgeon were moving into deeper, cooler water (if available) as water temperature increased.
Life History ReDroductive Biolociv: Little is known about reproduction or spawning activities of pallid sturgeon.
Even basic parameters such as spawning locations, substrate preference, water temperature, or time of year have not been documented.
No spawning beds have been located and larval pallid sturgeon have not been recorded by investigators.
(There is presently no information available that distinguishes larval pallid sturgeon from larval 8
shovelnose sturgeon.
All larval Scaphirhynchus spp. that have been collected have been classified as shovelnose sturgeon because of the rarity of pallid sturgeon.)
Spawning reportedly occurs between June and August (Forbes and Richardson 1905).
Females collected in June and July in Lake Sharpe, a reservoir on the Missouri River in South Dakota, contained mature ova and presumably were ready to spawn.
However, there has been no evidence of successful reproduction during 10 years of sampling for young-of--the--year fish in Lake Sharpe (Kallemeyn 1983).
Kallemeyn (1983) reported that pallid sturgeon males reach sexual maturity at 53.3--58.4 cm (21 to 23 in), but size and age of females at sexual maturity are unknown.
Conte et al. (1988) indicated that females of most sturgeon in North America do not mature until 7 years of age and typically require several years for eggs to mature between spawnings.
The age of sexual maturity and intervals between spawning were estimated for nine pallid sturgeon by recording what were interpreted to be spawning events from pectoral fin ray cross sections (L. Jenkins, U.S. Fish 
Sexual maturity for males was estimated to be 7 to 9 years, with 2-- to 3--year intervals between spawning years.
Females were estimated to reach sexual maturity in 15 to 20 years, with 3-- to 10--year intervals between spawning years.
Time of sexual maturity and the intervals between spawning years is likely to be influenced by available forage, environmental conditions, and other factors.
Keenlyne et al. (1992) from the upper Missouri weighed 1,952 g, which fecundity was estimated estimated fecundity for a female pallid sturgeon taken River.
The authors found the mass of mature eggs represented 11.4 percent of total body weight.
Total at 170,000 eggs for this female.
While there may be differences in the spawning requirements between the pallid sturgeon and shovelnose sturgeon, the shovelnose sturgeon still provides the closest model for determining spawning requirements.
Because there is little information available on pallid sturgeon spawning, spawning requirements are extrapolated from what is known regarding shovelnose sturgeon spawning.
Shovelnose sturgeon spawn over substrates of rock, rubble, or gravel in the main channel of the Missouri/Mississippi Rivers and major tributaries, or on wing dams in the main stem of larger rivers (Christiansen 1975; Elser et al. 1977; Moos 1978; Helms 1974).
Shovelnose sturgeon spawning occurs in the unchannelized Missouri River near Vermillion, South Dakota, when water temperatures reach 180C to 190C.(64aF to 660F), which can be from late May through June.
Spawning was suspected to occur in the relatively swift water in or near the main channel (Moos 1978).
Shovelnose sturgeon spawning occurs in the Tongue River, Montana, a Yellowstone River tributary, from early June until mid--July at water temperatures of 16.90C to 21.50C (610F to 700F) (Elser et al. 1977).
Initiation of shovelnose sturgeon spawning migrations have been associated with increased flows in June (Berg 1981).
Food and Feeding Habits: Carlson et al. (1985) determined composition of food categories, by volume and frequency of occurrence, in the diet of shovelnose sturgeon (n=234), pallid sturgeon (n=9), and presumed hybrids (n=9).
Aquatic 9
invertebrates (principally the immature stages of insects) composed most of the diet of shovelnose sturgeon, while pallid sturgeon and presumed hybrids consumed a greater proportion of fish (mostly cyprinids).
Other researchers also reported a higher incidence of fish in the diet of pallid sturgeon than in the diet of shovelnose sturgeon (Cross 1967; Held 1969).
Most piscivorous Missouri River species eat large quantities of aquatic insect larvae in early life and even as adults.
Shovelnose sturgeon were found to consume large numbers of Hydropsyche spp. and Psychonyiidae (Tricopteran larvae) (Modde and Schmulbach 1977).
Aae and Growth: Little is known about age and growth of pallid sturg~on.
The total length of pallid sturgeon was significantly greater than that of shovelnose sturgeon in the lower Missouri and Mississippi Rivers for each age group in which comparable data were available (Carlson et al. 1985).
Fogle (1963) estimated growth rates using cross sections of pectoral fin rays from six pallid sturgeon from Lake Oahe in South Dakota.
He estimated that growth of these fish was relatively rapid during the first 4 years, but that growth decreased to approximately 70 mm (4 in) per year between ages 5 and 10.
Carlson and Pflieger (1981) presented data (n=8) from the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers in Missouri, which showed slightly slower growths than from pallid sturgeon in South Dakota.
By interpreting cross sections of pectoral fin rays, L. Jenkins (pers. comm. 1991) estimated that pallid sturgeon can live more than 40 years.
Reasons for Decline Habitat Loss: Destruction and alteration of habitats by human modification of the river system is believed to be the primary cause of declines in reproduction, growth, and survival of pallid sturgeon.
It is unlikely that successfully reproducing populations of pallid sturgeon can be recovered without restoring the habitat elements (morphology, hydrology, temperature regime, cover, and sediment/organic matter transport) of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers necessary for the species continued survival.
On the main stem of the Missouri River, approximately 36 percent of riverine habitat within the pallid sturgeon's range was eliminated by construction of six massive earthen dams between 1926 and 1952 and another 40 percent has been channelized.
The remaining 24 percent has been altered due to changes in water flows caused by dam operations.
These dams also are believed to have adversely affected pallid sturgeon by blocking migration routes and by causing inundation of spawning and nursery areas.
Channelization of the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers began at the turn of the century and continues to the present.
Channelization causes changes in water velocity, reduces the width of the river, and prevents water flow into backwaters.
In the channelized reach downstream of Sioux City, Iowa, the Missouri River that was once a diverse assembledge of braided channels, sandbars, and backwaters is now confined within a narrow channel of rather 10
uniform length miles) reduced
width and swift current.
Funk and Robinson (1974) calculated that the of the Missouri River between Rub, Nebraska, and its mouth (~500 river had been reduced by 8 percent and the water surface area had been by 50 percent following channelization.
The Missouri River habitat between and downstream of main stem dams has been altered by removal of snags, reductions in sediment and organic matter transport/deposition, channel degradation, flow modification, hypolimnetic releases, and narrowing of the river through channelization.
These activities have adversely impacted the natural river dynamics by reducing the diversity of bottom contours and substrate, slowing accumulation of organic matter, reducing overbank flooding, changing seasonal flow patterns, severing flows to backwater areas, and reducing turbidity and water temperature.
The middle Mississippi River from the mouth of the Missouri River to the mouth of the Ohio River is principally channelized with few remaining secondary channels, sandbars, islands, and abandoned channels.
The middle Mississippi River has been extensively diked to maintain a 2.7 m (9 feet) navigation channel, and flood control levees have reduced the size of the floodplain by 39 percent.
The surface area of the fluvial landscape in 1968 was 260 km2 (100 mi2) (17 percent islands, 83 percent riverbed), 39 percent less than in 1888 (Fremling 1989).
The constricted channel and bed degradation have contributed to river fluctuations by as much as 15 m (50 feet) annually, effectively dewatering some secondary channels during low stages (Fremling 1989).
Levee construction on the lower Mississippi River from the Ohio River to near the Gulf have eliminated major natural floodways and reduced the land area of the floodplain by more than 90 percent (Fremling 1989).
Fremling (1989) also reports that levee construction isolated many floodplain lakes and raised river banks.
As a result of levee construction, 15 meander loops were severed between 1933 and 1942.
The pattern of flow velocity, volume, and timing of the predevelopment Missouri River provided the essential life requirements of native large--river fish like the pallid sturgeon and paddlefish.
Hesse and Mestl (1993a) found a significant relationship between the density of paddlefish larvae and two indices (timing and volume) of discharge from Fort Randall Dam.
When dam operations caused discharge to fluctuate widely during spring spawning, the density of drifting larvae was lower (R = --0.3728, P = 0.17).
Also, when annual runoff volume was highest, paddlefish larval density was highest (R -- 0.4014, P -- 0.13).
Hesse and Mestl (1987) modeled these same two indices of discharge from Fort Randall Dam with an index of year class strength.
They demonstrated significant negative relationships between artificial flow fluctuations in the spring and poor year class development for several native fish species, river carpsucker (Carpiodes carpio), shorthead redhorse (Moxostoma macro lepidotum), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), flathead catfish (Pylodictis olivaris), sauger, common carp (Cyprinus carpio), smallmouth buffalo (Ictiobus bubalus), and bigmouth buffalo (I. cyprinellus).
The sample size of sturgeon was too small to model in that study; however,
11
there was a clear relationship between poor year class development in most native species studied and the artificial hydrograph.
Before impoundment behind Missouri River reservoirs (1926 to 1952), peak discharges generally occurred in April, and then again with a larger peak in June (Pflieger and Grace 1987).
Today, dam operations reduce flows from April to July for flood control, and increase flows from July to April for navigation, water supply, and hydropower.
In addition to such seasonal shifts in the flow patterns, main stem dams operating for daily hydropower needs can cause daily fluctuations in water levels in tailwater areas by as much as 2 to 3 m (6.6 to 9.8 ft).
This fluctuation can disrupt the macroinvertebrate community and larval fish rearing areas for many miles downstream of the dam by alternately flooding and dewatering habitats.
Modde and Schmulbach (1973) observed that factors affecting shovelnose sturgeon prey availability within the unchannelized Missouri River include temperature, seasonal recruitment, and changes in density influenced by the timing and discharge rates from Gavins Point Dam.
They hypothesized that the reduction in numbers of shovelnose sturgeon may be due to reduced availability of prey species caused by high discharges from Gavins Point Dam.
Before the Missouri River was channelized and impounded, it annually eroded 3.1 hectares/km of its floodplain (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1981).
Most of this erosion has stopped due to channelization and impoundment.
Erosion was a natural function of the river system, and through erosion, inorganic sediments, organic matter, and large woody debris were introduced into the river.
This material import was essential to the habitat dynamics and nutrient cycling of the river system.
Such sediment and nutrient discharge are the raw materials for habitat development in the Missouri and Mississippi River system.
Construction of dams eliminated 80 percent of this material.
Fremling (1989) reports that the sediment load of the middle Mississippi River has declined 66 percent from pre--1935 levels, mainly due to sediment entrapment in Missouri River impoundments.
This lack of sediment delivery upset the natural channel equilibrium and was replaced by a variety of nonequilibrium processes such as hydraulic sorting and bed paving, which eventually will eliminate all sediment movement.
This has already occurred to some extent and has resulted in reduced bed roughness and, therefore, reduced substrate diversity.
This has reduced the reproductive success of substrate spawners, such as sauger (Stizostedion canadense), sturgeon, and paddlefish (Hesse and Mestl 1993b).
The turbidity caused by suspended sediment also provided the pallid sturgeon and other native fish, adapted to living in a nearly sightless world, with cover while moving from one snag or undercut bank to another.
Today, water clarity has increased dramatically, and this essential cover is gone.
Under such conditions, predation by sight--feeding predators, such as northern pike (Esox lucius), walleye (Stizostedion vitreum), and smallmouth bass (micropterus dolomieui), can be expected to significantly impact native species not equipped by evolution with good eyesight.
12
It is also suspected that increased clarity of the Missouri River has affected food availability by changing species composition and by making it more difficult for pallid sturgeon, and other native species, to capture prey in the clearer water environment.
In the Missouri River, pelagic planktivores and sight--feeding carnivores have increased in abundance, whereas species specialized for life in the turbid, predevelopment river (like the pallid sturgeon) have decreased in abundance (Pflieger and Grace 1987).
This change in community structure is less apparent where changes in the natural hydrograph, temperature regime, and turbidity are less pronounced.
Flood flows were essential for the dynamic transport of sediment and the rearrangement of these sediments into natural morphological channel features (fish habitat); it served to introduce and transport organic matter from the floodplain; and to maintain turbidity.
Flood flows were the principle method for the introduction of large woody debris and carried nutrients to floodplain plant communities, which determined floodplain forest composition and structure.
Invertebrate reproduction and behavioral migration was closely tied to the natural hydrograph (Hesse and Mestl 1993c).
Nearly all snags were removed from the Missouri River between 1838 and 1950.
This, plus the cessation of flooding and meandering as a result of damming and channelizing the river has reduced the availability of organic matter supplies utilized by the aquatic invertebrate community (Hesse and Mestl 1993a).
Snags influence sedimc3nt routing, thus creating pools, gravel bars, and depositional areas, which in turn reduce the rate of downstream transport of particulate organic matter (Bilby and Ward 1991; Bilby and Likens 1980).
Snags also provide habitat for aquatic insects that make up a large proportion of both the shovelnose and pallid sturgeon's diet.
These insects are collector--filterer--gatherers (Merritt and Cummins 1984).
They cling to large woody debris in high velocity areas, gathering drifting diatoms, algae, animals, and organic detritus.
Mestl and Hesse (1993) documented a decline in the abundance of snag insect production of more than 65 percent in Nebraska's portion of the Missouri River between 1963 and 1980.
In spite of man's efforts to constrict and control the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers with reservoirs, stabilized banks, jetties, dikes, levees and reventments that result in impacts described above, remnant reaches of the Missouri River and the Mississippi River from the Missouri River confluence to the Gulf still provide habitat believed usable by pallid sturgeon.
These remnants described later as Recovery--Priority Management Areas are priority areas for implementation of recovery actions.
Commercial Harvest: Historically, pallid, shovelnose, and lake sturgeon were commercially harvested on the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers (Helms 1974).
The larger lake and pallid sturgeon were sought for their eggs which were sold as caviar, whereas shovelnose sturgeon were destroyed as a bycatch.
Commercial harvest of all sturgeon has declined substantially since record keeping began in the late 1800's.
Most commercial catch records for sturgeon have not differentiated between species.
Combined harvests as high as 195,450 kg (430,889 lbs) were recorded in the Mississippi River in the early 1890's, but had declined to less than 9,100 kg (20,062 lbs) by 1950 (Carlander 13
1954).
Lower harvests reflected a decline in shovelnose sturgeon abundance since the early 1900's (Pflieger 1975).
Today, mortality of pallid sturgeon occurs from both sport and commercial fishing activities.
In 1990, the head of a pallid sturgeon was found at a sport--fish cleaning station in South Dakota, and in 1992 a pallid sturgeon was found dead in a commercial fisherman's hoop net in Louisiana.
The States of North Dakota, South Dakota, and Louisiana all sturgeon whether taken commercially or for sport.
Kansas allow commercial harvest of sturgeon.
Sturgeon harvested as a bycatch of commercial fishing operations Missouri, Illinois, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, and require the release of Neither Montana nor continue to be in Nebraska, Iowa, Mississippi.
Pollution/Contaminants: Although more information is needed, pollution is a likely threat to the species over much of its range.
Pollution of the Missouri River by organic wastes from towns, packing houses, and stockyards was evident by the early 1900's and continued to increase as populations grew and additional industries were established along the river (Whitley and Campbell 1974).
Due to the identified presence of a variety of pollutants, numerous fish--harvest and consumption advisories have been issued over the last decade or two from Kansas City, Missouri, to the mouth of the Mississippi River.
This represents about 45 percent of the pallid sturgeon's range.
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB's), cadmium, mercury, and selenium have been detected at elevated concentrations in tissue of three pallid sturgeon collected from the Missouri River in North Dakota and Nebraska.
Detectable concentrations of chlordane, DDE, DDT, and dieldrin also were found (Ruelle and Keenlyne 1991).
Abandoned landfills, mines, sewage treatment plants, and industries have a high potential to contaminate pallid sturgeon habitats in several States.
Some of these sites are currently listed as Superfund sites or are being studied by the Environmental Protection Agency for possible listing under Superfund or Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
The prolonged egg maturation cycle of the pallid sturgeon (Conte et al. 1988), combined with an inclination for certain contaminants to be concentrated in eggs (Ohlendorf et al. 1981; Eisler 1986), could make contaminants a likely agent adversely affecting developing eggs, development of embryos, or survival of fry, and thereby reduce reproductive success (Ruelle and Keenlyne 1991).
Further investigations are needed to identify sources of contaminants in the Missouri and Mississippi Rivers and to assess the role of contaminants in the decline of pallid sturgeon populations.
Hybridization: Carlson et al. (1985) studied morphological characteristics of 4,332 sturgeon from the Missouri and middle Mississippi Rivers.
Out of this group he identified 11 pallid sturgeon and 12 pallid/shovelnose hybrids.
Suspected hybrids recently have been observed in commercial fish catches on the lower Missouri and the middle and lower Mississippi Rivers (K. Graham, Missouri Department of Conservation, pers. comm. 1992; B. Reed, Louisiana Dept. of Wildlife and Fisheries, pers. comm. 1992).
Bailey and Cross (1954) did not report hybrids, which may indicate that hybridization is a recent 14
phenomenon resulting from environmental changes caused by human--induced reductions in habitat diversity and measurable changes in environmental variables such as turbidity, flow regimes, and substrate types (Carlson et al. 1985).
A recent study by Keenlyne et al. (1993) concluded that hybridization may be occurring in half of the river reaches within the range of pallid sturgeon and that hybrids may represent a high proportion of remaining sturgeon stocks.
Hybridization is thought to be related to environmental degradation.
Presumedly, the loss of habitat diversity caused by human--induced environmental changes inhibits reproductive isolating mechanisms naturally occurring among fish species.
Also, the loss of total available spawning habitat forces sharing of suitable habitat areas by similar species, resulting in increased hybridization.
Channel Catfish (Ictalurus punctatus)
15
