Who we are and what we do...
Permanent Commission on the Status of Women Cindy R. Slane, Chair Jann-Marie Halvorsen, Vice-Chair Tanya Meck, Secretary Ann M. Clark, Treasurer Mildred Bauzá Marcia A. Cavanaugh Barbara DeBaptiste Anne Dailey Patricia T. Hendel Sarah E. McGirr Rosaida Morales-Rosario Susan O. Storey
T
he Permanent Commission on the Status of Women (PCSW) was created in 1973 by an act of the Connecticut State Legislature.
Under Sections 46a-1 through 46a-6 of the Connecticut General Statutes, a seventeenmember Commission, the staff and volunteers work to eliminate sex discrimination in Connecticut.
Five Commission members are appointed by the Governor, four are appointed by the Speaker of the House, and four are appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate.
These members are unpaid and serve for terms of five years.
Co-Chairs of the Judiciary committee and ranking minority members also serve on the Commission.
As required by statute, the PCSW studies all matters concerning women; informs the leaders of business, education and government about the nature and scope of sex discrimination; serves as a liaison between government and private interest groups concerned with services for women; promotes consideration of qualified women to all levels of government positions; and works with state agencies to assess programs and practices as they affect women.
(C.G.S. 46a-4)
Legislative Members Senator Eric D. Coleman Senator John A. Kissel Representative Michael P. Lawlor Representative Robert Farr
Honorary Members Connie Dice Patricia Russo
Staff Leslie J. Brett, Executive Director Susan H. Hoover, Special Projects Director Barbara Potopowitz, Public Information Officer Natasha M. Pierre, Legislative Analyst Jacquelyn Slamon, Nontraditional Employment for Women Program Manager Magdaliz Baez, Secretary to the Executive Director Rosemary Lopez, Legislative Secretary Lillie Wright, Administrative Assistant Jazzlyn Mills, NTO Project Assistant Sarah Grabill, Legislative Secretary
The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women
Who we are...and what we do
The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women 18-20 Trinity Street n Hartford, CT 06106 Voice 860.240.8300 n Fax 860.240.8314 E-mail pcsw@po.state.ct.us www.cga.state.ct.us/pcsw
18-20 Trinity Street n Hartford, CT 06106 Voice 860.240.8300 n Fax 860.240.8314 E-mail pcsw@po.state.ct.us www.cga.state.ct.us/pcsw
Public Policy Since 1973, the PCSW has provided valuable research and analysis to the legislature and state leaders regarding such issues as sex discrimination in education, employment and credit, the health and safety of pregnant workers, child day care, women in nontraditional employment, sexual harassment, child support enforcement, equal education, women and healthcare, the economic status of women and welfare policy.
Complaints: Information and Referral Services A large part of the Commission's work is taking complaints from individuals who believe they have been discriminated against on the basis of sex in employment, public accommodations, credit, education and other areas.
Although the Commission is not an enforcement agency, its staff provides information and referral regarding legal rights and assistance in filing formal complaints with the Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities.
n Congressional District Advisor y Councils to create a forum for leaders in different regions of the state to share information and ideas about women's issues.
n Nontraditional Employment for Women program which has three components: a Pre Apprentice Training Program to prepare women to enter skilled trades apprenticeships; technical assistance about recruitment and retention for training providers and employers; and an annual Women in the Trades and Nontraditional Occupations Conference.
S
pecial Projects of the Commission have included...
n Connecticut Women's Voices 2000, a comprehensive polling and research project on women's values and policy priorities for the economy.
P n Annual Report
ublications
n Annual Legislative Summary
n Continuing Progress for CT Women n PCSW Brochures: Who We Are and What We Do (in English and Spanish) The PCSW Talent Bank The PCSW Internship Program The Women's Economic Development Initiative CDACs
n A Directory of Women's Organizations in Connecticut n Facts About the Status of Women in Connecticut 2001- Special edition on pay equity n FACTS UPDATE 1997, 1998, 1999 and 2000 editions n Sexual Harassment Prevention Training Consultants n Fact Sheets on the Status of Women n Nontraditional Jobs for Women: A Resource Guide for Counselors and Women in Connecticut n Nontraditional Occupations Information Packet These and other publications are available free of charge from the PCSW office.
Ongoing Projects...
The Connecticut Women's Agenda (CWA) was established by the PCSW as a forum for groups concerned with women's issues to meet and share information and ideas regarding public policy.
The Connecticut Women's Health Campaign (CWHC) convened by the PCSW to create a strong voice for women's health care needs as public policy and healthcare reforms are developed and implemented.
Women's Economic Development Initiative (WEDI) works with women, legislators, leaders in government and the business community to create and enhance economic development opportunities for women business owners in the state.
Public Information The PCSW provides speakers, fact sheets, educational booklets and other materials addressing a broad range of women's issues.
In addition, the PCSW can provide skilled workshop leaders who can facilitate discussion on subjects from sexual harassment to health care to welfare reform to the economic status of women for community groups, businesses or government agencies.
PCSW Talent Bank The PCSW maintains a file of qualified women for consideration for appointments to state agencies and various boards, councils and commissions in state government.
Permanent Commission on the Status of Women
