Vol. VIIII No. 3
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
STONY KILL ALMANAC NEWSLETTER BY AND ABOUT
Stony Kill Farm Environmental Education Center and the Stony Kill Foundation, Inc.
Calendar of Events inside
Calling All Kids! Stony Kill's Summer Day Camp program might be just what you're looking for this summer.
Come outside with us and explore different habitats, discover the wonders of nature by participating in fun, hands-on activities! Programs run Monday through Friday from 9:00 am - 12:00 pm. Parents can get in on the fun too at a campfire on Friday night ­ we'll provide the marshmallows! Call us soon to reserve your spot.
Junior Explorers July 9-13 (1-2 grade) 16-20 (3-5 grade) Senior Explorers July 23-27
BUTTERFLY FESTIVAL Saturday, August 4 10:00 am - 2:00 pm What it is like to be a caterpillar and change into a butterfly? Learn about the butterflies life cycle, identify local species, listen to butterfly stories and create butterfly crafts, as well as enter an enclosure of live butterflies.
Mr. David Bouton, world renown lepidopterist, will speak about Butterfly friendly environments.
Nature Notebook Workshops for children and adults Are you a budding Rachel Carson or John Burroughs? Join us and design and craft your own nature notebook from scratch.
Wednesdays June 27 - July 25 (except July 4) Separate workshops for children and adults will run concurrently.
Calling All Families! Trail walks, activities and an interactive program is designed for families this August.
Learn how to appreciate and enjoy nature together.
Family Explorers 9:00 - 12 noon Monday - Friday August 6-10 August 13-17 (grade 3 and under) (grade 3 and older)
materials fee for each workshop will vary.
Preregistration required.
Call for more information 831-8780, ext 300.
Join us for a summer packed with fun!
2 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
STONY KILL FARM ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION CENTER
FROM THE DIRECTOR'S DESK by Robert A. Herberger, Jr.
Habitat n.
The area or type of environment in which an organism or biological population normally lives or occurs.
Main # (845) 831-8780 Office Hours - Stony Kill Farm Monday - Friday, 8:30 am - 4:45 pm Saturday, 9:30 am - 12:30 pm Sunday, 1:00 pm - 4:00 pm CLOSED ON ALL MAJOR HOLIDAYS
EDUCATION STAFF Robert Herberger, Jr, Director, ext 303 Jim Herrington, Farm Manager, ext 305 Susan Eschbach, Teacher Trng Coordinator, ext 304 Beth Hoffman, Environmental Educator, ext 317 Christopher O'Sullivan, Environ Educator, ext 327 Susan Patton, Secretary, ext 300 OPERATIONS STAFF Michael Lapp, Operations Supervisor, ext 308 Dan Tompkins, Maintenance Supervisor, ext 324 FORESTRY STAFF Jeff Wiegert, Sr Forester, ext 309 Lou Sebesta, Urban Forester, ext 316 Stony Kill Foundation, Inc.
Board of Directors Warren McKeon, Acting President William Reiner, President Emeritus Richard Lahey, Chairman Art McCormack, Treasurer Ed Connelly Marsha Kramer Patrick Goodall Patrick Manning Janet Hirkala Gwen Saylor Mike Hirkala Betty Strang Alexandra Koppen David Wohlbach Foundation Office Dolores Imrich, Office Manager, ext 310 hours: Mon, Tues, Thurs (9:00 - 12:00) ***** Volunteer Office Carolyn Plage, Volunteer Coordinator, ext 306
We choose to define our habitat as a place where we like to live.
We live in cities, suburbia, and the country.
All in all, the Hudson Valley is a beautiful place to live, but the clear cut lines between these environs are becoming increasingly hazy.
Suburbia, ever spreading, is changing our landscape, as populations increase, as people become more mobile and combined with the ever present desire for a piece of the American dream (home ownership), farms and open space are under attack.
The serenity of the country is harder to find.
This brings me to my point.
Stony Kill is an "island of sanity", amongst this urban sprawl; seven hundred and fifty six acres of green space, paths and peace.
Come walk the trails, look for blue birds, or take a child fishing.
Find your "roots."
In today's' tremotulous life style, Stony Kill offers a repose, a place where you can gather your thoughts and catch a days breath.
Enjoy! If you have been wondering what all that activity is on Stony Kill and Red Schoolhouse Roads, look no further for we are building new parking lots.
Off of Stony Kill Road the Freedom trail will have immediate access, while the parking lot off of Red Schoolhouse Road will provide a path to Mueller Pond.
In addition to Stony Kill's grounds being open seven days a week, sunrise to sunset, our offices are now open seven days a week (except major holidays) for your enjoyment.
Stony Kill Almanac is a quarterly newsletter of Stony Kill Farm Environmental Education Center.
Produced by Susan Patton.
If you wish to be included on our mailing list please call Stony Kill Farm, ext 300.
Check out DEC's WEBSITE at www.dec.state.ny.us
3 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
Slate of Public Programs JUNE Saturday the 2nd 10:00 am AQUATIC INSECT ADAPTATIONS Have you ever wondered how some insects can live under water and others cannot? Can you tell a dragonfly nymph from a damselfly nymph? Here is your chance to learn about the aquatic insects that inhabit our Stony Kill Pond by donning a pair of waders and hunting for these insects and then learn how they have adapted to their home.
Nice hands-on program for adults and children 5yrs and up.
Saturday the 9 10:00 am FINDING YOUR WAY We are having a map party! Through scavenger hunts and map activities children will learn the basics of finding their way around.
Recommended: ages 7 and older.
Fee $2 Saturday the 16th 6:30 pm CAMPFIRE Come investigate the summer night.
Bring the whole family, everyone will enjoy this traditional summer past time.
We provide the marshmallows, you bring your appetite to learn.
Fee $2 Thursday the 21st 10:00 am STORY TIME It's Summer! Explore nature through interactive story telling.
Come listen and get involved in this great tradition.
Recommended for kids 4 years and older.
Saturday the 23rd 10:00 am FARM TRAIL WALK Bring the family on an easy meander through Stony Kill's fields.
We will watch for summer birds while learning about the importance of maintaining open spaces.
Saturday the 30th 10:00 am BUGS, BUGS, EVERYWHERE! Summer is here and the time is right for bugs buzzing in your ear! Bring the kids and we'll learn about, and safely capture, some of the interesting insects and assorted creepy crawly critters found at Stony Kill Farm.
Free! th
JULY Saturday the 7th 10:00 am CELEBRATE YOUR INDEPENDENCE Celebrate your independence with a walk along the Freedom Trail.
Join Stony Kill staff for a leisurely stroll along the two mile trail through woodland and wetland.
We'll take time to explore the remains of stone walls and foundations found along the trail.
Remember to bring plenty of water and binoculars, there's no telling what wildlife we may see.
Saturday the 14th 10:00 am SIERRA TRAIL WALK Start off your weekend with a leisurely walk around our Sierra Trail.
Saturday the 21st 10:00 am CLASSIFICATION FOR KIDS What would you wear if you were a bird? Or a snake? Games and stories illustrate the differences between animals classes.
Children become scientists as they classify nature objects.
Saturday the 28th 9:00 am BREAKFAST WITH BOSSY Come have a continental breakfast of bagels, cream cheese, coffee, juice and tea.
Visit with Stony Kill's farm animals, the sheep, chickens and ever popular cows.
Talk to a naturalist about the omnivores, herbivores and carnivores, and see some interpretive displays.
Fee $3
Join us at our Open Barn Hours are: Saturday's from 9:30 - 12:30.
Pre-registration is necessary for all programs CALL (845) 831-8780.
4 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
AUGUST Saturday the 4th 10:00 am - 2:00 pm BUTTERFLY FESTIVAL Do you know what it is like to be a caterpillar and change into a butterfly? During this festival you can learn about the butterflies life cycle, identify local species, listen to butterfly stories and create butterfly crafts, as well as walk into an enclosure of live butterflies.
A fun and educational experience for the whole family with many activities to participate in. fee$3 adults, $2 children 3 yrs and older.
Saturday the 11th 10:00 am WATER STRIDER SPECTACULAR! Bring the family and explore summer pond life here at the farmstead.
Once we have scooped, examined and admired the creatures of the pond, we will construct our own water striders and watch them walk on water! Saturday the 18th 7:30 pm STARRY STORIES Turn your gaze to the night sky as starry tales from different cultures are recounted.
Come one, come all, bring a blanket, lawn chair and binoculars and get comfortable.
Free.
Saturday the 25th 10:00 am FOREST ECOLOGY Join our urban forester for a general forest ecology and tree/interpretive walk.
We will discuss the function and benefits of community forested open spaces and some urban forestry issues.
Recommended for adolescents to adults.
Tuesday - Sunday the 21st - 26th DUTCHESS COUNTY FAIR Stop by and visit the DEC and the many other fine exhibits, and shows at the Fair.
Teacher Training Workshops: Classroom teachers! Nature Center Educators! Student Teachers! Looking for material to help you meet the new learning standards? Here are activity based, teacher workshops about wildlife 
Are you looking for easy to use field tested activities that don't involve a great deal of materials and can be used right in your classroom or schoolyard? Check out the offerings below!
Sunday, June 3
9:00 am - 1:00 pm
Aquatic Project WILD Aquatic Project WILD focuses on wildlife in fresh and salt water ecosystems.
This hands-on workshop offers multi-curricular activities to supplement classroom curricula while helping to meet the new Learning Standards.
grades K-12.
FREE activity guide and supplemental handouts.
$4.00 refreshment fee.
Pre-registration required.
Project WILD is sponsored in New York State by the Return a Gift To Wildlife contributions.
Pre-registration required
CALL (845) 831-8780 A sneak preview of our programs for September: Sunday the 2nd @ 2 pm Sunday the 9th @ 2 pm Friday the 14th @ 7 pm Sunday the 23rd @ 2 pm Sunday the 30th from 12-5 pm Living in a Log Trail Walk Owl Prowl Fall Wildflower Walk Harvest Festival
ATTENTION HUNTERS and would-be hunters! Starting in late summer through early fall, we will be having a hunter education, bow hunter education, trapper education and water fowl identification course.
Call in early August for times and dates.
5 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
STONY KILL FOUNDATION, INC.
The Stony Kill Foundation can now accept donations by VISA or Master Card through PayPal.
A donor must have both an e-mail account and an account with PayPal to take advantage of this.
Go to PayPal.com and send your donation to Stonykill@yahoo.com until PayPal allows for more reasons for payments, designate your donation as "service."
Soon after we get your donation we will send an acknowledgment through both e-mail and regular mail.
A new PayPal account is subject to a $250 spending limit, by verifying a bank account with them the limit is removed.
If you are establishing a new account, please access the Web page via https://secure.paypal.com/affil/pal=stonkill%40yahoo.com this will make us eligible for a small bonus if you choose to use PayPal's other features such as their money market fund.
If you have any questions about PayPal please feel free to send them to us at Stonykill@yahoo.com
VERPLANCK GARDEN CLUB, INC.
The VGC is concluding its 12th year as a club formed to interest and educate the people of the community in gardening and conservation of natural resources and to enhance the grounds of Stony Kill Farm EEC.
The Saturday before Mother's Day in May the VGC held its annual plant sale.
The Club holds this sale each spring to make available inexpensive annuals, perennials, vegetables, herbs, houseplants and shrubs.
Shoppers were also able to ask gardening questions and have them answered by "Master Gardeners".
The June meeting will be held at an area restaurant where club committees will wind down the activities for the year.
Monthly meetings will resume in September.
During the summer the Club will be sponsoring a local youngster to attend one of the DEC's Environmental Camps.
Visit the Verplanck Garden Club's colorful tent at Stony Kill Farm's Annual Harvest Festival on Sunday, September 30th, and fill up on delicious homemade baked goods and soups.
The Verplanck Garden Club meets the 2nd Tuesday of each month at 7 PM at Stony Kill Farm EEC.
All interested gardeners or wannabes are welcome to attend.
For information about the Club or monthly meetings please call (845) 831-8780 x 304.
PLEASE NOTE The Stony Kill Foundation no longer has a post office box so, please address all Foundation correspondence to
Stony Kill Foundation, Inc. 79 Farmstead Lane Wappingers Falls NY 12590 (845) 831-8780, ext 310
In Memory We are sorry to announce that Marion Schnetzler of Beacon, passed 2001.
Marion was a dedicated Stony Kill volunteer who contributed her not only as an office volunteer, but also at Harvest Festivals, and Earth She was a delight to work with and shared her smile and laughter with Kill.
We will miss her dearly.
away on April 9, time (500+ hours) Day celebrations.
everyone at Stony
6 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
Model Railroaders Volunteer for SKF The Olde Newburgh Model Railroad Club, in existence since 1940, presently meets every Wednesday evening in the VFW in Walden, New York.
The twenty active members, men, women, retired, not retired, a few youngsters too, all have one thing in common ­ they love trains! The club has two layouts in the VFW, one "HO" gauge and the other, even smaller model trails, "N" gauge.
In addition, there is a "traveling layout" the members take to shows and special exhibits.
Of course, individual members often have their own layouts in their homes.
The members enjoy planning and building, revising and viewing their intricate layouts of trains of all types with villages, industries, mountain scenery, you name it, they've probably got it! So what's this got to do with Stony Kill? Our environmental education center received a grant from the Catskill Watershed Corporation to develop a watershed model and other educational materials for public education presentations.
We needed some volunteers who liked to build models, scenery, and already had knowledge in this area, and we definitely found the right group! After calling a few other such clubs we spoke to Peter King of Wappingers Falls, a member of ONMRC and he presented the idea to the group.
To make a long story short by several months later member, Ed Miller, became the coordinator of the project.
Ed started in August in his basement in Highland, NY and spent at least six hours a week and now has over 100 hours of volunteer service! He also had assistance from Ted Lippincott, Mr and Mrs. Ed Miller unveil the watershed model for staff member and environmental educator, Ralph Jenkins, and Christopher O'Sullivan (middle) who was involved in coordinating the project.
Mike Callan, also members of the ONMRC.
The grant paid for materials for the project and all the labor was donated with enthusiasm and dedication.
The Catskill Watershed model depicts the topography of the land from the Catskill's reservoirs to New York City, showing the mountains, rivers, major features, and locations of several pertinent sites, such as Stony Kill Farm.
A terrific job was done by these gentlemen.
The model was designed to be portable, as well as to allow the presenter to demonstrate the way the water supply travels from the reservoirs many miles away to New York City faucets.
It will be a very useful educational tool for our visiting New York City school children participating in Operation Explore, as well as many other presentations by our environmental educators.
As they say in the classroom ­ good job, men! And THANK YOU! By: Carolyn Plage, Volunteer Coordinator
7 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
· · · · ·
There are many scary myths about bats.
Here are some fun facts to help you get to know this helpful and misunderstood animal.
One bat can eat 600 mosquitos in one hour! Little Brown Bats can catch up to 1200 insects in one hour! A bat's knees are backwards so that it can hang upside down.
Less than half of one percent of bats have rabies.
You are more likely to be hurt by a dog or bee than a bat! Bats can tell the difference between a strand of hair and a gnat at night, the won't get caught in your hair! More than 50% of American bat species are in decline or listed as endangered.
Keep pesky mosquitos away by inviting bats to live nearby! Building bat boxes can be a fun experiment for the whole family.
Some folks paint the top of the box a dark color and the bottom white so that the bats can have warm and cool spots inside.
You can learn more cool tricks like this and get plans to build a box by visiting Stony Kill Farm or these web sites: www.batcon.org and www.lads.com
Q: All! But only the bat eats just insects.
Which of these
animals eats insects?
8 STONY KILL ALMANAC
WWW.DEC.STATE.NY.US
JUNE - AUGUST 2001
SAVE THE DATE Sunday September 30, 2001 Live birds of prey - with Bill Robinson, and also farm animals, hay rides, sheepshearing, candle dipping, kids activities, food, environmental exhibits, live MUSIC by the Howland Wolves and much more! Join us at our annual Fall Harvest Festival FEE: Adults $5, members, seniors and students $3, children 5-12, under 5 years old FREE
NYS Department of Environmental Conservation Bureau of Environmental Education STONY KILL FARM ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION CENTER Rt 9 D, Wappingers Falls NY 12590
NONPROFIT ORG U.S. POSTAGE PAID PERMIT 122 WAPPINGERS FALLS NEW YORK 12590
